--- Sayfa 1 ---
1
Kora Shriners
SURVIVAL GUIDE
2017 VERSION

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2
Kora Shrine Center
11 Sabattus Street
Lewiston, ME 04240
Tel: 207-782-6831
Fax: 207-782-2870
www.korashriners.org
Parking
There is limited parking in Kora’s lots (40 spaces with 5 handicapped).  There is off
street parking available.  Parking in the Medical Building across the street is only
allowed after 6 pm on week days and is available on Saturdays & Sundays.  The
Park Street Parking Garage is free on weekends and is only 3 blocks from Kora.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3
Table of Contents
Kora Shriners Contact Information
2
Table of Contents

3
Greetings from Kora’s Potentate

4
What We Are All About

5
Organizational Structure

7
Membership Information

10
Fez & Emblem

12
Protocols - Do’s & Don’ts

13
Our History

16
Our Hospitals

20
Units

23
Clubs

28
Major Events

30
Affiliated Women’s Organizations

32
Traveling

33
NSA Temples

34
Common Terms

35
Notes

36
How to use this Guide
This guide is an invaluable tool for you as you progress through your journey as a
Noble of the Mystic Shrine.  It does not have all the answers but should give you a
better understanding of Kora Shriners.  Whether you are interested in the history of
Kora, what are the different units or clubs, or what you should wear, this survival
guide should be of some help or at least if by chance you are holding it during the
Second Section of the Initiation Ceremony then it might keep you dry!

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5
WHAT’S A SHRINER?
A Shriner is a man who professes a faith in God.
As a man of faith he uses the tools of moral and Ethical truths to serve mankind.
A Shriner binds himself to like-minded men in a Brotherhood that transcends all
religious, ethical, social, cultural, and educational differences.
In fellowship, with his brothers, a Shriner finds ways in which to serve his God, his
family, his fellow man, and his country.
A Shriner is dedicated.  He recognizes his responsibility for justice, truth, charity,
enlightenment, freedom and liberty, honesty and integrity in all aspects of human
endeavor.
A Shriner is such a man!
WHAT WE ARE ALL ABOUT
MISSION OF SHRINERS
INTERNATIONAL

Be the premier fraternal organization
for men of good character.

Provide attractive, quality programs and
services for its members, their families
and their friends in a spirit of fun,
fellowship and social camaraderie.

Foster self-improvement through
leadership, education, the perpetuation
of moral values and community
involvement.

Serve mankind through the resources
of its philanthropy, Shriners Hospitals
for Children.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
Vision Statement of Kora Shriners

Kora Shrine is a fraternal organization whose members join together for fun and
fellowship.  Supported by our Shrine families, we strive to maintain our role as a
premier Shrine Center with the support of an enthusiastic and growing membership.
Kora Shrine supports Shriners Hospitals for Children with spirit, time, talent, and
means.
Mission Statement of Kora Shriners

We strive to be a premier fraternal organization whose primary objective is having fun
while helping kids.
The Shriners Creed
Shriners believe in God and that He created man to serve His
purposes, among which is service to others in His name.
We believe that care for the less fortunate, especially children who
suffer from burns and crippling disease, is our institutional calling.
We are patriots, each willing to serve his country with fidelity and
courage. We cherish independence under law and freedom with
responsibility.
We honor family. We respect our parents, wives and children. We
should instill in our children the tenets of this creed, and the heritage
from which it emanates.
As individuals we pledge ourselves to integrity, virtue and nobility of
character. Our intentions will be honorable, our relationships will be
trustworthy and our spirits forgiving of each other.
As brothers we offer each other fraternal affection and respect.
Together we will support each other in adherence to this creed, so that
we and our communities will be the better because of our fraternity and
its principles.  As Shriners we look beyond ourselves to serve the
needs of others, especially children who cannot help themselves. We
believe Shriners Hospitals to be the world’s greatest philanthropy, and
we covenant with each other to support its “temples of mercy” with
spirit, time, talent and means.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7
Kora Shriners Organizational Structure
Kora’s Divan - Elected. These positions are  voted on, annually, by the Nobility at the
December’s Election of Officers Meeting.
• Potentate:  This is, essentially, the President of the Shrine, and is responsible for
the operations of the Temple during the year.
• Chief Rabban:  1st Vice President.  It is expected that the Chief Rabban will, the
following year, be elected to the position of Potentate.
• Assistant Rabban:  2nd Vice President. It is expected that the Assistant Rabban will,
the following year, be elected to the position of Chief Rabban.
• High Priest & Prophet: 3rd Vice President.  It is expected that the High Priest and
Prophet will, the following year, be elected to the position of Assistant Rabban.
• Oriental Guide: 4th Vice President. In some Temples this is an appointment of the
incoming Potentate, but then he has to be elected by the Nobility to become Oriental
Guide. It is expected that the Oriental Guide will, the following year, be elected to the
position of High Priest and Prophet.
• Treasurer:  Responsible for financial accounts of the Temple.
• Recorder:  Responsible for recording all proceedings of the Temple and
maintaining Membership Roster.
Kora’s Divan - Appointed.  These positions are appointed by the sitting Potentate
and are assigned various duties, though the idea is that this is a progressive line,
excluding the Director and Chaplain.
• 1st Ceremonial Master
• 2ndCeremonial Master
• Marshal
• Captain of the Guard
• Outer Guard
• Director
• Chaplain
Kora Shriners Leadership
Shrine Leadership positions have, for the newcomer, odd sounding titles. In addition,
some positions are elected and some are appointed. Appointments are made by the
sitting Potentate.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8
Kora’s Unit Directors, Committee Chairs, Other Associations
• Unit Colonel & Lieutenant Colonel:  They are in charge of the organization of all
Temple Units and is the direct link between the Divan and the Units.  They are
appointed by the Potentate.
• Unit Directors: They are in charge of leading their respective Units and are
appointed by the Potentate.
• Club Presidents & Officers: They are elected by their club and are in charge of
leading their club according to their position.
• Committees:  These committees are assigned to perform a task or run a specific
event for Kora Temple.  Most members volunteer and are then appointed by the
Potentate.  Some of the current committees are as follows: the Circus,
Communications, Donor Relations, Feztival of Trees, Kare for Kids Ride In,
Membership, and Public Relations.
Finances-Budget
The Chief Rabban annually puts together an Operating Budget for the following year.
This includes all revenue and expenses to manage the finances for the Fraternity for
the year.  The Budget is reviewed by the Board of Directors of Kora Shrine and the
Finance Committee.  It is then voted on by the Nobles of Kora Shrine at their annual
meeting.  The Board of Directors of Kora Shrine is the elected Divan. They are elected
at the Stated Meeting in December of each year.  The Treasurer and Finance
Committee of Kora Shrine oversee the budget during the year.  Any expenditures that
exceed the budgeted amount are reviewed at a Stated meeting of Kora Shrine for
approval by the Nobles present.  An annual budget report is issued to Imperial offices
in Tampa, Florida for their review.
Kora Kares Fund
This fund was set up in 2012 for two purposes: 1) Provide an annual scholarship to a
Noble or a member of his family to further his or her education.  2) To provide
resources for a Noble and his family in time of need.
The Kora Kares Fund is administered by the Board of Directors of Kora Shrine.
Scholarship applications are available from any Board member or from the Kora
office.  Requests for resources for a Noble in need can be made through the Kora
office or from a Board member.  The fund will be administered by the Board of
Directors of Kora Shrine.  Decisions about payments from this fund will be their
responsibility.  Donations are accepted to help maintain an adequate balance in the
fund.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9
 Kora Temple Foundation
The Kora Temple Foundation is a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of
the State of Maine.  This Maine Corporation was formed in 2012.  The Foundation is a
501 c 3 Corporation whose sole purpose is to raise money to preserve, protect and
maintain the Kora Temple building located at 11 Sabattus Street in Lewiston, Maine.
New Board members are elected by the current board members.  Preference for the
Board is to maintain an equal balance of Shriners and non-Shriners on the Board.
Annually, a Board President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer are elected by
the Board members.  All net funds raised are available for capital and maintenance
projects identified by the Kora Temple Association.  Approved funds are transferred to
the Association for these specific projects.  The Foundation meets as needed, but at
least annually.
Kora’s Temple Association
The Kora Temple Association is a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Maine.   This Maine Corporation was formed when the building was built in the early
1900’s.  The ownership of the Kora Temple building, located at 11 Sabattus Street in
Lewiston, Maine rests with the Association.  Its primary responsibility is to oversee and
manage the Kora Temple building.  All Nobles of Kora Shrine are members of the
Association.  The Association holds its annual meeting in January and elects board
members to 3 year staggered terms so that one member of the board is elected each
year from the membership.  A board member can serve 2 terms. There are 6 elected
board members and in addition, the Potentate also serves as a member of the Board.
Each year a Board Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer are elected by the Board of the
Association.  The Association meetings are held quarterly.
Shriners Hospital for Children Board
Kora Shrine supports the 22 hospitals of Shriners Hospital for Children.  Kora Shrine’s
direct support is to Shriners Hospital for Children in Boston and Shriners Hospital for
Children in Springfield.  The Boston Hospital is primarily a burn care facility and the
Springfield Hospital is primarily an orthopedic facility.  Each hospital is expanding into
other areas of pediatric care.  The focus of the hospitals is care of children, but also
includes research and teaching.  Each hospital has a board of directors elected by
Shrine Temples in their respective geographic locations.  Board members are elected
by the Board of Directors of their Temple subject to the approval of the local hospital
board and the Imperial Board of Directors.  Board meetings are held monthly at the
Hospital.  Each board member is required to attend a minimum of nine board meetings
during the year.  Board members serve three year terms and can serve a maximum of
3 terms.  Board members are the direct link to the hospital of their temple.  Kora
Shrine is currently represented by five members on the Boston Board and two
members of the Springfield Board.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10
• Important Facts:

You must stay in Good Standing in your Masonic Lodge.

In order to participate in any activity as a Noble of Kora , you must be current
on your Shrine Dues.

Dues Cards are required for all Business Meetings & Ceremonials.

All events with meals require a Reservations, which can be made through
Kora’s office.

Please make your “Reservations” in a timely manner, before the due dates.

Meals & Activities are not included with your dues, so must be paid for prior
to event.

Help support our Kora Sands by becoming a “Booster” at only $10 per year.
Membership Information
• Meeting & Ceremonials:

Kora’s Stated Business Meetings are held at least once in each calendar
quarter.  Usually held on the Tuesday Evening prior to a scheduled
Ceremonial.  These meetings are for Nobles Only and current Dues Cards
are required.

Election of Officers is held at the December Meeting.

Annual Meeting is held on the second Saturday in January.

Special Meetings can be called the Potentate at anytime.
• Communications: Kora uses a number of ways to communicate with it’s members.
Here are just some of the ways: Kora Sands (Magazine), Mailings, E-mails, Kora
Konnections, Kora’s Website, FaceBook, etc…
• www.Shrinersvillage.com - As a Noble you can register to login.  This site offers
almost everything from Shrine information, to resources, to shopping.
• webfez.shrinenet.org - As a Noble you can register to login.  This site allows you
to see your membership information (address, dues, units, etc…) and allows you to
update changes in your contact information.
• www.KoraShriners.org - Kora’s website site. Is full of information regards to Kora
Temple.
• www.beashrinernow.com - How to become a Shriner.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11
• Dues:

Each Noble is responsible for the
payment of Annual Dues.

A valid dues card is required to
attend all Shrine Functions,
especial Kora’s Business
Meetings & Ceremonials.

Every year you will receive
invoice from Kora, usually in the
late Fall.

Payment must be made by January 1st for that year.

Kora Temples Dues is the annual membership fee & the money goes
towards operating the Kora Temple.

Imperial Shrine per Capita Tax is a fee paid to Imperial Shrine.

Hospital Levy goes to directly support
our Shriners Hospitals.
• Initiation Fee:

Initiation Fees are required to
initiate any new Noble into Kora
Shrine.

The cost associated with this
process covers your dues, Fez,
and meals for your and your Lady.

Initiation Fee: $175 (as of 2017)
paid on application’s submission.

Does not cover lodging at
Ceremonial or extra activities.
• Life Membership: Are available for each of the three components that make up
Kora’s Annual Dues.
1. Kora Temple Life Membership: Based on age.

Under age 31 = 30 times annual dues.

Between 31 to 46 = 25 times annual dues.

Between 47 to 65 = 20 times annual dues.

Over age 65 = 10 times annual dues.
2. Per Capita Life Member (PCLM): One time fee that exempts members for
annual paying the per Capita Tax.  Currently cost $900.
3. Permanent Contributing Member (PCM) :  Members may purchase a
Permanent Contributing Membership in the Hospitals, exempt from the
annual Hospital Levy.   Currently cost $150.
Life Membership for
50 year members &
Past Potentates.
What do I get for my money?
Dues paid for rest of the current year.
$85 Value.
My very own Creation Fez,
$75 Value.
Ceremonial Meals & Beverages for both
the Candidate and his Lady (this might
varies), but generally speaking,
$75 Value.
Over $60 in Savings!!!
What is the dues payment consist of?
For the current year, Dues are $85.
• Kora Temple Dues: $50
• Imperial Shrine Per Capita Tax:
$30
• Hospital Levy: $5

--- Sayfa 12 ---
12
The Fez & Emblem of the Shrine
The fez is one of the most recognizable symbols of
Shriners International and was adopted as the
Shriners’ official headgear in 1872. Named after the
city of Fez, Morocco, the hat represented the Arabian
theme the fraternity was founded on. It also serves as
an outward symbol of one’s membership in the
fraternity. Much like the white apron worn by Masons
as a symbol of their brotherhood, the fez is worn only
by Shriners as a symbol of their membership in this
unique fraternity.
Today the fez is worn at Shriners' functions, in parades
and at outings as a way of gaining exposure for the
fraternity. Members customize their fez to show their
allegiance to their temple. Look closely at a fez and you will also learn other important
information about its wearer, such as membership in Shrine clubs, special roles within
the organization and much more.  A fez with multiple rows of jewels denote the
wearers title or office.   Each fez is custom made and a Shriner may own more than
one fez depending on his activities and memberships.
The Fez
The Emblem
The emblem on the front of the fez, the crescent and scimitar, is an important part of
the fraternity’s theme, and is representative of the characteristics embodied by the
Shriners.
The scimitar stands for the backbone of the
fraternity, its members.
The two claws are for the Shriners fraternity
and its philanthropy.
The sphinx stands for the governing body of
the Shriners.
The five-pointed star represents the
thousands of children helped by the
philanthropy each year.
The emblem also bears the phrase “Robur et Furor,” which means “Strength and Fury.”

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13
Protocols - Do’s and Don’ts
• It is unlawful for this temple, or any unit or club under its control, or any group of its
members, or any member  acting for or on behalf of the temple, to promote or take
part in any engagement or enterprise prohibited by the law of the land.
• Nobles may not violate Shrine Law.
• The consumption of alcoholic beverages during parades and ceremonials is
forbidden by those Nobles participating therein.
• The laws of the State of Maine for the consumption and the production, distribution
and use of Alcohol apply to all members and guests at all meetings and functions of
Kora Shriners.
• Members exhibiting violence, abusive language, intoxication or unbecoming/unruly
conduct during any meetings, ceremonies, or events will be asked to leave the
function and their conduct, if warranted, may be brought up for review by the
Potentate.
• The Provost Marshals are responsible for security and safety at all Kora Shrine
functions.  All members are required to respect these Nobles and follow any of their
instructions which are for the safety of you, other Nobles, Guests, and Kora Temple
and it’s property.
• The Medical Unit is responsible for assisting in any medical emergency or injury
that occurs at a Temple function.
• Remember that we are all volunteers so please treat all fellow Nobles with respect.
• Use Designated Drivers, “Brothers don’t let Brothers drive drunk”!
• A general rule for wearing your Fez, if the Potentate is wearing his Fez then all
Nobles should be wearing their Fez.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14
Kora Dress Code
When attending meetings and events it is very important to know what to wear so you
don’t feel out of place.  Different events call for different attire and we want you to know
what to wear, including your Fez!  Please join us, feel comfortable and have fun!
It is traditionally the practice at Kora Shrine that the dress code is listed when the event
is advertised.  This is not always the case so here you will find a guideline and
description of what each designation means.
The most formal event of the year takes place in January during the evening when we
hold our Installation of Officers.  During this particular event, the Divan wears Tuxedo’s
and everyone else is semi-formal.  Several units, however, will be in their Unit Uniform
as they take part in the ceremony.  Most other regular events are listed below.
Fez - To Wear or Not to Wear?
Shriners International has adopted the fez as the exclusive type of head covering to be
worn by all nobles when appearing as such.  This means all nobles must wear their
fezzes at stated meetings, ceremonials, Shrine parades, caravans, special Shrine
events, and any other Shrine-related activities.  The fez is never worn at a Masonic
lodge communication or meeting.  At non-Shrine functions where an Imperial officer is
representing Shriners International, or a temple officer is representing a Shrine temple,
he may wear his fez.  However, other Shriners in attendance are not to wear their
fezzes.  As a noble, you are particularly admonished never to wear your fez in any
company or place in which you would decline to introduce your mother, wife, sister or
daughter.  Never forget this.  No other person is ever allowed to wear a noble’s fez.
During Prayer
During the offering of a prayer, the Fez should be removed and held in the right hand
over the heart.  At the end of prayer, when “Amen” is said, the appropriate response
is “So Mote It Be” just like in Masonic Lodge, we are all Masons.  The Fez is then
placed back on the head.
The Salute to the Flag
The Fez being considered part of the uniform of a Shriner, a Noble who is wearing his
Fez will execute a right-hand salute when the Colors are within six paces of him. He
will not remove his Fez. After the Colors have passed, he should drop his right hand. In
case the same Colors pass the same point again, as frequently happens in a
Ceremonial Session or in display drills, the Colors need not be saluted a second time.
Nobles who are or have served in the military for their respective countries and who
are not wearing a Fez will observe the rules of their country concerning the salute to
the flag.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15
Dress Code by Event Type

Nobles
Ladies
Installation of
Officers
Divan - Tuxedo
Nobility - Semi-Formal
Semi-Formal
Stated Meetings
Unit Uniform or Business Casual
 N/A
Spring/Fall/Winter
Ceremonials
Unit Uniform or Business Casual
N/A
Summer Ceremonial
Shrine Casual and Casual For
Evening Events
Shrine Casual and Casual for
Evening Events
Ladies Luncheon at
Ceremonials
N/A
Business Casual
Shriner's Ball
Formal/Semi-Formal
Formal/Semi-Formal
Definitions of Dress

Nobles
Ladies
Formal
Black Tuxedo
Gown or Cocktail Dress
Semi-Formal
Suit, Sportscoat, Dress Shirt and Tie
Cocktail Dress or
Pants with Fancy Top
Unit Dress
Unit Uniform or Unit Shirt
Unit Shirt or other appropriate attire
Smart/Business
Casual
Slacks, Collared Shirt,
Jacket Optional - No Jeans
Slacks, Skirt, Dress, Blouse, Jacket
or Sweater - No Jeans
Shrine Casual
Slacks, Khakis or Jeans
 with Shrine Shirt
Jeans, Pants,
Capris and Shrine Shirt
Casual
Jeans, Shorts and Casual Shirt
Jeans, Pants, Capris, Shorts and
Causal Shirt
“I pledge allegiance to my Flag and to the Country for which it stands; One
Nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”
The Shrine Pledge of Allegiance

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16
Our History
History of Kora Temple

The first meeting of Kora was held on
December 3, 1891 at the Lewiston Masonic Temple.
The organization of Kora was started by seventeen
local Shriners of whom most were members of Aleppo
Temple in Boston.  The movement was spearheaded
by Nobles George & Frank Babbit.  At the first meeting,
Illustrious Sir Charles E. Libby was elected as Kora’s
first Potentate.  The cost of the original regalia was
$712.50.  The first candidate class was made up of
twenty-seven Master Masons.  As the size of the
membership grew, Kora met at various meeting halls
around Lewiston until February 28, 1896 when a new
The Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine (A.A.O.N.M.S.)

In 1870 a group of Masons gathered frequently for lunch at the Knickerbocker
Cottage on Sixth Avenue in New York City.  At a special table on the second floor a
particularly fun-loving group of men met regularly.  Among the regulars were Walter M.
Fleming, M.D. and William J. “Billy” Florence, an actor.  The group frequently talked
about starting a new fraternity for Masons – one centered on fun and fellowship, more
than ritual. Fleming and Florence took this idea seriously enough to do something
about it.

Billy Florence had been on tour in France, and had been invited to a party given
by an Arabian diplomat.  The exotic style, flavors and music of the Arabian-themed
party inspired him to suggest this as a theme for the new fraternity.  Walter Fleming, a
devoted fraternity brother, built on Fleming’s ideas and used his knowledge of fraternal
ritual to transform the Arabian theme into the Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the
Mystic Shrine (A.A.O.N.M.S.).

With the help of the Knickerbocker Cottage regulars, Fleming drafted the ritual,
designed the emblem and costumes, formulated a salutation and declared that
members would wear the red fez.

The first meeting of Mecca Shriners, the first temple (chapter) established in the
United States, was held September 26, 1872.  As word got out about the fledgling
organization, membership grew rapidly, spreading across the U.S. In the early 1900s,
membership spread into Canada, Mexico and Panama.  Today, Shriners International
is a fraternity with nearly 200 temples in several countries, thousands of clubs around
the world and hundreds of thousands of members dedicated to the principles of
brotherly love, relief and truth.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
17
block was erected at 163 Lisbon Street in Lewiston.  Kora met in this building until
1909 when it moved to the current location.  The old Kora Temple building was used
afterwards and the old hall was named the Mystic Ballroom, where public dances
where held.  The old temple eventually became know as just “The Mystic” and was
used as a movie theatre for Silent Movies.

By 1901, Kora’s membership
had grown to 831 Nobles.  In 1903,
Kora purchased the lot which our
current building sits on.  By 1906, the
membership had exploded to 2,040
Nobles and a committee was formed
to erect a new temple.  Kora hired one
of it’s own, Noble Harry Coombs, as
the architect for the new Temple and
by March of 1909 the new Temple was
completed, at a cost of $100,000.

On March 18, 1909, a Ladies Night opened the weekend long dedication
ceremony.  Over 1,200 people attended the grand banquet, requiring two seating's.
Following dinner, a receiving line was formed consisting of the current Potentate,
Illustrious Sir Wellington Sprague and his wife, along with many dignitaries.  The dance
that followed continued until 2 am.  The official building dedication occurred the
following day with dignitaries from all over the United States.

Kora continued to grow and prosper in her new building.  Prior to 1922, Kora’s
jurisdiction covered the entire State of Maine.  On June 15, 1922, Anah Temple,
meeting in Bangor, received their Charter, there by splitting the State of Maine in half
between our two Temples.

The exquisite murals which adorn the banquet hall were painted by Noble Harry
Cochrane, a member,  between 1922 and 1927.  In 1948 Noble George W. Lane, Jr.
donated the Tiffany Chandelier in Ceremonial Hall.  This priceless chandelier weighs
over one ton.  In the 1970’s, all of the Cockrane’s murals where professionally
restored.  At which time, smoking in the building was prohibited and the sprinkler
system was also installed.  In 1975, Kora Temple was added to the National Register
of Historic Places for its distinctive Moorish-inspired architecture.

In 2012, the Kora Foundation was formed whose sole purpose is to raise money
to preserve, protect and maintain the Kora Temple building.  The foundation is made
up of both Shriners and Non-Shriners and is a non-profit corporation.

Three of our very own have served as Imperial Potentates for Shriners
International, J. Putnam Steven served in 1925, Dana S. Williams in 1934, and our
most recent was Richard B. Olfene in 1983.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
18
Past Potentates of Kora
Year
First name
Last Name

1891-1893
Frank
Faulkner*
1894-1895
Charles
Libby*
1896-1897
J. Frank
Babbitt*
1898-1899
George
Babbitt*
1900
Henry
Torsey*
1901
W. Freeman
Lord*
1902
Clarence
Emerson*
1903
J. Putman
Stevens*§
1904
Frederick
Payne*
1905
Albert
Penley*
1906
Edward
Stetson*
1907
Fred
Odlin*
1908
R. Elton
Attwood*
1909
Wellington
Sprague*
1910
C. Fred
Maines*
1911
John
Merrill*
1912
James
Dunning*
1913
Manning
Campbell*
1914
William
Bolster*
1915
John
Webber*
1916
Frank
Kimball*
1917
George
Turgeon*
1918
Dana
Williams* §
1919
Fred
Foster*
1920
Ernest
Watkins*
1921
James
Kingsley*
1922
C. Franklin
Packard*
1923
George
Lane, Jr.*
1924
Walter
Emerson*
1925
Charles
Turgeon*
1926
Harry
Coombs*
1927
Adam
Leighton, Jr.*
1928
Walter
Ordway*
1929
Perley
Dresser*
1930
Willis
Swift*
1931
J. Edward
Libby,Sr.*
1932
Harry
Stetson*
1933
Percy
Weymouth*
1934
Ralph
Littlefield*
Year
First name
Last Name

1935
George
Webber*
1936
Sylvan
Shurtleff*
1937
Paul
Baird*
1938
Edward
Cram*
1939
Leroy
Hussey Sr.*
1940
Harold
Bickmore*
1941
Frank
Stephens*
1942
George
Wallingford*
1943
Lewis
Sheaffer*
1944
Elford
Morison*
1945
William
Hinman*
1946
William
Nulty*
1947
Ralph
Farris*
1948
George
Meloon*
1949
Walter
Emerson, Jr.*
1950
John
Seavey*
1951
Lloyd
Hay*
1952
Alden
Merrill*
1953
Harold
Carman*
1954
William
Gove*
1955
Earle
Perry*
1956
Albert
Utterstrone*
1957
John
Skolfield*
1958
Carroll
McGilvery*
1959
Malcolm
Dunlap*
1960
Robert
Cleaves*
1961
Ervin
Lander*
1962
John
Carman*
1963
Deane
Quinton*
1964
Carl
Stilphen*
1965
Paul
Powers*
1966
Richard
Olfene* §
1967
Philip
Corey*
1968
Ralph
Gould
1969
Herbert
Seymour*
1970
Robert
McLeary*
1971
John
Preble*
1972
Leroy
Hussey , Jr.
1973
Myron
Rust*

--- Sayfa 19 ---
19
Past Potentates of Kora con’t
Year
First name
Last Name

1974
Robert
Milton*
1975
John
Trinward*
1976
George
Berry*
1977
John
Linnell*
1978
Torbin
Anderson*
1979
Charles
Glassmire*
1980
Douglass
Cooper
1981
Ralph
Hodgkins,Jr.
1982
M. Tiecke
Shelton, Jr.*
1983
Thomas
Haley*
1984
Stephen
Dunlap*
1985
Burton
Warren*
1986
Roderick
Lowell*
1987
Kenneth
Libby*
1988
Paul
Meservey*
1989
David
Libby*
1990
John
Carrier*
1991
George
Downing
1992
Harry
Jackson*
1993
Peter
Setford*
1994
Jack
Lustig*
1995
James
Curtis
1996
J. Henry
Lalumiere
1997
Richard
Bibber
1998
Paul
Sherman
1999
Richard
Olfene, Jr.
2000
Carlton
Swett*
2001
Frank
Preble
2002
Raymond
MacFarland*
2003
Michael
McFadden
2004
O'Neil
Morin
2005
Douglas
Swasey
2006
Edward
Moulton
2007
Thomas
Nason
2008
Glen
Lalumiere
2009
Karl
Finnimore
2010
David
Lidstone
2011
John
Knox
2012
Barry
Gates
Year
First name
Last Name

2013
Everett
Kaherl
2014
Daniel
Gove
2015
Richard
Hersom
2016
Paul
Poulin MD

§ - Denotes Past Imperial Potentate
* - Deceased
100 Million Dollar Club
The
Shriners
Hospitals
for
Children
Endowment Fund provides approximately
85 percent of the hospitals' operating
income. This fund is supported by the gifts
and bequests of Shriners and non-Shriners
alike. As hospital costs climb and Shriners
Hospitals
continue
to
provide
more
specialized
care
and
conduct
more
research, the financial need increases.  Too
many people, both Shriners and non-
Shriners, believe that if they cannot donate
or leave a large sum or money, their gift will
not count. Obviously, every contribution
helps. In order to encourage Shriners and
non-Shriners to contribute to Shriners
Hospitals for Children, the HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLAR CLUB was established in
1972. The club got its name from its goal of
adding 100 million dollars to the endowment
fund through gifts or bequests of $100 or
more.
   There are three ways to become a
member of the 100 Million Dollar Club:
1. By contributing $100 or more to
Shriners Hospitals for Children.
2. By having your will include a bequest
of $100 or more to Shriners Hospitals
for Children.
3. By adding a provision to an existing
will leaving $100 or more to Shriners
Hospitals for Children.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
20
SHRINERS HOSPITALS FOR CHILDREN®

With the first Hospital started in New Orleans in 1922, Shriners Hospitals for Children
is known as the World’s Greatest Philanthropy.  Today, Shriners throughout the world
continue to support the Hospitals by raising funds, assisting patient’s families with
transportation, volunteering on hospital boards and much more.
Children from birth to age 18 receive expert specialty medical care at these hospitals,
with no financial obligation to them or their families, thanks to the efforts of Shriners
and other generous supporters.  In addition, many Shriners Hospitals for Children
facilities are engaged in medical research and are affiliated with the top academic
medical institutions in North America.
The Fraternity and Hospitals are legally and financially separate.  Each are audited
independently.  In addition, Temples are incorporated as chapters of the Fraternity and
are audited individually.
Shriners Hospitals for Children is an international healthcare system dedicated to
improving the lives of children by providing pediatric specialty care, innovative research
and outstanding teaching programs.  The Hospitals focus on four specialized areas of
care:
Orthopedic Care – medical and rehabilitative services for children with congenital
deformities and conditions, problems resulting from orthopedic injuries, and
diseases of the neuromusculoskelatal system.
Burn Care – treatment for acute and non-acute burn injuries and related scarring,
along with physical and emotional rehabilitation.
Spinal Cord Injury – spinal cord injury rehabilitation specifically for children,
offering some of the most advanced treatment in the country, with full range of
services.
Cleft Lip and Palate Care – coordinated, comprehensive multidisciplinary care for
children with this condition.
Research
Shriners Hospitals for Children are dedicated to conducting innovative research for
complex medical difficulties affecting children.  Shriners Hospitals for Children’s
contributions to the medical community not only benefit our patients, but contribute to
the overall body of medical knowledge for the care and treatment for a wide range of
pediatric and adult conditions.
Education
Shriners Hospitals for Children is proud of its role in medical education.  In the past 20
years, more than 8,000 physicians have received residency education or postgraduate
fellowship within the healthcare system.  By maintaining relationships with more than
60 medical teaching facilities worldwide, Shriners Hospitals for Children fosters an
academic environment committed to providing high-quality medical care to all patients.
For a more in depth history and additional information on the Hospitals, please visit the
following website: www.shrinershospitalsforchildren.org.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
21
Our Boston Hospital

Shriners Hospitals for Children — Boston is a highly specialized pediatric
surgical care center located in the heart of the city. It is considered one of the world’s
preeminent hospitals in the treatment of children with severe burn injuries, complex
skin conditions, orthopaedic conditions, and cleft lip and palate. Affiliated with
Massachusetts General Hospital and verified by a joint program of the American Burn
Association and the American College of Surgeons, Shriners Hospitals for Children —
Boston meets all of the demanding standards for organizational structure, personnel
qualifications, facilities resources and medical care services to ensure the best
possible outcomes. All members of our staff are dedicated to providing the highest
quality care in a family-centered environment.

Shriners Hospitals for Children — Boston first opened its doors on March 13,
1964 as a five-bed unit located on an interim basis at the Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH). In 1968, a new hospital was constructed next door to MGH and was
later replaced with a larger hospital in 1999.

Today, the Boston Shriners Hospital is a 30-bed pediatric specialty hospital,
research and teaching center. It is a world leader in pediatric burn care and is the only
exclusively pediatric, verified burn center in New England. In addition to meeting the
needs of children with burn injuries, Shriners Hospitals for Children — Boston also
offers orthopaedic care, cleft lip and palate expertise, and reconstructive and plastic
surgery.

The hospital’s reputation is far reaching, with patients from over 70 countries
having received lifesaving and reconstructive care from our specialists. The hospital
staff practices family-centered care by providing resources and programs designed to
assist the whole family during a child’s treatment.
Our Springfield Hospital

Shriners Hospitals for Children — Springfield is unique in its ability to provide
exceptional, specialized pediatric orthopaedic, rheumatology and cleft lip and palate
care using the latest innovations in diagnosis and treatment. The hospital is designed
exclusively for children, offering a full range of inpatient and outpatient services under
one roof, so children can receive care and treatment in one building. Appointments
with physicians and clinicians in various departments throughout the hospital can be
conveniently scheduled for the same day.

Care for patients at the Springfield Shriners Hospital begins with an initial
consultation, followed by establishing a diagnosis and a treatment plan. Our pediatric
specialists and therapists collaborate to determine the best course of care, and
referring physicians are able to get results returned quickly. As a member of the Mayo
Clinic Care Network, we collaborate to expand our service and expertise for patients.
The comprehensive onsite services at the hospital include outpatient visits, inpatient
surgery, outpatient surgery, orthotics and prosthetics, radiology, the motion analysis
center (utilizing a 3D motion capture system), occupational therapy, physical therapy,
child life, care coordination, family services and nutrition.

The Springfield Shriners Hospital focuses on cost-efficient, high-quality care.
We participate in a number of local and national health plans and we work hard to
balance cost of care with the services needed.

www.shrinershospitalsforchildren.org

--- Sayfa 22 ---
22
Hospital Facts...
•
Shriners Hospitals for Children is a health care system with 22
facilities dedicated to providing pediatric specialty care,
innovative research, and outstanding teaching programs for
medical professionals.
•
There are 20 Shriners Hospitals for Children facilities in the
U.S., and one each in Canada and Mexico.
•
Children up to age 18 with orthopaedic conditions, burns, spinal
cord injuries, and cleft lip and palate are eligible for care.
•
All care and services at Shriners Hospitals for Children are
provided regardless of the families' ability to pay.
•
The first Shriners Hospital opened in Shreveport, La., in 1922.
•
The hospital assessment from every Shriner in 1922 was $2
per year, now is only $5.
Kora Shriners Screening Clinics
Kora Shriners sponsor New Patient Screening Clinics throughout Central and Southern
Maine locations. These clinics main purpose is to screen possible new patients for our
Hospitals-these clinics are held from 9 to 12 on a Saturday in May each year. If you
have any interest in volunteering for these clinics-please contact Tim Luttrell at 207-
754-4706.

Springfield-SHC Outreach Clinics

Kora Shriners hosts the staff from our Springfield Hospital twice a year here in
Lewiston. The purpose of the Outreach Clinic is to see Maine patients (already in our
system) here in Lewiston for checkup appointments instead of having the patient’s
family travel to Springfield. We usually have 14 to 16 staff members present and see
anywhere from 70 to 100 patients. These Outreach Clinics are held in June and
December at CMMC in Lewiston.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
23
Kora Units
• Aides:
• Ambassadors:
• Arab Patrol: The Patrol is the oldest unit of the temple, established in 1892.  We
are a marching unit that assists the Illustrious Potentate in the opening
ceremonials. We attend and parade in the summer ceremonial and Northeast
Shrine Field Days. Our membership has decreased in the last few years. However
we have had and still have long time members, which proves that there is
something to be said for the expression “we march so that others may walk”.
Please consider becoming a part of tomorrow’s history of Kora Shriners and JOIN
WITH US. You are most welcome to visit our room on the third floor at any
ceremonial or just speak to any member of the Patrol on any questions pertaining
to the Patrol. Our regular meetings are held the first Tuesday of the month at 6:00
pm with special meetings called when needed. Patrol dues are $25.00 a year. The
only equipment that you have to furnish are black shoes and a white shirt. The
Patrol co-sponsors an annual Thanksgiving Turkey Smoker with Androscoggin
County Shrine Club held at Kora Temple.
• Band: The Kora Band is one of the oldest units in Kora Temple, founded in 1929.
Our mission is to furnish music for Kora Shrine gatherings and our community and
to promote and support Kora Shriners and our Shriners Hospitals for Children.  The
Kora Units & Clubs

The Nobility is highly encouraged to join at least one Unit &/or Club.  Units and
Clubs are essential to Kora, providing members with a meeting place and defined
social activities.  There is a large variety in the Units and Clubs of  Kora, each
dedicated to the Fraternity and under the jurisdiction of Kora’s Potentate.  These
organizations are composed of men who share a passion, enthusiasm or hobby.  Many
have Ladies meetings or offer activities for Ladies when they meet.  With such a wide
array of Units and Clubs offered at Kora, a list has been composed with a brief
description of each unit and club.

Units and Clubs have their own bylaws and, therefore, their own officers.  Each
Unit or Club defines the officers and terms of office.  Some units have annual dues or
charge for required clothing, so you will want to ask about these costs.

Many Units have international affiliations and, therefore, have their own
conventions.  Some occur during Imperial Session.

Marching in Shrine parades is something that the Nobles participate in only.
Imperial has strict bylaws which apply to when our Ladies can and cannot participate in
our Public Events.  Ladies are always encouraged to attend parades, whenever
possible.  It’s fun and shows your support of the Nobles and the Shrine.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
24
band strives to provide quality music, as well as, promoting fellowship and
brotherhood among our members.  The band is always looking for new members,
so if you have ever played an instrument or just want to help out, we welcome you
to join the band unit or just “sit-in”.  We perform concerts and in parades through
out the year. There are no annual dues.  We also host annual fundraisers, our
Oktoberfez and Concert in the Park.  The newly refurbished Kora Band Room is
located on the third floor (or mezzanine level) of Kora Temple.
• Buccaneers: The purpose of the Kora Shrine Buccaneers is to participate in
designated Kora Shrine events as well as promoting loyalty, brother-hood, and
shrinedom. The Kora Shrine Buccaneers shall also promote the Kora Shrine
Center through participation in public functions.  Each Unit Member must purchase
their own costume. Initiation Fee shall be assessed and annual dues charged.  The
Buccaneers have monthly meetings so as to keep everyone up to date with shrine
information as well Buccaneer business.
• Facts & Figures:
• Crazy Cops: The Crazy Cops are one of the largest and more active units at Kora
Temple.  We travel around the central and southern part of Maine parading at city
and town events, acting as ambassadors for the Temple and representing the
Shriners Children’s Hospitals.  We also are very active in the Shrine Circus and the
Feztival of Trees, as well as many other events at Kora.  In this capacity, we
present ourselves and represent our Brothers with dignity while having fun.
• Cycle Corp: The Cycle Corps (a mini-bike unit) was formed and became an official
Temple unit in 1969. Our motto is “We ride so kids can walk,” and our mission is to
support Kora Shriners by:  1.  Participation in parades.  2.  Participation in inter-
temple competitions at conventions. 3.  Supporting and conducting fund-raising
projects for our hospital philanthropies.  Current membership in the Cycle Corps is
20 with a listed maximum strength of 25. A prospective member must be a member
in good standing of Kora Shriners and have a valid drivers license. Each member
will be assigned ( if possible) a 5 HP Rupp Mini-Bike and be required to purchase
the units parade uniform and dress uniform. Some of these uniform parts are
provided by the unit. Annual dues are $25.00 Meetings of the Cycle Corps are held
once a month. Practice drills are held once a week or once every two weeks on
Thursdays at 6:30 PM, at a convenient local area. 75% attendance record of all the
unit’s functions is required. The unit participates in approximately 12 parades, 1
competition and 4 ceremonials per year.  Entertainment and fund-raising projects
are sponsored by the Kora Cycle Corps. Wives of the members are very supportive
and wear distinctive jackets similar to the Corps uniform, with appropriate
markings. The Kora Cycle Corps is one of the more active units at Kora Shriners,
because of this, our services are always in demand.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
25
• Greeters: The Kora Shrine Greeter Unit was formed in 1983. Prior to that date, we
were part of the staff, similar to the Aides, under the direction of the Potentate.   Our
specific duties consist of,  but are not limited to, Kora Shrine Center Ceremonials
and other mandatory functions such as the Shrine Circus, Shrine Lobster Bowl,
FEZtival of Trees and Kora Ride In. We sell and collect admission tickets at most of
these functions. Greeting nobles and their ladies and the general public at Shrine
events is an important part of our duties. We try to answer any questions about the
murals in the temple along with the history of Kora Shrine and assist the Potentate
at his direction.  We have 4 or 5 stated meetings per year, usually on the day of a
Kora Stated Meeting (at 5 PM in the Greeter Room) as well as outings and casual
gatherings which are optional. The Greeters are always looking for new members
who are enthusiastic and want to participate in our duties to help make our Shrine
Center successful in its’ endeavors to support our Boston and Springfield Hospitals.
• Flags:  One of the newer units of the Temple, the Flag unit began under the
sponsorship of Kennebec County Shrine Club and became an official Temple unit in
1982. The unit participates in Shrine parades and other events authorized and
approved by the Illustrious Potentate. It promotes Kora Shriners, the Masonic
fraternity, Shrinedom and good fellowship amongst its members.
• Funsters: The Funsters are a group with a mission to support Kora Temple and the
Shrine Philanthropies by appearing in costume at various functions for the
entertainment of the public. Any donations received are presented to the Temple in
support of the Shriners Hospitals for Children.
• Klowns:  The Kora Klowns are a group of Nobles who through the art of clowning
bring smiles to the faces of all ages while supporting our Shrine and its
objectives.  We attend 17 circus shows, about 12 or so parades, and a couple
private events.  We attend a Clown College in Massachusetts yearly (this is a pre
requisite for full member status).  The average active clown typically spends 100+
hours in costume per year. The member is responsible for his own make up and
costume and help is always available to new members.  Everyone has a little clown
in them, some just surface better!
• Highlanders:  The Kora Shrine Highlanders are a traditional military style Pipe and
Drum Corps.  The units was formed in 1979 and has been making sweet Highland
music ever since to spread the word about and support the Shrine’s good work.
The Corps performs in many Shrine events, civic parades, and other public
performances throughout the year and while we are committed to excellence in
what we do we are equally committed to having fun doing it.
• Karts: The Kora Karts unit is organized for the purpose of promoting Kora Shriners,
Shrinedom and friendship and fellowship among its members. The Karts have been

--- Sayfa 26 ---
26
a Temple unit since 1972.
• Medical Corps: This unit has been existence since 1999. Its function is to raise
monies for the Children’s Hospitals and the good of the order. This is done by
performing in parades and other services as directed by the Potentate.
• Legion of Honor:  The Legion of Honor became an official unit of Kora Shriners in
1928. Its mission is to provide escort duty at Kora ceremonials and other official
functions, to carry the Temple colors and assist in flag ceremonies. The Legion
performs floor drills at ceremonials and when appropriate, enters competition with
other similar units at Shrine conventions. The unit ALSO participates in all Shrine
parades and other functions as requested, when deemed appropriate.  All
members are Military Veterans, either active or retired.
• Log Rollers:  The Log Rollers were started in 1988 by Harold Jordan who
purchase the first truck. In 1989 the Log Roller Unit was accepted as a Kora unit
and Harold became the first Director. After six years at the throttle the members of
the unit elected Arthur Jordan, Harold’s son, the Director. Arthur is still leading the
parades today. The Log Rollers promote Kora Temple and good fellowship.
• Motor Corps:  The Motor Corps is a unit of Kora Shriners, having been accepted
in 1984. Its mission is to promote Shrinedom and Kora Shriners; to perform
services for the Potentate at his request; to participate in parades and other official
functions; to provide transportation for nobles and guests of Kora Shriners as the
need arises.
• Mini Racers:
• Mopeds:  The purpose of the Moped unit is to provide members an opportunity to
become proficient in motorized drill formation and maneuvers within a uniformed
unit of Kora Temple. Additionally, upon direction of the elected Potentate,
participate in designated Kora Shrine events as well as promoting loyalty, brother-
hood and Shrindom through our drill for the enjoyment of the Nobility. The Kora
Shrine Moped Unit shall also promote Kora Shrine Temple through participation in
public function.
• Oriental Band: The Oriental Band has been a unit of Kora Shriners since 1956. Its
function is to assist in the ritual of Kora Shriners, perform at ceremonials and
participate in parades at the request of the Potentate
• Provost: The Provost Unit of Kora Shriners, was established in 1983. This unit is
responsible for the internal security of Kora Temple and the protection of the
Nobility at Shrine functions. The unit members are also responsible for security at
events that are considered Kora Shriners functions, including but not limited to the
following: Ceremonials, Lobster Bowl Football Game and Kora Shrine Circus.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
27
• Renegades: For over forty years, the Kora Renegades have provided great
entertainment for crowds at parades.  We take our name from the mini Jeep
Renegades that we drive, and maybe from our attitude as well!  We typically field
15-21 of our mini Jeeps, a full-sized Jeep with a float, a "wrecker", and two golf
carts for members that can't operate a mini Jeep.  We average 12-15 parades a
year, mostly in southern Maine.  We are a close-knit, family-friendly unit.  After
every parade we have a cookout at a members house or a tailgate party at the
parade site.  Come visit, and enjoy our hospitality!
• Second Section:  The Second Section has been a unit of Kora Shriners since
1891. Its function is to assist in the ritual work of the temple and to introduce
novices to the Hot Sands through the Second Section of the Degree. It also takes
part in parades and performs other services at the direction of the Potentate.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
28
Kora Clubs
• Androscoggin Shrine Club:  The Androscoggin Shrine Club allow Nobles and
their Ladies a chance to meet once a month, break bread and socialize.  We raise
money to benefit Kora, and do so mostly by hosting events like Basket Bingo and
the annual Turkey Smoker.  The Shrine Club also volunteers cooking meals for
Kora meetings and the Shrine Lobster Bowl team dinner.  We usually meet on the
Third Monday Evening of each month at Kora Temple in Lewiston. Happy Hour is
5:30-6:30, meeting at 6:30 with supper to follow.  Annual dues are $5, as is
supper.
• Cumberland County Shrine Club:  The Cumberland County Shrine Club monthly
meeting is held on the second of each month.   Their meetings are held at the
American Legion, Stephen W. Manchester Post # 62, 17 Dunn Street, Westbrook.
Our meeting will feature a social hour, catered dinner, business meeting, and
entertainment, runs from 5 pm to 8 pm.  Their meetings are open to all Shriners,
Ladies, & Guests.  Each meeting has a door prize raffle and 50/50 drawing.  So,
please make an effort to come out for an evening of friendship and enjoyment with
your fellow shiners while supporting our club.
• Kennebec County Shrine Club:   Kennebec Valley Shrine Club holds a luncheon
on the second Friday of the month at the Cohen Community Center, Town Farm
Rd. Hallowell, at 11:30 am. The directors meeting are held on the fourth Monday of
the month at 7:00 pm in the Abnaki Room of the Augusta Masonic Bodies building
317 Water Street, Augusta. The Club holds its annual meeting in December.
Regular activities also include a Ladies Night and Potentates Reception held on the
fourth Saturday of January, at the Elks Club in Augusta. We sell tickets for the
Shrine Circus and work at the event.  KVSC sponsors a screening clinic for
Shriners Hospitals for Children on the second Saturday of May.  Most events are
Nobles only but they do invite their Ladies to some of the events.
• Kora Brewers - Taproom No. 11:  The purpose of Kora Brewers is to support
Kora Shriners and promote the good of Shrinedom and Brotherhood in general.
Kora Brewers exists as a means for members to explore their hobby of home
brewing through the promotion and education of brewing beer / wine making /
distilling / and other related activities and to increase the awareness of the quality
and variety of homemade beverages (either non-alcoholic or alcoholic).  Our
membership is made up of those who home brew and also those who just like to
enjoy fine beverages, but more importantly we like to have fun and fellowship while
supporting Kora and our Hospitals.  Our annual meeting is held in April and we
host a monthly “outing” and also sponsor club fundraisers.
• Kora Kampers:

--- Sayfa 29 ---
29
• Kora Widows Club: Kora widows Club is open to any Nobles Widow/Partner.  The
club usually meets on a monthly basis for lunch.  The club helps to serve meals at
the temple, fill baskets for Basket Bingo, send cookies to the Ride-In at Twitchell’s
Airport, help with the Feztival of Trees, gather gently worn coats for the hospitals,
attend Andro. Shrine club meetings each month and so on. We are not a “unit” in
Kora Temple but we are “under the umbrella” of the temple. We are here to help the
temple out to the best of our abilities. If you want to be active in the temple, you can
be, as I am very active, but mostly our widows are content to go to lunch as a club
and do a bit of help at the temple.
• Kora Kraftsman: The Kora Kraftsman is an officially sanctioned Grand Lodge of
Maine Degree Team.  The purposes of the Club are to train and provide skilled
individual, Degree team(s) for all Masonic Degrees, Installations, various Masonic
Lectures, and other Masonic related presentations at public, semi-public or regular
meetings of any Masonic Body.  The club strives to promote, enhance, and cement
Masonic relations between Masonic Fraternity and Shrinedom.  We also provide
and maintain an avenue for fraternal and social activity for Past and Current
Officers of Masonic Lodges, their ladies and families through fraternal meetings,
banquets, dances and other social activities.  The club is open to all Kora Shriners
who are  current or past Lodge officers.
• Motorcycle Club:
• Mid-Coast Shrine Club:
• Oxford County Shrine Club:  Oxford County Shrine Club meets once a month to
come together in Fellowship and friendship. Our social hour is followed by a
wonderful meal and then our monthly meeting takes place , which is generally very
short. We meet at the VFW hall in South Paris on the 3rd Wednesday of the month.
It is always a wonderful time and the meals are always spectacular along with a
table of appetizers that is usually more than we can handle. Come join us with your
Lady for a great night of Brotherhood and fellowship. You can be assured a great
time.
• Western Mountain Shrine Club:
• York County Shrine Club:

--- Sayfa 30 ---
30
Kora’s Major Events
• Circus:

• Maine Shrine Lobster Bowl Classic:  The Maine Shrine Lobster Bowl Classic is
held on the Third Saturday in July of each year.  2017 marked our 28th consecutive
year with Lobster Bowl XXVIII.  This High School Senior All-Star football game is a
Kora Shrine sponsored event where 100% of the net proceeds from the game are
for the benefit of the 22 Shrine Hospitals for Children across the US, Canada, and
Mexico. The Maine Shrine Lobster Bowl Game has been created to raise money
and to help make the public aware of the expert orthopedic and burn care facilities
available to children who desperately need this specialized care, regardless of the
patients’ ability to pay.  This East vs. West match-up brings over 150 student
athletes and coaches from all over the state together to help produce what is
considered the premier High School sporting event held in Maine. All participants
commit to a week long training camp where they make new friends and more
importantly learn why we play the game… ”Strong Legs Run … So that Weak Legs
May Walk”.  The student athletes are high school seniors who have just graduated
and are about to enter college. They are nominated to play in this prestigious game
by their coaches and selected by a committee from the Maine Athletics Association.

All Kora Nobles are mailed a set of tickets to either buy or sell to the game.  Any
tickets which are paid for and returned to Kora are donated to youth leagues
throughout Southern Maine to attend the football game.

There is also a Lobster Bowl Golf Tournament held every year prior to the
game.  The tournament is open to the public and monies raised goes towards this
hospital fundraiser.

• Kora Kares Ride In:  The Kora Kare for Kids Ride-In and BBQ Competition
is one of Kora Shriners major fundraisers.  All net proceeds benefit
Shriners Hospital for Children.  The Ride-In is held at Twitchell’s Airport
in Turner, Maine. The day includes a scenic escorted motorcycle ride, an
ATV trail ride and a Classic Car Cruise –In. The Classic Cars are also
welcome to join the motorcycle ride. All rides return to the field for live
music, food, beverages, raffles, vendors, and a judged BBQ competition
with some delicious BBQ sampling all day, and a Kora Corn Hole
tournament.  Donations to Shriners Hospital for Children from groups,
clubs and individuals are presented in a donation ceremony. The day
starts with breakfast and an opening ceremony with Shriners hospital
patients sharing their success stories.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
31

The BBQ Competition is open to any individual, group or organization
to show off their BBQ skills in a “fun”draising competition for the overall
Grand champion and the People’s choice awards. Cash prizes and great
trophies are awarded, and most importantly….. bragging rights !!!. Our
panel of celebrity judges decide the Grand Champion and the public will
decide the people’s choice. The Competitors sell samples of BBQ and
side dishes to the public all day. Dry camping is available Friday and
Saturday night.

Admission only to the event is free; there is a charge for the riders.
Come out for a day of fun with the Kora Shriners, enjoy some really great
BBQ, live music and meet some of our patients that have been helped at
Shriners Hospital for Children. This event is open to the public and all
are welcome to attend.
• Feztival of Trees:  During the holiday season, Kora Temple holds our Annual
FEZtival of Trees during the week of Thanksgiving. Come in a see the beautiful
trees and decorations, take a chance on the Raffle Room, visit our craft show, and
top it off with a visit with Santa!

--- Sayfa 32 ---
32
Affiliated Women’s Organizations
• Daughters of the Nile is an international organization for women who are related by
birth or marriage to a Shriner, Master Mason or Daughter of the Nile. Founded in
1913, by 22 progressive women with strength of purpose and vision, it boasts 149
Temples throughout the United States and Canada. The top official of the Supreme
Temple holds the title of Supreme Queen. The Daughters of the Nile contribute
over $1 million annually to the Shriners Hospitals for Children. Members also
contribute their time and creative efforts to Shriners Hospitals through volunteer
work and the sewing of garments, quilts, and other necessary items for the
children.
• Ladies Oriental Shrine of North America is a fun group of women who are related by
birth or marriage to a Master Mason. Each court assumes an obligation to extend
financial support and assistance to Shriners Hospitals for Children with emphasis
on the hospital fund, sewing and special projects. Founded in 1903, there are
currently 86 courts throughout the United States and Canada under the Grand
Council. The top official of the Grand Council holds the title of Grand High
Priestess.
• Shrine Guilds of America provides independent support and aid to Shriners Hospitals
for Children and concentrates on the education of children during their stay at
Shriners Hospitals. Organized in 1947, there are approximately 14 guilds today,
mostly in Florida and Indiana. Members are wives or widows of Shriners. The
leader of the Imperial Council of Shrine Guilds of America is called the Imperial
Maharanee.
• Order of the Eastern Star is the largest fraternal organization to which both men and
women may belong. Worldwide, there are approximately 1 million members under
the causes including: Shriners Hospitals for Children, Cancer Research Project,
Arthritis Fund, orphanages and many other charities.
• Sunshine Club is a separate organization with the sole mission of providing financial
assistance for transportation and housing for a child and a family member while the
child is receiving treatment at a Shrine facility. Made up of both men and women,
Shriners and non-Shriners, this organization works year round to raise funds. One
major fund raiser is their Holiday Craft Fair held in November each year. Donations
for the Sunshine Club do come through other sources, but it is the work of this
group in particular that enables Anah temple to more completely assist children
who need medical attention for everything from burns to spina bifida, cleft palates,
orthopedic braces or artificial limbs.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
33
Traveling
• Visiting other Shrines:  Just like in Blue Lodge, Shriners are encourage to travel
and visit other Shrine Temples.  You will want to make arrangements while traveling
prior to attending any events.  This can be done either by contacting that Temple
directly or going through Kora’s office to contact the Temple that you would like to
visit.  Like Blue Lodge depending on the type of event, will determine how formal
the process will be for you to gain admission.  For more information or any
questions on the process please contact Kora’s office.

• Northeast Field Days:  Every year the Northeast Shrine Association holds their
Field Days.  This event is usually held in early Fall and it’s location rotates each
year between the fifteen Temples in our association.  All Nobles and their Ladies
are encourage to attend this event, even if you are not part of a unit.  Many of
Kora’s units travel and participate in the weekend long event which includes
meetings, a Parade, a Banquet, local tours, great hospitality, and so much more.
Hotel arrangements for attending this event can be made through Kora’s office.

• Potentate’s Annual Trip:  As tradition each year, the Potentate hosts an annual
trip.  All Nobles and their Ladies are invited to join the Potentate and his Lady on
their tour.  The locations and dates change each year, the Potentate and his Lady
determined when and were the trip is.  Past trips have included Cruising the
Caribbean, Ireland, the Grand Canyon, the Black Hills, Washington DC, New York
City, Mexico, and many other locales.  The information for each years trip are
published in Kora Sands and there is an information meetings prior to trip booking,
which covers trip details like cost and travel dates.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
34
Northeast Shrine Association Temples

• ALEPPO SHRINERS (a le’ppo) No. 13 - Wilmington, Massachusetts
www.alepposhriners.com

• ANAH SHRINERS (a’na) No. 151 - Bangor, Maine
www.anahshriners.org

• BEKTASH SHRINERS (bek’tash) No. 96 - Concord, New Hampshire
www.bektashshriners.org

• CAIRO SHRINERS (ki’ro) No. 90 - Rutland, Vermont
www.cairoshriners.org

• KARNAK SHRINERS (kar’nak) No. 81 - Dollard des Ormeaux, Quebec, Canada
www.karnakshrine.com

• KORA SHRINERS (ko’ra) No. 59 - Lewiston, Maine

www.korashriners.org

• LUXOR SHRINERS (lux’or) No. 87 - Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada
www.luxorshriners.com

• MAZOL SHRINERS (ma zul’) No. 184 - St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada
www.mazolshriners.com

• MELHA SHRINERS (mel’ha) No. 78 - Springfield, Massachusetts
www.melhashriners.com

• MOUNT SINAI SHRINERS (mount si’ni) No. 3 - Montpelier, Vermont
www.mountsinaishriners.org

• PHILAE SHRINERS (phi’le) No. 128 - Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
www.philae-shriners.com

• PYRAMID SHRINERS (per’a mid) No. 9 - Stratford, Connecticut
www.pyramidshriners.org

• RHODE ISLAND SHRINERS (rode i’land) No. 19 - Cranston, Rhode Island
www.rishriners.com

• TUNIS SHRINERS (too’nis) No. 179 - Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
www.tunis179.org

--- Sayfa 35 ---
35
COMMON TERMS TO THE SHRINE
Assistant Rabban – the second vice-president of the Temple Divan
Caravan – the annual parade of all Shrine units and clubs
Chaplain – responsible for giving the prayers at the Temple.  Offers prayers, blessings
& benedictions as called upon.
Chief Rabban – the first vice-president of the Temple Divan
Crescent & Scimitar – the Shrine emblem
Divan – the group of governing elected and/or appointed officials of each Shrine
Temple.  The top five officers typically progress towards the Potentate position.
Dress – if the noble forgets to introduce his lady, it is said he must purchase a dress
for his Lady
Fez – the red head gear worn by the Shriners
High Priest and Prophet – the third vice-president of the Temple Divan
Hospitals – the Shrine has 22 hospitals to help children with orthopedic, spinal
column, cleft lip and palate, and burn needs
Illustrious Sir – the title that  the present and past Potentates are addressed as
Imperial – the governing body of Shriners International
Imperial Sir – title given to an officer of the Imperial Divan
Lady – a spouse or female friend of a Shriner
Masonic – every Shriner must be a member of this Fraternity
NSA – Northeast Shrine Association – the group of 14 Shrine Temples in our area who
meet on an annual basis to celebrate, entertain and have unit/club competitions.
Noble – the title each Shriner is addressed by
Oriental Guide – the newest elected Divan member and fourth vice-president of the
Temple
Potentate – the President or CEO of the Shrine Temple, elected for a one year term
Recorder – responsible for the records of the Temple
Shriners – the authorized term for referring to the local nobles
Shriners Hospitals for Children – a Colorado Corporation
Shriners International – an Iowa Corporation
Stated Meeting – the regular business meeting of the Temple
Temple – authorized term for referring to the local Shrine building.  Can also be
referred to as the local Shriners and their organization.
Treasurer – responsible for the monies of the Temple
Unit/Club – a group of Shriners who has a common interest and enjoys getting
together.  A Noble can belong to both a unit and a club.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
36
NOTES: