--- Sayfa 1 ---
The Degree Rituals
of
The Supreme Council, 33°, AASR
for the
Northern Masonic Jurisdiction
United States of America
by C. DeForrest Trexler, 33°
Copyright © 2008
Supreme Council, 33°, AASR, NMJ
All rights reserved.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
“If the time ever comes when the Scottish Rite determines to remain
static, when its philosophy may not be adjusted to the needs of a chang-
ing world, then is the time for its obsequies. Until then, its leaders
should never abandon study of the philosophy of its ritualistic teach-
ings that, by recast and revision, it may keep in the van of advancing
civilization.”
Melvin Maynard Johnson
Sovereign Grand Commander
(1943 Allocution)
“It shall be the duty of the Committee on Ritualistic Matters to study
and from time to time to suggest revision of all rituals and ceremonials
of the Scottish Rite within this jurisdiction, to make recommendations
with respect thereto, and to report thereon to the Supreme Council at
each annual meeting.”
Constitutions 135 – 1(5)
If the holder loses possession by death or otherwise,
the finder will please return to:
The Grand Secretary General
Supreme Council, 33°
33 Marrett Road
Lexington, MA 02421

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Contents
1.
Foreword ..........................................................................5
2.
Preface..............................................................................6
3.
Argument..........................................................................8
4.
Degree Realignment.......................................................10
5.
What’s in a Name?..........................................................11
6.
Matters of Style ..............................................................12
7.
Techniques and Technology ...........................................13
8.
The Question of Resources.............................................14
9.
Time and Scheduling......................................................15
10.
A Long Journey – The Fourth Degree............................17
11.
Sacred Fire – The Fifth Degree ......................................20
12.
A Matter of Faith – The Sixth Degree............................22
13.
Equity – The Seventh Degree.........................................24
14.
David and Solomon – The Eighth Degree......................25
15.
Who Serves God Best? – The Ninth Degree..................26
16.
Disobedience – The Tenth Degree .................................29
17.
The Bad Steward – The Eleventh Degree ......................31
18.
Quality of Mercy – The Twelfth Degree ........................33
19.
Royal Arch – The Thirteenth Degree .............................35
20.
Perfection – The Fourteenth Degree ..............................37
21.
The Fifteenth and Sixteenth Degrees .............................40
22.
The Rose Croix Degrees.................................................43
23.
Good and Evil – The Nineteenth Degree .......................47
24.
Master for Life – The Twentieth Degree........................49
25.
Let Justice Be Done – The Twenty-first Degree ............52
26.
The Twenty-second “Musical” Degree ..........................55
3
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 4 ---
27.
The Twenty-third “Four Chaplains” Degree ..................57
28.
The Twenty-fourth “American Indian” Degree..............61
29.
The Twenty-fifth “Ben Franklin” Degree.......................64
30.
The Twenty-sixth “Gettysburg” Degree.........................67
31.
Church and State – The Twenty-seventh Degree ...........71
32.
Search for Truth – The Twenty-eighth Degree...............74
33.
Toleration – The Twenty-ninth Degree ..........................77
34.
Practice Justice – The Thirtieth Degree..........................79
35.
Knight Aspirant – The Thirty-first Degree.....................82
36.
Sublime Prince – The Thirty-second Degree .................85
37.
Epilogue..........................................................................88
38.
Chronological Development of
NMJ Degree Rituals from the Union of 1867................89
39.
Chairmen of the Supreme Council
Committee on Rituals (Ritualistic Matters)....................91
40.
Bibliography...................................................................92
4
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Foreword
to
The Degree Rituals
The most recent edition of The Degree Rituals appeared in the year of the bi-
centennial which we note was some 32 years ago. In an effort to bring most of the
Supreme Council publications up to date, it was requested that Ill. C. DeForrest
Trexler, 33°, chairman of the Ritualistic Matters Committee, assume the respon-
sibility for preparing the present edition for publication.
The work of the committee is demanding, sensitive, essential and on-going.
Ritual is not static but must constantly be subjected to re-evaluation for effective-
ness in light of the times. The Supreme Council is grateful for the yearly efforts
of this select committee of diligent Brothers and especially for the scholarship, pa-
tience and attention to detail of its chairman, Ill. C. DeForrest Trexler, 33°. The
work is not easy, yet as evidenced by this present edition, the committee proved
itself up to the task begun with such competence by Ill. Irving E. Partridge Jr., 33°,
whose chairmanship of the committee to produce the first edition lasted 16 years.
The dedication of Illustrious Brothers, such as Partridge and Trexler and their
committees, is to be noted with deep appreciation.
Fraternally yours,
JOHN Wm. McNAUGHTON, 33°
Sovereign Grand Commander
September 1, 2008
5
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Preface
More than 30 years have passed since publication of The Rituals of the
Supreme Council, 33°, for the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, U.S.A. This
unique work traced the obscure and complex origins and development of the
29 Scottish Rite degree rituals through the course of 200 years from the ear-
liest surviving source, Henry Francken’s 1783 manuscript of 300 pages, be-
lieved to be based on earlier French rituals entrusted to Francken by Stephen
Morin.
The author of The Rituals, Ill. Irving E. Partridge, 33°, Active Member
for Connecticut, was eminently qualified for the task. A member of the
Supreme Council Committee on Rituals1 since 1951, he had served as chair-
man for 15 years, 1957-72, and would be called upon to resume that post in
1977-78. Despite the credentials he brought to the project, Partridge readily
conceded credit for the content of The Rituals to his predecessor, Ill. McIlyar
H. Lichliter, 33°, Active Member at-Large and committee chairman in 1945-
57. Brought to the Supreme Council by Sovereign Grand Commander Melvin
Maynard Johnson in 1942, Lichliter emerged as the preeminent scholar and
authority on the degree rituals of the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction during the
20th century. Lichliter devoted more than a dozen years to research and analy-
sis of the rituals of the jurisdiction, compiling voluminous notes which de-
scribed their content and traced their development. Lichliter continued his
studies until 1958.
Lichliter was more than an antiquarian. He believed that Scottish Rite Ma-
sonry was not simply the working of ritual for its own sake. Ritual was the
means of presenting Masonic philosophy that men might understand the rea-
son and purpose of life, and thereby gain the knowledge and inspiration to
better themselves and society. The logical extension of this belief is that as life
and society are continually changing, so the ritual must be adapted from time
to time to remain relevant. Lichliter’s copious notes included recommenda-
tions as to how the degree rituals might be revised and improved. In this con-
viction, he probably was influenced, and certainly was encouraged, by Grand
6
The Degree Rituals
1 The Supreme Council Standing Committee on Rituals and Ritualistic Matter was renamed
in 2002 as the Committee on Ritualistic Matters. The term “Committee on Rituals,” wher-
ever used throughout this work, refers to the same committee.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Commander Johnson. In contrast to the opinion that prevailed in many other
Scottish Rite jurisdictions, Johnson believed that ritual existed to serve the
Rite, not the other way around.
Although Johnson and Lichliter were prominent advocates of ritual revi-
sion, the practice, as we shall see, did not begin with, nor has it been confined
to, their efforts. As Ill. Arturo De Hoyos, 33°, recently has noted, “The
Supreme Council, 33°, NMJ, has a longstanding practice of ritual revision.
Rather than using only the traditional legends and themes of the Scottish Rite,
many of its degrees employ modern themes to teach its lessons.”2
Consistent with this philosophy, the degree rituals of the Northern Ma-
sonic Jurisdiction have continued to evolve. Since publication of Partridge’s
work in 1976, all 29 rituals have been revised at least once, many of them ex-
tensively, and some have gone through as many as four revisions. Six entirely
new degree rituals have been written and introduced, and one previously
withdrawn has been reintroduced. Five rituals extant in 1976 have since been
withdrawn and replaced.
It is of passing interest that in 1960 the Supreme Councils of the Northern
and Southern Jurisdictions of the United States agreed to joint meetings of
their respective Committees on Rituals for the purpose of promoting greater
uniformity in degree work. Before any meetings were held, however, the
Southern Jurisdiction withdrew from the venture on the grounds that its ritual,
written by Albert Pike, already “was as perfect as humanly possible.” Hence,
there was no reason to discuss change, notwithstanding that Pike himself had
been the greatest innovator of Masonic ritual and, over a period of 30 years
to 1884, had revised the initial versions of his own rituals. Perfect or not, the
reality was that Valleys across the Southern Jurisdiction routinely were
abridging and adapting the Pike ritual to suit their individual situations. Per-
haps it was inevitable that, starting in 1985, the Southern Jurisdiction began
to soften its stance by undertaking to modify and simplify, i.e., abridge, the
Pike ritual. This process culminated in 2000 with issuance of The Revised
Standard Pike Ritual.
7
The Degree Rituals
2 Scottish Rite Ritual Monitor and Guide (2007), 90, n. 1.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Argument
Why is revision (i.e., change) of Masonic ritual necessary or desirable?
Masons come to the Scottish Rite from the symbolic lodge imbued with a
belief in the purported ancient origin and immutability of Masonic ritual and
strictures against innovation. Yet what many regard as the spiritual core of
symbolic lodge ritual, the Hiramic legend of the Master Mason’s degree was
itself an innovation that did not come into general usage until a decade or
more after the formation of the first Grand Lodge.
The Scottish Rite degree rituals recorded in the Francken Manuscript and
what we know of their communication during most of the nineteenth century
were skeletal compared to the dramatized allegories with which we are famil-
iar. For example, the 20° and 27° rituals, noted for their impressive dramas,
did not include dramatic sections at all until they were added by the revised
rituals of 1896. Moreover, the medieval trial drama of the 30° (formerly the
31°) did not appear until 1938 and did not become a permanent part of the rit-
ual until 1949. Even more recent is the dramatic section of the 11° which did
not appear until 1974. Perhaps most surprising of all is the fact that the “Con-
stans” allegory of the 31°, considered by many of our Brethren to represent
the essence of Scottish Rite ritual, made its first appearance as late as 1916,
when it was added to the ceremonial ritual of the 32°.
During the past 150 years the format of Scottish Rite degree rituals has
been completely transformed. The traditional full form ritual, established by
the French rituals of the mid-1700’s and no doubt based on the form of the
symbolic lodge degrees, consisted of a ceremonial opening, followed by re-
ception of the candidate, the obligation and investiture, and a lecture or cat-
echism, often very lengthy, explaining the history, symbolism, and lesson of
the degree. In the late 19th century the lecture and catechism were increas-
ingly replaced by a dramatic allegory which during the 20th century became
the principal component of most degree rituals. In other words, the dramatic
had superseded the didactic as the preferred method of communicating the
essence of the ritual. By the end of the last century, the ceremonial portion
was disappearing entirely from most degree rituals, leaving only the dramatic
section, or allegory, as the ritual of the degree.
8
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Several noteworthy examples of radical revision of Scottish Rite degree
rituals occurred during the first half of the 20th century. In 1922, Frederick
of Prussia and the European setting of the 20° ritual were superseded by
George Washington and the American Revolution. The change was believed,
and subsequently proven, to be more effective in communicating the lessons
of patriotism and trustworthiness to an American audience. In 1942, the
drama of the 26° ritual, based on the persecution of early Christians in ancient
Rome, was replaced by the biblical story of Joseph and his brothers which
was seen as an improved medium to communicate the lesson of mercy. That
same year, an elaborate dramatic production set against the colorful back-
ground of Herod’s Temple replaced the time-honored, solemn and didactic rit-
ual of the 17°, based on the Book of Revelation.
We have touched upon the philosophical justification, if not the impera-
tive, for ritualistic revision. If the purpose of the ritual is to impart a moral les-
son and shape personal behavior, then it must be meaningful and inspiring to
the individuals to whom it is communicated. This, in turn, requires that the
method in which the ritual is communicated be understandable and that its
content be relevant in the prevailing social culture. Society, as we know, is
subject to continuing change, and during the past 30-odd years that change
has come at an accelerated rate. Of course, truth and the contrast between
moral right and wrong do not change. But means of communication and in-
terpretation must be responsive to cultural change if the message is to be un-
derstood.
9
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Degree Realignment
Without question, the most significant single development in the degree
ritual of this jurisdiction since 1976 has been the realignment or transfer of
four degree rituals in their entirety from the Consistory to the Lodge of Per-
fection. As early as 1974, the Committee on Rituals’long range policy for rit-
ual revision called for realignment of the ritualistic allegories of the Lodge,
Council, Chapter, and Consistory in a logical, approximately historical se-
quence. This required the transfer of the Old Testament-based allegories of the
23°, 24°, 25°, and 26° from the Consistory to the Lodge of Perfection. More-
over, the Consistory rituals contained dramatic allegories that illustrated im-
portant moral lessons which were seen as an improvement over traditional
Lodge of Perfection degree rituals that were nothing more than extensions of
the Hiramic legend exemplified in the symbolic lodge.
Although the proposed realignment was not presented for the Supreme
Council’s approval until 1985, implementation proceeded rapidly thereafter.
The transfer began in 1986 and was completed in 1993, replacing the existing
rituals of the 5°, 6°, 9°, and 12°. The greatest challenge, or rather opportunity,
of the process was the necessity to prepare four entirely new degree rituals to
replace the Old Testament allegories in the Consistory. Inspired, no doubt,
by the success of the “Washington” allegory of the 20°, all of the new rituals
were based on more contemporary American themes. Thus, the aim was for
Scottish Rite ritual to provide a more timely and relevant message as well as
a more coherent one.
10
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 11 ---
What’s in a Name?
Notwithstanding extensive changes in the form and substance of degree
rituals over the years, the titles of the degrees remained relatively constant
from the early 19th century. This resulted in the traditional titles of many of
the degrees, however grandiloquent, becoming increasingly arcane, obscure,
and irrelevant to the ritual. In 1979 the Committee on Rituals considered the
increasing inconsistency between the titles and the rituals of various of the de-
grees, but determined that degree titles were mandated by the Constitutions
of the Supreme Council. Thus, the traditional degree titles were left in place.
There the matter rested for nearly a quarter century. In the meantime, the
transfer of the four Old Testament degree rituals from the Consistory to the
Lodge of Perfection and their replacement by entirely new rituals had made
the anomaly of degree titles more difficult to overlook. In 2003 the committee
revisited the question of degree titles that bore no relevance to the subject
matter of the ritual. Prime cases in point were the 6°, “Intimate Secretary,” the
ritual of which now was based on the biblical story of Moses and the brazen
serpent, and the 25°, “Knight of the Brazen Serpent,” now with a ritual based
on the life of Benjamin Franklin. Appropriate changes in the titles of the 6°,
9°, 24°, 25°, and 27° were recommended and approved, together with perti-
nent enabling amendments to the Constitutions. In subsequent years similar
changes were made in the titles of the 4°, 12°, 23°, 26°, 30°, and 31°, as well
as abbreviations of the titles for the 10° and 15°.
11
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Matters of Style
Ritual revision most frequently takes the form of stylistic changes in the
dialogue. The choice of a word and the turn of a phrase, though highly sub-
jective, are far from arbitrary distinctions without a difference or elevations
of form over substance. They can matter a great deal in attracting and retain-
ing the appreciation of the audience, no less than in facilitating the effective
delivery of lines by amateur actors. The dialogue must not only convey the
intended message and be clearly understood, it must capture the attention of
the audience and, ideally, impress and inspire the mind and the emotions with
the message we are seeking to communicate.
The meaning, usage, and nuance of many words change over time, so they
may no longer express the same thought or be understood in the same way as
they were by previous generations. “Gay” and “awesome” are but two ex-
amples of words that have undergone such a change within the recent past.
Grammatical style also evolves with time. The florid, verbose style of dis-
course, so natural and popular at the turn of the 20th century, no longer is in
vogue or even understood by many. Words and styles of speech must be mod-
ified in order to communicate to succeeding generations.
The situation is complicated by the fact that authors of the degree rituals
in many cases intentionally used styles of speech, such as King James Eng-
lish, that were archaic even in their day. Perhaps the intention was to imbue
the language of the ritual with a more elevated and poetic tone than was pres-
ent in ordinary verbal discourse. The result, unfortunately, has been that over
time ritualistic dialogue has become increasingly less impressive and intelli-
gible to contemporary audiences.
Audiences of the early 20th century also were accustomed to lengthy the-
atrical performances, featuring long monologues. In contrast, contemporary
audiences, conditioned no doubt by modern media, expect and tolerate only
much shorter presentations in which thoughts are communicated in brief ex-
changes of interactive dialogue, in the nature of everyday conversation. In
other words, the message of the degree ritual must be communicated within
a shorter audience attention span.
12
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Techniques and Technology
The accelerating pace of visual arts technology and the expanding use of
new theatrical techniques have raised the bar for achieving the necessary ef-
fect of theater, “suspension of [audience] disbelief.” Scottish Rite Valleys
have been obliged to accommodate these developments if they expect to com-
municate the degree rituals effectively to audiences that have become accus-
tomed to them. Many Valleys have introduced computerized lighting and
sound controls. Use of a conventional main curtain and scenery sets may help
create impressive visual tableaus, but often compromises the presentation by
breaking the continuity of the drama and losing audience attention by exces-
sive dead curtain time. Hence, traditional techniques increasingly are being
superseded by imaginative use of open stage concepts, scrims and scenery
drops or flies, and electronic projections, resulting in significant savings of
time, cost, labor, and, most important of all, audience appreciation.
Video recording of degree rituals was first sanctioned by the Supreme
Council in 1986, subject to specified conditions, for the limited purposes of
training, critique, and evaluation. In 2003 the Supreme Council discontinued
publication of the degree rituals in printed book form, a practice that dated
back at least to 1870. Henceforth, all the degree rituals were recorded on a sin-
gle computer disk, an updated copy of which is distributed to each Valley an-
nually. This transition has greatly facilitated the process of ritual review and
revision, and accelerated distribution to the Valleys of the current version of
the ritual, not to mention the substantial savings that have accrued to the
Supreme Council by elimination of printing costs.
13
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 14 ---
The Question of Resources
Ritualistic revision also has been driven by conditions and changes within
the fraternity. One hundred Valleys, more or less, spread across the 15-state
jurisdiction, from the Atlantic to the Mississippi River, and from Canada to
the Ohio River, represent diverse aggregations of human and material re-
sources. Degree rituals that require a multi-scene stage production, with a
sizable cast and elaborate costumes and sets, may be an acceptable challenge
for large, well-endowed Valleys, but beyond the capabilities of small Valleys
with slender resources. The usual result is that such a ritual never appears in
the degree schedules of the latter, or, if it does, is presented in an unimpres-
sive, inadequate manner. The optimum goal should be to devise a ritual with
options that can be presented in full panoply by Valleys able to pursue that op-
tion, but providing for basic cast, dialogue, and scene requirements so that the
ritual can be presented in a meaningful and inspiring manner by all Valleys
in the jurisdiction.
Membership trends since the 1970’s have had an impact on the availability
of degree cast participants in every Valley of the jurisdiction, regardless of
size or location. A universal complaint from directors is that they no longer
are able to cast the degrees. Large degree casts once may have been desirable
to provide opportunities for member participation, as well as for theatrical
effect. But present reality calls for rituals that can be presented effectively by
minimal numbers of essential cast members.
14
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Time and Scheduling
One of the greatest influences on ritual revision is the element of time. In
recent decades Scottish Rite reunions have been contracted into increasingly
tighter time schedules. Even large Valleys are challenged by this kind of pres-
sure. The day is long past when candidates anywhere in the jurisdiction ex-
perience all 29 degrees before attaining the 32°. At present, two eight-hour
daily sessions probably represent the maximum in degree programs. In many
Valleys it can be considerably less. One-day reunions, originally introduced
as special occasions to accommodate candidates whose occupational obliga-
tions would not allow their participation for a longer period, soon became
commonplace occurrences.
One-day reunions provide adequate time for candidates to witness the six
degree rituals required as a minimum for advancement to the 32° (Constitu-
tions 516-1). A schedule that provides only the minimum requirement, how-
ever, affords little opportunity for candidates, and members for that matter, to
witness the remaining 23 degree rituals and experience the full degree system
of the Rite as it was intended and designed. In 1990 the Committee on Rituals
reported as a matter for concern the growing trend toward shorter reunions
and the presentation of fewer degrees, as candidates who witness only the re-
quired degrees are not exposed to the complete philosophy of Scottish Rite
Masonry.
Such concerns led to the Scottish Rite passport program, proposed in 1999,
to encourage 32° Masons to witness all the Scottish Rite degrees. The follow-
ing year the Supreme Council adopted a policy goal for each Valley in the ju-
risdiction to present every one of the 29 degrees at least once during a six-year
cycle. Of course, both of these programs are dependent upon voluntary com-
pliance by members and Valleys. Their success has been limited.
More effective in addressing the problem generated by shorter reunion
schedules has been the policy of the committee in revising the degree rituals
to make them more concise. This policy was first formalized in 1995, when
the Supreme Council approved a recommendation of the committee to elim-
inate the opening and ceremonial sections from all future revisions of the de-
15
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 16 ---
gree rituals (except for the 32°). The effect was that the degree rituals would
begin with the prologue. The policy was justified on the grounds that with the
trend toward shorter reunions and fewer degree exemplifications, it is better
to dispense with the ceremonial sections and devote as much as possible of
the limited time available to presentation of the allegories (dramas) that con-
tain the Masonic lessons of the degrees.
This policy subsequently was extended in implementation to eliminating,
or making optional, scenes not deemed essential to dramatize the philosoph-
ical theme of the degree. Furthermore, ritual revision in major part has be-
come the rewriting of dialogue to delete superfluous material and render
passages more concise in expression.
A goal of ritual revision pursuant to these policies is to enable each of the
23 non-mandatory degree rituals to be presented at least once over a two-
year cycle of four two-day reunions.
*
*
*
*
*
Notwithstanding these efforts, however, the 21st century brought a revo-
lutionary innovation in Masonic membership that appeared to require an
equally revolutionary response. Grand Lodges across the jurisdiction began
to sponsor “one-day classes,” whereby candidates could receive all three sym-
bolic lodge degrees and, in addition, become a Scottish Rite Mason in a single
day. Obviously, in such a venue the time allotted to the Scottish Rite degree
work was extremely brief, in some cases barely more than one hour. These
conditions permitted the presentation of only one degree, either the 14° or
the 32°, begging the question whether any philosophical lesson could be ef-
fectively communicated, let alone the philosophy of Scottish Rite Masonry.
The response, in 2004, to the challenge posed by the “one-day class” was
a new departure in degree ritual. It did not purport to communicate a moral
lesson in itself, but rather to give the candidate a preview of the philosophical
presentations he could expect to experience on his ritualistic journey through
the degrees of Scottish Rite Masonry.
16
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 17 ---
A Long Journey — The Fourth Degree
Despite its prominent position as the first of the Lodge of Perfection, or
so-called “Ineffable,” degrees, the ritual of the 4°, until very recently, has had
a relatively languid, uneventful, and uninspiring development.
As recorded in Henry Francken’s 1783 manuscript, the 4° ritual was sim-
ple in content as well as in form. It represented a lodge of Secret Masters
convened to fill a vacancy among the guardians of the Holy of Holies of the
unfinished Temple. The lessons, obviously enough, were secrecy and silence.
Seventy-odd years later, Albert Pike’s ritual greatly elaborated upon
Francken, adding an antiphonal invocation of duty as the lesson of the degree
and introducing a catechism on the various names of God. The Pike ritual
was the primary source for the 4° Ritual of 1871, the first version to be ap-
proved by the Supreme Council after the Union of 1867. Several additions
and deletions were made in the succeeding rituals of 1894 and 1917. Except
for the addition of a ceremonial cleansing of the candidate, however, there
was no significant change in content.
The prevailing attitude toward the ritual was best expressed in few words
by McIlyar Lichliter in 1943, “Dead. Dull. Overloaded with symbolism.”
Many agreed that what was needed was a more dramatic ritual. Nevertheless,
no effective steps were taken to address the need.
The changes introduced with the ritual of 1955 were more of form than
substance. A new ceremonial section included a formal opening of the Lodge
of Perfection, a cover obligation for all the Lodge of Perfection degrees, and
an introductory legend and prologue. The so-called “drama” was not dramatic
at all, but simply a modernized version of the traditional initiation ritual, i.e.,
reception, obligation, investiture, and lesson (lecture), together with the cer-
emonial cleansing and antiphonal on duty.
The ritual of 1955 was indeed distinct from previous rituals, but there was
no real difference. Nevertheless, it remained the authorized ritual of the 4° for
half a century. In 1984 the Supreme Council approved a requirement that the
4° must be exemplified by every Valley at least once a year. It was an attempt
to establish the importance of the degree as a bridge from the symbolic lodge
17
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 18 ---
to the Scottish Rite. However, despite numerous attempts during the succeed-
ing years, the Committee on Rituals was unable to produce a meaningful im-
provement on what was generally considered to be an unsatisfactory ritual.
For three successive years, commencing in 1987, the committee reported
a continuing study to improve the viability of the 4° ritual. Then, during 1991-
94, the committee reported the review of no fewer than six proposed revisions
of the ritual, all of which were attempts to introduce a dramatic scene to por-
tray the Masonic lesson of duty. None of the six was found to be suitable.
Then, an unprecedented call was extended to Scottish Rite Masons through-
out the jurisdiction to contribute to the effort. Apparently, no acceptable re-
sponses were received. In 2002 the committee considered three separate
proposals for a new, dramatic 4° ritual, all of which were based on Old Tes-
tament themes — David and Goliath, Moses and the Burning Bush, andAbra-
ham and his sons — the first of which reached the point of a trial
exemplification. None of them, however, was considered to be acceptable.
The most the committee could accomplish was to amend the ceremonial sec-
tion to expand references to the Solomonic era to accommodate the four de-
gree rituals transferred to the Lodge of Perfection from the Consistory.
The apparently insoluble problem of the 4° had been around for a consid-
erable time and had baffled generations of ritualists long before the turn of the
21st century. Even Albert Pike, that most prolific of Scottish Rite ritualists,
confessed his frustration in an allocution delivered in his 70th year that the
Lodge of Perfection rituals were not all they should or could be, but that “We
cannot do all things.”
Then, in 2004, circumstances took a sudden, unexpected and dramatic
turn. Recent developments in membership were having a radical impact on
the presentation of degree rituals. Grand Lodges had begun to authorize “one-
day classes,” in which it was possible for candidates not only to receive all
three symbolic lodge degrees, but also to become Scottish Rite Masons on
the same day. To accomplish this, the time available for Scottish Rite ritual
work, of necessity, allowed exemplification of only one degree, either the
14° or the 32°. Whatever the results in expanding membership, the situation
was most unsatisfactory insofar as exposing candidates to the degree rituals
and communicating to them the moral philosophy of the Scottish Rite. Nev-
ertheless, the “one-day class” appeared to be a feature of the Masonic land-
scape for the foreseeable future.
18
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 19 ---
To accommodate the new situation created by the “one-day class” and to
restore the viability of the Scottish Rite degree system, Sovereign Grand
Commander Walter E. Webber proposed preparation of a new 4° ritual that
would be the required initial degree for Scottish Rite candidates. The pro-
posed ritual would introduce the candidate to the Rite as he identified with an
exemplar passing through four dramatic scenes, each representing one of the
coordinate Bodies of the Scottish Rite. In each scene, the exemplar would
encounter some of the characters, dramatic situations, and philosophy pre-
sented in the degree rituals of the representative Body. In effect, the proposed
ritual would be a ritualistic preview of the Scottish Rite degree system. Hope-
fully, it would encourage candidates to return to view the degree rituals they
had not yet experienced.
A rough draft of a degree ritual conforming to the outline proposed by
Grand Commander Webber was prepared virtually overnight by Ill. James L.
Tungate, 33°, Active Member for Illinois and a member of the Committee on
Ritualistic Matters. Within a few months the ritual was completed and staged
in a trial exemplification. As completed, the ritual consisted of a prologue, an
introductory scene where the exemplar, a newly-made Master Mason, met
his guide through the Scottish Rite, followed by four scenes in which the ex-
emplar encountered a selection of characters and passages of dialogue (so-
called “modules”) from the rituals of the 8°, 12°, 16°, 18°, 20°, 23°, 24°, and
31°. The proposed new ritual was presented to the Supreme Council and ap-
proved as the 4° Tentative Ritual of 2004, under a new, descriptive title, “Mas-
ter Traveler.”
In 2007, after a few years of presentation across the jurisdiction, the ten-
tative ritual was revised by the addition to scene five (Consistory) of modules
for the 22°, 26°, and 27°. Moreover, the modules for the 22°, 23°, 24°, 26°,
and 27° were made optional, any two of which were to be presented, together
with the required modules for the 20° and 31°. The purpose of this revision
was to allow individual Valleys greater flexibility in using the ritual to intro-
duce candidates to the degree system of the Scottish Rite.
The 4° tentative ritual represented a new departure in Scottish Rite degree
rituals. It was unprecedented in concept, in substance, and in manner of pres-
entation.
19
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Sacred Fire — The Fifth Degree
The ritual of the 5°, “Perfect Master,” as it appeared in the Francken Man-
uscript, followed the traditional pattern of the earlier French rituals from
which it was derived. A candidate was received and obligated, then given a
long explanatory lecture and catechism that included a description of the fu-
neral and tomb of Hiram Abif.
Seventy years later, the Carson/Van Rensselaer ritual3 presented similar
themes in the form of a funeral service at the tomb of Hiram Abif, inculcating
respect for the memory of a deceased brother as the lesson of the degree.
With various changes and embellishments, these themes continued to evolve
through several rituals until they emerged in the ritual of 1960 as a dramati-
zation of a Lodge of Sorrow for Hiram Abif.
Although the Lodge of Sorrow was a logical culmination of the ritualistic
development of the 5° since the Francken ritual, it provoked adverse criticism.
Many viewed the 1960 ritual as a gratuitous and essentially meaningless ex-
tension of the Hiramic legend exemplified in the symbolic lodge which served
no purpose in the degree system of the Scottish Rite.
Increasing disenchantment with the Hiramic legend as a degree theme co-
incided with plans of the Committee on Rituals to replace several of the
Lodge of Perfection degree rituals with Old Testament-based rituals from the
Consistory. The so-called degree realignment policy was approved by the
Supreme Council in 1985, and three years later, after having survived in
evolving forms for more than 200 years, the 5° ritual became the second
Lodge of Perfection degree ritual to be withdrawn and replaced under this
policy.
The new 5° Tentative Ritual of 1988 was the 23° ritual of 1930. It was
based on the Old Testament story of the sons of Aaron, who, by their self-ab-
sorbed inattention and neglect of duty, allowed the sacred fire in the Taber-
nacle to be extinguished. The prime author of the ritual was English-born Ill.
John Lloyd Thomas, 33°, later an Active Member for New York and a mem-
20
The Degree Rituals
3Enoch Terry Carson’s 1853 ritual apparently was based on the 1845 manuscript of Killian
Van Rensselaer. Hence, that work is referenced throughout as the Carson/Van Rensselaer
Ritual.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
ber of the Committee on Rituals, who submitted a draft ritual to the committee
in 1907.4 This draft was approved as the 23° Ritual of 1908, which, with
minor revisions, became the ritual of 1930.
The tentative ritual was superseded by the revised 5° Ritual of 1996, which
contained stylistic changes to “modernize” the dialogue and deleted the cer-
emonial section, in accordance with the policy adopted by the Supreme Coun-
cil in 1995. Further stylistic changes were made in the ritual of 2007,
eliminating passages of dialogue considered to be extraneous or obscure to
modern audiences, such as mention of the Shekinah. Anachronistic reference
to “Jehovah” was changed to “the Lord,” and the equally ahistorical reference
to “Hell” was deleted. The recent revisions, however, have left intact the con-
tent of the Thomas ritual.
21
The Degree Rituals
4 Ill. Brother Thomas (1857-1925) made a prolific and important contribution to the degree
rituals of this Scottish Rite jurisdiction. Writing in the early 20th century, his work has
stood the test of time. He was the prime author of the basic rituals that are still in use today
for the 5°, 9°, 31°, and 32°.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
A Matter of Faith — The Sixth Degree
The 6° in the Francken Manuscript bore the unusual and unwieldy title
“Perfect Master by Curiosity of Intimate Secretary.” This name, at any rate,
was descriptive of the reception, where the candidate intruded into the pres-
ence of King Solomon as an unintentional eavesdropper and thereby gained
admission to the degree. Another unusual feature was the fact that the lecture
explained the delta as symbolic of the Christian triad, Faith, Hope, and Char-
ity, an anomaly for the Old Testament setting of the ritual. Nevertheless, this
explanation (although deleted by Albert Pike) remained a part of the 1871
ritual, the first to be approved after the Union of 1867. A succession of 6° rit-
uals over more than 150 years made only minor verbal changes, except for ab-
breviating the title of the degree to “Intimate Secretary,” improbable as that
name may have been for a Scottish Rite degree.
A major revision finally appeared in the ritual of 1966 although it re-
mained consistent with the essence of the Francken ritual. In accordance with
the conventional form of degree rituals as they developed during the 20th
century, a ceremonial section, including the obligation and investiture, was
followed by a dramatized elaboration of the eavesdropping incident repre-
sented in the reception of the Francken ritual. This remained the ritual of the
6° for more than a quarter century.
In 1985 the Supreme Council approved the transfer of degree rituals with
Old Testament themes from the Consistory to the Lodge of Perfection. This
plan ultimately resulted in withdrawal of the traditional 6° ritual which in
substance dated back more than 200 years to the Francken Manuscript. It
was replaced in 1993 by a tentative ritual that had been the ritual of the 25°,
“Knight of the Brazen Serpent.” The 1993 tentative ritual, with some modi-
fications, later was approved as the 6° Ritual of 1996.
The new ritual of the 6° consisted of a prologue, and introductory scene
one, in which the officers of the lodge discussed the problems and needs of
the contemporary world in preparation for the lesson of the degree which
then was exemplified in dramatic form in scene two. The dramatization,
which dated back to 1896 and owed its inspiration to Albert Pike, was based
on the biblical account of Moses and the Brazen Serpent. The lesson of the
degree was faith — in ourselves, in each other, and in God.
22
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Several years later further revisions were made with the ritual of 2003.
Presentation of scene one was made optional and the prologue was moved to
a logical sequence preceding scene two. A number of stylistic changes were
made in the dialogue. Finally, the title of the 6° was changed from the now
totally irrelevant “Intimate Secretary” to the highly descriptive “Master of
the Brazen Serpent.”
23
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Equity — The Seventh Degree
Few degree rituals of the Scottish Rite can be traced in recognizable form
from origins as early as that of the 7°, “Provost and Judge.” Not only is it
found in the Francken Manuscript of 1783, but that version also appears to
have been a literal translation of earlier French rituals dating back to 1754.
The title of the degree was derived from a biblical source, that is, the officers
appointed over Israel by David (I Chronicles 23:4). The lesson of the degree
from its inception has been truth, equity, and justice. The drama, as we know
it, a dispute between workmen in a quarry and its eventual resolution, was
first introduced with the ritual of 1894. This was amplified by addition of the
trial scene in 1915. The 1941 ritual added an optional brief intermediate scene
in pantomime, depicting the theft of the keystone.
Thus matters stood for more than 30 years until the tentative ritual of 1974.
After an extended period of trial exemplifications across the jurisdiction and
further modifications, this version was approved as the ritual of 1980. As fi-
nally approved, the revised ritual included a marginally shortened ceremonial
opening, a few modest word changes in the drama, and elimination of the op-
tional pantomime scene.
The ritual of 2005 eliminated the ceremonial opening in its entirety, con-
sistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995, and made a
number of stylistic changes in the dialogue of the drama. However, the cast
of characters and the dramatic theme presented in the quarry and the trial
scenes remained intact. Today, the message of the 7° is essentially the same
as that which appeared in French rituals 250 years ago and is dramatized in
the same fashion, as a quarry dispute, that was introduced into the ritual in the
1890’s.
24
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 25 ---
David and Solomon — The Eighth Degree
The ritual of the 8° provides a ready example of the developmental pattern
of many Scottish Rite degree rituals. The Francken Manuscript included a
complete ritual for the 8°, entitled “Intendant of the Building.” The ritual con-
tained the traditional elements of a Scottish Rite degree ritual — opening, re-
ception, obligation, investiture, and a lecture, explaining the symbolism of
the degree. The theme was the creation by King Solomon, in the role of Thrice
Potent Master, of a superintendent of the workmen on the Temple.
Subsequent rituals were either copies of Francken or added only minor
embellishments. All of this was greatly elaborated and presented in more dra-
matic form by Albert Pike’s ritual, which in essence was the ritual adopted
after the Union of 1867 and used in this jurisdiction for more than a century.
Then, beginning in 1979, the Committee on Rituals embarked on a revi-
sion of the ritual. The prime author of the revision was Ill. William W. Merrill,
33°, a member of the Valley of Detroit and a consultant to the committee.
Merrill added a dramatic section in two scenes that depicted David’s selection
of Solomon as his successor and the builder of the Temple. To compensate for
the addition of the dramatic section (15 pages) and to avoid greatly extending
the length of the ritual, Merrill significantly shortened the ceremonial section
which contained the original elements of the ritual. The aim was to commu-
nicate the lesson of the degree in dramatic form, as an allegory which was be-
lieved to be more effective than the traditional didactic form of Masonic
ritual. The revised version was approved as the ritual of 1981.
Twenty-five years later another revision of the ritual deleted the ceremo-
nial section in its entirety, consistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme
Council in 1995, thereby reducing the playing time by a third. The prologue
was modified to include an explanation of the lesson of the degree instead of
simply reciting the biblical background of the drama. Modest changes were
made in the drama to eliminate superfluous and obscure dialogue. The
anachronistic reference to “Jehovah” was changed to “the Lord.” In all other
respects the ritual of 2006 preserved the content of the drama and still bears
the original Francken title, “Intendant of the Building.”
25
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 26 ---
Who Serves God Best? — The Ninth Degree
The ritual of the 9°, as it appeared in the Francken Manuscript, followed
the usual pattern of early Scottish Rite rituals — a ceremonial opening and
reception, the obligation and investiture, and a long explanatory lecture. The
theme was derived from the Hiramic legend exemplified in the symbolic
lodge, in particular, the murder of Hiram Abif and the ensuing pursuit of the
assassins. The lesson was a forbidding admonition on vengeance and the
breach of an obligation.
Subsequent rituals made various refinements on the Francken ritual, in-
cluding a dramatization of the selection by lot of nine craftsmen who were to
pursue the assassins; hence the title of the degree, “Master Elect of Nine.”
(Pike’s variation on this was “Knight Elu of Nine.”) Such was the form of the
ritual of 1871, the first to be approved by the Supreme Council for the 9°
after the Union of 1867. It remained substantially unchanged for nearly a cen-
tury, until the first of a succession of tentative rituals was introduced in 1965.
The criticism written in 1943 by McIlyar Lichliter was but one expression
of dissatisfaction with the rituals of the 9° and 10°, both of which were based
on the same theme, pursuit of the assassins of Hiram Abif. In addition to the
issue whether this theme provided an appropriate basis for the moral lessons
to be exemplified in two degrees of the Scottish Rite, the version of the Hi-
ramic legend portrayed in the degree ritual was at variance with that exem-
plified in the symbolic lodge, despite the fact that the latter was part of the
experience of every Freemason and the very reason why the legend was the
theme of the two rituals.
Consequently, over a period of 15 years commencing in 1965, three suc-
cessive tentative rituals were prepared for both the 9° and the 10°. The pri-
mary author of these efforts was Ill. William H. Cantwell, 33°, Active
Member for Delaware, a member, and for a time chairman, of the Committee
on Rituals. The culmination of Cantwell’s work was a combination ritual for
the 9° and 10°, the tentative ritual of 1980. This was a logical step, as for
many years it had been customary to present both degree rituals in conjunc-
tion as a continuous performance.
26
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 27 ---
The 1980 tentative ritual, however, was quickly overtaken by events and
never was issued. Since 1974, the Committee on Rituals had been working
by fits and starts toward a major realignment of degree rituals. The plan en-
tailed a transfer of rituals based on Old Testament themes from the Consistory
to the Lodge of Perfection. By the early 1980’s the realignment was becoming
a reality. The proposal was formally approved by the Supreme Council in
1985, and in 1986 the 9° became the first Lodge of Perfection ritual to be
withdrawn and replaced by a degree ritual transferred from the Consistory.
Any doubts about the moral lessons to be derived from the traditional rit-
ual of the 9° were more than addressed by its transplanted replacement, the
tentative ritual of 1986. The new 9° ritual featured a dramatic allegory that
had originated as the literary handiwork of Ill. John Lloyd Thomas, 33°, later
an Active Member for New York and a member of the Committee on Rituals,
that had been adopted by the Supreme Council in 1909 as the ritual of the
24°. The allegory, consisting of a single, albeit lengthy scene, depicted a fic-
titious event at the dedication of the Temple, an assembly of representatives
of many religions summoned by King Solomon. After a discussion of many
views on the nature of God, disrupted by a voice of skepticism, the dramatic
action climaxed with an expression of spiritual unity inspired by a moving
plea for a universal faith of service to humanity. “God is best served by those
who best serve their fellow men.”
The tentative ritual was subsequently confirmed as the 9° Ritual of 1992.
Although the substance of the ritual did not provoke criticism, its presentation
did pose casting and scheduling difficulties for Lodges of Perfection. This
was taken into consideration in the following decade when the ritual was next
reviewed and revised.
The 2003 revision was primarily the work of Ill. C. DeForrest Trexler,
33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania and chairman of the Committee on Rit-
ualistic Matters. It deleted the brief ceremonial section in conformity to the
policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995, although much dialogue
from the ceremonial was incorporated in a relatively long prologue to set the
background for the allegory. More significant were changes in the allegory.
In addition to extensive stylistic revisions in the dialogue, the essential cast
was reduced by a third, including two of the eight representatives of foreign
27
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 28 ---
religions.5 The overall effect was a substantial decrease in playing time,
thereby facilitating presentation of the allegory by Lodges of Perfection. Fi-
nally, the traditional title of the degree, “Master Elect of Nine”, which no
longer was relevant to the content of the ritual, was changed to “Master of the
Temple.” These revisions were approved as the 9° Ritual of 2003.
28
The Degree Rituals
5 Two cast deletions, the Chinese merchant and the Persian priest, were apparent anachro-
nisms. It is unlikely that direct commercial contacts existed between China and the Middle
East in the tenth century B.C. Even less explicable was the presence of a disciple of
Zoroaster some 400 years before the latter’s lifetime.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Disobedience - The Tenth Degree
As part of the Rite of Perfection, the ritual of the 10° appeared in the
Francken Manuscript under the title “Illustrious Elect of Fifteen.” It was in
the traditional form of degree ritual, with reception, obligation, and explana-
tory lecture. In the mid-19th century the ritual was expanded by Albert Pike,
who injected symbolism with philosophical meanings and titled it “Illustrious
Elu of Fifteen.” Although a virtual copy of the Pike ritual was in use after the
Union of 1867, it was superseded in 1871 by a shorter ritual that omitted
much of Pike’s symbolism and adopted the modern title “Master Elect of Fif-
teen.” The influence of Pike reappeared in the ritual of 1894.
The early rituals of the 10°, as those of the 9°, were based on a theme from
the Hiramic legend exemplified in the symbolic lodge; that is, the pursuit and
apprehension of the assassins of Hiram Abif. The lesson that pervaded the
various versions of the ritual was obedience to authority. The ritual of 1917
dramatized the episode of the assassins in two scenes, which was expanded
to five scenes in the tentative ritual of 1966, in addition to the traditional el-
ements of the ceremonial section. For some years it had been customary to
present the 10° in conjunction with the 9°, as the rituals of the two degrees
were based on the same theme and the dramatic action from the 9° ritual to
the 10° was continuous.
The succession of three tentative rituals proposed for the 10° (as for the
9°) over a span of 15 years from 1965 indicated dissatisfaction with the con-
tent of the ritual and repeated efforts to rework the Hiramic legend and im-
prove the message. As early as 1943, McIlyar Lichliter had criticized the
rituals of both the 9° and 10° as presenting a version of the Hiramic legend
that differed from that exemplified in the symbolic lodge to which the Scottish
Rite rituals obviously were intended to relate. The primary author of the ten-
tative rituals was Ill. William H. Cantwell, 33°, Active Member for Delaware,
a member and one time chairman of the Committee on Rituals. Cantwell’s ef-
forts culminated in a short-lived attempt to combine the ritual of the 9° with
that of the 10° into a single ritual which was approved by the Supreme Coun-
cil as the 9° and 10° Tentative Ritual of 1980. In the event the combined ritual
never was issued. By this time the Committee on Rituals was moving to im-
plement a plan to replace several of the Lodge of Perfection degree rituals,
29
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 30 ---
including that of the 9°, with degree rituals from the Consistory having Old
Testament themes.
At that juncture, the committee abandoned efforts to salvage the Hiramic
legend theme and in 1985 proposed a new ritual for the 10°, based on the
apostasy of Solomon. It consisted of a short ceremonial section, prologue,
and a dramatic allegory of three scenes. The theme was consistent with the
traditional lesson of the degree, “The violator of his obligations shall not go
unpunished.” The primary author of what became the new 10° Tentative Rit-
ual of 1986 was Ill. Robert L. Miller Sr., 33°, Active Member for Indiana and
chairman of the committee.
The new tentative ritual was confirmed as the 10° Ritual of 1992 and re-
mained in effect until revised fourteen years later. The ritual of 2006 abbre-
viated the degree title to “Master Elect,” deleted the ceremonial section in
accordance with the current Supreme Council policy, and made a modest
number of mainly stylistic changes in the prologue and the allegory. The ritual
of the 10° is one of the few current Scottish Rite degree rituals to have a les-
son that is posed in negative rather than positive terms.
30
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 31 ---
The Bad Steward — The Eleventh Degree
The Francken Manuscript contained the full text of a ritual for the 11°,
“Sublime Knight Elected,” in the traditional form of opening, reception, ob-
ligation, and a lengthy lecture, which included a catechism of symbolism.
The ritual of Albert Pike, titled “Sublime Knight Elu of Twelve,” introduced,
among other things, an explanation that abuses committed by his tax collec-
tors prompted King Solomon to appoint supervisors, or Elus, which was ex-
emplified in the ritual. The first 11° rituals in use after the Union of 1867,
including that approved in 1871, were variations of the Pike ritual, and bore
the modern title, “Sublime Master Elected.” The ritual of 1894 was essentially
a condensed version of the Pike ritual. No changes were made in this ritual
for the next 80 years.
The ritual of 1974 transformed the degree by introducing a substantial
dramatic section of five scenes and 47 pages following a brief ceremonial
section. The drama portrayed a story of abuse and fraud perpetrated by one
of Solomon’s tax collectors. Exposure of the wrongdoing persuades the King
to appoint one of the victims and a select group of his associates as “Sublime
Masters” to superintend the collection of taxes. A principal reason for the
change was to provide Lodges of Perfection with an opportunity to present a
major dramatic ritual.
The purpose apparently was served, as the 1974 ritual continued in use
for 30 years without second thoughts on the part of the Committee on Rituals.
However, concerns did develop. The long drama with five scene changes and
a substantial cast was not easily accommodated by the scheduling constraints
and limited resources of many Lodges of Perfection. The revised ritual of
2004 was intended to alleviate these difficulties and facilitate presentation of
the degree while preserving the content of the dramatic ritual.
The ritual of 2004 eliminated the brief ceremonial section, in accordance
with the Supreme Council policy adopted in 1995, as well as the “Interlude”
scene two of the dramatic section. Moreover, the lengthy scene four (revised
scene three), which was entertaining, but did not significantly advance the
action of the drama, was made optional. These changes shortened the playing
time of the ritual by as much as a third and eased the casting requirements.
31
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Stylistic revisions were made in the dialogue. Repetitious and superfluous
passages were deleted. Anachronisms were corrected. Finally, the inexplica-
ble and possibly derogatory use of Arabic names for certain, less than exem-
plary, characters in the drama was changed to Hebrew names appropriate to
the time and place represented. The prime author of the revised ritual was the
chairman of the Committee on Ritualistic Matters, Ill. C. DeForrest Trexler,
33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania.
32
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Quality of Mercy — The Twelfth Degree
Henry Francken’s 12° ritual, “Grand Master Architect,” contained a long
(ten page) lecture and catechism that reviewed the moral symbolism of nu-
merous branches of scientific knowledge, the five orders of architecture, and
the mathematical instruments. As such, the ritual was closely related to the
symbolic lodge degrees, in particular the fellowcraft, and introduced funda-
mentals of symbolic Masonry into the Scottish Rite. In yet another extension
of the Hiramic legend, the setting of the ritual was the School of Architecture
established by King Solomon after the death of Hiram Abif to train craftsmen
to complete the design and building of the Temple. The ritual was not dra-
matic, nor, through its long history, did it lend itself to a dramatic presenta-
tion.
The 1871 ritual, the first to be approved after the Union of 1867, defined
the lesson of the degree with the phrase “Virtue is as necessary as talents.”
Subsequent rituals were greatly influenced by Albert Pike, emphasizing the
five orders of architecture to which the candidate was introduced in the Fel-
lowcraft Degree of the symbolic lodge. The 1917 ritual introduced an optional
semi-dramatic scene in which the relative qualities of various ancient types
of architecture were debated. In 1968, a new tentative ritual, later approved
as the 12° Ritual of 1976, brought the School of Architecture forward in time
to the Renaissance. The telescoping of time was intended to correct the
anachronism of discussing the five orders of architecture, which were of clas-
sical origin, in a Solomonic setting. However, it also created another anomaly,
as all the degree rituals of the Lodge of Perfection, by definition, were sup-
posed to be set in the Solomonic era. Before too many more years passed, this
issue became academic.
The proposal by the Committee on Rituals to transfer degree rituals with
Old Testament themes from the Consistory to the Lodge of Perfection was ap-
proved by the Supreme Council in 1985. As a result of this policy, the 12° Rit-
ual of 1976, which had evolved from the 1783 Francken ritual, was
withdrawn in 1993. Its replacement, the tentative ritual of 1993, was very
different in every respect.
The new ritual of the 12° was a modified form of the dramatic allegory
from the 26°, which itself was of comparatively recent origin. Introduced to
33
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 34 ---
the Scottish Rite degree system with the 26° Ritual of 1942, the allegory was
a dramatization of the familiar biblical story of Joseph and his brothers, and
was considered to be an ideal vehicle to teach the then lesson of the 26° —
mercy. The primary author of the allegory was Ill. Ernest W, Hotchkiss, 33°,
a member of the Valley of Detroit, who had written the drama some years
earlier for presentation by Scottish Rite players in his Valley.
Despite general agreement as to the appropriate nature of the theme, it
took nearly ten years for the “Joseph” allegory to be awarded permanent sta-
tus as the ritual of the 12°. The problems were practical ones, similar to those
experienced with other degree rituals transferred from the Consistory to the
Lodge of Perfection. The length of the ritual, size of the cast, and staging re-
quirements of four scene changes and three different sets posed production
difficulties for smaller and single-body Valleys, as well as under the time con-
straints imposed by the trend toward shorter reunion schedules. The sched-
uling and casting problems were partially addressed in the tentative ritual of
1996, which deleted the ceremonial section in compliance with the policy
adopted by the Supreme Council the previous year. However, the Committee
on Rituals recognized that this was not a complete solution.
This led, in 2002, to a complete rewrite of the prologue and the allegory,
of which Ill. C. DeForrest Trexler, 33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania and
chairman of the Committee, was the primary author. The most radical change
was the reduction of the allegory from five to two scenes (revised scenes
three and five of the tentative ritual), without requiring a change of set. As
rewritten, these scenes contained a condensed dramatization of the story of
Joseph and his brothers, as well as the lesson of the degree. A revised version
of scene one of the tentative ritual was retained for optional use as an intro-
ductory scene by those Valleys with adequate casting and staging resources
and time in the reunion schedule. In addition to extensive revisions in the di-
alogue, several changes were made for the sake of greater consistency with
the story as related in the biblical book of Genesis. As a result of the forego-
ing, the 12° Ritual of 2002 represented a considerable simplification of cast-
ing and staging requirements as well as shortening of playing time.
A further step needed to be taken. In 2005, the name of the degree was
changed from the once descriptive, but now arcane “Grand Master Architect”
to the apropos “Master of Mercy.”
34
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Royal Arch — The Thirteenth Degree
A complete ritual for the 13°, by name “The Royal Arch,” is recorded in
the Francken Manuscript. Written for a cast of five lodge officers, it consisted
of an opening and prayer, reception, obligation, a long lecture reciting the
legend of the Royal Arch of Enoch, and a closing in which the signs and
words of the degree were rehearsed. The setting of the ritual was an under-
ground vault. During the reception, three candidates were admitted at a time.
Descending into the earth by rope and retrieving the delta proved them worthy
to receive the secrets of the degree.
By the middle of the 19th century, the Carson/Van Rensselaer ritual (1853)
and that of Albert Pike (1855) still retained the substance of the Francken rit-
ual but with more dramatization under the name “Knight of the Ninth Arch.”
Following the Union of 1867, the Carson/Van Rensselaer ritual essentially
was adopted by the Supreme Council as the ritual of 1871. With the ritual of
1894, the degree received its modern title, “Master of the Ninth Arch.” The
ritual of 1917 was a revised and abridged version of the Carson/Van Rensse-
laer ritual which continued in use for more than half a century.
The tentative ritual of 1971, approved as the ritual of 1977, represented an
extensive revision in the structure of the 13°, although the substance was re-
tained. In the fashion of Scottish Rite degree rituals of the period, it was com-
prised of a ceremonial opening, reception, and obligation, followed by a
prologue and dramatic section, or allegory, of five scenes, alternating between
the audience chamber of King Solomon and the entrance to the subterranean
Temple of Enoch. The legend that had been communicated by the lecture in
previous versions of the ritual was now dramatized in the allegory.
Another extensive revision was introduced with the 13° Ritual of 2004.
Consistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995, the cer-
emonial opening, reception, and obligation were eliminated. The prologue
was shortened. Although the five alternating scenes were retained in the al-
legory, there were numerous stylistic changes and abridgements in the dia-
logue. The result was a significant reduction in playing time. Despite the
revisions, the substance of the ritual remained that of Carson/Van Rensselaer
and consistent with the theme found in Francken, albeit recast in form for the
35
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 36 ---
benefit of contemporary audiences. “Difficulties and dangers, however great,
should not deter the true and faithful Brother….”
36
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Perfection — The Fourteenth Degree
Among the 25 degrees of the Rite of Perfection catalogued by Henry
Francken in his 1783 manuscript, no ritual was lengthier or more detailed in
exposition than that of the 14°, titled simply “Perfection.” Over time, the title
of the degree evolved into “Grand Elect Mason,” from the setting of the
Francken ritual in a Lodge of Grand Elect Masters.
Many elements of the Francken ritual, in modernized form, remain a part
of the current ritual. After the opening and reception, the examination re-
viewed the words, signs, and lessons of the preceding Lodge of Perfection de-
grees. This was followed by the confessional inquiry, the obligation,
anointing, ring presentation, covenant of friendship or aroba, a symbolic shar-
ing of bread and wine, and the investiture. No longer in use is the historical
lecture that traced the history of Israel from the reign of King Solomon and
a legendary history of Freemasonry down to the Crusades and the Knights of
St. John (not the Knights Templar), which accounted for two-thirds of the 39
manuscript pages that Francken devoted to the 14°.
To Francken’s already long and multi-sequence ritual, the 1853
Carson/Van Rensselaer ritual added the lesson, an antiphonal recital of scrip-
tural passages, the Ten Commandments, and, as part of the investiture, the
symbolism of the collar, apron, and girdle of perfection. All of this was the
basis of the ritual of 1871, the first to be approved after the Union of 1867.
The subsequent rituals of 1894, 1917, 1927, and 1938 incorporated a number
of minor changes, the main effect of which was incrementally to condense the
historical lecture.
Then, in 1945, the Committee on Rituals set to work on a major revision.
This project, at least in its initial stages, was abortive, as the committee could
not agree among themselves on a draft of proposed revisions. Points of con-
tention involved the confessional nature of the inquiry and whether or not to
retain the historical lecture. The issues were heatedly debated by the Active
Members in the Executive Session of the Supreme Council and referred back
to the committee for further study. To resolve the impasse, Sovereign Grand
Commander Melvin Johnson appointed a new committee, chaired by McIlyar
Lichliter.
37
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 38 ---
After a year of intensive effort and multiple draft revisions, as well as so-
licitation of comments from across the jurisdiction, the committee proposed
a revised ritual, which was approved by the Supreme Council as the 14° Rit-
ual of 1946. The end result of this process was that most of the ritual had
been rewritten and considerably shortened, although the substance remained
intact. The opening was made optional. In major breaks with the past, the in-
quiry was directed to the individual conscience, thereby eliminating public
confession, and the long, traditional, historical lecture was deleted. A new
obligation emphasized charity and reverence for God.
The ritual of 1976 included a new prologue, shortened the reception and
ring dialogue, eliminated exemplification of the degree signs from the exam-
ination and investiture, altered the sequence of portions of the ritual, inserted
a number of stage directions, and added an epilogue to the closing. It also in-
troduced a dramatic element in the person of Moses to present the Ten Com-
mandments.
During 1986-93, several degree rituals were transferred from the Consis-
tory to the Lodge of Perfection, replacing the existing rituals of the 5°, 6°, 9°,
and 12°. This development necessitated changes in the examination which
made specific reference to the superseded rituals. This was addressed in the
14° Tentative Ritual of 1995 by condensing the review of Lodge of Perfection
degrees into a single paragraph so that it no longer was a catechism of each
of the preceding degrees.
Other significant changes also appeared in the tentative ritual. The se-
quence of obligation, ring, covenant of friendship (aroba), and anointing was
rearranged. More controversial were the deletion of the investiture and the re-
wording of the many scriptural passages of the ritual to conform to the New
Revised Standard English Bible. This was one of the first instances in which
scriptural passages in a degree ritual of the jurisdiction did not follow the tra-
ditional King James translation.
In 2000, the Supreme Council restored the investiture and, with this mod-
ification, the tentative ritual was approved as the 14° Ritual of 2000.
Writing in 1945, McIlyar Lichliter had criticized the ritual of the 14° as
lacking in continuous action and dramatic unity. It was, in his view, a collec-
tion of unconnected sequences. Despite three major revisions during the next
half century, this important ritual in the Scottish Rite degree system was still
considered by many to be less than satisfactory.
38
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Consequently, after a brief period, there was another revision, resulting in
the 14° Ritual of 2006. The opening, which had been optional since 1946,
was eliminated, consistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme Council
in 1995. The examination was further modified and shortened. Reference to
the “Holy Bible” was changed to the “Volume of the Sacred Law.” While the
overall sequence of the ritual was retained, extensive revisions were made in
the stage directions and the dialogue for the sake of consistency and clarity
and to eliminate superfluous passages. Some of the Thrice Potent Master’s di-
alogue was reassigned, or permitted to be reassigned, to other members of the
cast in order to relieve excessive monologues.
The issue of biblical translation was revisited and resolved by a decision
to retain the New Revised Standard version introduced in 1995, except for the
23rd Psalm, which reverted to the more familiar and poetic language of the
King James translation.
An option was added to permit the Ten Commandments to be delivered by
the orator, instead of Moses, where the ritual is presented by a cast in modern
Masonic dress rather than in Solomonic costume.
A recurring issue with the 14° was the proper setting of the ritual. Tradi-
tionally, as with other Lodge of Perfection degrees, the setting was the
Solomonic era. From the beginning, however, this posed an anachronism.
Philosophically, as Albert Pike recognized, the setting of the ritual should be
the present. Moral concepts from the historic past, many of which were un-
known in the tenth century B.C., are introduced as lessons of the degree. The
inconsistency never has been fully resolved. Thus, the set for the 14° contin-
ues to be furnishings associated with the Temple of Solomon and the cast
may appear in Solomonic costume, or in modern Masonic dress wearing the
regalia of the Lodge of Perfection. Either is permitted by the current ritual.
With all due respect to the opinion of Dr. Lichliter, the ritual of the 14°
may be lacking in dramatic unity because, unlike most other Scottish Rite
rituals, it is not and never was intended as a dramatic presentation. Despite
extensive revisions to the ritual over the years, generations of ritualists have
been reluctant to stray very far from the original elements of the Degree as it
existed in 1783. Thus, today’s ritual of the 14°, “Grand Elect Mason,” is not
all that far removed from the essentials found in the Francken Manuscript.
39
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 40 ---
The Fifteenth and Sixteenth Degrees
If for no other reason than their number, the ritualistic development of the
two degrees presented in the Council, Princes of Jerusalem, has been compar-
atively less complex and contentious than the eleven conferred in the Lodge
of Perfection. The essence of the current rituals of the 15° and 16° may be
traced to the Francken Manuscript of 1783. Often called “The Historical De-
grees” of the Scottish Rite system, the rituals are based on incidents relating
to the return of the Jews to their homeland from the Babylonian captivity and
the construction of the Second Temple in the late sixth century B.C. Sharing
a common historical setting and protagonist, the Jewish prince Zerubbabel,
as well as a similar dramatic theme, these degrees also share the same pro-
logue which is given only in the 15° when both degrees are presented during
the same session of the Council.
The 15° rituals of Francken (1783), Carson/Van Rensselaer (1853), and
Albert Pike (1855) all were based on the theme of Zerubbabel’s appeal to
King Cyrus on behalf of his people “to return to Judea and restore the Tem-
ple.” They also shared the same title for the degree, “Knight of the East, or
Sword.” The tempting of Zerubbabel to disclose the “Secrets of Freema-
sonry” as the price for his request first appeared in the Carson/Van Rensselaer
and Pike rituals, but not in dramatized form. Dramatization was introduced
with the ritual of 1878, although the modern temptation scene did not appear
until the ritual of 1911. It is believed (although not documented) that this
scene was written by Ill. Eugene S. Elliott, 33°, a member of the Valley of
Milwaukee, sometime previous to 1902 and may have been presented in that
Valley for some years before its inclusion in the degree ritual.
The modern ritual of the 15° dates from 1920 and continued virtually in-
tact, with only one significant revision, until early in the present century. Sev-
eral changes were approved by the Supreme Council in 1959. These included
elimination of the fourth, anticlimactic and superfluous scene in the Apart-
ment of the West, consisting mainly of a lecture describing what the audience
had already witnessed in the action of the preceding scenes, and moving the
obligation from the end of the degree to the opening. The ritual of 1999 was
the first complete edition of the 15° ritual since that of 1943, and differed
from the latter only by incorporating the changes approved in 1959.
40
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 41 ---
As a result of the 2003 decision to record all degree rituals on computer
disk and discontinue publication of the degree rituals in book form, and in
view of the fact that a study had not preceded publication of the 1999 ritual,
the Committee on Ritualistic Matters made a complete review of the 15° rit-
ual, last done more than 45 years before. The result, the 15° Ritual of 2005,
represented an extensive revision of the previous ritual, in effect, the first to
be promulgated since 1943.
Despite the scope of the 2005 revision, the historical setting, dramatic
theme, cast of characters, and Masonic lesson were unchanged. However, the
ceremonial opening, obligation, and sash and sword investiture were deleted,
consistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995. For sim-
ilar reasons, the lengthy entrance and introductions of princes and satraps
were deleted from the drama. The dialogue was rewritten to render archaic
and obscure language intelligible to a contemporary audience. Several overly
long or essentially meaningless passages were deleted. The ordeal sequence
was rewritten to include an active intercession by Daniel on behalf of Zerub-
babel. Historically questionable references to the practice and secrets of
“Freemasonry,” which dated back to the mid-19th century rituals, were
changed to the more ambiguous “Ancient Craft.” The 1943 prologue, which
was a lengthy recitation of biblical events and dates, with only a single sen-
tence devoted to the Masonic lesson of the degree, was substantially revised
and shortened. Vestigial reference to the “Apartment of the East” was re-
moved. Finally, the title of the degree was shortened to “Knight of the East.”
The result was seen as a more audience-friendly presentation with a much
reduced playing time.
The theme of the 16° ritual recorded by Francken was the story from the
Old Testament Book of Ezra and the Apocryphal Book of Esdras of an em-
bassy, led by Zerubbabel, sent from Jerusalem to the court of King Darius to
request assistance in rebuilding the Temple. In the mid-19th century the Car-
son/Van Rensselaer ritual, as well as that of Albert Pike, followed the account
from Esdras almost verbatim to feature Zerubbabel’s speech extolling the
power of truth as the lesson of the degree. As in the case of the 15°, drama-
tization was introduced with the ritual of 1878.
The modern ritual of the 16°, “Prince of Jerusalem,” also appeared in
1920. As its companion 15°, it was subject to a major change in 1959, when
the final scene, the Apartment in the West, was eliminated for the same rea-
41
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 42 ---
sons. The change was carried forward in the ritual of 1992, a more thorough
revision, in which the dialogue was rewritten (“modernized”) to appeal to a
contemporary audience. Historical background to the ritual was provided dra-
matically by additional dialogue in the first scene, notwithstanding that much
of this also was presented to the audience in lecture form in the prologue
shared by the 15° and the 16°. The duplication was eliminated when the new
prologue written for the 15° in 2005 was made a part of the 16° ritual that
same year.
The 16° Ritual of 2007 incorporated further refinements in dialogue, elim-
inating superfluous wording and marginally shortening the playing time.
Anachronistic use of the name “Jehovah” was replaced by “the Lord.” The
climax of the ritual, Zerubbabel’s dialogue on truth and the response by King
Darius, was rearranged for greater dramatic effect.
As in the case of the 15° Ritual of 2005, the revisions made to the 16° rit-
ual in 1992 and 2007 have left the dramatic theme, cast of characters, and
Masonic lesson unchanged.
42
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 43 ---
The Rose Croix Degrees
As in the Council, the two degree rituals presented in the Chapter of Rose
Croix share a common historical setting, in this case, that of the New Testa-
ment. Unlike the Council degrees, however, the ritual of each of the so-called
“Philosophical Degrees” of Rose Croix has gone through a very different
process of development.
The ritual of the 17°, “Knight of the East and West,” that appeared in the
Francken Manuscript seems to have been a stand-alone ritual with a chivalric
background, i.e., Knights Templar, featuring symbolism and passages from
the New Testament Book of Revelation. Early rituals of the degree included
a disclaimer that it was a “Degree of Chivalry,” historically unrelated to
Freemasonry. The ritual that was approved by the Supreme Council in 1870
had atrophied into a brief prelude, a mere appendage to the 18°, concerned
with the search for the Lost Word. And so it continued into the middle years
of the 20th century.
In 1939, a dramatic allegory, replete with pageantry and a large cast, was
proposed as a replacement ritual for the 28° and was approved for trial exem-
plification as the Tentative 28° Ritual of 1940. The primary author was Dr.
Harry K. Eversull, 32°, a clergyman and president of Marietta College in
Ohio. The setting of the allegory was King Herod’s Temple which supplanted
the Second Temple of Zerubbabel in the first century B.C. It soon became
apparent to Sovereign Grand Commander Melvin Johnson, among others,
that the “Herod Allegory” could provide a convenient historical and philo-
sophical bridge from the Council degrees to the 18°. What became one of the
more bizarre chains of events in the ritualistic history of the Supreme Council
was set in motion.
In 1942, the 17° ritual in use since 1870 was abruptly withdrawn and, as
recommended by Commander Johnson, was replaced by the tentative 28° rit-
ual which became the 17° Ritual of 1942. Unfortunately, the new ritual was
not universally accepted. A survey conducted in 1954 disclosed that many
Valleys had no history or intention of presenting the 1942 ritual because of
what were perceived to be demanding cast and staging requirements. Rather
than attempting to modify the ritual to facilitate its presentation, in 1957, the
43
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Supreme Council withdrew the “Herod Allegory” and restored the traditional
17° ritual that it had superseded only 15 years earlier.
Thirty years passed. Then, the Valleys were heard from again, this time ex-
pressing discontent that Rose Croix Chapters, in contrast to the other Scottish
Rite Bodies, could present only what amounted to a single degree. The re-
stored 17° ritual, of course, had resumed its old place as but a prelude to the
18°. In response, the “Herod Allegory” was resurrected and, beginning in
1989, was rewritten several times over the course of the next five years to
address the production drawbacks that previously had discouraged its pres-
entation and to reinforce its connection with the 18°. The first draft was the
work of Ill. Theodore E. Torok, 33°, a member of the Valley of Trenton (Cen-
tral Jersey) and a consultant to the Committee on Rituals.6 Subsequent drafts
were prepared by Ill. Richard W. Parker, 33°, Active Member for Vermont, a
member and later chairman of the Committee.
Finally, the modified “Herod Allegory” returned as the 17° Tentative Rit-
ual of 1994, for the second time displacing the traditional ritual of the 17°.
The tentative ritual later was approved as the 17° Ritual of 2002. The new rit-
ual ended with the sealing of the Book of Life, thus creating a link to the
ritual of the 18°. Instructions published with the ritual expressly permitted
individual Valleys to adjust the size of the cast to conform to stage capacity,
provided there were sufficient actors to make the scene realistic. The ritual
was to be dramatized as a single scene, thereby eliminating the need for scene
changes and multiple sets.
A further revision of the “Herod Allegory,” approved a few years later as
the 17° Ritual of 2007, removed the ceremonial section in conformity with the
policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995. A number of wording
changes were made in the prologue and the allegory mostly stylistic in nature.
A few superfluous passages were deleted as was the unlikely intention of the
Essenes “to visit the schools of philosophy in Greece and Rome.”
Many elements of the present 18° ritual, “Knight of Rose Croix,” were
present in the Francken Manuscript. These included the symbolism of the
44
The Degree Rituals
6 Ill. Brother Torok’s talents as a dramatist were evidenced by his popular Masonic theme
play December’s Rose, published by the Masonic Service Association in 1988 for presen-
tation to Masonic and non-Masonic audiences.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
pelican, the cubic stone, the three pillars of faith, hope, and charity, the mystic
letters “I.N.R.I.”, and use of Jesus of Nazareth as the exemplar. Where the
Francken ritual differed most radically from the modern ritual was in the stip-
ulation that only Christians could be admitted to the degree.
The 18° ritual approved by the Supreme Council in 1870 reinforced and
perpetuated the original Christian emphasis of the degree. This circumstance
was not without its critics, however. For one, Albert Pike, Sovereign Grand
Commander of the Southern Jurisdiction and a renowned Masonic ritualist in
his own right, objected to the 18° ritual of the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction
as a “strictly Christian degree.” The rebuttal to Pike was that he was an inno-
vator, who had changed the ritual of the 18° to transform what always had
been a Christian degree into a universal degree.
The issue never was completely resolved, as some voices continued to ad-
vocate a ritual with a more universal message, that is to say, acceptable to all
monotheistic faiths. This point of view finally gained concessions in the ritual
of 1942, further refined in 1964, which made widespread changes to rephrase
or delete overtly Christian dialogue and included a new prologue that em-
phasized the universal character of the degree. However, as it does to this
day, the ritual retained Christian symbols, the beatitudes, “The Story of the
Cross,” the mystic letters, and Jesus of Nazareth as the exemplar of the de-
gree. Another refinement toward a more universal ritual was made in 1987,
when the name “Jesus” replaced “Christ” in the prologue.
In 1990-91, and again in 2007, the Committee on Ritualistic Matters ex-
pressed concern that the universalist philosophy of Scottish Rite Masonry
was being compromised by local Valleys embellishing presentations of the
18° with non-ritualistic, unauthorized Christian sermons, prayers, and hymns.
As to the ritual itself, however, the 18° remains in equipoise between tradi-
tionalists and universalists. In effect, it has retained its Christian character
but has been purged of theology and dogma.
Aside from issues of Masonic philosophy, the ritual of the 18° has been
impacted by the redefining changes made in the 17°. As previously explained,
the 17° Ritual of 1957, based on the Book of Revelation, had been presented
in conjunction with and as a prelude to the 18°. The decision to withdraw
that ritual in 1994 prompted a revision of the 18° ritual to incorporate intro-
ductory material formerly communicated as part of the 17°. This resulted in
45
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 46 ---
the 18° Tentative Ritual of 1994. The tentative ritual also introduced a stylistic
innovation that would have ritualistic ramifications beyond the 18°. The nu-
merous scriptural passages in the ritual were rewritten according to the New
Revised Standard English Bible, replacing the time-honored King James ver-
sion. The tentative ritual was approved as the 18° Ritual of 1999.
Further revisions followed in the ritual of 2007. The brief ceremonial sec-
tion was eliminated consistent with the policy adopted by the Supreme Coun-
cil in 1995. A modest number of stylistic changes were made in the dialogue.
Use of the word “Shekinah” was discontinued for the sake of clarity to mod-
ern audiences. Significantly, suggestions to shorten the ritual and to remove
passages relating to the Crucifixion and the Resurrection were resisted. None
of the revisions made to the 18° ritual since 1964 have altered the dramatic
theme of Masonic lesson of the degree.
46
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Good and Evil — The Nineteenth Degree
The 19°, “Grand Pontiff,” now the first of the Consistorial degrees, was
one of the Rite of Perfection degrees recorded in the Francken Manuscript.
In its earliest form, it consisted primarily of a kind of lecture with references
to the “New Jerusalem” and other symbols from the New Testament Book of
Revelation.Albert Pike’s ritual expanded on these elements to include a series
of 12 lectures on the struggle between good and evil. The ritual of 1886 de-
veloped this theme into a dramatic allegory which forms the basis of the mod-
ern ritual. It introduced Philetus the Neophyte, his visit to the Shades, and
the personified Spirits of Evil and of Masonry. This ritual continued intact
until a shortened form appeared in 1953.
After more than a century of presentations to Scottish Rite Masons, mak-
ing it one of the longest running degree rituals in the Jurisdiction, the 19° rit-
ual underwent major revisions. This process was not quickly or easily
accomplished. Over a period of five years, commencing in 1988, a succession
of five draft revisions were prepared. The primary author of these successive
revisions was a clergyman, Ill. Richard C. Thistle, 33°, a member of the Val-
ley of South Bend and a consultant to the Committee on Rituals.
In the course of these revisions, the ritual was rewritten in more contem-
porary language. An addition to the prologue explained the derivation of the
word “Pontiff” from the Latin “pontifex,” literally “bridge-builder.” The ap-
pearance of the Spirit of Evil and his confrontation with the Spirit of Masonry
were staged as a vision of the pontiffs. The obligation and the anointing were
eliminated as anticlimactic to the principal action of the allegory, thereby set-
ting a precedent that would be followed in subsequent revisions of other de-
gree rituals. In place of these deletions, a charge was added at the close of the
ritual. The fifth such revision was approved as the 19° Tentative Ritual of
1993.
For nine years the approved revision remained in limbo as the tentative rit-
ual until it was superseded by a further revision, the 19° Ritual of 2002. The
2002 ritual retained the prologue and scenes one and two of the tentative
ritual without change and made two minor deletions from dialogue in scenes
three and five.
47
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Major changes, however, were made in the climactic scene four. The dance
of the “imps,” or spirits of darkness, was eliminated because of the perception
that in many presentations it fostered a Halloween-like atmosphere that de-
tracted from the serious message of the ritual. The voices of gloom and of
prophecy also were deleted, their dialogue being spoken, respectively, by the
Spirit of Evil and the Spirit of Masonry. Much consideration was given to
substituting a Spirit of Good for the Spirit of Masonry because of possibly un-
intended religious connotations arising from this character’s confrontation
with and triumph over the Spirit of Evil (i.e., Satan). Ultimately, it was de-
cided that such a change would detract from the Masonic character of the rit-
ual. Hence, the character was styled the “Spirit of Freemasonry” and the
“Defender of Good.”
Notwithstanding the many changes embodied in the 1993 and 2002 rituals,
the action sequence and dramatic theme of the degree have remained the same
— the perennial conflict between good and evil.
48
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 49 ---
Master for Life — The Twentieth Degree
It is no exaggeration to observe that the allegory of the 20° for many years
has been regarded as the most popular and inspiring of the Consistorial degree
rituals, due in no small measure to its patriotic American theme. Of course,
the early form of the ritual as it appeared in the Francken Manuscript was
quite different. It was comprised principally of nine symbolic lights and a
lengthy lecture reviewing the symbols of Freemasonry. Perhaps the most
unique feature of the degree was its threefold title — “Venerable Master,”
“Sovereign Prince,” or “Master ad Vitam.”
The first major revision came with Pike’s ritual in the mid-19th century,
“Venerable Master,” which in turn was revised shortly thereafter by the ritual
of 1866, under the modern title, “Master ad Vitam,” or Master for Life. The
core elements of the 1866 ritual were the presentation of a gavel and
Francken’s nine symbolic lights, representing the principles of Masonic lead-
ership. This remained the ceremonial, or “candle” section of the 20° through
the 19th and most of the 20th centuries.
A radical departure was introduced with the ritual of 1896, when a dra-
matic allegory was added to what until then had been a ceremonial ritual.
The protagonist of the allegory was King Frederick of Prussia, the legendary
patron of Scottish Rite Masonry, who supposedly convened the first Supreme
Council of the Rite. As became the pattern for other Consistorial degree al-
legories, the cast was made up of prominent historical characters, who al-
legedly were Freemasons, although the action of the allegory was not based
on an historical event. In the setting of a lodge meeting in 18th century Eu-
rope, a story of treachery unfolded in which a Freemason was exposed as
having misused his fraternal associations to commit espionage. At the conclu-
sion, Frederick issued the Regulations of 1762 as the basic law and presented
the double-headed eagle as the emblem of Scottish Rite Masonry.
The ritual was reissued without change in 1915. In the aftermath of World
War I, however, there was much sentiment for removing the allegory to a set-
ting that would have more relevance, interest, and inspiration for American
Masons. The result, which appeared in the ritual of 1922, transferred the dra-
matic plot, much of the dialogue, and the Masonic lesson of the “Prussian”
49
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 50 ---
allegory to an American setting with the American Masonic icon George
Washington replacing Frederick as the lead character. The primary author of
the transplanted allegory was J. Frank Davis, 32°, K.C.C.H., of San Antonio,
Texas.
As the first Scottish Rite degree ritual with anAmerican setting and theme,
the 20° Ritual of 1922 enjoyed immediate acceptance. Within a few decades
its popularity was enhanced by the patriotic fervor generated during the era
of World War II. The allegory was so well received that over the years there
were repeated requests for permission to make public presentations. All such
requests, of course, were rejected, as by law and by custom the degree work
of the Rite may be exhibited only to persons who are Scottish Rite Masons
of the requisite degree.
In 1936, a prologue and epilogue to the allegory were approved for op-
tional use on a trial basis. The effect was to portray the drama as a multi-
scene dream sequence. The additional scenes never were adopted as part of
the ritual and were withdrawn in 1951.
The ritual was reissued without significant change in 1939 and 1951. More
than 40 years then passed before the ritual again underwent scrutiny by the
Committee on Rituals. In the interim concern had arisen over the depiction
of some prominent historical characters in the allegory as Masons, as no doc-
umentary evidence was known to prove their membership. There also was a
question as to when and where Lafayette had become a Mason. These con-
cerns over historical accuracy were partially addressed in 1980, when the
Committee on Rituals directed that some of the characters in the allegory be
replaced by others with proven Masonic credentials.
The significant change made by the ritual of 1994 was elimination of the
ceremonial opening, i.e., the “candle section,” which dated back more than
200 years to the Francken Manuscript. This ceremony had been the essence
of the 20° ritual until the allegory was introduced shortly before the turn of
the 20th century. Its removal from the ritual was unquestionably a blow to
Scottish Rite tradition. It was justified, however, for the sake of facilitating
presentation of the allegory, which exemplified what had evolved as the Ma-
sonic lessons of the degree. For this reason the Supreme Council already had
made the presentation of degree ceremonials optional, and many Valleys rou-
tinely omitted them in the interest of tightening reunion schedules. Although
50
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 51 ---
it went unsaid, continued use of the ceremonial with the allegory in fact per-
petuated a dichotomy in the degree. The two sections of the degree had
evolved from wholly different sources and, especially after the patriotic
American drama had been introduced, communicated two entirely different
lessons. Indeed, with the removal of the only part of the 20° ritual that was
representative of the original degree, the name itself, “Master for Life,” be-
came a non sequitur.
Ten years later a refinement was made to the allegory for the sake of drama
and emphasis. The final lines of dialogue and stage directions were deleted
so that the allegory would conclude with Washington’s ringing statement of
the Masonic attitude toward the crime of treason.
The first major revision of the “Washington” allegory since its introduc-
tion came in 2007, the 85th anniversary of its introduction. The last vestiges
of the ceremonial opening, including the obligation, were eliminated in accor-
dance with the policy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995. The admis-
sion of characters to the lodge room was rearranged. Extensive stylistic
changes were made in the prologue and throughout the allegory. Several pas-
sages of dialogue, considered overly lengthy, were abridged. For reasons of
character portrayal, these included the final exchange between Washington
and the American traitor, Arnold.
The result was a degree ritual of marginally shorter playing time, but no
significant change to the cast of characters or dramatic action. The average
spectator should find the differences between the 20° Ritual of 2007 and the
previous version imperceptible, while hopefully receiving an improved appre-
ciation of its Masonic message.
51
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 52 ---
Let Justice Be Done — The Twenty-first Degree
The ritual of the 21° lays claim to what is probably the most unusual origin
of any degree in the Scottish Rite system. The ritual that appeared in
Francken’s 1783 manuscript under the title “Prussian Knight or Noachite”
had no apparent connection with the traditional Masonic symbolism of the
Solomonic Temple. The pattern of Francken’s ritual was conventional
enough. There was the opening, containing a lecture in the form of a cate-
chism, followed by a rather simple reception, obligation, and investiture, con-
cluding with a long historical lecture. The subject of the lectures was the Old
Testament story of Noah and a curious legend concerning Peleg, the reputed
architect of the Tower of Babel. After the Confusion of Tongues, Peleg al-
legedly had taken the arts of Masonry to Northern Europe, i.e., Prussia and
Germany, where his tomb supposedly was discovered in the sixth century
A.D.
The name of Peleg appears in genealogical lists in the Book of Genesis as
a descendant of Noah and an ancestor of Abraham, contemporary with the
Confusion of Tongues. More to the point, however, although Noah, together
with many other biblical and historical figures, is mentioned as a practitioner
of the Masonic arts in the fanciful history contained in Anderson’s Constitu-
tions, there is no reference to the Masonic associations of Peleg upon whose
legendary role the ritual of the 21° was based.
The French ritual which was the source of Francken’s 21° supposedly was
translated from an earlier German ritual in 1757. The title of the presiding
officer of the assembly depicted in the ritual was “Lieutenant Commander.”
The position of Grand Master of the Order was reserved for King Frederick
of Prussia.
So it remained for 70-odd years. Then, in 1855, the ritual of Albert Pike
made an abrupt departure from tradition and introduced the dramatic theme
that in large measure comprises the current ritual. Pike selected for the back-
ground of his ritual the mysterious secret tribunals (vehmgerichte) of me-
52
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 53 ---
dieval Germany.7 These extra-legal tribunals dispensed what was purported
to be impartial justice, regardless of rank or affluence, for criminal acts and
excesses committed by minions of both church and state. The vehmgerichte
apparently had three grades or degrees of membership, thereby paralleling
the later organization of the symbolic lodge. As the motto of the 21°, Pike
adopted the Latin form of a fitting phrase, “Let justice be done though the
heavens should fall.”
At the Union of 1867, the Pike ritual was the accepted form of the 21° in
this Jurisdiction with an important addition — the Ordeal of the Three Tests.
In 1886, the ritual was further elaborated by expanding the reception to intro-
duce a number of historical rulers of the period, including Kings Richard the
Lionhearted and Philip Augustus. The addition of these characters was ahis-
torical in the extreme, an instance of celebrity namedropping that was mean-
ingless for the development of the dramatic action.
The next change of note was made in the ritual of 1919. As a result of pa-
triotic emotions generated by World War I, which also would motivate re-
placement of the original allegory in the 20° by the “Washington” allegory,
references to “Prussia” were deleted from the ritual. The title of the degree
was altered to “Patriarch Noachite,” virtually the only vestige of the original
Francken ritual. Somewhat surprisingly, the German setting of the ritual re-
mained unchanged.
In 2003, the reference to “Belus”, a form of Baal, the infamous deity of the
ancient Canaanites, and the word “infidel”, used as a gratuitous and deroga-
tory reference to the Islamic faith, were removed from the ritual.
The first significant revision of the ritual since 1886 came the following
year. As in the case of other recent degree ritual revisions, length of playing
time and the number of essential cast members were major considerations.
The opening and reception, moreover, were not separate sections of the ritual,
as Pike had incorporated them as an integral part of an overly long, single
scene drama. Thus, downsizing the essential cast to only ten characters, plus
optional supernumeraries, provided a means to achieve a significant reduction
53
The Degree Rituals
7Pike’s apparent source and possible inspiration for selecting the vehmgerichte as the back-
ground for the 21° ritual was an 1837 publication, Secret Societies in the Middle Ages by
Thomas Keightley, which also was a source used by Albert Mackey for his encyclopedia.
The 1827 novel Anne of Geierstein by the popular author of the period, Sir Walter Scott,
also cannot be overlooked as a possible source.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
in the playing time of the ritual. Fewer secondary characters allowed the time-
consuming reception to be deleted as well as portions of dialogue that did
not contribute to development of the action. Elimination from the cast of the
prominent names added by the ritual of 1886 also improved the historical
credibility of the drama. The dialogue was revised throughout to reword many
archaic, awkward (to the modern ear), inconsistent, or superfluous passages.
Stage directions were inserted to clarify the staging of the Three Tests. The
revised Prologue included an explanation of the motto of the degree. Ill. C.
DeForrest Trexler, 33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania and chairman of
the Committee on Ritualistic Matters, was the primary author of the revised
ritual.
Many of the extensive revisions made in the ritual of 2004 had the effect
of stripping away the embellishments added to Pike’s ritual from the 1880’s.
The result preserved the essence and hopefully the interest of his 150-year old
creation.
54
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 55 ---
The Twenty-second “Musical” Degree
The 22° appeared in Henry Francken’s manuscript by name, “Knight of
the Royal Axe,” a literal translation from the French, but without a ritual text.
All that Francken recorded about the degree was a legend about the Cedars
of Lebanon concerning use of the wood in the building of the Temples of
Solomon and Zerubbabel. This has led to conjecture that the 22° was intended
only as a “pass” degree without a complete ritual and lesson of its own.
A ritual for the 22° did not come into existence until Albert Pike’s initial
draft in 1855. Against the background of the Cedars of Lebanon, Pike intro-
duced the symbolic tools of the woodsman — the saw, the plane, and the axe
— as well as the dignity of labor as the lesson of the degree. This was the ap-
proved ritual for use in the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction at the time of the
Union of 1867 and, with only slight changes, for nearly 130 years thereafter.
Over time, the alternate title, “Prince of Libanus” (Lebanon) became gener-
ally accepted for the degree.
During the 1930’s, a variation of the ritual developed. Ill. Julius B. Christ-
man, 33°, and Ill. Otto J. Goffeney, 33°, members of the Valley of South
Bend, adapted the ritual to be presented in operatic style with members of
the cast performing vocal music, both solos and choruses. In 1942, this mu-
sical version was approved by the Supreme Council as an alternate ritual for
the 22°, thus becoming the only musical degree ritual to be authorized in the
jurisdiction.
Despite initial popularity, use of the musical ritual unfortunately became
less frequent. By the 1970’s, few Valleys were able to assemble sufficient
numbers of players with the requisite musical talent. In 1977, the Committee
on Rituals sought to address the problem by having the music of the 1942
ritual rearranged and transposed into lower keys to facilitate performance by
less accomplished vocalists and by quartets in place of choruses. Although
this solution seemed feasible in concept, it would not be implemented for
many years.
The project was suspended in 1984 after two successive consultants re-
tained by the committee failed to produce the desired results. The committee
renewed the effort in 1987 and persisted through six more years and the serv-
55
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 56 ---
ices of four more consultants. Finally, a computer-generated, rearranged and
transposed musical score was produced, incorporated in the ritual, and ap-
proved as the 22° Tentative Ritual of 1993 (Musical Version).
The following year, an extensive revision was made of the 1939 (non-mu-
sical) ritual, still essentially the 140-year old Pike ritual. A brief prologue was
added, replacing the ceremonial opening. The obligation, investiture, and
closing also were eliminated as was the historical lecture, a survival of the
Legend of Lebanon that had been all there was to the degree in the Francken
Manuscript. What remained was the dramatic allegory. In addition, many sty-
listic changes were made to “modernize” the archaic dialogue. Finally, the
text of the musical version was conformed to the non-musical version, so
that, except for the musical selections in the former, the ritual of both versions
was identical. These revisions were approved as the 22° Ritual of 1994 (both
musical and non-musical versions).
Notwithstanding the lengthy process and radical revision, which resulted
in a short ritual, easy to stage, with a small cast, a straightforward message,
and a choice between presenting either a musical or a non-musical version,
the 22° did not seem to gain popularity, based on the infrequency of its pres-
entation across the Jurisdiction. This prompted another review of the ritual in
2007.
In addition to modest revisions in wording, the action of the allegory was
transplanted from the slopes of biblical Mount Lebanon to a 19th century
American forest. The cast was costumed in ordinary work clothing, e.g.,
denim overalls, flannel shirts, etc., appropriate to the transposed time and
place. Thus, the 22° Ritual of 2007 became the sixth Consistorial degree (to-
gether with the 20°, 23°, 24°, 25°, and 26°) to be given a more contemporary
American setting.
56
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 57 ---
The Twenty-third “Four Chaplains” Degree
It was not until the middle of the 19th century that the ritual of the 23° was
recorded in any surviving form. It had been mentioned by Jean Frederick
Doszedardski in 1805 as one of the French “Philosophical Grades,” under
the title “Chief of the Tabernacle.” However, no indication of its content was
given. Killian Van Rensselaer’s 1845 manuscript provided signs and pass-
words for the degree but nothing further.
As was the case with several other Scottish Rite degrees, the writing of a
complete ritual for the 23° apparently had to await the creative pen of Albert
Pike, who gave no indication of his source. Pike gave the ritual a mosaic set-
ting consistent with the traditional title of the degree, the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness. The ritual was presided over by Aaron, as “Most Excellent High
Priest,” assisted by two of his sons as Wardens. The form of the ritual was tra-
ditional with an opening, reception, examination, obligation, a series of ten
charges, and concluding with a long investiture and lecture interpreting the
symbolism of the ritual. The Pike ritual was adopted by this jurisdiction after
the Union of 1867 and continued in use for more than 40 years.
Early in 1907, Ill. John Lloyd Thomas, 33°, later Active Member for New
York and a member of the Committee on Rituals, met with the committee
and submitted for their consideration a proposed new ritual for the 23°. Using
the setting of the Pike ritual, Thomas proposed a dramatization of the Old
Testament story of the sons of Aaron, who neglected their duty to tend the sa-
cred fire in the Tabernacle. In 1908, a modified form of the Thomas proposal
was approved by the Supreme Council, replacing the Pike ritual. Subject to
minor revisions made in 1930, the ritual of 1908 remained the ritual of the 23°
for the next 80 years.
In 1985, the Supreme Council approved a recommendation by the Com-
mittee on Rituals to transfer degree rituals based on Old Testament themes
from the Consistory to the Lodge of Perfection. This decision, of course, im-
pacted the 23°. Before the plan could be implemented, however, an acceptable
new ritual had to be available to replace each ritual transferred from a Con-
sistory degree.
57
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 58 ---
In the case of the 23°, the genesis of the replacement ritual went back to
the 1960’s, preceding its eventual adoption by 20 or more years. Ill. John H.
Van Gorden, 33°, Active Member for New York, had written a dramatic al-
legory, “The Four Chaplains”, as a suggested degree ritual. It was based on
the celebrated incident during World War II when four U.S. Army Chaplains
gave up their lifejackets to save injured servicemen and perished aboard a
torpedoed troop transport in the North Atlantic. However, the time for such
an allegory as a Scottish Rite degree ritual had not yet come.
By 1983, with the prospect of ritual “realignment” and the need for new
degree rituals on the horizon, Van Gorden’s proposal was being revisited. A
consultant to the Committee on Rituals, Ill. Haydn R. Jones, 33°, a member
of the Valley of South Bend and later Trenton (Central Jersey), was assigned
to prepare the script of a dramatic allegory suitable for a degree ritual based
on the “Four Chaplains” theme.
The underlying historical event seemed ready-made for the theme of a
Scottish Rite degree ritual, just as it had been a tocsin for patriotic morale
when it occurred in 1943. It was more than a real life story of heroism and
self-sacrifice, which wartime events produced in abundance. There was an ec-
umenical message. The four protagonists had come from diverse backgrounds
and represented different religious faiths (Protestant, Roman Catholic, and
Jewish).
Nevertheless, the subject did have a downside. The proposed ritual would
be the first to have a modern, indeed, a contemporary setting. Some members
of the Committee on Rituals had second thoughts about a degree allegory
based on an event within living memory. Modern ritual settings had the po-
tential of arousing reactions from personal experience and beliefs that could
distract attention from, or even compromise, the moral lesson that was being
exemplified. Degree rituals with biblical or remote historical, even American
Revolutionary, backgrounds did not have the same potential for distraction or
controversy. In the end, however, these reservations were overcome.
In 1986, the committee reported that an allegory based on the World War
II incident of “the Four Chaplains” would be proposed as the new ritual of the
23°. The work of Haydn Jones had been substantially completed by that time.
The proposed ritual would be innovative in respects other than its contempo-
rary setting. The ceremonial opening and prologue were followed by an eight-
58
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 59 ---
scene drama, with a cast of more than 30 characters, concluding with an epi-
logue. The scenes were introduced and linked by a narrator representing a
survivor of the event. To facilitate its presentation, which many Valleys would
find to be challenging and some daunting, the proposed ritual included ample
stage directions, production notes, and scene diagrams explaining that the al-
legory was designed to be presented with no scenery and with only limited
stage properties. Thus, modern theater techniques were applied to presenta-
tion of a Scottish Rite ritual.
In 1988, after trial exemplifications, the allegory of “The Four Chaplains”
became the tentative ritual of the 23°. The previous “Sacred Fire” ritual was
assigned to the 5° in the Lodge of Perfection. Eight years later the tentative
ritual, with some modifications, was approved as the 23° Ritual of 1996.
The first complete review of the “Four Chaplains” ritual was a two-year
process undertaken in 2006-08 under the primary responsibility of Ill.
Lawrence D. Inglis, 33°, Active Emeritus Member for Illinois and member
of the Committee on Ritualistic Matters. The review resulted in numerous
and significant revisions, although the dramatic theme and primary lesson
remained intact. The review included research of the historical event on which
the ritual was based, as well as the biographies of the four protagonists and
comments submitted by members across the jurisdiction.
The brief ceremonial opening was eliminated in accordance with the pol-
icy adopted by the Supreme Council in 1995. The prologue was substantially
modified by deletion of the better part of three paragraphs that attempted to
preserve a strained connection with the Old Testament story of the “Sacred
Fire,” which had been the theme of the 23° ritual before its transfer to the
Lodge of Perfection in 1988. References to the “Sacred Fire” which reoc-
curred in the allegory also were eliminated.
The quotation on religious toleration in the prologue, from President and
Ill. Brother Truman’s address at the dedication of the Chapel of the Four
Chaplains in 1951, was replaced by observations on fraternal love and self-
sacrifice made in the same address. The latter remarks were considered more
consistent with the primary lesson of the degree. An excerpt from Ill. Brother
Truman’s address emphasizing the lesson of the degree also was added to the
epilogue.
59
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 60 ---
The paraplegic narrator, who identified himself by name not found among
the crew and passengers of the troopship Dorchester, and incredibly as “a
member of this Valley,” was replaced by an anonymous survivor. A new, his-
torically factual character and incident, relating to the gloves of one of the
Chaplains, were added.
Numerous passages of dialogue were deleted from the allegory because
they were considered superfluous to the dramatic action or lesson of the de-
gree, or because they simply were improbable. Scene five, which dramatized
an unlikely verbal and physical altercation between one of the Chaplains and
a fictitious crewman, and which did not contribute to the theme of the ritual,
was deleted in its entirety.
The scriptural reading in the renumbered scene five was reworded from
that of the New Revised English Standard Bible to the King James version,
as the former had not yet been written in 1943. Many refinements in wording
were made throughout the allegory for the sake of clarity, style, or historical
or literary accuracy. Among these was the rewording of the Hebrew prayer in
the renumbered scene seven. Profanity also was eliminated from the dialogue.
The result of these thorough-going revisions, the 23° Ritual of 2008, pre-
served the dramatic theme with greater attention to historical accuracy and a
clearer statement of the moral lesson. It also represented a substantial short-
ening of playing time over the previous ritual which had been the longest of
the 29 degree rituals. Finally, the revised ritual renamed the degree from the
traditional “Chief of the Tabernacle,” which dated from 1805, but had been
irrelevant since 1988, to “Knight of Valor.”
60
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 61 ---
The Twenty-fourth “American Indian” Degree
The ritual of the 24°, like that of the 23°, at least in any identifiable form,
was a latecomer to the Scottish Rite degree system. There was no predecessor
to the current degree ritual preserved as part of the Rite of Perfection rituals
in Henry Francken’s 1783 manuscript. The traditional title of the degree,
“Prince of the Tabernacle,” was mentioned in 1805 by Jean Frederick
Doszedardski in reference to a French degree, but no details of the ritual were
given. Killian Van Rensselaer’s 1845 manuscript provided signs and words
for the degree, indicating that the lesson was toleration, but nothing more.
Thus, up to the middle of the 19th century, the content of the 24° ritual is un-
known.
Then, enter Albert Pike. Among the degree rituals he completed in 1855
was a ritual for the 24°. Pike’s source for this ritual remains a mystery. Os-
tensibly set in the time of Moses, the ritual meandered through the centuries
in an anachronistic mélange of philosophical ideas. At times it bordered on
the occult, at times on Masonic symbolism, arriving at Pike’s doctrine of
equilibrium. There was no discernible theme. The lesson of the degree, in
essence, was God, country, and the pursuit of happiness. It was not Pike at his
best.
Nevertheless, perhaps not only for lack of something better, but simply
for lack of anything else, the Pike ritual was accepted for the 24° of this ju-
risdiction after the Union of 1867. Moreover, this ritual continued in use, with
but a few minor changes, for the next 42 years.
Finally, in 1909, the Supreme Council withdrew the Pike ritual and ap-
proved a new ritual featuring a dramatic allegory for the 24°. The primary
author of the new allegory was English-born Ill. John Lloyd Thomas, 33°,
who later was elected anActive Member for New York and appointed a mem-
ber of the Committee on Rituals. The Thomas Allegory depicted a fictitious
incident during the dedication of King Solomon’s Temple.Adiscussion on the
nature of God by representatives of various religions was disrupted by a voice
of skepticism. The disharmony ultimately was resolved by an eloquent dec-
laration of the universal faith of service to humanity.
61
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 62 ---
The 24° Ritual of 1909, in substance, remained in use for most of the 20th
century, and probably would have continued into the 21st century as well had
it not been for other developments. In 1985, the Supreme Council approved
the recommendation of the Committee on Rituals to transfer to the Lodge of
Perfection those Consistorial degree rituals based on Old Testament themes.
The first of these rituals proposed to be transferred to the Lodge of Perfection
was that of the 24° which was to be replaced by a new “American Indian” al-
legory.
Obviously, the most challenging aspect of the so-called “realignment” of
degree rituals was to find or prepare rituals to replace those that were removed
from the Consistory degrees. In the case of the 24°, the solution came in 1983
with a proposal that a new ritual be written on the theme of an American In-
dian petitioning for membership in a colonial symbolic lodge. The primary
author of the proposed ritual was Ill. Henry J. Cooper, 33°, Active Member
for Rhode Island and a member/consultant of the Committee on Rituals. The
new ritual, consisting of a prologue and a dramatic allegory in three scenes,
was completed in 1985 and was approved by the Supreme Council as the
Tentative 24° Ritual of 1986.
The 1986 tentative ritual was only the second degree ritual in 65 years
(after the 20° Ritual of 1922) to have an American setting. It was an instant
success, due, no doubt, to the familiar appeal of an American frontier scene
and buckskin-clad, feather and bead-adorned cast members. The dramatic
theme of the ritual also was a factor in its widespread acceptance. It posed the
real-life dilemma experienced at one time or another by most active Masons.
Under what circumstances was use of the black ball justified in balloting on
a petitioner? On a climactic note of high drama, the allegory came to an end
before the result of the ballot was announced, the question left to linger unan-
swered in the individual consciences of the audience.
Larger issues also were presented. The qualification of the petitioner was
cast in terms of misunderstanding (i.e., ignorance) of Native American reli-
gious beliefs. The discussion of those beliefs, concluding with acknowledg-
ment of the spiritual brotherhood of man under a universal Heavenly Father,
was reminiscent of the previous ritual of the 24°. The apparent lesson was tol-
eration of religious and cultural diversity. However, in the social context of
late 20th century America, many perceived a tacit lesson of racial tolerance.
62
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 63 ---
The tentative ritual eventually was approved without change as the 24°
Ritual of 1993, although publication of the final ritual was delayed.
Despite its positive reception, the ritual was plagued by concerns for “po-
litical correctness.” Consultants were enlisted to review the dialogue to opine
whether Native Americans were portrayed in a patronizing or stereotypical
manner. In the 2002-03 revision, pejorative adjectives, such as “drunken” and
“depraved” were deleted. Native American dialogue was revised to reflect
grammatical simplicity, but avoiding stereotypical monosyllables character-
istic of “Hollywood Indians.” In addition, a number of passages considered
to be superfluous were eliminated. A major change was the deletion of highly
improbable woodland dialogue in which a Harvard graduate lectured Native
Americans on comparative religion. With the foregoing revisions, the 24°
Ritual of 2003 in all other respects preserved the substance of the 1986 ten-
tative ritual.8
Finally, the traditional title of the 24°, which was of uncertain origin and
for many years had been all there was of record to the degree, was changed
from “Prince of the Tabernacle” to the descriptive “Brother of the Forest.”
63
The Degree Rituals
8 There was some concern over the apparently anachronistic reference in the ritual to the
“Trail of Tears,” a term usually associated with the forcible relocation of the Cherokees
during the 1830’s. While the Cherokee incident may have been the most infamous, many
similar relocations of Native American peoples occurred over the years. Thus, it was de-
cided to make no change to the reference in the ritual.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
The Twenty-fifth “Ben Franklin” Degree
The 1855 ritual of Albert Pike was the earliest surviving ritual of the 25°.
True, in the first decade of the 19th century Doszedardski had mentioned the
degree by name, “Knight of the Brazen Serpent,” as one of the French “Philo-
sophical Grades,” and Killian Van Rensselaer had recorded the signs and
passwords of the degree in his 1845 manuscript. However, neither of these
sources provided anything of the content of the ritual. Pike, himself, did not
cite a source for his work, leaving us to conclude that it was a product of his
own creation. The theme of the ritual was easy enough to create. It was sug-
gested by the traditional title of the degree. After Pike’s fashion, however,
the Old Testament story of Moses and the brazen serpent was secondary to an
exposition of symbolism and the philosophy of equilibrium.
Consequently, the Pike ritual was virtually all that existed of the degree,
and it remained the authorized ritual of the 25° in this jurisdiction for 30 years
from the Union of 1867. Then, the revised ritual of 1896 introduced a drama-
tization of the Old Testament story of the brazen serpent and emphasized faith
as the lesson of the degree. Another revision in 1951 added a new ceremonial
section to the ritual but made little change in the drama. In 1993, the 1951 rit-
ual was transferred to the Lodge of Perfection, becoming the ritual of the 6°,
where it remains to the present time, in substance the 1896 drama of the
Brazen Serpent.
The removal of the “Brazen Serpent” ritual from the 25° was part of the
“realignment” of degree rituals with Old Testament themes from the Consis-
tory to the Lodge of Perfection, a policy approved by the Supreme Council
in 1985. This decision, of course, necessitated the preparation of new rituals
to replace the traditional rituals of the Consistory degrees. In the case of the
25°, the origin of the replacement ritual began two decades before it finally
was implemented.
In 1974, in anticipation of the national bicentennial celebration, the
Supreme Council approved the preparation of a dramatization of events in
the life of Benjamin Franklin to be made available to Valleys for presentation
during 1976. The Committee on Rituals subsequently recommended that the
“Franklin Allegory” be considered as a tentative alternate ritual for the 25°.
64
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 65 ---
Texts of the proposed allegory were distributed to selected Valleys for trial ex-
emplification. However, the response to a questionnaire sent to all Consisto-
ries in the jurisdiction was not favorable to the proposal. Consequently, in
1977 the committee reported that the proposed allegory “would not harmo-
nize with our degree structure chronologically or historically” and recom-
mended its withdrawal. The issue seemed permanently put to rest in 1980,
when the committee approved the play Benjamin Franklin for public presen-
tation.
Nevertheless, retirement of the Franklin theme was only temporary and in-
terest in the subject soon was revived. The approval and implementation of
the degree ritual “realignment” policy during the 1980’s increased the priority
for finding a replacement ritual for the 25°. As a result, several alternative
scripts on the Franklin theme were considered by the committee as potential
degree rituals. Finally, in 1992, Ill. Robert L. Miller Sr., 33°, Active Member
for Indiana and chairman of the committee, completed a draft ritual on the
Franklin theme, consisting of a main prologue and two dramatic scenes sep-
arated by a second prologue, as a replacement for the 25°. After trial exem-
plifications and a number of modifications, this proposal was approved in
1993 as the tentative ritual of the 25°, permitting transfer of the “Brazen Ser-
pent” allegory to the 6°. The new tentative ritual was the last to be approved
as a replacement for a Consistory ritual transferred to the Lodge of Perfection
and became the third degree ritual (after the 20° and 24°) to have an 18th
century colonial American setting.
Although the tentative ritual was approved in 2000 as the ritual of the 25°,
the committee postponed publication pending further study. There was a ques-
tion of dramatic unity, as the two scenes of the drama portrayed different,
disconnected events in Franklin’s life, separated by nearly 60 years. Scene
one represented the interview of the young Franklin by a committee investi-
gating his petition for membership in a Masonic lodge. Most of the dialogue
of the scene centered on Franklin having fathered a child out of wedlock.
Scene two represented a Masonic lodge (with future presidents and fellow
Masons Washington and Monroe in attendance) honoring Brother Franklin on
his 82nd birthday by recalling some of the salient public events in his distin-
guished life.
Upon reconsideration, the Committee on Ritualistic Matters recommended
elimination of scene one, as, in their view, it did not contribute to the theme
65
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 66 ---
of the degree; that is, Franklin’s lifetime of personal accomplishments and
public service. This allowed the second prologue to be eliminated as well.
Scene two was retained without change. The main prologue was rewritten to
emphasize personal industry, exemplified in the life of a prominent Freema-
son, Benjamin Franklin, as the lesson of the degree. The effect of these revi-
sions was to eliminate one scene change, reduce the cast by three speaking
roles, and decrease the length of the script by one-third, with a consequent
shortening of playing time. The traditional and now meaningless title of the
degree, “Knight of the Brazen Serpent,” was changed to “Master of Achieve-
ment” to reflect the current subject matter and lesson of the ritual. These re-
visions were incorporated in the 25° Ritual of 2003.
A lingering issue for Masonic scholars was Franklin’s Masonic status and
whether he would have attended a Pennsylvania lodge at the time depicted in
the ritual. This was addressed in the historical notes to the degree without in-
jecting complications into the drama of the ritual.
66
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 67 ---
The Twenty-sixth “Gettysburg” Degree
The development of the ritual of the 26° has been a drama in itself and at
times along the way has been a center of intense controversy. The earliest
surviving ritual for the degree dates only from the mid-1850’s. More recently,
there have been four different rituals for the 26° within the space of 65 years.
The 26° was not part of the Rite of Perfection. Thus, no mention of it ap-
peared in the Francken Manuscript. In fact, it was not mentioned in any of
the early ritual sources until 1805 (Doszedardski’s manuscript), and then only
by name, without more. According to the Masonic scholar Albert Mackey,
the original title of the degree, (translated from the French) “Prince of Mercy
or Scottish Trinitarian,” referred to the “Triple Covenant” made by God with
humanity through Abraham, Moses, and Jesus Christ.
We have no written ritual for the 26° before Albert Pike’s 1855 opus of 53
pages. The setting of Pike’s ritual was the catacombs of ancient Rome. Pike’s
inevitable series of long lectures described the tribulations of early Christians
during the Persecution of Emperor Domitian. At the Union of 1867 the Pike
ritual for the 26° (there was no other) was adopted by the Northern Jurisdic-
tion and, except for an abridgement of (only) 31 pages in 1911, remained in
use for 75 years.
In 1938, the Committee on Rituals reported bluntly that the ritual of the
26° “failed utterly to teach the quality of mercy as it should be taught in the
Scottish Rite.” Soon thereafter, the committee settled on what appeared to be
a more satisfactory theme, the Old Testament story of Joseph and his brethren.
A tentative ritual was approved for trial exemplification in 1940. It was based
on a play, Joseph and His Brethren, written for public presentation by Ill.
Ernest W. Hotchkiss, 33°, a member of the Valley of Detroit.
Although other compositions on the subject were considered, the sub-
stance of the tentative ritual was approved as the 26° Ritual of 1942. Preceded
by the customary ceremonial opening, reception, and prologue, the allegory
of “Joseph and His Brethren” was dramatized in five scenes, exemplifying the
lesson of the degree, mercy.
67
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 68 ---
For 50 years thereafter the new ritual served its purpose until it was im-
pacted by the 1985 decision to transfer to the Lodge of Perfection those Con-
sistorial degree rituals based on Old Testament themes. Thus, in 1992, the
“Joseph Allegory” became the ritual of the 12°, where, in a modified form, it
still remains.
Of course, the most challenging aspect of the exercise was finding a suit-
able replacement ritual for the 26°. From time to time the Committee on Rit-
uals had considered the efficacy of a degree ritual based on the American
Civil War. The first substantive possibility to this end appeared in the late
1970’s with House Undivided, a dramatization of incidents relating to
Freemasonry during the Civil War, based on Allen E. Roberts’ book of the
same title. There being no immediate need for a new degree ritual, the oppor-
tunity passed by. Publication of House Undivided was approved by the
Supreme Council in 1979 for presentation to the general public.
As the 1980’s progressed, the need for new rituals to replace those trans-
ferred from the Consistory degrees to the Lodge of Perfection took on new
urgency. The goal of the committee crystallized on development of a degree
ritual with Abraham Lincoln as the central character, notwithstanding the fact
that Lincoln had not been a Freemason. Eventually, in each of the years 1988-
90, the committee reported work on a new ritual for the 26° based on an in-
cident relating to Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address. The theme had been
suggested by a play written many years previously by Ill. Henry J. Cooper,
33°, Active Emeritus Member for Rhode Island, a member/consultant of the
committee, and primary author of the “American Indian” ritual of the 24°.
Cooper, assisted by Ill. Robert F. Case, 33°,Active Member for New York and
a member of the committee, assumed the primary role in modifying the play
and incorporating Masonic content to make it suitable for a degree ritual.
After a number of revisions and trial exemplifications, the “LincolnAllegory”
was proposed and approved as the 26° Tentative Ritual of 1992 and subse-
quently as the 26° Ritual of 1999, although not without persistent opposition.
The new ritual was well received. It had a familiar subject as a theme and
it played well dramatically. It consisted of a prologue and three scenes with
two set changes, a script of only seventeen pages, and required only four
speaking roles. Despite this, the ritual never was able to convince its dis-
senters.
68
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 69 ---
In summary, the case against the “Lincoln Allegory” was that it was arti-
ficial and contrived, when, as House Undivided had demonstrated, there were
many real life events reflecting on Freemasonry during the Civil War that
could serve as the basis for a degree ritual. Lincoln was not a Freemason.
Why, then, should he be the central figure in a Masonic degree allegory?
The truth of the matter was that the story line of the “Lincoln Allegory”
was not Masonic, nor was it factual, nor was it original. Its source was a fic-
tional short story, The Perfect Tribute, written in 1906 by Mary Shipman An-
drews. It played on the popular myth of Lincoln’s humanity and what critics
might describe as maudlin sentimentality. Perhaps more important than the
origin and substance of the story was the fact that it had become a prominent
feature of the public domain. It had been portrayed on film in the 1940’s and
again on television in the 1990’s. Passages of dialogue in both productions
were verbatim with the ritual. This gave rise to the inevitable inquiry, if the
ritual can be shown to millions by the mass media, why can’t it be presented
to families, friends, and prospective Scottish Rite Masons?
Consequently, in 2001, only two years after approval of the 1999 ritual
(but after a turnover of members on the committee), the Committee on Rituals
decided to recommend withdrawal of the “Lincoln Allegory” as a degree rit-
ual and authorize its presentation to general audiences. No action was taken
to implement this decision until 2004, when the committee recommended to
the Supreme Council that the 1999 ritual of the 26° be withdrawn and ap-
proved for public presentation. In its place, the committee recommended
preparation of a new, factually-based Civil War degree ritual with a Masonic
theme. Specifically, the committee proposed a dramatization of the historical
incident memorialized in the National Cemetery at Gettysburg by the “Friend
to Friend” Masonic Memorial erected and dedicated by the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania in 1993. Despite strenuous opposition from former members
of the committee, the recommendation was approved.
Ill. C. DeForrest Trexler, 33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania and chair-
man of the Committee on Ritualistic Matters, was assigned to prepare the
new degree ritual pursuant to the recommendation approved by the Supreme
Council. The result consisted of a prologue and four dramatic scenes with
three set changes, a cast of seven speaking roles and optional walk-ons. All
characters were historical and known to have been Freemasons. The story,
told in flashback from the first scene, was the Masonic friendship of Union
69
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 70 ---
General Hancock and Confederate General Armistead that ended with their
confrontation and the latter’s death at Gettysburg. Period music was arranged
for scene interludes and the finale and was recorded for use by Consistories
unable to provide live musicians. The traditional title of the degree, “Prince
of Mercy,” was to be changed to “Friend and Brother Eternal.”
All was completed and recommended by the committee for approval in
2005, only to encounter the most unanticipated and acerbic criticism of a rit-
ualistic proposal and the work of the committee since the impasse over the
proposed revision of the 14° ritual in 1945. In the end, the proposed ritual
was spared outright rejection and tabled, only to be recalled the following
day and referred back to the committee for further study. Thus, the “Lincoln
Allegory” remained in place as the ritual of the 26° instead of being released
for public presentation that year as many had expected.
As the criticisms of the proposed ritual had been nonspecific, the com-
mittee was at some loss as to what modifications might improve its accept-
ability. The approach pursued was to reduce the length and complexity of the
proposed ritual. The first scene and the flashback feature, as well as one of
the principal characters, were eliminated. There was minor editing of the di-
alogue, but the substance of the drama remained. A revised version was pre-
sented and approved over minority opposition as the 26° Tentative Ritual of
2006. “Friend and Brother Eternal.” The “Lincoln Allegory” was withdrawn
as a degree ritual and approved for public presentation as The Last Full Meas-
ure.
70
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Church and State — The Twenty-seventh Degree
As the 27° was not among the degrees of the Rite of Perfection, no refer-
ence to it appeared in the Francken Manuscript. It was mentioned only by
name, “Commander of the Temple,” in an 1804 manuscript of unknown au-
thorship which provided no hint of the ritual. Moreover, it is unlikely that
any of the Consistorial degrees other than the 30°-32° were conferred in this
jurisdiction prior to 1845.
The first ritual of the 27° in authorized use after the Union of 1867 in-
cluded an elaborate ceremonial opening and reception of a Prince of Mercy,
26°, into an order of knighthood dedicated to the five qualities of humility,
temperance, chastity, generosity, and honor. The chivalric order portrayed in
the ritual was represented to be the historic Order of the Teutonic Knights. Al-
though some sources have claimed that the 27° ritual originally was based on
the Order of the Knights Templar, there is no evidence to support this con-
tention.
The dramatic section did not appear until 1896 when the convocation
scene with a 13th century historical setting was added to the ritual. This ad-
dition greatly extended the length of the ritual and expanded the cast to more
than 50 players with accompanying costume requirements. Another innova-
tion was that the traditional five qualities were eclipsed in importance by the
three vows of chastity, obedience, and charity.
After nearly half a century, the ritual of 1944 introduced major revisions,
almost all of which affected the original ceremonial opening rather than the
dramatic section. The numerous vows assumed by the novice were greatly
condensed and references to his Masonic associations and duties were deleted
as anachronisms in the 13th century setting of the ritual. The obligation was
replaced by a shorter cover obligation. The historical lecture was removed
and portions incorporated in a new prologue. The poetic dirge also was elim-
inated and the previous emphasis on the imminence of death was reduced to
the symbolic display of the pendant sword. The five qualities, which origi-
nally had been the principal lessons of the degree, disappeared from the ritual.
Belief in a free church within a free state, neither seeking to dominate the
other, as dramatized in the convocation scene, emerged as the primary lesson
of the degree.
71
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Another 40 years were to elapse before the ritual next was scrutinized by
the Committee on Rituals. Notwithstanding the drama and pageantry of the
ritual that gave the 27° widespread popularity, several problems were becom-
ing apparent in its presentation. For one, addition of the elaborate convocation
scene to the preexisting ritual, with protracted processionals, individual en-
trances, and recessionals, significantly lengthened the playing time of the de-
gree and gave it a dual message. For another, the large cast, costuming, and
staging requirements were difficult, if not impossible, for smaller Valleys to
produce. Finally, although the dramatic confrontation between secular au-
thority and the Papacy was historical, it unfortunately provided opportunities
for unscripted anti-Catholic bias to manifest itself in some performances.
Despite all of this, few changes were reflected in the 1983 ritual.9 The
most obvious was the introduction of an alternative short version which pro-
vided a marginal easing of production difficulties by use of a slightly abridged
opening and reception preceding the convocation scene. More subtle was the
addition of wording to the prologue, implying that the dispute which gave
rise to the dramatic confrontation between church and secular leaders was
caused by poor communications, or misrepresentations perpetrated by devi-
ous underlings rather than by inherent antagonism between the two institu-
tions or their respective leaders.
Twenty years later the ritual underwent a thorough revision. The primary
author of the revision that became the 27° Ritual of 2003 was Ill. C. DeForrest
Trexler, 33°, Active Member for Pennsylvania and chairman of the Commit-
tee. The revised ritual deleted the opening, obligation, and reception. Not
only did this significantly reduce the length of the ritual, it resolved the dual
message of the degree by eliminating the last vestiges of the original 19th
century ritual. The lesson of the degree was framed unambiguously to address
the ever-present tension between secular and religious authority, an issue that
is with us today as it was during the 13th century.
The revised ritual made minor deletions and stylistic changes in the pro-
logue. Although the theme and principal characters of the convocation scene,
or “drama,” remained intact, the revisions were extensive. The dialogue,
which reflected a stilted, artificial, and overly verbose style, was largely
72
The Degree Rituals
9 According to then chairman of the Committee on Rituals, Ill. Robert L. Miller Sr., 33°,
(The Walls Came Tumbling Down), there was insufficient support among the Active Mem-
bership to approve more substantial revisions in the 27° Ritual of 1983.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
rewritten. Latin intonations, frequently mispronounced or made the subject of
levity, and some obscure historical references were eliminated. Derogatory
references to Islam, although an accurate reflection of attitudes during the
historical period portrayed, were considered unnecessary distractions from
the message of the ritual and were rephrased in less offensive language.
The number of prescribed characters and supernumeraries in the cast was
sharply reduced. Only five chivalric characters and one monarch, Emperor
Frederick, were retained. Five temporal rulers, whose participation in the con-
vocation was gratuitous to the dramatic action (as well as historically ques-
tionable), and their largely extraneous dialogue were deleted. The
proclamation at the opening of the convocation and the anticlimactic reces-
sional toward the close of the degree also were removed. The result of all this
was a substantial reduction in casting and staging requirements as well as
playing time.
The drama of the 27° is based on an historical event, the convocation at
Ferrentino, Italy, in March, 1223, when Pope Honorius III and Emperor Fred-
erick II met to discuss a new Crusade to recover Jerusalem. Portions of the
dramatization in the ritual, however, are implausible or fabricated. This in-
cludes what is represented to be the underlying cause of ill feeling between
the Pope and the Emperor, an irreligious writing called The Three Imposters.
In fact, this document did not appear until a dozen years after the events dram-
atized in the ritual during the reign of a subsequent Pope. In the ritual, the
issue is conveniently resolved by Frederick’s dismissal of the alleged author
of the offensive writing, his Chancellor, Petrus de Veneis. In historical fact,
origin of the document was not attributed to Veneis but to Papal partisans
seeking to discredit the Emperor. Veneis was an eloquent proponent of secular
authority who continued to enjoy Frederick’s trust and favor for another 26
years before he was removed from office for embezzlement, not blasphemy.
To correct these anachronisms and inaccuracies, however, would have evis-
cerated the dramatic quality of the ritual. Thus, for the sake of drama and the
moral lesson of the degree, Veneis has remained the villain of the piece. Not
for the first time in Scottish Rite ritual, dramatic license has prevailed over
historical fact.
Finally, the ritual of 2003 changed the traditional title of the degree, “Com-
mander of the Temple,” to “Knight of Jerusalem” as a more accurate reflec-
tion of the dramatic setting.
73
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 74 ---
Search for the Truth — The Twenty-eighth Degree
Probably the most unusual or even, as some might say, unique degree rit-
ual of the Scottish Rite is that of the 28°. The degree originated as the 23° of
the Rite of Perfection. It appeared as such in the Francken Manuscript, the
ritual occupying an exceptional length of 35 closely written pages. The prin-
cipal officer in the ritual was Father Adam, assisted by Brother Truth and a
number of spiritual beings, who remained in the ceremonial section of the
modern ritual. According to Francken, the degree was titled “The Key of Ma-
sonry,” although French rituals used the more familiar title “Knight of the
Sun.” Frederick Dalcho’s manuscript ritual of 1801 adopted the title “Knight
of the Sun or Prince Adept.”
As one might expect from its sheer length, the ritual was verbose, filled
with much mystical symbolism that provided no discernible practical lesson.
Albert Mackey, the 19th century Masonic scholar, attributed the roots of the
ritual to Hermetism and the medieval Jewish theosophy of Cabalism. All of
this was grist for the mill of Albert Pike, who expanded the Francken ritual
to 65 printed pages of interminable, rambling, esoteric lectures on mystical
concepts, without a common theme or practical application. The Pike ritual
was adopted verbatim by the Supreme Council after the Union of 1867 and
continued in use for more than 40 years under the Dalcho title “Knight of the
Sun or Prince Adept.”
Finally, in 1910, Ill. James I. Buchanan, 33°, Active Member for Penn-
sylvania and chairman of the Committee on Rituals, prepared a revised ritual
for the 28°, which was approved by the Supreme Council the following year.
Although the 1911 ritual accomplished not a mean feat by condensing the
Pike ritual into 30 pages, it did nothing to improve the exposition or content.
Dissatisfaction with the ritual remained widespread and grew during the
1920’s and 1930’s, but acceptance of a meaningful replacement was slow in
coming.
In 1938, matters finally came to a head. The Committee on Rituals re-
ported that the ritual of the 28° “does not lend itself to satisfactory presenta-
tion. . . The degree is too esoteric and unreal.” Sovereign Grand Commander
Melvin Maynard Johnson agreed with this appraisal and appointed a special
74
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 75 ---
committee, comprised of six prominent clergymen, to prepare a new ritual
based on the contributions made by ancient religions to the “Search for
Truth.” In the event, the full committee never met, but one of the designated
members, Dr. Harry K. Eversull, 32°, president of Marietta College, prepared
a draft ritual based on the building of King Herod’s Temple. Although Ever-
sull’s draft did not meet Commander Johnson’s criteria, a modified version
was approved in 1940 for trial exemplification as the tentative 28° ritual.
The subject matter of the tentative ritual was soon recognized to be more
appropriate as an introduction to the Rose Croix Degree. Consequently, on
Commander Johnson’s recommendation, in 1942, it was approved as the rit-
ual of the 17°. Thus, the Pike ritual, in its original and condensed versions,
“admittedly unsatisfactory and unworkable, unreal and too esoteric” survived
the effort to replace it and remained the ritual of the 28° for well over a cen-
tury. In the words of McIlyar Lichliter, chairman of the Committee on Rituals,
written in 1946, the ritual “is not worthy of a place in the Ancient Accepted
Scottish Rite…. If there is anything more chaotic in our system, I do not know
what it is.”
There matters stood, despite well nigh universal dissatisfaction, until 1980,
when two members of the Valley of Chicago, Ill. N. Tracy Walker, 33°,
M.S.A., and Bro. William R. Deutsch, 32°, M.S.A., apparently without any
initiative from the Supreme Council, prepared a dramatic ritual on the search
for truth theme. The drama was based on the 17th century Brotherhood of
the Rosy Cross, an obscure organization of scholars and philosophers from
various lands, faiths, and cultures, which some have theorized influenced the
transition from operative craft Masonry to speculative Freemasonry. The ac-
tion depicted in the drama was not historical, but the protagonist, Elias Ash-
mole, is known to have been a Freemason in the transitional years preceding
the formation of the Grand Lodge of England in 1717.
The draft ritual found its way to the Committee of Rituals and was the
subject of trial exemplifications in 1981 and 1982. Consisting of a ceremonial
section, prologue, and allegory, it went through several revisions, primarily
involving Ill. Haydn R. Jones, 33°, a consultant to the committee. Finally, it
was proposed and approved as the 28° Ritual of 1984, under the abbreviated
title “Knight of the Sun.” After 200 years, during most of which it had been
the subject of criticism and dissatisfaction, the Francken/Pike ritual had been
withdrawn and replaced.
75
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 76 ---
The most recent revision of the 28° ritual, that of 2006, eliminated the cer-
emonial section in accordance with the policy adopted by the Supreme Coun-
cil in 1995 and made a few, minor wording and stylistic changes in the
prologue and the allegory. None of these changes altered the content of the
1984 ritual.
76
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Toleration — The Twenty-ninth Degree
The 29° was not part of the Rite of Perfection. Therefore, it was not men-
tioned in the Francken Manuscript. It appeared for the first time in surviving
records in Killian Van Rensselaer’s 1845 manuscript. The ritual was given
only in outline form, describing the decorations, signs, and words of the de-
gree, without suggestion as to the content of the ritual. As was the case with
many other degrees of the Scottish Rite, it remained for Albert Pike to pro-
duce a complete ritual for the 29° based on a purported chivalric order of the
Crusades called “Grand Scottish Knight of St. Andrew.” The practice of char-
ity was the primary lesson of the degree. However, it does not appear that the
Pike ritual was ever adopted for use in this jurisdiction.
The 29° ritual in use at the Union of 1867 was the Hays-Raymond ritual
of 1864. Although it obviously was influenced by Pike, borrowing the obli-
gation and other elements from his ritual, the central feature of the degree,
now styled “Knight of St. Andrew,” was an innovative dramatic allegory.
Captive Knights of St. Andrew granted the request of their captor, the Turkish
Sultan, to be made a member of their Order after having been persuaded that
the essential tenets of the Koran were compatible with their own Christian be-
liefs. Thus, the dramatic theme of the degree and its lesson of toleration have
remained intact from the 1860’s to the present day.
The ritual of 1896 extravagantly expanded the allegory with lengthy
speeches and even added a climactic battle scene between the Knights and the
Turks.10 These embellishments were not of long duration, however, and were
gradually eliminated from subsequent revisions of the ritual. The rituals of
1907 and 1915 abridged the longer speeches and deleted the battle scene as
inconsistent with the lesson of the degree. Further abridgments were made in
the ritual of 1933.
The changes apparently did not go far enough for the critics. For one, a
chairman of the Committee on Rituals, McIlyar Lichliter, complained that
the lecture on toleration, which had been a part of the 1864 ritual, was too
long and anticlimactic. Finally, after 45 years, the committee again addressed
77
The Degree Rituals
10The battle scene also was a feature of the 32° ritual at this period.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
the 29°. The result was the ritual of 1978 which contained a rewritten pro-
logue, more abridgments in the allegory, and converted the toleration lecture
into dialogue form.
A quarter century later there was a much more thorough revision. The
brief, optional opening was shortened further, as was the prologue. Stylistic
changes were made to “modernize” the affected King James English which
appeared throughout the allegory. Passages that could be construed as dis-
paraging to Islam were reworded. Much of the dialogue, which was deemed
to be overly long or extraneous to the dramatic action, such as the recital of
a lengthy biography of St. Andrew, was abridged or deleted entirely. The most
significant deletion was the long dialogue on toleration at the end of the al-
legory which had replaced the lecture in the 1978 ritual. Consistent with the
criticism made by Lichliter many years before, this material was considered
unnecessary and anticlimactic to the dramatic action that already had commu-
nicated the lesson of the degree. Nevertheless, this deletion also was not with-
out its critics. Thus, the allegory was ended on the dramatic climax, the Sultan
being created a Knight of St. Andrew. This revision, approved as the 29° Rit-
ual of 2003, resulted in a much shortened playing time and a more acceptable
presentation for a contemporary audience.
The substance of the allegory, as well as the timeless lesson of the degree,
toleration, remains the same today as when it first was introduced more than
140 years ago. The dramatic theme of the 29° was remarkably prescient of the
sectarian strife, purportedly arising from religious differences, that has taken
center stage again in the world of the 21st century.
78
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Practice Justice — The Thirtieth Degree
The ritual of the 30° appeared in the Francken Manuscript as the 24° of
the Rite of Perfection, under the grandiose title “Grand Elected Knight of Ka-
dosh or Knight of the White and Black Eagle.” The Hebrew word Kadosh
was translated as “consecrated, or set apart.” According to Albert Mackey,
the degree originated in France in 1743 and by 1758 had acquired the title
“Grand Elect Knight Kadosh.”
The Francken ritual consisted of 25 manuscript pages. The brief opening
was followed by the reception, which included an address on the history of
Masonry from the time of King Solomon to the Crusades. After the obligation
and a series of admonitions, the candidate was required to ascend and descend
the so-called “Mysterious Ladder” of seven steps. There followed a long his-
tory of the suppression of the Knights Templar and the martyrdom of Grand
Master Jacques DeMolay, which was likened to the murder of HiramAbif, the
investiture, and a concluding lecture in the form of a catechism.
By the middle of the 19th century three major versions of the 30° ritual
were in use — those of Killian Van Rensselaer, Charles Laffon-Ladebat, and
Albert Pike. In each of these rituals the dramatic elements were much en-
hanced from Francken. The candidate was conducted through a succession of
apartments and faced a panel of judges. Melodramatic symbols, such as tombs
and coffins, skulls and skeletons, were introduced. A multiplicity of vows be-
came more militant. Van Rensselaer took the candidate on a pilgrimage. Pike,
apparently following the lead of Laffon-Ladebat, introduced an indictment of
intolerance and bigotry allegedly practiced by the Roman Catholic Church.
Of course, the end result of all these embellishments was an increase in the
length of the ritual.
An abridgment of the Van Rensselaer ritual apparently was in use in this
jurisdiction at the Union of 1867, which, with adaptations from the Pike ritual,
was approved as the 30° ritual in 1875. The ritual was further revised and
condensed in 1904, and, for the first time, issued separately from the rituals
for the 31° and 32°. Previously, the 30° had been considered part of a trilogy
with the 31° and 32°. Only minor changes were made to the ritual in 1930 and
1938.
79
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 80 ---
The attempted synthesis of the Van Rensselaer and Pike rituals was not
easily accomplished and would contribute to future difficulties in acceptance
of the ritual. The fact that the 1904 ritual continued substantially intact for a
century, that no revisions at all were made in the ritual from the 1930’s until
the 21st century, and its absence from the agenda of the Committee on Rituals
during all that period did not signify a vote of confidence. Quite the contrary,
it was evidence of disuse and disinterest as was amply demonstrated by the
infrequency of its presentation across the Jurisdiction.
All of this came as no surprise to McIlyar Lichliter, who spared few words
in his 1946 criticism of the 30° ritual. He found its evolution haphazard, with-
out a logical or orderly pattern. As a result, its staging was awkward its action
tiresome, its message confused. Aside from obvious shortcomings of inordi-
nate length and archaic, obscure language, it was anticlimactic, both internally
and in comparison with the highly dramatic allegories of the Consistorial de-
grees that preceded it. In essence, it was a ritualistic dinosaur, a survivor of
the didactic style that had been characteristic of Masonic ritual in an earlier
age. His solution was that the ritual would have to be entirely reconstructed
and rewritten.
In 2004, the Committee on Ritualistic Matters finally took the long over-
due step of confronting the ritual of the 30°. The committee quickly arrived
at the same conclusion Lichliter had reached nearly 60 years earlier. Attempts
to salvage the ritual by rewrite ended in frustration. The ritual simply did not
express a meaningful lesson for Scottish Rite Masons of the 21st century.
Hence, the decision was made to recommend withdrawal of the ritual and its
replacement by a highly modified version of what then was the ritual of the
31°.
The replacement ritual, taken from the 31°, itself presented problems. Al-
though its current form was comparatively recent by ritualistic standards, dat-
ing only from 1949, the script ran to some 45 pages. Use in the dialogue of
such archaic English words as “wot” (know) and “yclept” (named), and the
legal term “thwert-ut-nay” (general denial) required that a glossary be ap-
pended to the ritual. That, of course, did nothing for the audience, for many
of whom the experience was almost like a journey to Tolkien’s Middle Earth.
80
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 81 ---
The 31° Ritual of 1949 consisted of the usual ceremonial opening and pro-
logue, followed by a dramatization of a civil trial in 14th century England.
The primary author of the trial scene had been Ill. Harold Whittaker Connell,
33°, a member of the Valley of Milwaukee and a consultant to the Committee
on Rituals. A lawyer by profession, Connell devoted two years to researching
and recreating a medieval English trial. Unfortunately, he did not live to see
the fruits of his labors. The trial scene was approved as part of the 31° tenta-
tive ritual in 1938, a year after Connell’s untimely death. The Scottish Rite de-
gree system thereby acquired a third ritual, in addition to the 7° and the 21°,
that used a dramatized trial scene in an historical setting to portray a similar
lesson, justice.
The 2004 committee recognized the merits in the work. The trial scene
was easy to stage and could be entertaining as well as instructive. However,
there would have to be extensive editing of the dialogue into more contem-
porary English and condensation of the ritual to the essence of the trial scene.
The vocabulary and grammar of the dialogue was “modernized,” but the sub-
stance and sequence, as well as the cast, of the scene were left intact. Signif-
icant shortening of the ritual was accomplished by elimination of the
ceremonial opening, as mandated by the policy adopted by the Supreme
Council in 1995, and by deleting the opening portion of the trial scene, in
which the judges identified themselves with famous lawgivers of history, an
exercise that contributed nothing to the dramatic action.
Finally, the former title of the 31°, “Grand Inspector Inquisitor Com-
mander,” was abbreviated by dropping the last two words and replaced the
meaningless title of the 30°, “Grand Elect Knight Kadosh or Knight of the
White and Black Eagle.” These changes and transfer of the modified ritual
from the 31° were approved by the Supreme Council as the 30° Ritual of
2004, “Grand Inspector.”
81
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Knight Aspirant — The Thirty-first Degree
Neither the 31° nor any recognizable predecessor to the degree was part
of the Rite of Perfection and recorded in the Francken Manuscript. Nothing
is known of the ritual of the degree previous to Killian Van Rensselaer’s man-
uscript, written in 1845 or shortly thereafter. For much of the 19th century the
30°-32° were considered and probably conferred as a unit, the “Kadosh”, and
they were recorded in that manner by Van Rensselaer. However, ten or so
pages of Van Rensselaer’s manuscript can be identified with what later be-
came the 31°, “Grand Inspector Inquisitor Commander.”
The first distinct ritual of the 31° was completed by Albert Pike in 1859.
From its central principle, justice, Pike created a ceremonial and dramatic
ritual that portrayed the training of a judge. The Pike ritual was adopted by
this jurisdiction at the Union of 1867. Subsequent revisions of the 31° ritual
in 1875, 1904, and 1930 attempted the difficult task of synthesizing the Pike
ritual with the earlier ritual of Van Rensselaer.
In the mid-1930’s Ill. Harold Whittaker Connell, 33°, a member of the
Valley of Milwaukee and a consultant to the Committee on Rituals, undertook
the scholarly recreation of a 14th century English trial court as a dramatic
scene for the 31°. In 1938, a year after Connell’s untimely death, the product
of his labors was adopted as part of the tentative ritual of the 31°, a dramatic
portrayal of justice, which Pike had defined as the central principle of the de-
gree. The tentative ritual subsequently was approved as the 31° Ritual of 1949
and remained in place for more than half a century.
In 2004, the Committee on Ritualistic Matters recommended withdrawal
of the traditional ritual of the 30° and its replacement with an extensively
modified version of the trial scene from the 31°. In place of the transplanted
ritual, the committee recommended that the “Constans Allegory” be moved
from the 32° and made the new ritual of the 31°, to be called “Knight Aspi-
rant.” The allegory, with a medieval setting, dramatized the Vigil of an aspi-
rant for knighthood, his spiritual trial by the temptations of personal
self-interest, and ultimately his supreme sacrifice in the cause of the “Royal
Secret” to which all Scottish Rite Masons aspire.
82
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 83 ---
Although by the late 20th century dramatic allegories were featured in
most of the degree rituals of the Scottish Rite, it was the allegory of the 32°
that came to be identified simply as “the allegory.” For many Scottish Rite
Masons, “the allegory” had come to represent the epitome of the degree rit-
uals of the Rite. Because of its unique status, the allegory was considered ca-
pable of standing alone as a degree ritual in its own right, rather than
continuing to serve simply as the dramatic component of a larger, more com-
plex ritual. Indeed, the degree schedules of many Consistories in the jurisdic-
tion already were treating the allegory as if it were a separate degree instead
of an integral part of the 32°.
To introduce the new ritual of the 31°, a new prologue was written, which
consisted, in essence, of the former closing dialogue of the 32° ceremonial
section that had introduced the allegory. No changes were made in the dia-
logue of the allegory.
Given the prominence that the allegory has attained, it may come as a sur-
prise to many Scottish Rite Masons that it had not been a traditional part of
the 32° ritual and cannot be traced back to the origins of the degree. It did not
become part of the degree until it was added to the ceremonial in 1916. The
prime author of the allegory was Ill. John Lloyd Thomas, 33°, Active Mem-
ber for New York and a member of the Committee on Rituals. Thomas earlier
had authored the ceremonial section of the 32° as well as what later became
the rituals of the 5° and the 9°.
The allegory, still substantially as Thomas had written it, and the new pro-
logue were approved as the 31° Ritual of 2004, “Knight Aspirant.” Neverthe-
less, the so-called “bifurcation” of the 32° ritual and the transfer of the
allegory to the 31° provoked more intense controversy than normally has
been aroused by ritualistic changes. An adverse and at times highly emotional
reaction across the jurisdiction stemmed largely from attachment to the long-
standing practice of presenting the allegory as the finale to Consistory degree
conferrals.
The most recent version is the 31° Ritual of 2008. It incorporated a number
of revisions in wording, most of which preceded the vigil. The most signifi-
cant change was the addition to the prologue of several lines from Tennyson’s
Guinevere, describing knightly virtues. These lines formerly had been part
83
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 84 ---
of the introduction of the allegory in the closing dialogue of the 32° ceremo-
nial that had been adapted as the prologue of the 31° in 2004. The change
thus was more a matter of restoration than of innovation.
84
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Sublime Prince — The Thirty-second Degree
The 32° of the Scottish Rite had its origin as the 25th and last degree of
the 18th century Rite of Perfection and may be traced back to a French degree
that was extant 250 years ago. The Francken Manuscript of 1783 did not
record the ritual of the degree, but it did describe a major component, the
symbolism of the camp, disclosed the signs and passwords of the degree, and
provided the motto, then as now, “Spes Mea in Deo Est.” Also then as now,
a person admitted to the degree was styled “Sublime Prince of the Royal Se-
cret.”
The earliest surviving ritual of the degree appeared in 1845, or soon there-
after, in the manuscript of Killian Van Rensselaer. At the time a single ritual
encompassed the 30°, 31°, and 32°. In that portion of the composite ritual as-
sociated with the 32°, set in the period of the Crusades, the candidate was
made a prisoner by Moslems and rescued by Knights Templar. By 1875, per-
haps under the influence of the American Civil War and its veterans’ organ-
ization, the Grand Army of the Republic, the 32° had become a military
degree with a Grand Masonic Army attired in a prescribed Consistory uni-
form. The rescue of the candidate was made in a dramatic battle scene.
By the turn of the 20th century, however, the military influence had run its
course. Reflecting the changing trend, Ill. John Lloyd Thomas, 33°, later to
become an Active Member for New York and a member of the Committee on
Rituals, proposed a new ritual for the 32°. What Thomas proposed was a dig-
nified ceremonial with much improved dialogue, and without dramatization.
Adopted as a tentative ritual in 1912, it became the basis of the later ceremo-
nial section and the current ritual of the 32°.
A few years later, because of continuing interest in a dramatic ritual,
Thomas revised the tentative ritual, separating it into two sections. The first
was the ceremonial ritual with the symbolism of the camp, obligation, and in-
vestiture, climaxing in a stirring call to patriotism. This was followed by a
new dramatic allegory, a medieval scene that portrayed the vigil of Constans,
an aspirant for knighthood, who overcame the temptations of personal self-
interest and ultimately made the supreme sacrifice in the cause of the “Royal
Secret.” The new ritual with ceremonial and allegory was approved as the
85
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 86 ---
32° Ritual of 1916 and remained substantially unchanged for almost 90
years.11
The ritual of 1950 added to the obligation a statement on the unity of
Freemasonry, which dated back to the Union of 1867, but which had been
deleted from the 1875 ritual. The tentative ritual of 1978 introduced changes
in the allegory, reassigning some passages of dialogue from the Prince Com-
mander to the Bishop. More significantly, the tentative ritual introduced Con-
stans’ soliloquy over his armor during the vigil. The closing ceremony was
eliminated as anticlimactic, so that the degree ended when the curtain fell on
the allegory. These changes were incorporated in the ritual of 1981.
In 2003 a further revision to the allegory eliminated one of Constans’four
tempters as being unconvincing and adding nothing to the dramatic action
that was not already provided by another of the tempters.
The following year the Committee on Ritualistic Matters recommended
“bifurcation” of the 32° ritual, by removing the allegory from the degree and
reassigning it as the ritual of the 31° to replace the former ritual of that degree
which had been transferred to the 30°. There were several reasons for this
decision which had been under consideration by the committee for several
years.
Firstly, the 32° had become an overly-long ritualistic anomaly, containing
both a ceremonial and a dramatic component, notwithstanding that this format
had been discontinued in every other degree ritual. Secondly, the allegory
was not traditionally a part of the 32°, having been added to the ritual, and,
comprising 17 pages of dialogue, it could stand alone as a credible degree
ritual in its own right. Thirdly, the two components of the 32° ritual, a formal
Masonic ceremonial and a dramatic medieval allegory, were so different in
character that in practice they had become virtually two separate degrees. In
many Consistories, their presentation usually was scheduled as such, not in
immediate sequence as two successive acts of a single dramatic presentation,
as originally intended. This development gave rise to concern that in practice
theAllegory had come to overshadow the ceremonial, which often took on the
appearance of a mere preface or interlude.
86
The Degree Rituals
11 Ill. Brother Thomas was eminently qualified for the task of rewriting the 32° ritual during
1911-16. He previously had authored the rituals of the 23° and 24°, now the rituals of the
5° and 9°.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Moreover, despite the need for change, tradition must count for something.
As we have seen, the last three degrees of the Scottish Rite had been consid-
ered as a ritualistic unit for much of their history. Thus, it seemed logical that
the ritualistic replacement for the 31° should come from the 32°. Finally, the
ceremonial was directly representative of what originally had been the last de-
gree of the Rite. It contained an overview of the philosophical lessons exem-
plified in all the preceding degrees including that dramatized in the allegory.
It embraced the obligation, investiture, and proclamation of a Sublime Prince,
32° Scottish Rite Mason. Hence, the ceremonial should remain in place as the
ritual of the 32°, as it always had been.
With removal of the allegory, several modifications were required in the
ceremonial. The concluding dialogue, designed to introduce the allegory, also
was removed from the 32° and became the new prologue of the 31°. The se-
quence of the flag presentation was altered so as to follow the investiture and
proclamation of the new Sublime Prince. The ceremonial was given a cli-
mactic conclusion with the stirring call to patriotism and universality, “…
looking forward to the day when love of country shall be joined to love of hu-
manity and the Scottish Rite standard shall rise in peaceful triumph over a
worldwide brotherhood of man.”
The foregoing changes, as recommended by the Committee on Ritualistic
Matters, were approved as the 32° Ritual of 2004.
A complete review of the 32° ritual was made four years later, resulting in
the revised 32° Ritual of 2008. This revision included a number of stylistic
changes, most of them deletions of words or phrases considered superfluous
or of questionable meaning. Reference to the “Holy Bible” was changed to
“Volume of the Sacred Law.” The most obvious change was the replacement
of “Constans” by the “Knight Aspirant” in the cast of characters. The purpose
of this substitution was to prevent possible misidentification of this character
with the protagonist of the allegory of the 31° and to represent advancement
of the candidate from Knight Aspirant of the 31° to Sublime Prince in the
32°.
87
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Epilogue
The mission of the Supreme Council Committee on Rituals (Ritualistic
Matters), as stated in the report of the committee for 1976, the year Ill.
Brother Partridge, 33°, published The Rituals, is to “study our degrees in a
continuing effort to make the presentation of our degree lessons more im-
pressive and inspiring.”
Nearly 30 years later the committee reported that its “pervasive challenge
. . . is to provide a degree system that embodies the philosophy of Scottish
Rite Masonry, and that can be communicated in an understandable and inspi-
rational manner by all Valleys . . .”
Truth is fixed and unchanging, but the revelation of truth is progressive.
We interpret life in terms of the moral and philosophical teachings of the past.
From these lessons we must develop a moral code and philosophy in our own
day so that men might have a guide, a moral compass as it were, to the truth
which they can understand and interpret in their own time.
The degree rituals of the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry always have been
a work in progress. They never are a finished thing.
88
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Chronological Development of
Northern Masonic Jurisdiction
Degree Rituals from the Union of 1867
By Date of Supreme Council Approval of Ritual or Revision
Lodge of Perfection
4° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1953T, 1955, 2004T, 2007T
5° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1958T, 1960, 1988T, 1996, 2007
6° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1962T, 1966, 1993T, 1996, 2003
7° - 1871, 1894, 1915, 1941, 1970T, 1974T, 1980, 2005
8° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1981, 2006
9° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1965T, 1966T, 1980T, 1986T, 1992, 2003
10° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1965T, 1966T, 1980T, 1986T, 1992, 2006
11° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1967T, 1973T, 1974, 2004
12° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1968T, 1976, 1993T, 1996T, 2002
13° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1941, 1971T, 1977, 2004
14° - 1871, 1894, 1917, 1927, 1938, 1946, 1976, 1995T, 2000, 2006
Council, Princes of Jerusalem
15° - 1878, 1911, 1920, 1943, 1959, 1999, 2005
16° - 1878, 1911, 1920, 1959, 1992, 2007
Chapter, Rose Croix
17° - 1870, 1914, 1942, 1957, 1994T, 2002, 2007
18° - 1870, 1936T, 1942, 1958T, 1961T, 1964, 1994T, 1999, 2007
89
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Consistory
19° - 1880, 1886, 1934, 1953, 1993T, 2002
20° - 1880, 1886, 1896, 1922, 1939, 1951, 1994, 2004, 2007
21° - 1880, 1886, 1915, 1919, 1933, 1936, 1974, 2003, 2004
22° - 1880, 1896, 1920, 1939, 1994, 2007
22° (Musical Version) - 1942, 1993T, 1994, 2007
23° - 1880, 1908, 1988T, 1996, 2008
24° - 1880, 1908, 1918, 1930, 1988T, 1996, 2003
25° - 1880, 1896, 1909, 1951, 1993T, 2000, 2003
26° - 1880, 1911, 1940T, 1942, 1981, 1992T, 1999, 2006T
27° - 1880, 1896, 1930, 1944, 1983, 2003
28° - 1880, 1911, 1920, 1940T, 1984, 2006
29° - 1880, 1896, 1907, 1915, 1933, 1978, 2003
30° - 1875, 1904, 1930, 1938, 2004
31° - 1875, 1904, 1930, 1938T, 1949, 2004, 2008
32° - 1875, 1912T, 1916, 1934, 1950, 1978T, 1981, 2003, 2004, 2008
T = Tentative Ritual
90
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Chairman of the Supreme Council
Committees on Rituals (Ritualistic Matters)
Enoch Terry Carson
Ohio
1868-1882
Charles Thomson McClenachan
New York
1882-1896
Nicholas Randle Ruckle
Indiana
1897-1900
James Isaac Buchanan
Pennsylvania
1900-1916
William Geake
Indiana
1916-1927
John Prouty McCune
Ohio
1927-1930
Norris Greenleaf Abbott
Rhode Island
1930-1934
Delmar Duane Darrah
Illinois
1934-1944
George Edward Bushnell
Michigan
1944-1945
McIlyar Hamilton Lichliter
Ohio
1945-1957
Irving Emerson Partridge Jr.
Connecticut
1957-1972
Albert Newton Hepler Jr.
Indiana
1972-1973
William Henry Cantwell
Delaware
1973-1975
Wayne Edward Stichter
Ohio
1975-1977
Irving Emerson Partridge Jr.
Connecticut
1977-1978
Robert Lowell Miller Sr.
Indiana
1978-1994
Richard Waldo Parker
Vermont
1994-2001
Charles DeForrest Trexler
Pennsylvania
2001-2001
91
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Bibliography
The primary source material for this work are the texts of the Northern
Masonic Jurisdiction Scottish Rite degree rituals in use during the period
since 1975; selected Rituals in use prior to that year; and the reports of the
Supreme Council Committee on Rituals (Ritualistic Matters) for 1974 and
subsequent years, published annually in the Abstract of Proceedings of the
Supreme Council.
Secondary sources are the historical notes that accompany the text of most
Degree Rituals; the 1996 updated edition of Newbury and Williams’ A His-
tory of the Supreme Council, 33°, A.A.S.R., N.M.J., U.S.A.; Samuel H. Bay-
nard’s 1938 History of the Supreme Council, 33°, A.A.S.R., N.M.J. U.S.A.;
Robert L. Miller’s The Walls Came Tumbling Down, a readable and often
tongue-in-cheek memoir of the author’s long tenure as a member and chair-
man of the Supreme Council Committee on Rituals; selected manuscript
notes on the degree rituals prepared by McIlyar Lichliter, on file in the
archives of the Scottish Rite Masonic Library at Lexington, MA; Partridge’s
The Rituals of the Supreme Council, 33°, for the Northern Masonic Jurisdic-
tion, U.S.A.; Paul T. Million’s Report on the Ritual, Scottish Rite Leadership
Conference 2000 (S.J.); Arturo De Hoyos’article “Development of the Scot-
tish Rite Rituals”, published in The Plumbline, vol. 14, no. 4 (Spring 2007);
and Scottish Rite Ritual Monitor and Guide (2007) by the same author.
92
The Degree Rituals

--- Sayfa 93 ---
93
The Degree Rituals