--- Sayfa 1 ---
How Modern Dictators Survive:
An Informational Theory of the New Authoritarianism∗
Sergei Guriev†
Daniel Treisman‡
This draft: November 2015
First draft: February 2015
Abstract
We develop an informational theory of dictatorship. Dictators survive not because of their use of
force or ideology but because they convince the public—rightly or wrongly—that they are competent.
Citizens do not observe the dictator’s type but infer it from signals inherent in their living standards,
state propaganda, and messages sent by an informed elite via independent media. If citizens conclude
that the dictator is incompetent, they overthrow him in a revolution. The dictator can invest in making
convincing state propaganda, censoring independent media, co-opting the elite, or equipping police to
repress attempted uprisings—but he must ﬁnance such spending at the expense of the public’s living
standards.
We show that incompetent dictators can survive as long as economic shocks are not too
large. Moreover, their reputations for competence may grow over time—even if living standards fall.
Censorship and co-optation of the elite are substitutes, but both are complements of propaganda. Due
to coordination failure among members of the elite, multiple equilibria emerge. In some equilibria the
ruler uses propaganda and co-opts the elite; in others, propaganda is combined with censorship. In the
equilibrium with censorship, diﬃcult economic times prompt higher relative spending on censorship and
propaganda. The results illuminate tradeoﬀs faced by various recent dictatorships.
∗We thank Alberto Alesina, Marina Azzimonti, Maxim Boycko, Georgy Egorov, Francesco Giavazzi, Andrea Prat, Gerard
Roland, Gergely Ujhelyi, and other participants in the Political Economy Meeting of NBER (April 2015), participants of
ISNIE/SIOE Conference at Harvard, seminars at Warwick and LSE, as well as Maxim Ananyev, Chao-yo Cheng, George
Derpanopoulos, Barbara Geddes, Scott Gehlbach, Eoghan Staﬀord, Qian Wang, Feng Yang, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya for
helpful comments and suggestions.
†Professor of Economics, Sciences Po, Paris, and Research Fellow, CEPR. E-mail: sergei.guriev@sciencespo.fr
‡Professor of Political Science, UCLA, and Research Associate, NBER. E-mail: treisman@polisci.ucla.edu
1

--- Sayfa 2 ---
1
Introduction
How do dictators hold onto power? The totalitarian tyrannies of Stalin, Hitler, Mao, Pol Pot, and others
relied largely—although not exclusively—on mass terror and indoctrination. Although less ideological, many
20th Century military regimes—from Franco’s Spain to Pinochet’s Chile—used considerable violence to
intimidate opponents of the regime.1 Personalistic dictators in Africa and the Caribbean—such as Mobutu,
Bokassa, Somoza, and the Duvaliers—also relied on blood and fear to sustain their rule.
However, in
recent decades, a less carnivorous form of authoritarian government has emerged, one better adapted to the
globalized media and sophisticated technologies of the 21st Century. From the Peru of Alberto Fujimori to
the Hungary of Viktor Orban, illiberal regimes have managed to consolidate power without isolating their
countries from the world economy or resorting to mass killings.
Instead of inaugurating “new orders,” such regimes simulate democracy, holding elections that they make
sure to win, bribing and censoring the private press rather than abolishing it, and replacing ideology with an
amorphous anti-Western resentment.2 Their leaders often enjoy genuine popularity—albeit after eliminating
plausible rivals—that is based on “performance legitimacy,” a perceived competence at securing prosperity
and defending the nation against external or internal threats. State propaganda aims not to re-engineer
human souls but to boost the leader’s ratings, which, so long as they remain high, are widely publicized.
Political opponents are harassed and humiliated, accused of fabricated crimes, and encouraged to emigrate.
The new-style dictators can brutally crush separatist rebellions and deploy paramilitaries against un-
armed protesters. But, compared to most previous autocrats, they use violence sparingly. They prefer the
ankle bracelet to the Gulag. Maintaining power, for them, is less a matter of terrorizing victims than of
manipulating beliefs about the world. Of course, totalitarian leaders also sought to inﬂuence public beliefs—
some were great innovators in the use of propaganda. Yet, how they used it was quite diﬀerent. Dictators
such as Hitler and Stalin sought to fundamentally reshape citizens’ world views by imposing comprehensive
ideologies. The new autocrats are more surgical: they aim only to convince citizens of their competence
to govern. The totalitarian dictators often employed propaganda to encourage personal sacriﬁces for the
“common good.” Their successors seek to manipulate citizens into supporting the regime for selﬁsh reasons.
Finally, although propaganda was important for the old-style autocracies, violence clearly came ﬁrst. “Words
are ﬁne things, but muskets are even better,” Mussolini quipped (Odegard 1935, p.261). Recent tyrannies
1More than 30,000 people are believed to have been killed by Pinochet’s agents, “most of them taken away to secret detention
centers and camps, tortured, tossed still alive from airplanes into the sea or shot and buried in unmarked graves” (Roht-Arriaza
2005, p.viii).
2On the use of elections and partially democratic or pseudo-democratic institutions in dictatorships, see Gandhi (2008),
Gandhi and Lust-Okar (2009) and Levitsky and Way (2010). For insightful journalistic accounts of how such regimes operate,
see Dobson (2012) and Simon (2015). Although our focus is on “dictatorships,” which we see as synonymous with “authoritarian
regimes,” we consider the dividing line between soft authoritarian regimes and illiberal democracies to be a fuzzy one. Our
model also applies to most illiberal democracies.
Compared to their counterparts in democracies, leaders in dictatorships
are more likely to be replaced as the result of mass protests or coups rather than simply because they lost a fair election.
Institutional checks on leaders also tend to be more elaborate and eﬀective in democracies. But, although operating within
tighter constraints, democratic leaders also seek to inﬂuence and manipulate information ﬂows.
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Sources: Database of Political Institutions 2010 (see Beck et al. 2001); Polity IV database.
Notes: “Non-democracies” are countries with Polity2 scores of less than 6.
Figure 1: Legislatures in non-democracies, 1975-2012
reverse the order. “We live on information,” Fujimori’s security chief Vladimiro Montesinos confessed in
one interview. “The addiction to information is like an addiction to drugs.” Montesinos paid million dollar
bribes to television stations to skew their coverage. But killing members of the elite struck him as foolish:
“Remember why Pinochet had his problems. We will not be so clumsy”(McMillan and Zoido 2004, p.74).
When dictators are accused of political murders these days, it often augurs the fall of the dictatorship.
Some bloody military regimes and totalitarian states remain—for instance, in Egypt and Burma, or North
Korea. And some less violent non-democracies existed even in the heyday of authoritarian repression (mostly
monarchies and post-colonial African regimes). But the balance has shifted. As Figure 1 shows, compared
to 35 years ago, far more of the undemocratic orders around today have elected legislatures in which non-
government parties occupy a signiﬁcant place. And, as Figure 2 shows, fewer are currently involved in mass
atrocities against their populations. Whereas in 1975 22 percent of non-democracies were engaged in mass
killings, by 2012 this share had fallen to 6 percent. Besides Fujimori’s Peru and Orban’s Hungary, other
regimes that share some or all of these characteristics include Vladimir Putin’s Russia, Mahathir Mohamad’s
Malaysia, Hugo Chavez’s Venezuela, and Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s Turkey. One might even see Lee Kuan
Yew’s Singapore as a pioneer of such “soft autocracy.” China’s recent party bosses also ﬁt in some respects,
but whereas the other leaders inherited ﬂawed democracies and undermined them further, the institutions
hollowed out in China were those of totalitarian communism.
We develop a model of dictatorship to capture the logic that governs the survival of such regimes. As
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Sources: Polity IV; Mass Killings Database (see Ulfelder and Valentino 2008, and updated data at
https://dartthrowingchimp.wordpress.com/2013/07/25/trends-over-time-in-state-sponsored-mass-killing/.
Notes: “Non-democracies” are states with Polity2 scores of less than 6. A “mass killing” is “any event in which the actions of
state agents result in the intentional death of at least 1,000 noncombatants from a discrete group in a period of sustained
violence.”
Figure 2: Proportion of non-democracies with ongoing mass killings.
in signaling models of democratic politics, the ruler may be either competent or incompetent.3 Only the
dictator and a subset of the public—“the informed elite”—observe his type directly. But ordinary citizens
update their beliefs about this based on the information available to them from the state media, independent
media, and their own living standards. Citizens’ private consumption depends on the tax rate set by the
dictator and on economic performance, itself a function of the leader’s competence and a stochastic shock.
If enough citizens infer, based on these various signals, that the incumbent is incompetent, they overthrow
him in a revolution. Members of the elite—if not co-opted—would also prefer to replace an incompetent
incumbent but cannot do so without the masses to back them up.4
The dictator can aﬀect all the channels of information. He can spend on making the propaganda broadcast
via state media more convincing. He can bribe (or impose costs—such as ﬁnes or violence—on) the informed
elite to prevent the latter from sending critical messages. And he can censor those messages that they do send.
The dictator can also spend on hiring and equipping the police with the tools of repression, thus increasing
3Competence here refers to the ability to promote—or at least not undermine—economic growth and defend the country
against external threats. The contrast between the rapid, sustained growth in the Singapore of Lee Kuan Yew and the consistent
economic decline in the Zaire of Mobutu Sese Seko suggests that some dictators may indeed be more competent than others.
4Leaders of authoritarian states are more often removed by coups than by mass uprisings (Geddes 1999), but we focus here
on regime change, which is less frequent than leader turnover. One can imagine combining the game studied in this paper with
another game played in parallel between the leader and those members of the elite with military or organizational resources;
this would involve a combination of cooptation and deterrence, as well as other techniques to prevent conspiracies (Svolik 2012).
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
the cost of revolution. However, all these actions must be paid for by the government, either by raising the
tax rate (which reduces after-tax income and therefore consumption for citizens) or by reducing government
spending on other items, which may include public services that the population values. Policemen assigned
to intimidate journalists are not solving real crimes. Citizens, observing their lower consumption or the
depleted supply of public services, will downgrade their estimates of the incumbent’s competence. Hence the
tradeoﬀ.
“Propaganda” here should be understood broadly: it refers to any action by the government that makes
the message “the leader is competent” more convincing to the public. Thus, it includes traditional instru-
ments such as government advertising, production and broadcast of distorted news shows, pro-regime online
media, bribing and planting of stories in the supposedly independent press, and hiring of internet “trolls” to
post pro-regime comments. In China, an estimated 20 percent of all internet comments come from members
of the “50 cent party,” so-called because of the fee each is paid per pro-government post (Simon 2015, p.99).
In addition, reforming school curricula to make them more “patriotic” may ﬁt (Cantoni et al., 2014). But
propaganda can also be understood to include actions of the government that render credible the leader’s
excuses for poor economic performance. These could include manufacturing diplomatic, economic, and even
military confrontations with foreign powers so that they can be more convincingly blamed for domestic
stagnation. Of course, such actions can be very costly for the country but still rational for the dictator if
the propaganda beneﬁt is large.
Censorship, in the new dictatorships, also involves a mix of traditional and non-traditional methods.
Besides blocking publication of speciﬁc articles or programs, it can include ﬁltering the internet, hiring
hackers to attack opposition websites, bribing the owners and journalists in “independent” media to censor
themselves, and prosecuting and imprisoning journalists who refuse.
It can also involve paying friendly
investors to buy out and domesticate critical broadcasters, overtly or through shell companies. Such activities
divert resources from productive uses and cut into government spending on welfare-enhancing programs.
China reportedly employs two million censors to police the internet (Bennett and Naim 2015).
Under
Fujimori in Peru, the regime paid more than $36 million a year to the main television channels to skew their
coverage, and reportedly oﬀered one channel a $19 million bribe (McMillan and Zoido 2004, pp.82-5).
Our model shows how the dictator’s strategy and his equilibrium survival odds, as well as the path
of citizens’ beliefs, change with the various exogenous parameters—the size of the stochastic shocks, the
distribution of competence, and the technology of censorship, propaganda, and repression. We identify two
stable equilibria: in one the dictator co-opts the elite, in the other he censors the private media. Multiple
equilibria exist because members of the elite must coordinate on a strategy. When both equilibria exist, the
one with co-optation always yields the dictator higher survival odds than the one with censorship. We also
ﬁnd that, so long as force is not too cost-eﬀective, it is used against the general public only as a last resort
after co-optation, censorship, and propaganda have failed.
The model oﬀers insight into a number of observations and puzzles about the functioning of dictatorships.
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
First, it shows how modern autocracies can survive while employing relatively little violence against the
public. Repression is not necessary if mass beliefs can be manipulated suﬃciently by means of censorship,
co-optation, and propaganda. Indeed, since in our model major repression is only used if equilibria based
on co-optation and censorship have disappeared, violence signals to the general public that the regime is
incompetent and therefore vulnerable. For instance, the appearance in 2000 of a tape that seemed to implicate
Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma in the killing of a journalist set oﬀprotests that led ultimately to the
country’s “Orange Revolution” four years later. Conversely, when co-optation and censorship have failed
and opposition to the regime becomes overt, state repression is all that remains—and is sure to be used.
As Davenport (2007, pp.7-8) notes, one result that emerges with “astonishing consistency” from studies of
repression is that: “When challenges to the status quo take place, authorities generally employ some form
of repressive action to counter or eliminate the behavioral threat.”
Second, the eﬀectiveness of propaganda in authoritarian regimes is a prima facie puzzle. Given that
citizens know the dictator has an incentive to lie about his type, why do they ever listen? In our model,
propaganda works because whereas competent leaders can costlessly show themselves to be competent,
incompetent ones must invest resources to fake the evidence that will make this claim convincing—and
sometimes they choose to spend their budget on other actions instead. Thus, observing a dictator claim
persuasively to be competent increases the odds that he actually is—especially given the resources he could
shift from propaganda to consumption and public goods which are directly observed by the public.
Third, the model oﬀers one reason why some clearly incompetent dictators nevertheless manage to retain
power for long periods. Rulers whom most or all citizens—if fully informed—would prefer to overthrow can
still survive in many circumstances simply by manipulating information. And we focus on a mechanism other
than the well-studied one of blocking communication among potential protesters. The dictator’s survival
depends here not on preventing citizens from expressing their willingness to rebel (in our model, we abstract
from the issue of coordination among the protesters), but on manipulating public beliefs about the state of
the world and the incumbent’s type.
Moreover, we show that over time incompetent leaders, if they survive, may acquire a reputation for
competence as a result of rational Bayesian updating by citizens. Such reputations can withstand temporary
economic downturns if these are not too large. This is consistent with the empirical ﬁnding that dictators
that last through their ﬁrst few years are less likely to be overthrown (Svolik 2009, Bueno de Mesquita
and Smith 2010, Treisman 2014). However, the mechanism we propose here—of rational updating of beliefs
about the leader’s type—diﬀers from those of Svolik (2009), who emphasizes power consolidation by the
incumbent, and Treisman (2014), who emphasizes selection eﬀects.
Fourth, the multiple equilibria associated with diﬀerent leader strategies illuminate why, among dictator-
ships that seem otherwise quite similar, some focus on censoring independent media while others censor much
less but co-opt the elite with patronage. For example, while Iran has the world’s strictest limits on internet
content, according to Freedom House, Morocco has among the least restrictive internet controls, on a par
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
with those of Japan (Freedom House 2013). The Moroccan royal family has consistently viewed co-optation
“as a much more eﬀective tool than confrontation and repression,” given the country’s traditional system in
which “patronage and accommodation were deeply ingrained” (Willis 2014, p.444).
Fifth, the model predicts that as economic conditions worsen a dictatorship may boost relative spending
on censorship and propaganda. This is consistent with a noted increase since the global ﬁnancial crisis in
eﬀorts to limit opposition media in a range of countries, from Hungary and Turkey to Russia. For example,
as Turkey’s growth rate fell from 7.8 percent in 2010 to 0.8 percent in 2012, according to the World Bank,
the number of journalists in jail increased from 4 to 49.5 Between 2008 and 2011, Hungary fell 15 percentage
points on Freedom House’s press freedom index. Conversely, China, while certainly not eschewing censorship,
seems to have placed an increasing focus on consumption and provision of public goods during its long period
of rapid growth. Starting in the 1980s, Beijing replaced the Mao-era system of comprehensive control with
one that relied increasingly on co-optation and commercialized self-censorship; media owners, editors, and
journalists are rewarded for loyalty with state advertising contracts and well-paid jobs, thus incentivizing
them to censor themselves. “The desire to win performance bonuses tends to result in journalism that steers
well clear of dangerous political controversy and meets the party’s propaganda requirements,” according
to one analyst (Esarey 2005, pp.57-9).
Censorship of the internet, meanwhile, has focused on blocking
collective action rather than on suppressing criticism of the government and party (King, Pan, and Roberts
2013). In Singapore as well, “forsaken proﬁts and stiﬀlegal penalties have been more eﬀective in fostering
self-censorship than earlier methods of intimidation” (Rodan 1998, p.69).
Sixth, the model oﬀers a variety of reasons why—as widely noted—modernization makes dictatorship
harder to sustain, at least in the absence of vast resource rents. By increasing the size of the “informed
elite,” economic development increases the cost for incompetent dictators of either co-opting potential critics
or censoring their media messages. Even relatively small economic shocks then become suﬃcient to threaten
the incumbent’s rule. If modernization also increases the technological sophistication of opposition media,
then censorship may fail for this reason as well.6
Yet, if modernization makes it harder to sustain an information-based dictatorship, we believe it increases
the costs of mass repression even more.
An autocrat’s greatest nightmare is that his security services,
when ordered to violently suppress opposition, will split or simply disobey, igniting a power struggle that
undermines the regime (Francisco 2005, p.66). The more educated, globally integrated, and professionalized
are the dictator’s agents, the greater is the chance they will shrink from committing a massacre. At the same
time, harsh repression is both more public and more economically harmful in a more developed society. A
knowledge economy, dependent on innovation, stands to lose its entrepreneurs to emigration if the dictator
uses force. In a world of global media and capital ﬂows, political violence can depress foreign investment,
stimulate capital ﬂight, and even puncture conﬁdence in the currency (Blanton and Blanton, 2007, Fielding
5Data from the Committee to Protect Journalists, https://www.cpj.org/imprisoned/2014.php.
6A complementary reason why modernization may encourage transition to democracy is that education increases the taste
for political participation (Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer 2007).
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
and Shortland, 2005). All these factors help explain the modern dictator’s preference for less overt methods.
We develop the model assuming the simplest, linear technologies for propaganda, censorship, co-optation,
and repression. This allows us to study the interactions between the dictator’s techniques that arise due
to the inference problem of citizens rather than due to assuming non-linear functional forms. We point
out that propaganda (positive reports by the leader about his competence) is complementary to both the
co-optation of the informed elite and the censorship of independent media, both of which are techniques
that aim to prevent news of the incumbent’s incompetence from getting out. Censorship and co-optation
are substitutes. Repression against potential revolutionaries is a substitute for all the information-based
techniques for maintaining power. Under some parameter values, equilibria exist in which no repression
against the public is needed at all. Under other parameter values for which there are no equilibria based on
co-optation, censorship, or propaganda, an equilibrium based on repression of potential protests may exist.
To focus on the less studied aspects of the problem, we assume the uninformed public is homogeneous and
we do not examine the problem of coordination among protesters. For treatments of the latter issue, see
Lohmann (1994), Edmond (2013), and Little (2014).
The next section reviews related literature. Section 3 outlines the elements of the model. Section 4
derives the equilibria.
Sections 5 and 6 discuss comparative statics and several extensions, including a
dynamic version of the game and one with continuous economic shocks. Section 7 concludes.
2
Literature
Wintrobe (1990) pioneered the formal analysis of dictators’ behavior, modeling, in a reduced form, decision-
theoretic framework, the tradeoﬀbetween investing in repression and co-opting citizens with material ben-
eﬁts. He examined the choices of two types of dictators—“totalitarians,” who maximized power, and “tin-
pot” dictators, who maximized their own consumption subject to a minimum power constraint. In Wintrobe
(2007), he generalized the dictator’s objective function to include both power and consumption, allowing the
equilibrium levels to be determined by cost parameters.
Subsequent formal analyses of dictatorship focused on several diﬀerent— although related—questions.
One set of works considered the economic policies autocrats would choose and how these compare to those
prevailing under either anarchy or democracy.
Olson (1993) argued that dictators’ incentives to adopt
growth-promoting policies depend on their time horizon and how encompassing an interest they have in
national output.
A second direction of research examined the role of institutions in authoritarian states, interpreting
them as mechanisms by which the ruler solved time inconsistency problems. By creating institutions that
constrained him in the short run, a dictator could commit credibly to certain policies—repaying state debts
and respecting property rights (North and Weingast 1989, Gehlbach and Keefer 2011), redistributing income
to the poor (Boix 2003, Acemoglu and Robinson 2006), or sharing power with members of his ruling group
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
(Myerson 2008, Svolik 2012, Boix and Svolik 2013). Models showed how such credible commitments could
increase borrowing power and private investment in the ﬁrst case, prevent revolutions in the second, and
avoid coups or elite defection in the third.
Another literature models the relationship between dictators and their support group when such inter-
actions are not mediated by institutions. These works examine how the dictator chooses the number and
characteristics of his inner circle (Egorov and Sonin 2011, Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2003).
A fourth set of works analyzes the eﬀects of information problems under dictatorship. By monopolizing
the media and criminalizing dissent, rulers are assumed to prevent citizens from sharing information. Some
papers in this set have explored how costly protest actions by individuals communicate facts to other individ-
uals, triggering—or failing to trigger—informational cascades (Kuran 1991, Lohmann 1994). The greater is
the repression, the less likely are protests to occur, but the greater is the discontent that they communicate
if they do (Kricheli et al. 2011). Dagaev et al (2013) examine how new information technologies facilitate
coordination by potential opponents of a regime.
A few papers explore more complicated ways, in which dictators may seek to manipulate the information
environment. Egorov, Guriev, and Sonin (2009) and Lorentzen (2014) model the tradeoﬀfor a dictator in
setting the level of censorship, where a free media, on the one hand, provides the information necessary for
the dictator to discipline his bureaucrats, but, on the other hand, assists the expression and coordination
of opposition. Edmond (2013) examines the strategic use of propaganda. In his game, citizens want to
overthrow an existing regime but are imperfectly informed about the regime’s “strength.” The ruler sends
costly, biased signals about the regime’s strength in the attempt to prevent citizens from coordinating
against him. Citizens, although understanding the ruler’s incentive to deceive, cannot fully separate the true
information from the bias. In this sense, propaganda can work in equilibrium, and it is more eﬀective, the
more precise are the signals. Chen and Xu (2015) develop a model where propaganda and censorship allow
the government to prevent collective action against the regime and study the interaction between information
manipulation and policy choices. Huang (2014) also models state propaganda as the sending of signals of
repressive capacity.7 In his model, the content of the message is irrelevant; what constitutes the signal is the
amount of propaganda sent, which citizens are assumed to observe. His key assumption is that the capacity
to broadcast propaganda and the capacity to repress rebellions are correlated, so more propaganda signals
greater repressive capacity. Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2015) build a theory of state censorship in which
citizens seek to infer whether the absence of “bad news” is due to censorship or to the absence of bad news
for journalists to report.8
7Propaganda may also feature as part of loyalty rituals in authoritarian states—the leader’s ability to get citizens to repeat
the propaganda shows the extent of his political control, deterring challenges, as discussed in many analyses of totalitarian
regimes. We abstract from such loyalty rituals here in order to focus on the type of state propaganda that aims to inﬂuence
citizens’ beliefs about the competence of the ruler (at providing economic or security beneﬁts).
8There is also literature on media capture in democracy (see, for example Besley and Prat (2006)). In these models incumbent
politicians bribe media into favorable reporting in order to inﬂuence the results of the elections. This is similar to our co-optation
mechanism our model diﬀers in several respects. First, in our model the public also receives other signals — through propaganda
and through their own consumption. Second, our model has an economic dimension where the public’s consumption depends
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Our model explores the tradeoﬀs for rulers who choose a portfolio of techniques—censorship, propaganda,
co-optation, and repression—to preserve their power.9 Our approach diﬀers from those of Edmond and Huang
in that our incumbents vary in “competence,” whereas their incumbents vary in “strength,” understood as
the ability to repress mass protests. (In our model, as in Edmond’s, the “incompetent”/“weak” leaders try
to pool with the “competent”/“strong” ones and are able to do so in some states of the world.) Neither
paper considers censorship of private messages or the tradeoﬀs between propaganda, censorship, and positive
and negative rewards. They focus on the way ﬂows of information among the mass public inﬂuence protest.
This is also true of Chen and Xu’s paper. We bracket this question in order to explore the game between the
dictator and the “informed elite” over propaganda, private media messages, and censorship. Shademehr and
Bernhardt’s model of censorship is similar to ours, but they also do not consider the interaction of censorship
with cooptation, propaganda, and economic shocks, which is central to our analysis.
3
Setting
3.1
Players
There is a dictator and a continuum of citizens of unit mass. The dictator receives an exogenous rent each
period he remains in power. He maximizes the net present value of expected future rents. In a one-period
version of the model, the dictator simply maximizes the probability of staying in power, π. Citizens maximize
their current consumption plus the net present value of future consumption.
The citizens are exogenously divided into informed (elite) and uninformed (general public). The mass of
informed citizens, I, is small (so the elite cannot overthrow the dictator by itself; the general public can).
We assume that the informed citizens are organized into a ﬁnite number, N, of interest groups, each of mass
I/N.10
All agents are risk-neutral but have limited liability (i.e. cannot pay large ﬁnes).11
on the aggregate output (which is a stochastic function of the regime’s quality) and of costs of propaganda, censorship and
co-optation. Finally, our ‘elites’ are diﬀerent from Besley and Prat’s ‘media’. In our setting, independent (but potentially
co-opted) media are citizens who diﬀer from the other public only in terms of being more informed. Therefore the incentives
to share information are eventually driven by the returns to replacing an incompetent regime with a better one. In Besley and
Prat’s setting media care about maximizing viewership.
9A considerable literature examines state repression by itself (see Davenport, 2007).
However, since Wintrobe’s (1990)
decision-theoretic analysis, few papers have explored the tradeoﬀs between repression and other techniques in the dictator’s
repertoire. One recent exception is Frantz and Kendall-Taylor (2014), who argue that co-opting potential opponents by means
of partially-free parties and legislatures brings such opponents into the open and makes it easier to target violent repression.
10See Guriev and Treisman (2015) for a version of the model with a continuum of inﬁnitesimal elite members.
11Dal Bo et al. (2006) consider “plata or plomo” contracts where the regime can oﬀer the elite members not only rewards
(plata, Spanish for silver) but also punishments (plomo, Spanish for lead). In Section 5.4 we also allow for punishments for the
elites. In Dal Bo et al.’s model the punishments are costly as they result in lower incentives of high-ability citizens to enter
politics. In our case, punishments are costly as they are hard to hide and therefore are likely to reveal the incompetence of the
ruler.
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
3.2
The economy
Total output (GDP), Y , may take two values: Y L and Y H, where ∆Y ≡Y H −Y L > 0. The probability ξθ
of the high state, Y = Y H, depends on the quality of the dictator, θ.
For simplicity, we assume that θ can take two values: θ = 0 (the dictator is incompetent) and θ = 1 (the
dictator is competent). The dictator is competent with probability ¯θ (the parameter ¯θ is therefore also the
expected value of θ).
The probability ξθ of the high output Y = Y H is higher if the dictator is competent:
ξ1 > ξ0.
The dictator can use part of GDP for funding propaganda, P, censorship, X, and for rewarding the elites,
R. His budget constraint is Y = C + P + X + R, where C is consumed by the population. For simplicity,
we assume that C is distributed equally among citizens—so C is also per capita consumption, since the
number of citizens is normalized to 1—and is observed by all. By contrast, we assume that Y , X, P, and
R are not observed by the general public. Y may include both oﬃcial and unoﬃcial income sources, while
C may include consumption by citizens of both private goods and non-excludable public goods provided by
the government.
By spending P on propaganda, the dictator increases the probability that the propaganda message that
the public receives is convincing: p = 1. (The content of the message is: “the leader is competent, θ = 1”;
the value of p indicates whether it is convincing or not.) We assume that the competent dictator can send
the signal p = 1 costlessly. If the dictator is incompetent, the probability of the public getting a convincing
message, p = 1, is
Λ(P) = min
P
bP
, 1

.
(1)
Here bP is a parameter that represents the cost to an incompetent dictator of generating fully convincing
propaganda.
By spending X on censorship, the dictator blocks a proportion, x, of the opposition’s messages:
x = min
(
X/ b
X
(N −n)/N , 1
)
.
Here n is the number of the elite groups that support the elite and b
X is an exogenous cost parameter that
captures how much it costs to block all the messages if all informed citizens join the opposition. In other
words, if the dictator wants to block x ∈[0, 1] per cent of the messages, it has to spend x b
X N−n
N
dollars.
The co-optation of the elites works as follows: the dictator pays r to each member of an elite group if the
group does not send negative messages. The total cost of rewarding the elites is R = rnI/N; both n and r
are endogenously determined in equilibrium.
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
3.3
Information
There are four types of signals in the model. First, each informed citizen learns the type of the dictator,
θ, and GDP, Y , precisely.
Second, all citizens observe per capita consumption, C.
Third, the dictator
disseminates propaganda—which is a public signal, p = {0, 1}, received by every citizen. Given that the
competent dictator can send p = 1 at no cost, he always does so. Therefore if the public observes p = 0, it
knows with certainty that the dictator is incompetent.
Finally, the informed citizens can send a signal z = {0, 1} to the public. We assume that the informed
citizens can conceal evidence that the dictator is incompetent—i.e., send a signal z = 1 when, in fact,
θ = 0—but cannot convincingly claim that a competent leader is incompetent. This allows us to abstract
from the possibility that the elite blackmails competent leaders.
As already noted, the signal z = 0 gets through censorship with probability (1 −x), where x is the level
of censorship. If the public observes the signal z = 0 from the opposition, it knows for sure that the dictator
is incompetent. If, on the other hand, the public observes the absence of a negative signal (we denote this as
z = 1), it must infer whether this is because the signal was censored (probability x), because the true state
is θ = 1, or because nobody has joined the opposition (n = N) as all the elite groups have been co-opted.
3.4
Payoﬀs
3.4.1
Dictator’s payoﬀ
The dictator minimizes the probability of regime change. He does not beneﬁt from higher GDP directly,
just through increased resources to buy support and to fund propaganda and censorship.
3.4.2
Citizens’ payoﬀ
The public maximizes current consumption plus the net present value of future payoﬀs. In the interest of
generality, we assume that current consumption, C, may include both private goods (bought with citizens’
after-tax incomes) and public goods (funded by tax revenues minus spending on propaganda, censorship,
and co-optation). Therefore C ≤Y −P −R −X.
The future payoﬀs are normalized to the type of the regime θ. If the current dictator stays, the net present
value of the future payoﬀs is δθ. If the regime is changed, the present value of the expected future payoﬀs
is δ
 ¯θ −K

. Here, δ is not just a discount rate, but rather the net present value of having a competent
(rather than incompetent) dictator in the future. If the regime is changed, the new dictator is drawn from
the same distribution; hence the expected quality is ¯θ. Regime change involves a non-trivial, additional cost
to citizens, K.
The co-opted informed citizens (pro-regime elite) receive additional current consumption of r per capita.
Notice that the timing of the game (section 3.5) implies that both informed and uninformed citizens make
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
their decisions after C is set. However, the co-optation payment r matters for the informed citizens’ decision
to join the pro-regime elite or the opposition.
3.5
Timing
1. The dictator and the elite observe the type of the dictator, θ ∈{0, 1}. The economic shock Y is realized
(Y = Y H with probability ξθ and Y = Y L with probability 1 −ξθ). Both the elite and the dictator
observe Y .
2. The dictator chooses the level of censorship, x ∈[0, 1]. The dictator oﬀers a level of rewards, r dollars
per capita, to those elite groups that agree not to send anti-regime messages (limited liability implies
r ≥0). The dictator chooses a level of investment in propaganda, P.
3. Each elite group decides whether (i) to support the regime and receive the reward r, or (ii) to join the
opposition and send a signal to the public informing it that the dictator is incompetent. The number
of groups that choose to support the regime is n; the remaining N −n groups join the opposition.
4. Contracts for the elite are implemented. Censorship blocks a proportion, x, of the independent signals,
so the public receives the opposition’s signals with probability (1 −x) N−n
N .12 Payoﬀs are realized.
5. Citizens observe their consumption, C, propaganda signal, p = {0, 1}, and any independent signals
that get through censorship, z = {0, 1}. The citizens update their beliefs about θ and decide whether
to overthrow the dictator.
3.6
Assumptions
We assume that the dictator can commit to the contracts with the elites. In Section 4.3 we discuss why this
assumption is reasonable given that the elite members fully observe both the type of the dictator and the
economic outcomes.
We also assume that b
X and bP are suﬃciently large relative to ∆Y that X/ b
X < 1 and P/ bP < 1 in
equilibrium. This assumption is realistic but not innocuous. The dictator cannot completely silence the
elites through censorship while he may fully silence them through co-optation. To focus on more interesting
cases, we also assume that K < ¯θ, so that if the public knows with certainty that the dictator is incompetent
it prefers to replace him.
12Thus, the probability that the public receives an opposition message is proportional to the number of messages sent that
escape censorship; if all elite members send messages (n = 0) and there is no censorship (x = 0), the messages get through for
sure.
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
4
Analysis
We now solve for equilibria.
Given the parameters ¯θ, ξ1, ξ0, ∆Y , I, N, b
X, bP, δ, and K, we ﬁnd the
equilibrium strategies of the dictator (C, x, P, r), of the informed citizens (to get co-opted or to join the
opposition), and of the public (to protest or to support the regime).
All agents are rational and maximize their expected payoﬀs given the available information. In particular,
the informed citizens’ choice is contingent on the rewards, r, oﬀered for loyalty.
The general public observes consumption, C, and the signals p and z. If at least one of the latter two
signals is low (p = 0 or z = 0), the public knows with certainty that the dictator is incompetent and protests.
If both signals are high (p = z = 1), then the decision depends on the consumption level, C: the public
protests if consumption is low and supports the regime if consumption is high. Therefore, its strategy is
fully described by the consumption threshold C∗such that the public supports the regime if and only if it
observes p = z = 1 and C ≥C∗.
We ﬁrst describe the best response functions of the three players.
4.1
Players’ best response strategies
4.1.1
Public’s choice
The general public chooses whether to support the regime or to protest in such a way as to maximize the sum
of the per capita consumption and the net present value of expected future payoﬀs, C+δ max

E(θ|C, p, z); ¯θ −K

,
given all available information. Current period consumption, C, is already set and observed by the public
when it chooses its action. Here E(θ|C, p, z) is the expected value of θ given the public’s inference of the
equilibrium strategies of other players and the observed values of C, p, and z.
The public’s decision is described by a scalar threshold, C∗, that solves the following problem: C∗is the
lowest level of consumption that satisﬁes
E(θ|C∗, p = z = 1) ≥¯θ −K.
(2)
The public does not protest if and only if C ≥C∗and p = z = 1.
4.1.2
Informed citizens’ choice
The informed citizens choose whether to join the opposition or to get co-opted. They make decisions given
the strategies of the dictator and of the general public. They infer the probability of the regime surviving
as a function of the size of the pro-regime elite and of the opposition, Π(n). The latter is a monotonically
increasing function: the fewer elite groups join the opposition, the less likely the opposition signal is to
reach the public, and—for a given realization of Y and the dictator’s choice of propaganda, P, censorship,
14

--- Sayfa 15 ---
x, and rewards, r—the less likely the public is to overthrow the dictator. The function Π(n) is endogenously
determined in equilibrium.
If an elite group accepts to be co-opted, each member of the group gets:
U C = C + r + Π(m + 1)δθ + [1 −Π(m + 1)]δ(¯θ −K).
If the group decides to joins the opposition, each member gets:
U O = C + Π(m)δθ + [1 −Π(m)]δ(¯θ −K).
Here m ∈{0, ..., N −1} is the number of other groups supporting the regime.
As in the general public’s decision, current period consumption, C, does not aﬀect the informed citizens’
decision as it is already set by the time the latter make their choice.
The trade-oﬀis straightforward. By joining the opposition, an elite group decreases the odds of the
incumbent staying in power by [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)] but forgoes the co-optation payment, r. The net per
capita returns to regime change are δ

θ −(¯θ −K)

.
Therefore, an elite group joins the opposition if and only if r < δ [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)]

(¯θ −K) −θ

. It is
immediately clear that if the true type is high θ = 1, the right hand side is negative and nobody wants to
join the opposition—even if there is no co-optation reward. Hence, a competent dictator does not need to
oﬀer any rewards.
If the dictator is incompetent (θ = 0), then each elite group prefers to join the opposition if and only if
the co-optation rewards are suﬃciently low: r < r∗. Here
r∗≡δ(¯θ −K) [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)] .
(3)
Therefore, if the dictator is incompetent,
n(r) = N1{r ≥r∗}.
(4)
This follows from the fact that all elite groups are symmetric and face the same choice.
4.1.3
Dictator’s choice: censorship, rewards, propaganda
The dictator learns his type, θ, observes Y and chooses the strategies: censorship (x), rewards (r), and
propaganda (P). He maximizes his probability of staying in power, π. Given his choice of r, x, and P, the
expected probability of staying in power depends on the dictator’s type. We will consider the competent
and incompetent dictator separately.
15

--- Sayfa 16 ---
4.1.3.1
Solving the competent dictator’s problem
If the dictator is competent, there is no opposition in equilibrium: n = N. A competent dictator therefore
never uses rewards, censorship, or propaganda: P = R = X = 0. For him, the propaganda signal is p = 1
with probability 1 and consumption is C = C1(Y ) ≡Y . The probability of staying in power is therefore
π1 = 1{Y ≥C∗}.
(5)
4.1.3.2
Solving the incompetent dictator’s problem
If the dictator is incompetent, the probability of staying in power is:13
π0 =

1 −(1 −x)N −n
N

Λ(P)1{C ≥C∗}
(6)
where n = n(r) is a function of r determined by (4). Indeed, the probability of z = 1 is 1 −(1 −x) N−n
N , and
the probability of p = 1 is Λ(P).
Equation (6) implies that returns to censorship increase in propaganda and decrease in rewards. In other
words, censorship and co-optation are substitutes, and propaganda is complementary to both. This property
is not assumed; it follows from the nature of the public’s statistical inference problem.
Now consider the incompetent dictator’s optimization problem. We will maximize (6) in two steps. First,
the dictator will choose the level of consumption C = C0(Y ) and therefore the total budget, B = Y −C0(Y ),
for propaganda, censorship and rewards. Second, given the choice of consumption and budget, B, he will
choose the x, P, and r that maximize the probability, ρ, of p = z = 1 as a function of the budget:
ρ(B) =
max
X+R+P ≤B

1 −(1 −x)N −n(r)
N

Λ(P).
(7)
4.1.3.3
Incompetent dictator’s strategies given the choice of consumption
The dictator solves (7) taking into account R = n(r)rI/N and X = N−n(r)
N
b
X min{x, 1}.
The choice of rewards for co-optation is binary: either (i) high rewards r = r∗(so that n = N and
R = R∗≡r∗I), or (ii) no rewards r = 0 (n = 0 and R = 0). Indeed, rewards 0 < r < r∗are suboptimal for
the dictator relative to r = 0—they do not reduce the number of opposition activists but are costly. Rewards
r > r∗are also suboptimal for the same reason.
The dictator can choose high rewards only if R∗≤B. In this case, he spends R = R∗; censorship is
useless (as there is no opposition), so all remaining resources are spent on propaganda: P = B −R∗. The
probability of p = z = 1 is Λ(B −R∗) = B−R∗
b
P
.
13Notice that equation (6) immediately implies that Π(n + 1) −Π(n) = (1 −x)Λ(P)/N in equilibrium.
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
If the dictator chooses zero rewards (r = 0), he solves:
max
X+P =B
X
b
X
P
bP
.
(8)
The solution is P = X = B
2 . The probability of p = z = 1 is
B2
4 b
P b
X .
The analysis implies
ρ(B) = max
B −R∗
bP
; B2
4 bP b
X

.
(9)
Therefore the regime with co-optation is chosen if and only if R∗is suﬃciently low:
R∗< B

1 −B
4 b
X

.
(10)
4.1.3.4
Incompetent dictator’s choice of consumption
In equilibrium, the choice of consumption C0(Y ) should solve:
C0(Y ) = arg max
C
ρ(Y −C)1{C ≥C∗}
(11)
Since ρ(B) is strictly increasing in B, the dictator will always choose C = C∗and B = Y −C∗.
4.2
Equilibria
As the competent dictator always sets C = Y , it is easy to show that there can be two kinds of equilibria.
First, C∗= Y L, and the competent dictator always stays in power. The incompetent dictator is over-
thrown if Y = Y L. However, if Y = Y H he stays in power and spends B = Y H −Y L = ∆Y on rewards,
censorship and propaganda and therefore assures p = z = 1 with a non-trivial probability ρ(∆Y ).
Second, C∗= Y H, and the competent dictator only stays in power if Y = Y H; the incompetent dictator
is overthrown with probability 1.
Can there be equilibria with C∗< Y L? This is impossible as the public knows that if it observes C < Y L,
the dictator must be incompetent. So it makes sense to replace this dictator with probability 1.
Similarly, there cannot be equilibria with C∗∈(Y L, Y H). In this case, if the public observes such a C∗
and p = z = 1, it knows with certainty that the dictator is incompetent (and lucky).
4.2.1
Equilibrium with C∗= Y H
The equilibrium with C∗= Y H exists whenever the inferred quality of a dictator with C = Y L is below the
potential alternative ¯θ −K.
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Proposition 1. The equilibrium with C∗= Y H exists if and only if
∆Y ≥bP

1
¯θ −K −1

¯θ
1 −¯θ
1 −ξ1
ξ0
.
(12)
In equilibrium, none of the informed citizens joins the opposition, the co-optation rewards are inﬁnitesimal,
there is no censorship, and the incompetent dictator with Y = Y H spends ∆Y on propaganda.
In this equilibrium, the incompetent dictator survives with probability 0 while the competent dictator
survives with probability ξ1. The intuition is as follows: when the public observes p = z = 1 and C = Y L,
it understands that it is very likely that the dictator is incompetent. Notice that there is no opposition: the
informed citizens, understanding that the dictator will be overthrown anyway, accept to be co-opted even if
the rewards are close to zero. Given that there is full co-optation, the dictator spends nothing on censorship.
Finally, as the total co-optation rewards are trivial, the dictator spends all of ∆Y on propaganda.14
4.2.2
Equilibrium with C∗= Y L
In this equilibrium, the competent dictator always survives, while the incompetent dictator only survives if
Y = Y H. In the latter case, he spends ∆Y on propaganda, censorship and co-optation.
The properties of this equilibrium depend critically on the relative costs of co-optation and propaganda,
which is captured by the following parameter:
a ≡δ(¯θ −K)I
bPN
.
(13)
The co-optation rewards are endogenous in equilibrium; one of their key determinants is the informed citizens’
long-term cost of not revealing the dictator’s incompetence. There are N groups of informed citizens (size
I/N each); they knows that replacing an incompetent dictator would improve their own welfare by δ(¯θ −K)
per capita. Therefore, δ(¯θ −K)I/N is the opportunity cost for an elite group (of size I/N) of remaining
silent—which will be the minimum reward it will require for co-optation. On the other hand, bP, is how
much it costs the incompetent dictator to generate a positive propaganda signal with probability 1; in other
words, raising the probability of p = 1 by 1 percentage point costs the dictator 0.01 bP.
In this equilibrium, the general public should believe that the average type of the dictator with C =
C∗= Y L and p = z = 1 is weakly better than regime change:
E(θ|C = Y L, p = z = 1) =
¯θ(1 −ξ1)
¯θ(1 −ξ1) + (1 −¯θ)ξ0ρ(∆Y ) ≥¯θ −K.
(14)
14As the incompetent dictator is overthrown anyway, he is indiﬀerent between various strategies. Among these strategies,
spending ∆Y on propaganda maximizes the probability of p = z = 1. Therefore, it makes this equilibrium likelier to exist.
Indeed, the higher the incompetent dictator’s odds of delivering a positive message, p = z = 1, the stronger the public’s
incentives to overthrow a ruler with C = Y L.
18

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Proposition 2. The equilibrium with C∗= Y L exists only if ∆Y is suﬃciently small
∆Y < 4 b
X max

1
a + 1,
a
2 −1
a −1

(15)
There can be two kinds of stable equilibria in pure strategies:
If ∆Y < 4 b
X
1
a+1 and
∆Y ≤(1 + a) bP

1
¯θ −K −1

¯θ
1 −¯θ
1 −ξ1
ξ0
.
(16)
then there is an equilibrium with co-opted elites: n = N. In this equilibrium, the dictator uses co-
optation and propaganda, but not censorship. The probability of survival is:
ρ(∆Y ) =
∆Y
bP(1 + a)
(17)
If a > 2 and ∆Y < 4 b
X
a
2 −1
a−1
and
∆Y ≤
s
4 bP b
X

1
¯θ −K −1

¯θ
1 −¯θ
1 −ξ1
ξ0
,
(18)
there is an equilibrium with censorship in which all informed citizens join the opposition: n = 0. In
this equilibrium, the dictator uses censorship and propaganda, but not co-optation. The probability of
survival is:
ρ(∆Y ) = (∆Y )2
4 bP b
X
(19)
Equilibria with C∗= Y L only exist if ∆Y is suﬃciently small. Indeed, if ∆Y is large, the public knows
that the incompetent dictator—if lucky—can spend substantial resources to ensure that p = z = 1. Hence
observing p = z = 1 and C = C∗, citizens still decide to protest.
Multiple equilibria. If a > 2 and if ∆Y is suﬃciently small (satisfying both (15), (16) and (18)), then
we have two stable equilibria—one with propaganda and co-optation (n = N) and one with propaganda and
censorship (n = 0). Comparing (17) and (19) we ﬁnd that whenever both equilibria exist, the probability
of survival is higher in the equilibrium with co-optation. We discuss the intuition behind this result in the
section 4.3
Figure 3 presents the structure of equilibria under diﬀerent values of parameters (if conditions (16) and
(18) are not binding—e.g. if (1 −ξ1)/ξ0 is very high).
These equilibria (where C∗= Y L) can also co-exist with the equilibrium with C∗= Y H (indeed, for some
parameter values both conditions (12) and (16) are satisﬁed). In the latter equilibria, the public, observing
a positive signal p = z = 1 and low consumption, infers that the expected quality of the dictator is too low
and protests. As the informed citizens understand that the dictator will be removed anyway, they know that
19

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Figure 3: Structure of equilibria for diﬀerent values of parameters. The graphs represent the probabilities of
survival ρ(∆Y ) for the following parameter values: b
X = bP = 1, and a = 1.5 (left), a = 2.5 (middle), a = 3.5
(right).
their information will have no impact and are therefore happy to be co-opted even if rewards are low. Thus,
achieving the outcome with p = z = 1 and C∗= Y L is relatively cheap for the dictator. So the public’s
inference is justiﬁed. For the same parameter values, there may exist an equilibrium with C∗= Y L in which
informed citizens do have an impact on the dictator’s survival probability; in this case, co-opting them is
costly. Hence, observing the outcome p = z = 1 and C∗= Y L, the public infers that the expected type of
the dictator is relatively high.
4.3
Discussion of the results
The previous analysis yields four main results.
First, if economic volatility (the diﬀerence between good and bad economic states, ∆Y ) is not very high,
the incompetent dictator can survive in equilibrium. The logic is as follows. If ∆Y is low, that means that
an incompetent dictator who is lucky enough to experience a good economic outcome (Y = Y H) will have
only a small amount of extra resources, ∆Y , to spend on propaganda, censorship, and co-optation. As a
result, the messages received by the public should be relatively accurate. Thus, if the public does receive
the positive signals p = z = 1, it will tend to believe them and think the incumbent is competent, even if
consumption is low: C = Y L.
However, if volatility is high, then no equilibrium with C = Y L exists and the incompetent dictator is
overthrown. The impact of economic volatility is especially important in the dynamic setting (see section
5.2): we show that when volatility is low, the dictator is less likely to survive the initial period; but, if he
does, he is then more likely to remain in power for a long time.
This result may also be interpreted in a cross-sectional sense. If the public notices that other comparable
countries are doing much better (∆Y is high), they infer that their dictator may well have diverted a lot of
resources (∆Y ) into propaganda, censorship, and co-optation. As a result, they stop believing the positive
signals, conclude that the dictator is probably bad, and take to the streets to protest.
The second result is the multiplicity of equilibria. For some parameter values there exist two equilibria:
(i) an equilibrium with co-optation, in which the elite agrees to stay silent in return for rewards, and (ii) an
20

--- Sayfa 21 ---
equilibrium with censorship, in which all informed citizens join the opposition but the dictator attempts to
block their media communications.
The multiplicity of equilibria is driven by the ‘ﬁscal externality’ imposed by the elite members on each
other. Consider the equilibrium with co-optation n = N. Every elite group is happy to stay in the pro-regime
camp, receiving r∗for not joining the opposition. But now imagine that k > 0 groups join the opposition.
In this case, the dictator spends r∗kI/N less on rewards and reallocates the money to propaganda and
censorship, increasing x and P. How does that change the returns to joining the opposition for the remaining
N −k elite groups? These returns are related to Π(m+1)−Π(m), which in turn is proportional to (1−x)P:
the payoﬀto joining the opposition decreases in censorship and increases in propaganda.
Thus, the defection of some elite groups has two opposite eﬀects. On the one hand, the increase in
censorship reduces the odds that an anti-regime message will get through. This lowers the payoﬀto joining
the opposition. On the other hand, the increase in propaganda makes it less likely the general public will learn
of the dictator’s incompetence—and thus all the more important for informed citizens to try to communicate
it. This raises the payoﬀto joining the opposition. Which eﬀect dominates will depend on the parameters.
If the former eﬀect is stronger, no additional members of the elite defect, and the co-optation equilibrium
holds. But if the latter eﬀect dominates, then the initial departures set oﬀa spiral of defections, ending in
the equilibrium with censorship and no co-optation.
Therefore, for some parameter values, only one equilibrium exists, and for other parameter values, two
stable equilibria exist (see Figure 3).
The third result concerns how the dictator’s various instruments interact. As seen in (6), censorship and
co-optation of the elite are substitutes, while propaganda is complementary to both of them. Returns to
censorship and co-optation increase with propaganda. But higher spending on censorship decreases incentives
for co-optation. These interactions emerge endogenously due to the public’s statistical inference based on
the information it receives.
Finally, we see that whenever both the equilibrium with co-optation and that with censorship exist,
the dictator’s survival probability is always higher in the former. This result follows from the fundamental
asymmetry between these two equilibria.
In the equilibrium with co-optation, the dictator can always deviate to the equilibrium with censorship
by oﬀering zero rewards: r = 0. Whatever the elite’s original beliefs and therefore required rewards, r∗, if the
dictator oﬀers r = 0 < r∗, the elite members reject and join the opposition. This is why the equilibrium with
co-optation can only exist if it delivers a higher probability of survival than the equilibrium with censorship.
On the other hand, in the equilibrium with censorship the elites would only get co-opted if r∗is suﬃciently
high (greater than the right-hand side in (10)). The dictator cannot unilaterally deviate from censorship to
co-optation by oﬀering a lower reward: the elites would not agree to be co–opted.
This result implies that a dictator can get stuck in an inferior yet stable equilibrium, relying on a relatively
ineﬀective instrument (censorship rather than co-optation) to stay in power.
21

--- Sayfa 22 ---
In the analysis above, we have assumed that the dictator can commit to the co-optation contracts with
the elite members. If he promises at time 2 to pay r in return for loyalty, and the elite members send the
signal z = 1 at time 3, he does pay at time 4. This assumption does not matter for the equilibrium with
censorship (as r = 0 anyway). However, it is crucial for the equilibrium with co-optation. If this assumption
does not hold, a promise of any positive r > 0 is not credible. One way to justify this assumption is to
consider a repeated game version of the model. Although we do not model this explicitly, the co-optation
contracts can be sustained by grim trigger strategies. The elite members observe the type of the ruler and
the economic outcomes, so they fully understand whether the dictator sticks to the co-optation contracts or
reneges. If he reneges once, they switch to the censorship equilibrium and the dictator cannot return to the
co-optation equilibrium (which delivers a higher probability of survival).
We have not analyzed the eﬃciency of the equilibria. In the current setting, a welfare analysis would
require introducing a social welfare function that would include the payoﬀs of both citizens and dictators.
As the dictator’s payoﬀis non-monetary, there is no natural choice of such a welfare function. However, if
we assume that the dictator’s “oﬃce rents” are small compared to national income Y then the ﬁrst best is
straightforward. A competent dictator should always stay in oﬃce. If the dictator is incompetent, replacing
him is always optimal (as long as we make the natural assumption that ¯θ −K > 0).
5
Comparative statics and extensions
5.1
Comparative statics
How do the exogenous parameters aﬀect the dictator’s survival probability?
While the model has nine
parameters (∆Y , ¯θ, K, I, δ, bP, b
X, ξ0 and ξ1), the structure of equilibria with C∗= Y L depends on just two
combinations of them: a = δ(¯θ−K)I
b
P N
and ∆Y
4 b
X .
The parameter ∆Y is the ex ante economic volatility. From (16) and (18), we see that the dictator’s
survival probability in both the possible equilibria, ρ(∆Y ), increases in ∆Y (although this is not necessarily
true in a multi-period model, see Section 5.2). The reason is simple: the higher is ∆Y , the more resources an
incompetent dictator can spend on censorship, co-optation and propaganda in a given period when Y = Y H.
Not surprisingly, this translates into a higher probability of survival—as long as the equilibrium exists.
Parameter a captures the cost of co-optation relative to the cost of propaganda. If a increases then the
equilibrium with censorship is more likely to exist, while the equilibrium with co-optation is less likely to
exist. (This can be seen as we shift the curves in Figure 1 in response to change in a; indeed
1
1+a decreases
in a and
a
2 −1
a−1 increases in a). This result also allows comparing large and small countries. As the country
size increases, the eﬀectiveness of propaganda per capita grows; so bP falls and a increases. This makes the
equilibrium with co-optation deliver lower survival probability (relative to the equilibrium with censorship)
and less likely to exist.
22

--- Sayfa 23 ---
The comparative statics with regard to a show how the degree of organization within the elite aﬀects
outcomes. If the elite is consolidated (N is small), then a is large, the cost of co-optation is high, and the
equilibrium attained is more likely to be that with censorship. If the elite is divided into many groups (N is
large) then these groups are cheaper to co-opt one by one. The dictator can use a ‘divide-and-rule’ strategy.
As a result, the equilibrium with co-optation is more likely to obtain.
If b
X increases then both equilibria are more likely to exist—the public understands that censorship is
not cost-eﬀective so a good signal, if received, is more likely to be true. If the censorship equilibrium exists,
a higher b
X reduces the dictator’s survival odds (see 18): his censorship becomes less eﬀective. But if the
censorship cost rises too high, this equilibrium no longer exists and instead the equlibrium with co-optation
will hold. Recall that in the co-optation equilibrium, the dictator’s survival probability is always higher.
Paradoxically, an incompetent dictator is better oﬀif he has an extremely ineﬀective apparatus of censorship.
High censorship costs may serve as a commitment device, allowing the dictator to achieve an equilibrium
that he prefers.
If the dictator’s expected replacement is relatively competent and revolution is not too costly (high
(¯θ −K)), then the equilibrium with censorship is more likely and that with co-optation less likely. The
intuition is straightforward: for members of the elite, the returns to removing the incompetent dictator are
high, and so silencing them with rewards is expensive. As a result, the dictator prefers to use censorship.
By the same logic, if the elite cares more about the future (higher δ), bribing it to accept an incompetent
incumbent costs more, so censorship is favored. We do not make any assumptions on the structure of the
future payoﬀs; in our setting, parameter δ captures both the discount rate and the returns to having a more
competent leader in the future. In a two-period model with a stationary distribution of economic shocks, we
would have δ = βξ1∆Y where β is the discount rate and ξ1∆Y is the diﬀerence in expected consumption
between cases in which the leader is competent (ξ1Y H + (1 −ξ1)Y L) and in which the leader is incompetent
(Y L).
What happens if the cost of propaganda, bP, falls? Interestingly, a goes up and the equilibrium with co-
optation becomes less likely (while the equilibrium with censorship becomes more likely). The lower the cost
of propaganda, the more likely the public will get a convincing propaganda signal. This makes the signals
of the opposition more important, and renders the informed elite harder to co-opt, increasing the odds the
dictator will use censorship instead. For example, if an external enemy threatens the state’s security, this
may help the incumbent to dodge blame for poor economic performance, rendering his propaganda claims
more believable. If so, the equilibrium with co-optation could disappear, leaving only that with censorship.
One consequence of economic modernization is to broaden the informed elite, increasing I. In the cur-
rent setting, this makes co-opting the elite more expensive, and thus favors the equilibrium with censorship.
However, it may be more intuitive to suppose that the cost of censorship, b
X, rather than remaining ﬁxed,
also increases with I. If, for instance, b
X is proportional to I, it is easy to check that an increase in I makes
both equilibria less likely to exist. Indeed, higher I raises the costs of both co-opting and censoring. Since
23

--- Sayfa 24 ---
propaganda cannot substitute for censorship and rewards (propaganda is a complement rather than a substi-
tute for both), incompetent dictators face more problems whatever they do. As suggested by “modernization
theory,” broader access to information (or education) renders dictatorships less likely to survive.
5.2
Dynamics
We consider here a multi-period version of the model. We assume that the economic and informational
environment does not change over time (in particular, we do not allow either the dictator or the citizens to
save or borrow). The only state variable that does evolve over time, t, is the public’s beliefs, eθt, about the
type of the dictator at time t. Initially, the beliefs are the same as in the one-period model above eθ0 = ¯θ.
After each period, if the dictator survives, the public rationally updates its beliefs about him. We will assume
that the alternative regime’s quality, ¯θ −K, is constant over time. The informed citizens do not update their
views as they learn the dictator’s type precisely in the initial period.
We ﬁrst consider the dynamics of equilibrium with C∗= Y H. In this equilibrium, if the dictator survives
after the ﬁrst period, the public knows with certainty that the dictator is competent. Therefore in all future
periods eθt = 1 > ¯θ −K, so there are no protests.
The dynamics of the equilibrium with C∗= Y L are more complicated. In this equilibrium, the competent
dictator always survives, while the incompetent dictator survives with probability ξ0ρ(∆Y ) . Therefore, the
expectation eθt evolves over time according to the following Bayesian updating formula:
eθt+1 =
eθt(1 −ξ1)
eθt(1 −ξ1) + (1 −eθt)ξ0ρ(∆Y )
= eθt +
eθt(1 −eθt) (1 −ξ1 −ξ0ρ(∆Y ))
eθt(1 −ξ1) + (1 −eθt)ξ0ρ(∆Y )
(20)
This implies that eθt increases over time if and only if the following condition holds
ξ0ρ(∆Y ) ≤1 −ξ1
(21)
If this condition holds, the probability of survival in each particular period ξ0ρ(∆Y ) is rather low. However, if
the dictator does survive, the next period the public raises its expectation regarding the type of the dictator.
Conversely, if ξ0ρ(∆Y ) > 1 −ξ1, the public downgrades its beliefs every period according to (20).
Eventually, at a certain (ﬁnite) time t = t∗the belief eθt falls below ¯θ −K, and the incompetent dictator is
removed with probability 1.
Proposition 3. Suppose that at time t = 0 the economy is in an equilibrium with C∗= Y L and ρ(∆Y ).
If condition (21) holds, the incompetent dictator survives each period with probability ξ0ρ(∆Y ). His expected
lifetime in oﬃce is therefore
ξ0ρ(∆Y )
1−ξ0ρ(∆Y ).
If condition (21) does not hold, then there exists some ﬁnite time t∗> 1 such that eθt∗< ¯θ −K ≤eθt∗−1.
In the periods t < t∗, the incompetent dictator survives each period with probability ρ(∆Y ), and at the
24

--- Sayfa 25 ---
period t = t∗he is removed with probability 1. His expected lifetime is
ξ0ρ(∆Y )
1−ξ0ρ(∆Y )

1 −[ξ0ρ(∆Y )]t∗
.
The distinction between these two cases is especially interesting given that ρ(∆Y ) is diﬀerent in the
equilibria with co-optation and censorship.
For the same values of parameters, there may co-exist two
equilibria: an equilibrium with co-optation (where ρ(∆Y ) is high) and an equilibrium with censorship (where
it is low). It may be the case that in the censorship equilibrium condition (21) holds while in the co-optation
equilibrium it does not. In this case, the dynamics will be as follows: in the co-optation equilibrium, the
probability of surviving in each given period is higher (conditional on a particular belief) but the beliefs
are downgraded each period and eventually the dictator is overthrown with certainty. In the censorship
equilibrium, per-period survival is less likely, but beliefs are always adjusted upwards, so this equilibrium
will continue indeﬁnitely.
The ex ante economic volatility, ∆Y , is also important. If ∆Y is low, the public knows that condition
(21) holds, and a positive public signal, p = z = 1, implies that the probability of the dictator being
competent is high. So if he survives for another period, his reputation improves and he is even likelier to
last for yet another period. Conversely, if ∆Y is high, the public knows that an incompetent dictator could
be spending a lot on propaganda and censorship. Hence, each period, the public downgrades the reputation
of the surviving incumbent. Eventually, this reputation sinks so low that the public protests against the
dictator even if it observes a positive signal, p = z = 1.
The binary nature of the shocks renders the dynamics simple to analyze but it also rules out any dynamic
eﬀect of change in beliefs on the choice of consumption. In this model, consumption is always equal either
to Y H (if the dictator is competent and lucky) or to Y L. In section 6, we consider a model with continuous
economic shocks. There, an increase in ¯θ results in lower consumption in equilibrium. If the expected type of
the dictator is high, the incompetent dictator can get away with lower C. In such a setting, increases in eθt—
i.e. a trend towards greater perceived competence in government—are accompanied by falling consumption.
For simplicity’s sake, we have assumed away savings and investment. If the public were able to save, the
divergence result above would be reinforced. Indeed, if the public believes that the dictator is more likely to
be competent, the returns to investment increase, and the public invests more today, thus increasing GDP
tomorrow. This helps the incompetent dictator tomorrow to reallocate more resources towards co-optation,
censorship, and propaganda, thus further improving his reputation. Conversely, if the dictator’s reputation
is low, the public invests less, GDP is not likely to grow, and the dictator will have less resources to spend
on co-optation, censorship, and propaganda. His reputation will be downgraded even faster and he is likely
to be removed from oﬃce sooner.
What would happen if, instead of the public, the dictator were able to save? If the savings were observ-
able, the dictator would use them as a credible signal of his competence. Indeed, a more competent dictator
has a longer expected time in oﬃce and therefore a stronger incentive to save for the future relative to the
incompetent dictator. However, in equilibrium, a (lucky) incompetent dictator would pool with the compe-
25

--- Sayfa 26 ---
tent dictator and also save. This would decrease his budget for co-optation, censorship, and propaganda in
the current period and therefore reduce his chance to hold on to power.
If the savings were not observed, this eﬀect would weaken but would still exist. Suppose the dictator has
access to frictionless ﬁnancial markets and the public has a consumption-smoothing motive. A competent
dictator would always choose C = ¯Y1 ≡(1 −ξ1)Y L + ξ1Y H. Therefore the incompetent dictator would also
have to deliver C = ¯Y1. However, as his expected income is only ¯Y0 ≡(1 −ξ0)Y L + ξ0Y H, each period
his debt would increase—in expected terms—by ¯Y1 −¯Y0 = (ξ1 −ξ0)∆Y . Eventually, this debt would be
impossible to hide (or the creditors would stop lending to the dictator).
5.3
Repressing the protesters
In this section we consider an extension in which in addition to co-optation, censorship, and propaganda the
dictator can also use repression. By allocating certain resources to the riot police and military, the dictator
can increase the cost of regime change, K. The potential protesters do not observe this cost but can infer
the dictator’s optimal choice.
What is the eﬀect of adding a fourth instrument to the dictator’s repertoire? Now the dictator can choose
to reduce spending on censorship, rewards and propaganda, B = X + R + P, and use the savings, ∆Y −B,
to increase K. The latter matters as it directly aﬀects the parameter a, which, in turn, determines the cost
of rewards and therefore the structure of equilibria (see Figure 3).
Suppose that the dictator spends G on repressive capacity. He sets the level at the same time that he
allocates the budgets for censorship, X, rewards, R, and propaganda, P. We will assume that the repression
technology is linear, K = G/ bG, and that bG > ∆Y/¯θ; this implies that repression is suﬃciently costly so that
the dictator cannot achieve K = ¯θ. This assumption is reasonable—indeed, if the dictator could achieve
¯θ −K = 0, he would always do so and would never use other instruments as the public would never have an
incentive to replace him.
We now need to reproduce the analysis of the equilibria replacing B = ∆Y with B = ∆Y −G and a with
a(G) ≡δI(¯θ−G/ b
G)
b
P N
.
Consider ﬁrst the equilibrium with rewards (n = N). This equilibrium exists if ∆Y −G <
4 b
X
1+a(G). The
higher the level of repression, G, the likelier this inequality is to hold. Therefore, repression makes this
equilibrium more likely to exist. However, given that it exists, the probability of survival ρ(∆Y −G) =
∆Y −G
b
P (1+a(G)) decreases monotonically with G. This is because repression is not cost-eﬀective—it makes more
sense to spend money on rewards and propaganda.15
Consequently, if the equilibrium without repression exists, the dictator does not spend anything on
repression. However, if the equilibrium without repression does not exist, the dictator is better oﬀspending
just enough on repression to assure that this equilibrium exists. Suppose that a(0) < 2 and ∆Y >
4 b
X
1+a(0).
15This result holds because the repression technology is linear. In the non-linear case, there may be a non-trivial amount of
repression in equilibrium.
26

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Then without any repression, the equilibrium unravels and the dictator is removed from oﬃce with probability
1. In this case, he would beneﬁt from choosing the minimum level of repression that satisﬁes:
∆Y −G ≤
4 b
X
1 + δI(¯θ−G/ b
G)
b
P N
.
(22)
This level of repression is the smaller root of the corresponding quadratic equation.16 This solution always
exists (at G = 0, the left-hand side of (22) is greater than the right-hand side, while at G = ∆Y the left-hand
side is zero while the right-hand side is positive).
Given this level of repression, the dictator survives with a non-trivial probability ρ(∆Y −G) =
4 b
X
b
P (1+a(G))2 .
The intuition is simple. The dictator understands that without any investment in repressive capacity, the
elite is too costly to silence. So he uses some repression to make sure that the elite is less interested in regime
change and is therefore cheaper to bribe. This allows him to free up additional resources for propaganda
and therefore make ends meet in equilibrium.
Now consider the equilibrium with censorship (n = 0). In this equilibrium, the probability of survival
decreases in the level of repression: ρ(∆Y −G) = (∆Y −G)2
4 b
P b
X
. There are no incentives to spend on repressive
capacity in this equilibrium.
However, it may also be the case that this equilibrium does not exist without any repression. Consider
the situation where a(0) > 2 and ∆Y > 4 b
X
a(0)
2
−1
a(0)−1 = 2 b
X

1 −
1
a(0)−1

. Again, by spending a certain amount
of resources on repression, the dictator can ensure that the equilibrium does exist. This level of repression
is the minimum G that satisﬁes:
∆Y −G ≤2 b
X

1 −
1
δI
b
P N

¯θ −G
b
G

−1

.
This level of repression is also the smaller root of the quadratic equation.17
Thus, spending on repression against potential protesters cannot increase the probability of survival in
equilibrium. However, by raising the cost of revolution, some spending on repression can ensure the existence
of equilibrium. This rationale for repression works when ∆Y is suﬃciently high. In this case, the economic
decline is so large that the public does not believe the propaganda any more; hence the dictator prefers to
spend money on repression.
16The solution is G =
b
G b
P N
2δI

1 +
δI
b
P N

¯θ + ∆Y
b
G

−
r
1 +
δI
b
P N

¯θ + ∆Y
b
G
2
−
4δI
b
G b
P N

∆Y

1 + δI ¯θ
b
P N

−4 b
X
!
.
17The solution is G =
b
G b
P N
2δI

−1 +
δI
b
P N

¯θ + ∆Y −2 b
X
b
G

−
r
−1 +
δI
b
P N

¯θ + ∆Y −2 b
X
b
G
2
+
4δI
b
G b
P N

∆Y + δI ¯θ
b
P N

2 b
X −∆Y
!
.
27

--- Sayfa 28 ---
5.4
Repressing the elites
Would an incompetent dictator ever choose to repress members of the elite? So far, we have assumed r ≥0;
the dictator can only reward loyal members of the elite but cannot punish disloyal ones. In this section, we
allow for both positive and negative incentives. Suppose that at time 2 the dictator makes an oﬀer to each
member of the elite: if the elite member agrees to be co-opted, he receives a reward r > 0; otherwise he is
repressed and therefore suﬀers a loss of q ≥0.
In order to be credible, the dictator has to commit Q = qI “units” of repression at time 2. We assume
that the dictator assigns repression resources to each potential opposition member already at time 2; these
may include personalized surveillance, investigators focused on individual elite members etc. Therefore, at
time 2, each individual elite member understands that the dictator has the capacity to repress him and
repression will follow if he joins the opposition.18
For simplicity, we assume away the ﬁnancial cost of repression. However, repressing the elite involves an
additional risk as with probability Q/ bQ the general public observes the act of repression; this reveals that
the dictator is incompetent, and the public revolts.19 Here bQ is an exogenous parameter that measures the
“quantity” of repression that changes the probability that the public notices the repression from zero to one.
The equilibrium with censorship does not change.
Indeed, in this equilibrium, using repression is
counterproductive—the elite joins the opposition anyway and extra repression just risks revealing the dicta-
tor’s incompetence to the public without providing any beneﬁt.
Non-trivial investment in repression may emerge in the equilibrium with co-optation. Here, the investment
in repression capacity allows the dictator to save on co-optation rewards.
Indeed, the elite’s incentive
constraint is r + q ≥δ(¯θ −K) [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)].
The higher the potential repression, q, the less reward, r, is needed to keep the elite co-opted. However,
more repression means a higher risk of public exposure.
Therefore, the incompetent dictator’s problem
becomes:
ρ(∆Y ) =
max
R+X+P ≤∆Y,
R+Q≥R∗
P
bP

1 −Q
bQ

where ∆Y is the total budget for censorship, propaganda, and co-optation (recall that repression involves
no cost), and where R∗= δI(¯θ −K) [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)].
We immediately ﬁnd that X = 0, P = ∆Y −R, R = R∗−Q.
18We can also consider a more general setting allowing for diﬀerential intensity of repression against diﬀerent elite members.
In our simple model, however, the dictator would always choose the same level of repression, q, for each elite member in
equilibrium.
19A similar argument, of course, applies to co-optation and censorship. These are also never employed by a competent dictator.
Hence, co-optation and censorship are used only to the extent that they can be concealed. We assume that co-optation and
censorship are much easier to hide than repression. Indeed, by deﬁnition, censorship allows hiding information about the very
fact of censorship. Similarly, if the public observes payments to the elite, the dictator can plausibly claim to be paying members
of the elite for legitimate services.
28

--- Sayfa 29 ---
The dictator’s optimization problem becomes:
ρ(∆Y ) =
max
0≤Q≤R∗
(∆Y −R∗+ Q)( bQ −Q)
bP bQ
The solution is as follows:
(i) If ∆Y ≤bQ −R∗then Q = R∗, R = 0, and ρ(∆Y ) = (∆Y −R∗)( b
Q−R∗)
b
P b
Q
.
(ii) If ∆Y ∈

R∗+ ( bQ −2R∗), R∗+ bQ

then Q =
b
Q+R∗−∆Y
2
, R = R∗−Q > 0, and ρ(∆Y ) = ( b
Q−R∗+∆Y )
2
4 b
P b
Q
.
(iii) If ∆Y ≥R∗+ bQ then Q = 0, R = R∗, and ρ(∆Y ) = ∆Y −R∗
b
P
.
In order to complete the description of the equilibrium with co-optation, we use Π(m + 1) −Π(m) =
(1−x)Λ(P )
N

1 −Q
b
Q

to ﬁnd R∗= δI(¯θ−K)P
b
P N

1 −Q
b
Q

= a bPρ(∆Y ). Finally, the strategies above are equilibrium
strategies if and only if the dictator does not gain from deviating to R = Q = 0, using only censorship and
propaganda. In other words, for each of the three cases above, we need to compare ρ(∆Y ) with ∆Y 2
4 b
P b
X .
The analysis above implies that if the equilibrium with co-optation existed in the original model, it will
continue to exist as long as bQ ≥(1+a)∆Y (corresponding to the case (iii) above). If this condition does not
hold, there will be a non-trivial amount of repression in the equilibrium with co-optation. If bQ/∆Y is very
low then the dictator will only use repression and no rewards (case (i) above). If bQ/∆Y takes intermediate
values, then the equilibrium with co-optation involves both rewards and the threat of repression against the
elites: R > 0, Q > 0 (case (ii)).
Case (iii) implies that if repression against the elites is possible but is quite likely to be observed then the
equilibrium involves neither repression nor even the threat of repression: Q = 0. The equilibrium is exactly
the same as in the original model.
In the analysis above we assumed that repression of the elite is not costly and is limited only by the
fact that it is hard to conceal. If we assume that repression is also ﬁnancially costly—and therefore has to
be funded at the expense of the public’s consumption—the model becomes more involved but has similar
properties. In particular, for a range of parameters, repression is not used in equilibrium: Q = 0 (as in case
(iii) above); the higher the ﬁnancial cost of repression, the larger this range of parameters.
5.5
Other extensions
Our model assumes linear technologies for propaganda, censorship, and co-optation. In particular, there are
no non-linearities in the responses of informed citizens to the amount spent on propaganda. If the dictator
spends less on propaganda, the informed citizens understand that their opposition messages will have a lower
impact, and so the cost to co-opt them declines proportionally. This is why both equilibria with co-optation
and with censorship exist when ∆Y is small (so that spending on propaganda, P ≤B ≤∆Y , is also small).
29

--- Sayfa 30 ---
In reality, the informed citizens’ choice may be non-linear. There could be a ﬁxed cost of allowing oneself
to be co-opted (due to the “moral cost of opportunism”) or a ﬁxed cost of joining the opposition (e.g., a
limited jail term). A non-trivial moral cost would make the equilibrium with co-optation disappear for small
∆Y . Indeed, if the total budget for co-optation and propaganda, B = R + P = ∆Y , is small, the dictator
will not be able to aﬀord to compensate all members of the elite for the moral cost of co-optation.
Meanwhile, a jail term for opposition activists might eliminate the equilibrium with censorship at low
values of ∆Y . In this case, as the total budget for co-optation and propaganda, B = X + P = ∆Y , is low,
spending on propaganda, P = ∆Y/2. Therefore for each member of the informed elite the beneﬁts from
joining the opposition are low—they are proportional to the impact on the dictator’s survival probability,
and this impact is, in turn, proportional to the level of propaganda. Hence if ∆Y is suﬃciently low, the
beneﬁts of joining the opposition fall below the ﬁxed cost of a jail term, and the equilibrium unravels.
We have implicitly assumed that acts of both censorship and repression cannot be directly observed by
the public. Since competent incumbents never censor or repress, observing the dictator doing one of these
things would immediately reveal the incumbent to be incompetent. One might think of such revelations as
endogenously increasing the size of I. If enough people observed such behavior, this might set oﬀa spiral
of opposition activism and protest. There are, indeed, noted cases in which the use of excessive violence by
the regime, or the discovery of a grisly murder for which the regime was blamed, catalyzed opposition to
it rather than intimidating the public. While it is implausible that a single act of violent repression would
automatically undermine a dictatorship, if the model included some noise then only violence that rose above
a certain threshold would trigger a strong public reaction.
6
The impact of economic shocks
The model sketched so far allows only limited analysis of comparative statics with regard to economic shocks.
In the setting with two output levels, if the incompetent dictator’s output decreases, he is overthrown with
probability one, so his spending on propaganda, censorship, and co-optation are not relevant. In this section,
we consider a setting with a continuous distribution of economic shocks, in which such shocks can have a
non-trivial impact on co-optation, censorship and propaganda.
6.1
Setting
Let us assume that Y is distributed on [Y L, Y H] with the density function f1(Y ) if the dictator is competent
and f0(Y ) if he is incompetent. We assume that the density is positive for all Y ∈[Y L, Y H] and that
there are no mass points.
Higher output is more likely for the competent types and less likely for the
incompetent types; we assume that f0(Y ) is a (weakly) monotonically decreasing function and f1(Y ) is a
(weakly) monotonically increasing function.
30

--- Sayfa 31 ---
As the informed citizens observe both the output and the type of the dictator, the game between the
dictator and the informed citizens remains the same. In this game, there is no asymmetric information.
Therefore, the structure of equilibria is similar to that in the previous model: there can be equilbria with
co-optation (n = N) and with censorship (n = 0). We will denote by B(Y ) the total budget for censorship,
co-optation and propaganda as a function of output (in the model with binary output, B(Y H) = ∆Y and
B(Y L) would not matter as the dictator was overthrown anyway).
We assume that a ≥2 and b
X is suﬃciently large so that the existence conditions hold: ∆Y < 4 b
X
1
a+1
and ∆Y < 4 b
X
a
2 −1
a−1 for both equilibrium with co-optation and equilibrium with censorship.
The model with continuous output has no equilibrium in pure strategies. We therefore consider equilibria
in mixed strategies. In such equilibria, the general public chooses a probability of supporting the dictator as
a function of the observed consumption level γ(C) ∈[0, 1] if p = z = 1. If p = 0 or z = 0, the public knows
with certainty that the dictator is incompetent and protests with probability 1.
In equilibrium, the public’s choice of γ(C) is optimal:
γ(C) = 0
if
E(θ|C, p = z = 1) ≤¯θ −K,
0 < γ(C) < 1
if
E(θ|C, p = z = 1) = ¯θ −K,
γ(C) = 1
if
E(θ|C, p = z = 1) ≥¯θ −K.
As in the model with binary output, it is easy to show that the competent dictator always chooses
C1(Y ) = Y .
The incompetent dictator faces the following trade-oﬀ: if he spends more on propaganda, co-optation
and censorship, the probability is higher that the public will receive the positive signal, p = z = 1; however,
as this spending comes at the cost of lower consumption C, it implies a lower probability of survival given
the positive signal. His choice of consumption level, C0(Y ), solves the following optimization problem:
C0(Y ) = arg max
0≤C≤Y γ(C)ρ(Y −C).
(23)
6.2
Equilibrium
Lemma 1. If the distribution density f1(·) does not have mass points, there is no equilibrium in pure
strategies. The equilibrium in mixed strategies has the following properties:
(i) The public’s strategy, γ(C), is weakly monotonic. If γ(C) < 1, it is strictly monotonic. The incompetent
dictator’s strategy, C0(Y ), is also strictly monotonic.
(ii) There exists a C∗∗∈(Y L, Y H] such that γ(C) = 1 for all C ≥C∗∗;
(iii) γ(Y L) = 0;
31

--- Sayfa 32 ---
(iv) 0 < γ(C) < 1 for all C ∈(Y L, C∗∗).
(v) C0(Y ) is a diﬀerentiable, invertible function. In equilibrium, its ﬁrst derivative equals
C′
0(Y ) = f0(Y )ρ(Y −C0(Y ))
f1(C0(Y ))
(¯θ −K)(1 −¯θ)
(1 −¯θ + K)¯θ .
(24)
(vi) In the worst economic outcome, Y = Y L, the incompetent dictator spends all resources on consumption:
C0(Y L) = Y L.
(25)
(vii) Total spending on co-optation, censorship and propaganda, B(Y ) = Y −C0(Y ), monotonically increases
with Y .
The Lemma implies that both γ(C0(Y )) and B(Y ) increase with Y ; therefore the higher the realization
of the economic shock, Y , the higher the probability of survival, γ(C0(Y ))ρ(B(Y )).
In order to ﬁnd the equilibrium, we need to solve the diﬀerential equation (24) given the initial condition
(25). To complete the description of the equlibrium, we should ﬁnd γ(C) using the ﬁrst-order condition
from (23), which yields the following diﬀerential equation: γ′(C0(Y )) = γ(C0(Y )) ρ′(Y −C0(Y ))
ρ(Y −C0(Y )) . This equation
determines γ(·) up to a scalar multiplier. To ﬁnd this multiplier, we need to use the boundary condition:
γ(C0(Y H)) = 1.
6.3
Comparative statics
In this section, we carry out the comparative statics analysis with regard to the parameters of the model.
We also compare the behavior of an incompetent dictator in an equilibrium with co-optation with the one
in an equilibrium with censorship.
Proposition 4. In either the equilibrium with co-optation or the equilibrium with censorship, for given
distributions f0(·) and f1(·), and for a given realization of the economic shock, Y , an incompetent dictator
spends more on censorship, co-optation and propaganda and less on consumption if K increases, bP increases,
b
X increases (in the equilibrium with censorship), δI/N increases (in the equilibrium with co-optation), or if
both ¯θ and K increase, holding (¯θ −K) constant.
The intuition for the comparative statics is straightforward. If bP increases, a dollar spent on propaganda
is less eﬀective than before at rendering a false message convincing.
The public therefore increases its
estimate of the incumbent’s competence by more when it receives a convincing message, p = z = 1, even
if the consumption level is somewhat lower. Understanding this, an incompetent dictator has an incentive
to provide a lower level of consumption and spend more on increasing the probability of a positive signal,
p = z = 1. Similar logic applies for the cost of censorship, b
X, (in the equilibrium with censorship), and for
32

--- Sayfa 33 ---
the parameter δI/N (that determines the size of rewards in the equilibrium with co-optation). An increase
in K lowers the expected value of revolution; hence the public will accept a lower consumption level from
the incumbent.
Finally consider the impact of an increase in the expected quality of dictators, ¯θ, holding the quality of
the alternative regime ¯θ −K constant. The higher is ¯θ, the stronger is the public’s expectation that the
incumbent is competent, and so he can aﬀord to oﬀer a lower level of consumption. This result is especially
important for the analysis of the dynamics. Suppose that as in section 5.2, if the dictator is lucky enough
to survive, his reputation, ¯θ, increases next period; and that the expected quality of the alternative, ¯θ −K,
does not change. In this case, the equilibrium trajectory involves the surviving dictator’s reputation growing
over time and the consumption level declining over time.
We should emphasize that the comparative statics results in Proposition 4 are very diﬀerent from those
that a naive ‘partial equilibrium’ model would produce. For example, if we did not take into account the
endogenous equilibrium inference of the public, an increase in the cost of propaganda should result in lower
spending on propaganda and higher spending on consumption. However, as the public is rational and can
decipher this logic, the ‘general equilibrium’ result is that a higher cost of propaganda results in lower
consumption and higher spending on propaganda.
Equation (24) also allows us to compare the reaction to economic shocks in equilibria with co-optation
(where ρ(Y −C0(Y )) is proportional to Y −C0(Y )) and equilibria with censorship (where ρ(Y −C0(Y ))
is proportional to (Y −C0(Y ))2). Consider two countries, with the same ex ante distributions of economic
shocks, f0(·) and f1(·). Suppose that we observe the same output eY > Y L and the same consumption eC in
both countries, but that the ﬁrst country is in the equilibrium with co-optation, while the second one is in the
equilibrium with censorship. Our theory predicts that if these countries are hit by similar economic shocks
(e.g., Y declines to a certain level ¯Y ∈(Y L, eY )), then the ﬁrst country will respond with a smaller decrease
in consumption (and a greater decrease in the total budget for co-optation, censorship and propaganda)
than the second country. In other words, regimes with censorship react to negative economic shocks with
a greater reallocation of resources towards censorship, co-optation and propaganda than do regimes with
co-optation (which reallocate relatively more resources to consumption).
Proposition 5. Consider an equilibrium where C0(eY ) = eC. For any ¯Y ∈(Y L, eY ), the decrease in con-
sumption, C0(eY ) −C0( ¯Y ), is smaller if the economy is in the equilibrium with co-optation (both before and
after the decline in Y ) than in the case in which it is in the equilibrium with censorship (both before and
after the decline in Y ).
The intuition for this result is as follows. In the equilibrium with censorship, a given economic deteriora-
tion decreases citizens’ belief in the dictator’s competence—by more than the same economic deterioration
does in the equilibrium with co-optation (see Figure 3). Thus, in the censorship equilibrium, the dictator
has to spend relatively more on censorship and propaganda to oﬀset the induced loss of public conﬁdence
33

--- Sayfa 34 ---
when the economy declines.
6.4
Example
To illustrate the propositions stated above, we use a simple example. Let us assume that Y is distributed
on [0, ∆Y ].20 The distribution is uniform for the bad type: f0(Y ) = 1/∆Y and has linear increasing density
for the good type f1(Y ) = 2Y/(∆Y )2.
Let us assume that ∆Y is suﬃciently small so that the equilibrium existence conditions (15) are satisﬁed
(indeed, in this case for all realizations of Y the budget for co-optation, censorship and propaganda, B(Y ) ≤
Y ≤∆Y , also satisﬁes these conditions).
We shall solve (24) for the equilibrium with co-optation (n = N) and then for the equilibrium with
censorship (n = 0). In the equilibrium with co-optation, ρ(B) =
B
b
P (1+a). Using the boundary condition (25)
(which takes the form C0(0) = 0), we immediately ﬁnd a solution for (24):
C0(Y ) = ζY ;
γ(C) =

C
ζ∆Y

ζ
1−ζ
.
(26)
where ζ ∈(0, 1) is given by
ζ =
r
1 + 8 b
P (1+a)
∆Y
(1−¯θ+K)¯θ
(¯θ−K)(1−¯θ) −1
4 b
P (1+a)
∆Y
(1−¯θ+K)¯θ
(¯θ−K)(1−¯θ)
.
The solution is therefore simple: if output decreases, the incompetent dictator proportionally decreases
total spending on co-optation and propaganda B(Y ) = (1 −ζ)Y . Moreover, as follows from the Proof of
Proposition 2, spending on co-optation and spending on propaganda also change proportionally: R(Y ) =
a
a+1(1 −ζ)Y and P(Y ) =
1
a+1(1 −ζ)Y .
Now let us consider the equilibrium with censorship. In this case, ρ(B) =
B2
4 b
P b
X . Therefore, (24) turns
into a non-linear diﬀerential equation that has no analytical solution. However, we can approximate the
solution in the neighborhood of Y = 0:21
C =
s
∆Y
12 bP b
X
(1 −¯θ)(¯θ −K)
¯θ(1 −¯θ + K) Y
3
2 + o

Y
3
2

.
(27)
This means that in the equilibrium with censorship, the incompetent dictator spends relatively more on
censorship and propaganda as the economy worsens: B(Y )/Y increases as Y falls to zero. In the limit Y →0,
the share of output spent on censorship and propaganda actually reaches 100 percent: limY →0
B(Y )
Y
= 1.
Conversely, as output grows, the share spent on consumption increases: C0(Y )/Y is increasing with Y . The
20The lower bound of zero is a normalization to the lowest level of GDP above which income can be diverted to propaganda,
censorship, and co-optation. The analysis for any other interval would be the same but would involve additional notation.
21Here o(·) denotes any function such that limY →0
o

Y
3
2

Y
3
2
= 0.
34

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Figure 4: Consumption, C, and spending on censorship, X, co-optation, R, and propaganda, P, as a function
of the economic shock Y .
amounts spent on censorship and propaganda in this equilibrium are equal to each other X = P = B(Y )/2.
In proportion to total income, Y , their shares therefore also increase as output falls.
In Figure 4 we present the numerical solution and show that these properties hold for the whole range
of Y and not just in the neigborhood of Y = 0.
The example also illustrates Proposition 4. Indeed, in the equilibrium with co-optation, ζ increases in
∆Y
b
P (1+a)
(1−¯θ)(¯θ−K)
¯θ(1−¯θ+K) . And it is easy to show, both analytically and numerically, that in the equilibrium with
censorship, for any given Y , consumption C0(Y ) increases in ∆Y
b
P b
X
(1−¯θ)(¯θ−K)
¯θ(1−¯θ+K) .
7
Conclusions
The totalitarian tyrants of the past used mass violence, ideological indoctrination, and closed borders to
monopolize power. In a world of economic interdependence and modern communications technology, many
authoritarian leaders choose a diﬀerent strategy—that of manipulating information to convince the public
that they are doing a good job. We model the tradeoﬀs this generates, as dictators choose from a repertoire
of techniques, and citizens exploit the signals inherent in the dictator’s actions to infer his type.
We show that, in this setup, incompetent leaders can survive by manipulating the information environ-
ment so long as economic shocks are not too large. In such equilibria, no violent repression—or at most a
very little—is needed. Over time, an incompetent leader who survives may acquire a reputation for compe-
tence by virtue of rational Bayesian updating on the part of the public. Major economic downturns destroy
such equilibria, exposing the leader’s incompetence, and generating protests that can only be suppressed by
force.
The coordination problem of members of the informed elite leads to multiple equilibria, in one of which
the dictator focuses on co-optation and in the other of which he relies instead on censorship. Co-optation
and censorship are substitutes—both prevent the elite from publicizing an incumbent’s failures—but state
propaganda is complementary to both.
The multiplicity of equilibria may explain why we observe very
35

--- Sayfa 36 ---
diﬀerent levels of censorship and of patronage in otherwise similar regimes.
We also show that a dictator focused on co-optation reacts to economic shocks diﬀerently from one who
is commited to censorship. The latter is more likely to boost propaganda and censorship in response to
an economic downturn than the former. Although we do not explicitly model the use of institutions such
as legislatures, parties, and elections, it is clear that a dictator who succeeds in convincing the public that
he is competent can enjoy the beneﬁts of such “democratic” elements without fear of losing power. Such
institutions—which are quite compatible with a strategy of co-optation of the elite—can be used to amplify
the (accurate) perception of the dictator’s popularity.
Our model also explains why in information-based dictatorships violence either is a last resort when all
else has failed, or is used sparingly when it is possible to conceal it. The reason is that the competent
dictators do not need to use repression. Hence, reverting to repression immediately reveals the dictator’s
incompetence to the public and ultimately results in his downfall. This is why dictators often ﬁnd or create
some non-political pretext to imprison leaders of the political opposition. This also explains why dictators
who arrange for the murder of political opponents usually go to great lengths to deny responsibility. If the
goal were merely to intimidate the opposition, then such denials would be baﬄing—an open acknowledgement
would have a far greater deterrent eﬀect.22
The survival strategies we formalize are more compatible with a modernized society than totalitarian ones
or those of monarchs who rely on traditional legitimacy. Yet, we also show how modernization ultimately
undermines such informational equilibria. As education and information spread to a broader segment of
the population, it becomes harder to control how this informed elite communicates with the masses—either
through co-optation or through censorship.
22This also explains why those—usually in the security services—who stand to beneﬁt from a regime based on raw repression
may seek to compromise a dictator by committing acts of violence for which he will be blamed. The true goal in such cases
may be to force the dictator to switch from an information-based survival strategy to one based on sheer force. It also suggests
why an incompetent security apparatus can be so dangerous for a dictator. After troops shot the Philippine opposition leader
Benigno Aquino on the tarmac of Manila Airport, it was impossible for President Marcos to deny complicity. This murder
ignited the “People’s Power” movement that eventually prompted a split within Marcos’s military support group and the
collapse of his regime.
36

--- Sayfa 37 ---
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Barry, Ellen. 2011. “Before Voting, Russian Leaders Go to the Polls.” New York Times, August 17,
p.A1.
Beck,Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groﬀ, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh, 2001. “New tools in
comparative political economy: The Database of Political Institutions.”
World Bank Economic Review
15(1), 165-176.
Bennett, Philip, and Moises Naim. 2015. “21st Century Censorship: Governments around the world
are using stealthy strategies to manipulate the media.” Columbia Journalism Review January/February,
http://www.cjr.org/cover story/21st century censorship.php.
Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat. 2006. “Handcuﬀs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and
Government Accountability.” American Economic Review 96(3): 720-736.
Blanton, Shannon Lindsey, and Robert G. Blanton. 2007. “What attracts foreign investors? An exami-
nation of human rights and foreign direct investment.” Journal of Politics 69(1): 143-155.
Boix, C., and Svolik, M. W. (2013). The Foundations of Limited Authoritarian Government: Institutions,
Commitment, and Power-Sharing in Dictatorships. The Journal of Politics, 75(02), 300-316.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, and Alastair Smith. 2010. “Leader survival, revolutions, and the nature of
government ﬁnance.” American Journal of Political Science 54(4): 936-950.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow. 2003. The
Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang. 2014. “Curriculum
and Ideology.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
Chen, Jidong, and Yiqing Xu. 2015. “Information Manipulation and Reform in Authoritarian Regimes.”
Forthcoming in Political Science Research and Methods.
Dal Bo, Ernesto, Dal Bo, Pedro, and Rafael di Tella. 2006. “Plata o Plomo?: Bribe and Punishment in
a Theory of Political Inﬂuence.” American Political Science Review 100(1), pp. 41-53.
Dagaev, Dmitry and Lamberova, Natalia and Sobolev, Anton and Sonin, Konstantin, 2013. “Technologi-
cal Foundations of Political Instability,” CEPR Discussion Paper 9787, Centre for Economic Policy Research,
London.
Davenport, Christian. 2007. “State Repression and Politicial Order’, Annual Review of Political Science,
10: 1-23.
Dobson, William J. 2012. The Dictator’s Learning Curve: Inside the Global Battle for Democracy. New
York: Anchor Books.
37

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Edmond, Chris.
2013.
“Information Manipulation, Coordination, and Regime Change.”
Review of
Economic Studies 80: 1422-1458.
Egorov, G., Guriev, S., and Sonin, K. 2009. “Why resource-poor dictators allow freer media: a theory
and evidence from panel data.” American Political Science Review, 103(04), 645-668.
Egorov, G., and Sonin, K. 2011. “Dictators And Their Viziers: Endogenizing The Loyalty-Competence
Trade-Oﬀ.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(5), 903-930.
Esarey, A. 2005. “Cornering the market: state strategies for controlling China’s commercial media.”
Asian Perspective 29(4): 37-83.
Francisco, Ronald A. 2005. “The dictator’s dilemma.” In Repression and mobilization, eds. Christian
Davenport, Hank Johnston, Carol McClurg Mueller. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 58-81.
Frantz, Erica, and Andrea Kendall-Taylor. 2014. “A dictator’s toolkit: Understanding how co-optation
aﬀects repression in autocracies,” Journal of Peace Research, 51(3), 332-346
Fielding, D., and Shortland, A. 2005. “How does political violence aﬀect conﬁdence in a local currency?
Evidence from Egypt.” Journal of International Development, 17(7), 841-866.
Freedom House. 2013. Freedom on the Net: 2013, Washington, DC: Freedom House.
Gandhi, Jennifer. 2008. Political Institutions under Dictatorship. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Gandhi, Jennifer and Ellen Lust-Okar. 2009. “Elections under Authoritarianism.” Annual Review of
Political Science 12: 403-22.
Geddes, Barbara. 1999. “What do we know about democratization after twenty years?” Annual review
of political science 2(1): 115-144.
Gehlbach, Scott and Philip Keefer. 2011. “Investment Without Democracy: Ruling-Party Institutional-
ization and Credible Commitment in Autocracies.” Journal of Comparative Economics 39(2):123-139.
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. “Why does democracy need educa-
tion?” Journal of Economic Growth 12: 77-99.
Guriev, Sergei, and Daniel Treisman. 2015. “How Modern Dictators Survive: An Informational Theory
of the New Authoritarianism.” NBER Working Paper No. 21136, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Hassid, Jonathan, Controlling the Chinese Media: An Uncertain Business (June, 30 2008).
Univer-
sity of California, Reprinted from Asian Survey, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 414-30, 2008. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1153714
King, Gary, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts. 2013. “How censorship in China allows government
criticism but silences collective expression.” American Political Science Review 107(2): 326-343.
Kricheli, Ruth, Yair Livne, and Beatriz Magaloni. 2011. “Taking to the Streets: Theory and Evidence
on Protests Under Authoritarianism.” Stanford University: unpublished.
38

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Kuran, Timur. 1991. “Now Out of Never: The Element of Surprise in the East European Revolution of
1989.” World Politics, 44(1): 7-48.
Levitsky, S., and Way, L. A. 2010. Competitive authoritarianism: hybrid regimes after the cold war.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Little, Andrew. 2014. “Communication Technology and Protest.” Mimeo, Cornell.
Lohmann, Susanne.
1994.
“Dynamics of Informational Cascades: The Monday Demonstrations in
Leipzig, East Germany, 1989-91”, World Politics, 47(1): 42-101.
Lorentzen, P. (2014). China’s Strategic Censorship. American Journal of Political Science, 58(2), 402-414.
McMillan, J., and Zoido, P. 2004. “How to subvert democracy: Montesinos in Peru.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 18(4): 69-92.
Miller, M. K. (2015). “Elections, information, and policy responsiveness in autocratic regimes.” Com-
parative Political Studies, 48(6): 691-727.
Myerson, Roger B. 2008. “The Autocrat’s Credibility Problem and Foundations of the Constitutional
State.” American Political Science Review 102(1):125-139.
Odegard, Peter H. 1935. “Propaganda and Dictatorship,” in Guy Stanton Ford, ed., Dictatorship in the
Modern World, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp.231-270.
Olson, Mancur. 1993. “Dictatorship, Democracy and Development.” American Political Science Review
87 (Sept.): 567-76.
Rodan, G. 1998. “The Internet and political control in Singapore.” Political Science Quarterly, 113(1):
63-89.
Roht-Arriaza, Naomi. 2005. The Pinochet Eﬀect: Transnational Justice in the Age of Human Rights.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Shadmehr, Mehdi, and Dan Bernhardt. 2015.“State Censorship,” American Economic Journal: Microe-
conomics 2015, 7(2): 280-307.
Simon, Joel.
2015.
The New Censorship: Inside the global battle for media freedom.
New York:
Columbia University Press.
Svolik, Milan W. 2009. “Power sharing and leadership dynamics in authoritarian regimes.” American
Journal of Political Science 53(2): 477-494.
Svolik, Milan W. 2012. The Politics of Authoritarian Rule. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Treisman, Daniel 2014.
“Income, Democracy, and Leader Turnover.”
American Journal of Political
Science, doi: 10.1111/ajps.12135.
Ulfelder, Jay and Valentino, Benjamin, Assessing Risks of State-Sponsored Mass Killing (February 1,
2008). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1703426 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1703426
Willis, Michael J. 2014. “Evolution not Revolution? Morocco and the Arab Spring.” In Larbi Sadiki,
ed., Routledge Handbook of the Arab Spring: Rethinking Democratization, New York: Routledge, 435-450.
39

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Wintrobe, Ronald. 1990. “The Tinpot and the Totalitarian: An Economic Theory of Dictatorship.” The
American Political Science Review, Vol. 84, No. 3 (Sep.), pp. 849-872.
Wintrobe, Robert. 2007. “Dictatorship: Analytical Approaches.” In Carles Boix and Susan Stokes, eds.
Oxford Handbook of Comparative Politics. New York: Oxford University Press: ch. 16.
40

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1.
Let us calculate the expected value of the type of the dictator that the public
infers when observing p = z = 1 and C = Y L. This outcome is possible if the dictator is competent and
unlucky (Y = Y L which happens with probability ¯θ(1 −ξ1)) or if the dictator is incompetent but lucky
Y = Y H. In the latter case, the incompetent dictator spends ∆Y on censorship, repression and propaganda.
Let us calculate the probability of the incompetent dictator having p = z = 1 and C = Y L. The informed
citizens understand that the incompetent dictator is overthrown with probability 1. Therefore they expect
Π(n) = 0 for every n = 0, ..., N. Hence Π(m + 1) −Π(m) = 0, so that r∗= R∗= 0; the informed citizens
join the pro-regime elite even for an inﬁnitesimal reward. Since all elite groups are co-opted, there is no
need for censorship, x = 0. The dictator spends all his resources on propaganda, P = ∆Y . Therefore
ρ(∆Y ) = ∆Y/ bP. Consequently, the probability of the incompetent dictator having p = z = 1 and C = Y L
is (1 −¯θ)ξ0∆Y/ bP.
The equilibrium exists whenever
E(θ|C = Y L, p = z = 1) =
¯θ(1 −ξ1)
¯θ(1 −ξ1) + (1 −¯θ)ξ0ρ(∆Y ) ≤¯θ −K
which can be rewritten as (12).
Notice that ρ(∆Y ) = ∆Y/ bP is the maximum probability for the incompetent dictator to have p = z = 1
and C = Y L; in this equilibrium the incompetent dictator is overthrown anyway so he is indiﬀerent whether
to maximize this probability or to choose another strategy. However, if he spends less on propaganda and
C > Y L, this equilibrium does not exist. Also, if instead of spending all ∆Y on propaganda, the dictator
spends part of it on censorship or co-optation—the probability of having p = z = 1 is lower ρ(∆Y ). Hence.
the condition above may not hold and the equilibrium no longer exists. ■
Proof of Proposition 2.
Let us ﬁrst calculate Π(m + 1) −Π(m). Expression (7) implies
Π(m + 1) −Π(m) = 1
N E [(1 −x)Λ(P)1{C ≥C∗}] .
(28)
Two cases are possible. First, no opposition, n = N. In this case, x = 0, Λ(P) =
∆Y −R∗
b
P
. Hence,
Π(m + 1) −Π(m) = ∆Y −R∗
b
P N
.
Second, all the informed citizens join the opposition, n = 0. In this case, x = ∆Y/(2 b
X) and Λ(P) =
∆Y/(2 bP). Now Π(m + 1) −Π(m) =

1 −∆Y
2 b
X

∆Y
2 b
P N .
1. Equilibrium with co-optation. Let us ﬁrst consider the case in which n = N. In this case, Π(m + 1) −
Π(m) = ∆Y −R∗
b
P N
. Substituting R∗= r∗I and r∗from (3), we ﬁnd an equation for R∗:
R∗= r∗I = δ(¯θ −K)I [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)] = a(∆Y −R∗)
41

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Solving for R∗= ∆Y
a
a+1 and substituting into (10), we ﬁnd the following condition:
a
a+1 <

1 −∆Y
4 b
X

.
Therefore, this equilibrium exists only if ∆Y is suﬃciently low
∆Y < 4 b
X
1
1 + a
(29)
Finally, we need to check whether ρ(∆Y ) = ∆Y −R∗
b
P
=
∆Y
b
P (1+a) satisﬁes the condition (14). This gives us
the condition (16).
2. Equilibrium with censorship and no co-optation, n = 0. In this case, R = 0, and [Π(m + 1) −Π(m)] =
(1−x)P
b
P N
=

1 −∆Y
2 b
X

∆Y
2 b
P N . Hence, the equation for R∗is
R∗= δ(¯θ −K)I

1 −∆Y
2 b
X
 ∆Y
2 bPN
= a∆Y
1
2 −∆Y
4 b
X

This equilibrium exists whenever the condition (10) must be violated. We therefore derive
a
1
2 −∆Y
4 b
X

>

1 −∆Y
4 b
X

.
Since R∗must be non-negative, the left-hand side in the inequality above is non-negative; this also implies
that the right-hand side is also non-negative: (1 −∆Y
4 b
X > 1 −∆Y
2 b
X ≥0). Hence this equilibrium exists only if
a > 2 and if ∆Y < 4 b
X
a
2 −1
a−1 .
This equilibrium exists if ρ(∆Y ) = (∆Y )2
4 b
P b
X satisﬁes the condition (14); this is the case whenever (18) holds.
Asymmetric equilibria.
In this paper, we only consider symmetric equilibria in pure strategies.
In
principle, there can also be an asymmetric equilibrium where the elites are indiﬀerent on whether to join the
opposition. Suppose that precisely ˜m elite groups support the regime and N −˜m join the opposition. The
budget spent on rewards is
˜mr∗I/N = δ(¯θ −K) [Π( ˜m + 1) −Π( ˜m)] ˜mI/N = δ(¯θ −K) ˜mI (1 −x)P
bPN
This equilibrium can only exist if the condition (10) holds as equality
δ(¯θ −K) ˜mI (1 −x)P
bPN
= ∆Y

1 −∆Y
4 b
X

.
The dictator solves
max
X+P ≤∆Y −δ(¯θ−K) ˜mI (1−x)P
b
P N

1 −N −˜m
N

1 −
X
N−˜m
N
b
X
!!
P
bP
=
max
X+P ≤∆Y −δ(¯θ−K) ˜mI (1−x)P
b
P N

˜m
N b
X + X

P
bP b
X
This equilibrium is unstable. Suppose that one of the ˜m co-opted elite groups decides to deviate and join
the opposition. In this case, the dictator will spend less on co-optation and more on propaganda. This will
42

--- Sayfa 43 ---
immediately increase the informed citizens’ returns to joining the opposition in equilibrium (a higher level
of propaganda will increase Π(m + 1) −Π(m), so the remaining ˜m −1 will now strictly prefer joining the
opposition. ■
Proof of Lemma 1.
Non-existence of equilibrium in pure strategies. Suppose there is an equilibrium in
pure strategies. In this equilibrium, if p = z = 1, the public protests with probability 1 if C < C∗and
does not protest with probability 1 if C ≥C∗. Then there exists a certain threshold, Y ∗, such that the
incompetent dictators with Y ≥Y ∗choose C0(Y ) = C∗and survive with probability ρ(Y −C∗). Indeed,
if an incompetent dictator with Y1 chooses C = C∗, then any luckier incompetent dictator with Y2 > Y1
will also choose C = C∗and spend the additional resources (Y2 −C∗) −(Y1 −C∗)Y2 −Y1 on censorship,
co-optation and propaganda. There is no rationale for the dictator with Y2 to increase consumption as it
does not decrease the probability of being overthrown.
The competent dictators still choose C = Y ; there is no incentive for them to spend any money on
censorship, co-optation and propaganda.
Now let us calculate the expected type of the dictator, given observed consumption. If the public observes
C∗and p = z = 1, it knows that this may be the case if the dictator is competent and Y = C∗(which
happens with inﬁnitesimal probability, f1(C∗)dY ), or if the dictator is incompetent and Y ≥Y ∗(which
happens with probability
R Y H
Y ∗ρ(Y −C∗)f0(Y )dY ). Unless there is a mass point of competent dictators at
Y = C∗, the inferred probability that the dictator is good is actually zero—and the public strictly prefers
to overthrow him. Therefore this is not an equilibrium.
Properties of the equilibrium in mixed strategies.
(i) First, let us show that γ(·) is a monotonically increasing function. Suppose there are two values of
consumption, C1 and C2, such that C1 < C2 but γ(C1) > γ(C2). If this is the case, no incompetent
dictator will choose C = C2. Indeed, if a dictator chooses C2, he can do better by choosing C = C1,
assuring him a higher γ(C) and higher ρ (by spending additional C2−C1 on propaganda, censorship and
co-optation). Hence, if the public observes C = C2, it knows that the dictator cannot be incompetent.
Therefore, γ(C2) must be equal to 1. But this is impossible since γ(C2) < γ(C1) ≤1.
Similarly, we can prove that γ(C1) = γ(C2) is only possible if both are equal to 1.
The fact that C0(Y ) is monotonic directly follows from the monotonic comparative statics of the
optimization problem (23). As ρ(·) is a linear or quadratic function of Y −C (depending on whether
the equilibrium is the one with co-optation or the one with censorship, respectively), it is easy to show
that the solution of the optimization problem increases with Y . Moreover, if γ(C) < 1, the function
C0(Y ) strictly increases with Y .
(ii) If C = Y H and p = z = 1, the public understands that the dictator is competent with probability 1
(if the dictator is incompetent, he needs to spend a non-trivial amount on propaganda to send a signal
43

--- Sayfa 44 ---
p = 1 so he cannot ensure C = Y H). Therefore, γ(Y H) = 1.
Let us denote as C∗∗the choice of consumption by the incompetent dictator with the highest Y = Y H,
i.e.
C∗∗= C0(Y H).
Then, by deﬁnition, for all C ≥C∗∗, the public infers that the dictator is
competent with probability 1, so that γ(C) must be equal to 1.
(iii) Now we shall prove that γ(Y L) must be equal to zero. If this is not the case, then there exists a
certain eY > Y L such that for an incompetent ruler with this eY it is optimal to spend eY −Y L on
censorship, co-optation and propaganda.
(Indeed, the incompetent dictator with Y = Y L cannot
provide consumption C = Y L and ensure a positive signal p = z = 1). Let us now consider the choices
of incompetent dictators with Y ∈(Y L, eY ). Monotonicity of C0(Y ) implies that they should choose
C0(Y ) ≤Y L. If they choose C < Y L, they are ousted with probability 1. Therefore they choose
C = Y L, as this choice gives a positive probability, γ(Y L)ρ(Y −Y L), to stay in oﬃce. Therefore, if
the public observes C = Y L and p = z = 1, it infers the dictator may be competent with Y = Y L or
he may be incompetent with Y ∈(Y L, eY ). Since there are no mass points, the conditional probability
of the dictator being competent is inﬁnitesimal. Therefore, E(θ|C = Y L, p = z = 1) = 0, so γ(Y L)
cannot be positive.
(iv) Now let us prove that there cannot be an equilibrium in which γ(C) = 0 for C > Y L. If it were the
case, there would be a certain eC > Y L such that γ(C) = 0 for all C ∈[Y L, eC] and γ(C) > 0 for C > eC.
In this case all incompetent dictators with Y > eC would choose C0(Y ) > eC as this would give them
a positive probability to stay in oﬃce while C ≤eC guarantees losing oﬃce with probability 1. Let us
now consider the choice of the incompetent dictator with Y = eC. If he does not spend anything on
propaganda, censorship, and co-optation, then the probability to achieve p = z = 1 is trivial; hence the
public observing C = eC and p = z = 1 knows with certainty that the dictator is competent. Therefore,
γ( eC) must be equal to 1 rather than 0. Alternatively, if the incompetent dictator with Y = eC does
spend a non-trivial amount, B( eC) > 0, on propaganda, censorship, and co-optation, then C0( eC) < eC.
But this implies that there is no incompetent dictator that chooses consumption C ∈(C0( eC), eC).
Therefore, if the public observes C in the range ( eC −B( eC), eC), the public infers that the dictator must
be competent. Hence, γ(C) for C ∈( eC −B( eC), eC) must be equal to 1 rather than 0. We arrive at a
contradiction, which proves that γ(C) = 0 only for C = Y L.
(v) We have already proved in (i) that incompetent dictators with diﬀerent economic shocks cannot choose
the same consumption level. Therefore, the function C0(Y ) is invertible, and we can introduce the
inverse function y(C) = C−1
0 (C) (in other words, Y = y(C) if and only if C = C0(Y )).
Let us now calculate the E(θ|C, p = z = 1) given the equilibrium beliefs of the general public about
fθ(Y ) and C0(Y ). Suppose that the public observes consumption to be in the interval between C and
C + dC. This can be the case if the dictator is competent and has output Y ∈[Y, Y + dY ]; or it can
44

--- Sayfa 45 ---
be the case if the dictator is incompetent and the output is Y ∈[y(C), y(C) + y′(C)dC]. Therefore
E(θ|C, p = z = 1) =
¯θf1(C)
¯θf1(C) + (1 −¯θ)f0(y(C))ρ(y(C) −C)y′(C) =
1
1 + 1−¯θ
¯θ
f0(y(C))y′(C)
f1(C)
ρ(y(C) −C)
(30)
As E(θ|C, p = z = 1) = ¯θ −K for all C ∈[Y L, C∗∗], we can obtain a diﬀerential equation for y(C):
y′(C) =
f1(C)
f0(y(C))ρ(y(C) −C)
(1 −¯θ + K)¯θ
(¯θ −K)(1 −¯θ).
This equation implies that y′(C) is continuous, which implies that C0(Y ) is also diﬀerentiable and
its derivative is continuous. Using the inverse function theorem y′(C)C′
0(y(C)) = 1, we can use the
diﬀerential equation for y(C) above to obtain the diﬀerential equation (24).
(vi) If y(Y L) = eY > Y L, this would be a suboptimal choice for the incompetent dictator with Y = eY . If he
chooses consumption C = Y L, he will have a zero probability to stay in power, but he could do better
by choosing a certain C ∈(Y L, eY ).
(vii) In order to prove that B(Y ) never decreases with Y , we need to prove that C′
0(Y ) = 1 −B′(Y ) cannot
be above 1. As C0(Y L) = Y L, in the neighborhood of Y = Y L the diﬀerence B(Y ) = Y −C0(Y )
cannot decrease with Y , therefore C′
0(Y ) < 1 for all Y suﬃciently close to Y L.
Therefore, if C′
0(Y ) > 1 at least for some Y , there must exist Y such that C′
0(Y ) increases with Y
and C′
0(Y ) > 1. However, this is not possible. Indeed, for such Y the left-hand side of (24) increases
in Y while the right-hand side decreases with Y (as B(Y ) is decreasing with Y at this Y , the term
ρ(Y −C0(Y )) is decreasing in Y , also, f0(Y ) is decreasing by deﬁnition, and f1(C0(Y )) is decreasing
as well).
■
Proof of Proposition 4.
Let us consider a diﬀerential equation
C′
0(Y ) = MΦ(Y, C0(Y ))
(31)
where M is a constant and Φ(·) is a continuous function. Then a solution of this diﬀerential equation on
Y ∈[Y L, Y H] with the initial condition (25) has the following comparative statics property: if f
M > M then
for each Y > Y H the respective solution eC0(Y ) is above the original solution C0(Y ). Indeed, the equation
(31) and the initial condition (25) jointly imply that eC0(Y ) > C0(Y ) at least in some neighborhood of Y L.
Suppose that there exists a Y > Y L such that eC0(Y ) = C0(Y ). Let us denote ˘Y the intersection point
of eC0(Y ) and C0(Y ) which is closest to Y L. Since eC0(Y ) > C0(Y ) for all Y ∈(eY , ˘Y ), we should have
eC′
0( ˘Y ) < C′
0( ˘Y ). But since eC0( ˘Y ) = C0( ˘Y ), (31) and f
M > M imply that eC′
0( ˘Y ) > C′
0( ˘Y ).
45

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Therefore for each Y , an increase in M implies an increase in C0(Y ) and decrease in B(Y ) = Y −C0(Y ).
In the equilibrium with co-optation, we can substitute (17) into (24):
C′
0(Y ) =
(¯θ −K)(1 −¯θ)
( bP + δ(¯θ −K)I)(1 −¯θ + K)¯θ
f0(Y )(Y −C0(Y ))
f1(C0(Y ))
.
which has the form (31) for M =
(¯θ−K)(1−¯θ)
( b
P +δ(¯θ−K)I)(1−¯θ+K)¯θ.
Similarly, (19) and (24) imply the equation (31) for the equilibria with censorship:
C′
0(Y ) =
(¯θ −K)(1 −¯θ)
4 bP b
X(1 −¯θ + K)¯θ
f0(Y )(Y −C0(Y ))2
f1(C0(Y ))
.
In this case M =
(¯θ−K)(1−¯θ)
4 b
P b
X(1−¯θ+K)¯θ.
Diﬀerentiating the expressions for M with regard to parameters of the model, we obtain the comparative
statics results. ■
Proof of Proposition 5.
The equation (24) immediately implies that if both countries have the same Y
and C, then the ratio of slopes of C0(Y ) for the two countries is as follows
C(2)′
0
(Y )
C(1)′
0
(Y )
= Y −C
M
(32)
where M is a constant depending on the parameters of propaganda and censorship, and the distributions of
economic shocks.
Let us ﬁrst consider Y = Y L. At this level of output, the two countries have the same consumption:
C(1)
0 (Y L) = C(2)
0 (Y L) = Y L. Therefore (32) implies that in the vicinity of Y = Y L the slope C(2)′
0
(Y ) is
below C(1)′
0
(Y ). Therefore there exists a range of Y for which C(2)
0 (Y ) < C(1)
0 (Y ).
Suppose that at some Y the two curves C(1)
0 (Y ) and C(2)
0 (Y ) intersect. Let us denote as eY the intersection
point closest to Y L and eC the respective level of consumption. As C(2)
0 (Y ) < C(1)
0 (Y ) to the left of eY , so
we should have C(1)′
0
(eY ) < C(2)′
0
(eY ). Using (32), we ﬁnd that eY −eC > M.
Let us now prove that there cannot be another intersection (to the right of eY . Indeed, suppose that
there exist other intersection points. Let us denote as ˘Y the intersection point which is closest to eY . As
C(2)
0 (Y ) > C(1)
0 (Y ) for all Y ∈(eY , ˘Y ), we should have C(1)′
0
( ˘Y ) > C(2)′
0
( ˘Y ). This implies ˘Y −˘C < M < eY −eC.
But this contradicts monotonicity of B(Y ).
Therefore there can only be one intersection point eY . To the left of this intersection point, Y ∈(Y L, eY ),
the ﬁrst country has a higher consumption, C, and lower budget for propaganda, censorship and co-optation
than the second country. To the right of this intersection point, Y ∈(eY , Y H), the second country spends
more on consumption and less on propaganda, censorship and co-optation than the ﬁrst country. ■
46