--- Sayfa 1 ---
“ ES
S E L A M U
A L E I K U M ”
THE FULL
ILLU STRATED RITU AL
OF THE
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine
REVISED EDITION
EZRA A. COOK, PUBLISHER,
Incorporated.
26 East Van Buren Street,
Chicago

--- Sayfa 2 ---
T H E
MYSTIC SHRINE
AN
IL L U S T R A T E D R IT U A L
OF THE
Ancient Arabic Order
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine
R E V IS E D E D IT IO N
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
26 E. Van Buren St., Chicago

--- Sayfa 3 ---
C o p y r ig h t , 1931
By
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
( Incorporated)

--- Sayfa 4 ---
PR EFAC E.
Ezra A. Cook, who founded this publishing busi­
ness in 1867, was unalterably opposed to secret orders.
While many of our publications reflect his spirit, our
books have been extensively adopted as text books in
conferring the secret work of all standard orders, and
the publishers, in continuing their sale, believe they
are filling a much felt want.
In further justification, we submit the following
from the pen of a noted Masonic authority. This
quotation will naturally apply to treatises upon other
secret orders:—
“The objection to treatises and disquisitions on
Masonic subjects, that there is danger through them of
giving too much light to the world without, has not
the slightest support from experience. In England, in
.
France, and in Germany, scarcely any restriction has
(
been observed by Masonic writers, except as to what
is emphatically esoteric; and yet we do not believe
i _ that the profane world is wiser in those countries than
in our own in respect to the secrets of Freemasonry.
In the face of these publications, the world without has
j
remained as ignorant of the aporrheta of our art, as
if no work had ever been written on the subject, while
the world within—the craft themselves—have been
enlightened and instructed, and their views of Ma­
sonry, (not as a social or charitable society, but as a
philosophy, a science, a religion), have been elevated
and enlarged.
“The truth is that men who are not Masons never
read authentic Masonic works. They have no interest

--- Sayfa 5 ---
PREFACE.
in the topics discussed, and could not understand them,
from a want of the preparatory education which the
Lodge alone can supply.
Therefore, were a writer
even to trench a little on what may be considered as
being really the ‘arcana’ of Masonry, there is no danger
of his thus making an improper revelation to improper
persons.”
Mackey, Encyc. of Freemasonry, 1887 ed., p, 617.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
CHAPTER I.
T he M y s t ic S h r i n e .
A B r ie f H is t o r y o f t h e O r d e r.
The Ancient Arabic Order, Nobles of the MyStic
Shrine, was instituted at Mecca, Arabia, irt the year
5459, or the year of Our Lord 1608. The ritual was
prepared and issued at Aleppo, Arabia, by Louis
Maracci, the great Italian translator of Mohammed’s
Alkoran. The order was revived and established at
Cairo, Egypt, in 5598. (June 14, 1837. Freemasons
have beeti accustomed to date all of their acts and in­
struments according to the Hebrew Calendar.)
The primary purpose of the Ancient Arabic
Order, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, was the forma-
tfon of an Arabian and Egyptian Inquisition, or
Vigilance Committee. The order was composed of the
brave and upright men of the time, who performed
their duties fearlessly. It is said to have been an or­
ganization much like the Vigilantes of California, who
at the time of the rush to the gold fields, before any
legal government was yet organized there, assumed
the duties of captors, judges, jurors, and executioners
of criminals.
Since the Courts of justice are now able to cope
with lawlessness, and vigilance committees are not con­
sidered necessary in modern times, the Ancient Arabic
Order, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, has adopted other
interests. The Shrine pin, however, is still considered

--- Sayfa 7 ---
6
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
a badge of true and. honorable manhood, devoted to
high ideals. In various cities of Europe, Temples of
the Mystic Shrine were instituted some .years ago,
and they are Thriving charitable and social organiza­
tions.In 187-1 one of the foreign representatives of the
order brought the ritual to America and placed it in
the hands of Dr. Walter M. Fleming, 33rd degree,
Sovereign Grand Inspector-General, Ancient and Ac­
cepted Scottish Rite, and Eminent Commander of
Columbia Commandery No. 1, Knights Templar, New
York. Dr. Fleming, with other 33rd degree Masons,
(including William J. Florence, Edward Eddy, S. C.
Campbell, Oswald Merle D’Aubigne, G. W. Miller,
John A. Moore, William S. Patterson, John W. Sim­
mons and Albert P. Moriarty) and nearly all the
Knights Templar of Columbia Commandery No. 1
instituted Mecca Temple No. 1, of the Mystic Shrine
in New York. Dr. Fleming was unanimously chosen
as Grand Potentate (or presiding officer).
For several years this Temple remained inactive,
owing to the death of some of the leaders, and the
lack of interest of the others. In 1875 W. J. Florence
brought from Europe the Oriental Ritual of the order
as it was worked in foreign countries. In 1876 he
called together the remaining members of the original
Mecca Temple No. 1. A committee under his leader­
ship was appointed to draft a constitution and ritual
for the order in America. The constitution was
adopted June 6, 1876.
Since Mr. Florence, the chairman of the commit­
tee, and Dr. Fleming, Grand Potentate, were at that
time members of the old burlesque association known
as the Sons of Malta, a portion of the ritual of that
order was used. Part of the work was adapted from

--- Sayfa 8 ---
the higher degrees of the Rite of Memphis and thle
Scottish Rite, and also the Royal Arch and Templar
degrees, York Rite, and it was then decided that only
Masons of the 32nd degree by the Scottish Rite, or
Knights Templar by the York Rite should be eligible
to admission to the order.
The Mystic Shrine in America is a charitable and
social organization devoted to the welfare of Free­
masonry. The Imperial Council is the governing
body, with subordinate branches called Temples. There
are now about one hundred and fifty Temples in the
United States.
One adverse vote or blackball will reject a can­
didate for the term of thirteen weeks. The initiation
fee was originally placed at ten,dollars as the minimum
sum, and the dues were not less than two dollars an­
nually. These sums are smaller than the amounts re­
quired by the majority of Temples at the present time.
The Mystic Shrine is called an Arabic Order, but
it is only in a spirit of frolic that Shrinks assume the
garbe and role of Arabs. They do not worship the
Mohammedan Allah, and they do not accept the re­
ligion of Islam. Shriners are all Masons, believing in
deity, and they , are all liberty-loving Americans.
Organized for fun, the Shrine is called a “play­
ground for Masons”. Its principles are pleasure,
hospitality and jollity, without intemperance, coarse­
ness or rudeness. It is a mistake to call the Mystic
Shrine the highest degree of Freemasonry. It is
not a part of the Masonic Lodge, but it is perhaps the
best loved of all the non-Masonic bodies composed of
Masons. The order, in the United States numbers
thousands of members, all enthusiasts at the Shrine
of fraternal affection and good-fellowship.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF T H E ORDER.
7

--- Sayfa 9 ---
8
THE MYSTIC SHRINE,
RANK, TITLES AND POSITIONS OF OFFICERS; THEIR
COSTUMES AND JEWELS.
Illustrious Grand Potentate, first officer, in the
East.Costume—Velvet purple robe or domino; flowing
sleeves, trimmed with yellow or gold braid, yellow or
gold colored sash; high purple and yellow silk or satin
turban, with crescent of gold and jeweled; jeweled
sceptre with crescent at top.
Jewel of Office—Pyramid, with large, gold sur­
faced sun, with rays and a frowning face, or visage,
in the sun; suspended from left breast.
Illustrious Chief Rabban, second officer, in the
West.Costume—Velvet bright green robe, or domino;
full flowing sleeves, trimmed with purple, and broad
purple sash; green and purple turban, with crescent at'
front.Jewel of Office— Pyramid, with silver moon,
faced; suspended at left breast.
Illustrious Assistant Rabban, third officer, in the
South.Costume—Velvet blue robe, or domino; large
flowing sleeves, trimmed with orange; broad orange
sash; blue and orange turban, with crescent in front.
Jewel of Office—A gold-faced pyramid, covered
with silver stars.
Illustrious Most High Prophet and Priest, fourth
officer, right of East.
Costume—Robe made of woven "metal cloth, gilt
with silver, and covered like damask; flowing sleeves,
and fringed; broad gold and yellow turban, crown
shaped, yellow, gold and black-jeweled; and carries a
crozier.Jewel of Office—Large gold form of book, or

--- Sayfa 10 ---
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ORDER.
9
f
scroll, with pyramid on one page, in silver, and cres­
cent on the other, suspended about the neck, hanging
on front of breast.
Illu striou s O rien ta l G u id e, fifth officer, right of
the East.
Costume—Orange robe, or domino, trimmed with
purple; broad purple sash, belt and sword; orange
and purple turban, crescent in front; carries long
Arab staff or spear, trimmed at spear-head with
orange and purple ribbon.
Jewel of Office—Pyramid with gold-surfaced,
panther bodied, female headed Sphynx, suspended
from left breast.
Illu striou s T rea su rer, sixth officer, right of East.
Illu striou s R e c o rd e r, seventh officer, left of East.
Illu striou s F irs t C erem on ia l M a ste r, eighth offier,
right of West.
Illu striou s S ec o n d C erem on ia l M a ste r, o r S ta n ­
d a rd -B ea rer, ninth officer, left of West.
Illu striou s Captain o f the G u ard, tenth officer,
inside door.
f
Illu strio u s O u tsid e G uard, eleventh officer, out­
side door.
The1 first seven officers are elected annually, and
the remaining four appointed by the Grand Potentate.
ENTHRONEMENT.
Previous to the enthronement of a Potentate-
elect, the Imperial Council requires his assent to the
following ordinances, viz. :
1. Do you solemnly vow, upon your honor, that
you will exert your best endeavors to promote the
true happiness of your brother Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine ?
2. That you will endeavor to promote the general

--- Sayfa 11 ---
10
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
good of the order and preserve the solemnity of our
ceremonies with profound respect and reverence?
3. That you will not acknowledge, or have inter­
course with, any Temple1'which does not work under
constitutional authority, as recognized by the Imperial
Grand Council?
4. That you will ever maintain and support the
authority of the Imperial Grand Council of the United
States, and enforce obedience to its statutes,, edicts
and regulations?
i
Do you submit to all these ordinances, and promise
to observe and practice them faithfully ?
1
9

--- Sayfa 12 ---
C h a p t e r II.
T h e M y s t ic Sh r in e I l l u s t r a t e d ,
F u r n it u r e a n d O p e n in g C e r e m o n ie s.
The Lodge Boom is termed the Temple and the
furniture is similar to the Masonic with some additions,
the room being draped with black alpaca or white,
edged with purple and blue.
’
FURNITURE.
>
A Canopy or tent in a cart, a Pedestal with Gavel,
large Cymitar across the Pedestal, Altar of Obligation
covered in black, having on it the Bible and the Koran,
the Black Stone or Holy Stone of black marble, one foot
square or more, and two Crossed Swords; right of East,
Altar of Incense with burning incense of myrrh, etc.;
left of East, Bier and Coffin, each half way between
East and Altar of Obligation; Laver of Water in the
South; Organ, etc. The Working Tools, etc. are a large
Cylinder of Tin or Sheet Iron about 30 feet long, and
S feet in diameter and constructed so as to telescope to­
gether when not in use; a Galvantic Battery, an Altar
on which is placed a Gold Book with crossed swords on
it; three Gavels; Block and Tackle; Hoodwinks and
Blindfolders, Boxing gloves; a short Ladder, four pair

--- Sayfa 13 ---
12
THE MYSTIC SHBIKB.
of Drawers, three pair of Hand Cuffs; a Bumper, sort of
Desk six feet high constructed so as to fall to pieces
when required for work, a large five gallon Sponge, sev­
eral Chairs from three to six feet long a Chinese Gong;
Horse Fiddle and any other instrument on which a hid­
eous noise can be produced; twelve Suits of Uniform
with sabers for Arabic soldiers; several Masks or false
faces, a Rough and Rugged Road made of Ropes etc.;
Bridge of Sighs, throe small syringes, Dolman; Sand­
als; Fire Arms; Collapse; and any other uncouth
dress or figure to create terror or fear to the candidate.
OPENING CEREMONIES
Grand Potentate— (One blow with gavel, or scep­
tre), Chief Rabban, that no intei loper or spy may in­
trude upon the ceremonies of our Mystic Shrine, it is
my command that you summon your proper officers and
receive from them our mystic pass; disperse them with
alacrity in and about our Temple, to reoeive the same
from all within our portals, and communicate to you,
that you may give me the assurance that no ignoble
here intrudes.
Chief Rabban-^(Two raps,) First and Second Cere­
monial Masters, approach the Orient.
[They arise and approach the East.]
Have you your Mystic pass?
First and Second Ceremonial Mastert^-Chiei Rab­
ban, we have.
Chief Rabban.— Approach and give it.
First and Second Ceremonial Masters approach,
and each whispers Mecca.
Chief Rabban.—It is the command of our Grand
Potentate that you forthwith receive the mystic pass
from each and every one in or about the body of the
Temple, and return the same to me, that I may give

--- Sayfa 14 ---
OPS SING CEREMONIES.
13.
assurance that no ignoble spy intrudes upon the oere-
monies of our Mystic Shrine.
First and Second Ceremonial Masters, each on one
side of the Temple, receive the mystic pass, “ Mecca.'*
in a whisper, and returning, communicate the same to
the Chief Rabban; if one be present without the pass,
the C. M. announces aloud:
“ An intruder!”
Member arises, is vouched for, or expelled.
Chief Rabban— Grand Potentate, our Mystic Shrine
is secure and free from jeopardy; there are none present
save Nobles of our rite.
Grand Potentate — (To assistant Rabban.) Assist­
ant Rabban, inform the Captain of the Guard, and he
his comrade, the outer Guard, that our Temple is now
duly and regularly opened for the business and cere­
monies, and both take heed who enters.
Captain of the Guard informs the Outer Guard as
above, and reports (after closing the door:)
Captain o f the Guard.— Noble Assistant Rabban,
our outer Guard stands instructed and under double
guard, picketed by a tried and trusted officer without,
one who knows his duty, vigilantly assisted by the
Captain of the Guard within.
Assistant Rabban.—Illustrious Grand Potentate,
our sacred Temple is under a double and trusty Guard.
Grand Potentate.—Tis well.
Since all present are
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, and our Temple securely
guarded, I proclaim this Temple regularly open for
business and ceremony, and hereby forbid all confusion
and discord that may mar our mystic rites.
Regular business is now in order, as usual in all
such bodies conducted on Parliamentary law and rules.
I f an initiate presents himself, the Recorder and Treas­
urer discharge their duties respectively.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
C h a p t e r iii.
T h e M y s t ic S h r in k I l l u s t r a t e d .
INITIATION
Temple is now darkened, officers in their places,
when Grand Potentate says: First Ceremonial Master
you will retire to the outer walls and ascertain if any
novice awaits our pleasure.
First Ceremonial Master retires, ascertains, and re­
turning before the Altar, reports after giving the sign.
GBAND HAILING SALAAM,
Given by facing the Orient,
leaning forward as if making a low
bow, Arms raised and extended
palms out, head thrown forward in a
reverential and beseeching manner,
like cut except leaning forward more.
F i r s t C erem on ia l M a s te r—Illus­
trious Grand Potentate, there are
without (one, two or three) Sons of
the Desert who seek admission to our
Mystic Shrine.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
INITIATION.
10
Grand Potentate.— “ Illustrious First and Second
Ceremonial Masters accompanied by our Grand Mar­
shal, Jrou will retire without the Temple and prepare
those novices for reception in our Mystic Shrine.”
They salute and retire, and prepare candidates by
taking off the shoes, coat, collar and vest and clothing
them in white dominoes and slippers, handcuffed, or tied
at the wrist loosely.
When the candidate (one, two or three) is ready, the
Ceremonial Masters take charge of him.
Three loud
knocks at the outer door of the temple call the Orient­
al Guide to admit them.
The response is, inside, a
horrible clatter, the rasping of iron rings over an iron
bar and the withdrawal of several large bolts; then the
door opens:
“ What is the cause of this clamorous
alarm?
Who dares intrude upon the ceremonies of
our Mystic Shiine?” asks the Oriental Guide.*
First Ceremonial Master.— “ (one, two or three)
poor Sons of the Desert, who are weary of the hot sands
and the burning sun of the plains and humbly crave
shelter under the protecting dome of the Temple.”
Oriental Guide.— How may we know them to be
worthy and not of treacherous or ignoble purpose?
First Ceremonial Master— “ Their characters having
been
canvassed
and
coming
within
the
bounds
of good report; they have passed the ordeal of the Se­
cret Ballot of our Mystic Shrine unsoiled, and I espouse
their cause und sanction their reception with, the Secret
Pass. ”
Oriental Guide— “ Give me the pass.”
First Ceremonial Master advances and whispers:
“ Mecca” .

--- Sayfa 17 ---
16.
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
O rien ta l G u id e—“’Tis well; let them enter.” /
They enter, preceded by Marshall, Ceremonial Mas­
ters, etc,., conducting them, the guide leading all.
G ra n d Potenta te—(three raps, all rise.) Gong
sounds once, organ music. They march twice around,
Organ or singing or both; the gong sounds when they
pass the East and when they halt there the second time
around. Grand Potentate strikes once; all are seated.
Candidates halt.
G ra n d Potentate—“What strange intruders have
we here? Our pleasures were most perfect and should
be sacred from this turmoil and display.”
Previous to the entrance of the candidate, the
captain of the Guard chooses twelve members who
dress like Arabic soldiers with large broad Cymitars,
and are stationed outside; drill, and are ready for duty
when wanted. The candidates are seized and carried
out by the soldiers in a rough manner, at which the
the Oriental Guide supplicatingly answers.
O rien ta l G u id e—“Illustrious Grand Potentate “tis
I who have ushered in (one, two or three) poor Sons of
the Desert, who being weary of the hot sands and burn­
ing sun of the plains, humbly crave that sacred,boon to
the weary and thirsty traveler, a cup of water and shel­
ter under the protecting dome of our goodly Temple. I
do commend them to your favor, having found them
worthy and not of treacherous or ignoble purpose, each
having passed the ordeal of the Secret Ballot of our
Mystic Shrine unsoiled and vouched for by a Noble with
our secret pass.”
G ra n d Potentate—“Most Noble Guide, know you
the penalty of broken faith and do you stand forth as
ransom for them all?”
O rien ta l G u id e—‘ Illustrious Grand Potentate, I
do.”
G r a n d Potenta te—“So be it. then. Conduct them
once again about our Shrine and to our Most High
Priestjthat he may imprint upon the tablets of their

--- Sayfa 18 ---
INITIATION.
memories a knowledge of tbe duties they do here as-
( sume.”
Candidates are conducted around to the Prophet
and Priest, who is robed and wearing a mitre.
Priest— ‘ -Strangers, are your motives for coming
among us honorable, pure and free from hope o f gain
or pride of knowledge?
Candidates— They are.
Priest— Have you a belief in. the existence o f a
Deity, future rewards and punishments?
Candidates—I have.
Priest—Have you a desire to promote justice and
suppress wrong?
Candidates—I have.
Priest— Have you a due regard for female virtue?
Candidates— I have.
Priest—Are you willing to jeopardize your life, if
need be, to punish the guilty and protect the innocent
and labor in the cause of justice, truth and common hu­
manity?
,
Candidates— I am.
Priest— Have you still a desire to unite with us in
the inseparable bonds of the Mystic Shrine for the pur­
poses to which you have assented?
Candidates—I have.
High Priest—I f you have answered in sincerity
and in truth in these replies I can assure you that no
conflicting sentiment
nor requirement here w ill mar
your principles noi your duties in the outer world, be
they what they may.
Our alliance or the Bite o f our
Mystic Shrine is ancient, honorable, benevolent and
secret.
It is devoted to the cause of justice, truth and
11

--- Sayfa 19 ---
18 _
THE MYSTIC SBBINS.
mercy. It is ancient as the corner-stone of Moham­
med’s Temple of Mecca; as secret as the Moslem that
bound the tribes of Arabia to Allah or their god; as
honorable as the Christian, and the tenets to which it
is dedicated when once assumed cannot be eschewed or
cast aloof. We know no retrogression; justice is our
escutcheon; charity beyond reason we do not expect;
virtue must be regarded for its peerles worth and mo­
rality observed for the general good of all. We require
absolute secrecy and desire all our disciples to hold an
interest in our noble cause and a just observance of the
tenets of our faith. Let these preliminary teachings be
deeply graven upon your hearts. They are priceless
when well observed and attributes that cannot b e
bought with paltry, sordid gold. By the existence of
Allah and the creed of Mohammed; by the legendary
sanctity of our Tabernacle at Mecca, we greet you, and
in commemoration of the Arab’s faith in purity and in­
nocence, we accept your answers as sincere, and you will
now be permitted to proceed in the rites and ceremo­
nies of the mystic Shrine. The Oriental Guide and es­
cort will now conduct you onward, while you will rev­
erently lend an attentive ear to our preparatory service.
Gong, music, verse. Candidates proceed.
G ra n d P oten ta te.—Who is he who hath professed
to have conversed in person with the Supreme and
maketh himself mightiest of his Mohammed, the Proph­
et of the Arab’s creed?
Gong, music and short verse.
C h ie f R a b h a n.—Who but Mohammed mingled his
religion with his Hourii and said: Are not these the
true sources of happiness?

--- Sayfa 20 ---
IKITIATIOK.
1»
Gong, music, verse.
Assistant Pabban.— What shall befall them who
have reflected with abhorrence that which the Prophet
hath revealed?
Wherefore their works shall not avail;
do they not travel through the earth and see the end of
those who were before them?
Gong, music, verse.
Priest.— W hy do unbelievers indulge themselves
and eat as beasts; shall not their portion be a torment?
Appeal to the Prophets for the truth.
Gong, music, verse.
Grand Potentate.— To whom shall be meted out,
the boiling waters to drink, that they shall burst their
bowels and shall be cast into molten lava to be consum­
ed?
The infiflels who wait until the last hour of
justice.
Gong, music, verse.
Chief Pabban.— Let us be of the number o f those
who bathe m the fountain of incorruptible waters and
rivers of milk, the taste whereof changeth not, and riv­
ers of wine, pleasant and purifying to those who drink,
and enter into the vineyards where fruits rare and plen­
ty ever abound, and no evil exists.
Gong, music, verse.
Assistant Pabban.— He who follows the plain dec­
laration of his dictator will ever avoid those whose
evil works have been dressed for them by the devil and
who follow up their own lusts.
Gong, music, verse.
>
Priest—There are Moslems among ns; there are
others who swerve from propriety; but whosso seeketh

--- Sayfa 21 ---
so
THE HTBTIO SHRINE.
Islam earnestly seeks true direction; bat those who
swerve from trath and justice shall merit and reap
abundance of chastisement.
Gong, music, verse.
G r a n d P oten ta te—Let us purify one another. There
are two highways to good and evil; attempt not the city
of destruction. Be ye all possessed of the faculty of
distinguishing and the power of choosing wickedness
and piety. For the punishment of each will be equal
to the measure of his sin.
Gong and music, until the candidates, arriving at
the East, halt.
G r a n d Potentate—Sons of the Desert, you have
advanced through the preliminary ceremonies of the
Nobility of the Mystic Shrine, as far as it is possible,
unobligated. Before advancing further in our course
you will be required to assume a most powerful and
binding oath, inseparably uniting yourself with us, and
when once taken it can never be retracted or departed
from. But, I assure you, therein is not contained a
sentiment exceptionable to all that may become an hon­
est, upright man, be his beliefs what they may. Are
you willing to assume such an obligation?
Candidates—I am.
Candidates are conducted around to the W est and
to the Altar of Obligation amid sound of gong, drum
and music. Kneel at altar with bound arms leaning upon
the top, heads bowed. Grand Potentate strikes thrice
to call all around the altar, and then to candidates:
Repeat after me.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
INITIATION.
81
OBLIGATION.
, of my voluntary desire, uninfluenced and
of free accord, do here, assume, without reserve, the Ob*
ligation of the Nobility ,of the Mystic Shrine, as did
the elect of the Temple of Mecca, the Moslem and the
Mohammedan. 1 do hereby, upon this Bible, and on
the mysterious legend of the Koran, and its dedication
to the Mohammedan faith, promise and swear and vow
on the faith and honor of an upright man, come weal or
woe, adversity or success, that I will never reveal any
secret part or portion whatsoever of the ceremonies I
have already received, that are about to be communi.
cated to me or that I may hereafter be instructed in, to
any person in the world, except it be to a well-known
member of the Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine,
and I, knowing to an absolute certainty that he or they
be truly apd lawfully such, and of good standing with
such Nobility
That I will not‘be present, aid or coun­
tenance the conferring of the Order of the Mystic
Shrine upon any person who is not a Masonic Knight
Templar or a thirty-second degree A. and A. Scottish
Rite Mason in good standing.
1 '
I further promise and vow that I will not willfully
write, cut, speak or portray any detail that might be
construed into even a clue to the same, except for' offi­
cial Temple work.
Furthermore, I do here registera sacred vow, prom­
ising, should I live to become a member, I will "im­
partially cast a black ballot without fear orfavor against
friend or foe applying for membership in the Nobility
of the Mystic Shrine, whom I believe to be disgraced,

--- Sayfa 23 ---
THE MYSTIC SB BIKE
dishonored, a thief, a perjurer, a murderer, a lunatic, an
idiot or a criminal; And should I undismayed pass
safely through the Moslem test and be found worthy
the confidence of my fellows albeit I do not actively
espouse the cause, still I do promise to be silent, even
if neutral, and not oppose the purposes of the order.
I further promise and vow that I will obey the laws
and submit to the decrees of the Parent Temple, the
Imperial Grand Council of the United States of Amer­
ica, and that I will not acknowledge, recognize nor be
present in any other body of Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine, claiming to be Superior in authority, nor be
present in any clandestine Temple not holding consti­
tutional authority from the Imperial Grand Council of
the Mystic Shrine.
“I furthermore promise and vow that to the full
measure and of my ability I will never swerve from
justice nor duty. That I will respect virtue; protect the
innocent; assist the distressed; promote the inculcation
of honor and integrity and dispense reasonable charity.
That I will protect and defend the unsullied honor of
any Noble of the Mystic Shrine, when absent, if assail­
ed; and now upon this sacred book, by the sincerity of
a Moslem’s oath I here register this irrevocable vow,
subscribing myself bound thereto as well as binding
myself by the obligation of the prerequsite to this
membership, that of a Knight Templar or that of a
thirty-second degree A. and A, Scottish Rite Mason.
In willful violation whereof may I incur the fearful
penalty of having my eyeballs pierced to the center

--- Sayfa 24 ---
INITIATION.
with a three-edged blade, my feet flayed and I be forc­
ed to walk the hot sands upon the sterile "shores of the
Red Sea until the flaming sun shall strike me with livid
plague, and may Allah, the god of Arab, Moslem and
Mohammedan, the god of our fathers, support me to the
entire fulfillment of the same, Amen, Amen, Amen.” '
G ra n d Potenta te—“In token of your sincerity sa­
lute the Sacred Book, the Bible.”
P rie s t—“Unbind the Sons of the Desert. They are
now of noble birth. The rays of the hot, flaming sun
upon the sterile shores of the Red Sea are strong and
more scathing than the hempen thong.”
1
Nobles are all seated by the Grand Potentate’s
striking once. Candidates are ordered to arise and
their wrists are unbound.
P r ie s t—“Our Oriental will now conduct the Sons
of the Desert to our purifying cavern in the South. It is
the fountain of Mecca. Let them there wash their
hands in innocency, cleansing themselves of the snares
of sin and vice that may have surrounded them, and let
them be returned to us free from the stains of iniquity.”
Conducted to fountain or urn, with music and
verses then conducted to to the East.
G ra n d Potentate—“My friends, it is with pleasure
that I extend to you the greeting of the Nobles of the
Mystic Shrine and congratulate you upon having thus
far passed the ceremonie.s of our order; bear bravely up
to the Moslem test and prove your fidelity to our cause.
Although vague may appear the prospect in our cere­
mony and the aspect of our purpose, let me assure you
r

--- Sayfa 25 ---
I
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
that there is a deep and formidable meaning in it all,
and when you shall have passed unflinching and undis- 1
maved our final test of your fidelity, nerve and courage
then will you, indeed, be worthy to espouse our cause; ,
but, rdark well, should you ultimately decline to enlist
in active part you are still bound by the strongest ties
to remain neutral. Remember this and continue faith- ■
ful to the death; but ere we impart to you our formid­
able purpose, you must prove your fidelity and courage.
We do not expect all to join in active part, but those
who do not unite in the task must applaud our deeds,
or by silence favor not an adverse faction to gain sway.
With this admonition I yield you up to our Guide and , • ,
his cohorts, who will conduct you to the ante-room and
blindfold you, and one by one you will be subjected( to
the Moslem test of courage. And should an unfore­
seen disaster come we are in duty bound to honor and
protect those who are left near and dear to you. Ere
you depart we bid you God-speed and adieu.
P rie s t (approaching to East and raising both hands)
—And may Allah protect and support you, that you be
not cast into <al hotama’ (hell). Now let our secret
vaults open to their width, that the vapors of damp

stagnation may pass away. r Open the passage to the
desert and disperse our trusty Arabs in full array for
the Moslem test. Away!
Candidates conducted out under solemn music to
.be prepared for the second section.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
ININTIATION.
25.
Each candidate is in the custody of an Arabic soldier
They are seated and a drawing of lots takes place if
there is more than one candidate and each takes his
turn for initiation. They are put through blindfolded,
1, 2, and 3 etc. according to number, six being the
highest number actually initiated any one night. The
others if any are secretly taken aside, the blinder, re­
moved, and they witness the initiation of the others and
have only to take the obligations themselves.
In the Preparation Room they are told: A rough
and rugged road is before you, and it is beset with
danger and with difficulties.
Your life will be
threatened, and you may loose it. But remember those
who die in the faith, will be resurrected in glory; there­
fore summon to your aid courage—that, truly Masonic
qualification, that puts on a fearless and courageous
attitude; that scorns the acts of a coward, who but apes
the conduct ofia hero. Therefore suffer yourselves to
be initiated with all the forms and ceremonies of this
ancient and honorable institution. Do you all assent
to this trial of fortitude—that truly Masonic qualifi­
cation ?
Candidates.—I do.
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 are first led into the room with
hands pinioned behind them, blindfolded: when they
are put on the journey over the “Hot Sands,” [rugged
road] each with an Arab Soldier on each side, pricking
him with his saber to hurry him along, and when one
falls down, a whack with the flat of a saber causes him
to arise. After they have gone around two or three
times, two are selected to escape enemies who they are

--- Sayfa 27 ---
30.
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
told are approaching on a mission of murdering all who
have not passed “The Bung Hole Test.”
THE BUNG HOLE TEST.
The large metal cylinder is then produced, stretch­
ed out about 30 feet.
Each candidate is asked if
he was ever called a coward, or turned his back on an
enemy. He is .prompted to say No, I perform all I un­
dertake, and never back down or out.
They are then
led to opposite ends of the big cylinder, caused to en­
ter and are told to hurry up as the enemy is approach­
ing. The center of the cylinder contains a strong net­
work of cord or wire, preventing either from passing
th rough. They meet in the middle of the cylinder and
strive to pass each other while the Arabs pound on the
outside with clubs and swords till they are satisfied,
when they slide an opening in the door and ask if they
wish to go on or back out. They of course back down
and out, when they are given a lecture on their assur­
ance, and told never to be too sure of a thing till they
have tried it. They are one by one taken into another
apartment, often stretched out on a plank to rest.
While in this position a small dog or one who can imi­
tate a dog. is caused to give a sharp yelp, just after a
few drops of warm water has been squirted on the can­
didates face, with the remark, “Take that dog out, he
has just pissed in the face of M r.-----------, when a gen­
eral laugh takes place and the candidate is shown the
trick.
The “Bumper” is next used. A Box about six feet
high; perpendicular on one side, and concave on the
other side. A ladder is then placed on the concave

--- Sayfa 28 ---
INITIATION.
27.
side. The candidate acends the ladder and is seated on
the top, his legs hanging over the concave side. Then
he is told to take hold of the end of a large rope, about
two feet long: held up by a small string or thead. He
is told under no circumstances to let go of the rope,
which he firmly grasps, when the box falls to pieces,
and he is shot down the concave side of the box, thump­
ing his head and buttocks on a partition that is fixed to
receive him. He is then conducted to the Grand Po­
tentate, whom he is commanded to approach with hum­
ble and great reverence, stooping very low on his knees,
his head near the
ground, his but­
tocks e l e v a t e d ,
where he receives
the “Grand Salaam”
that is a blow on
his buttocks with two pieces of board between which
are placed some torpedoes that explode with a loud re-
•sport when they come together. This is called the
Grand Salaam or stroke of introduction. He is then
introduced to the Grand Potentate, near whom is a
Galvanic Battery, so arranged (under the carpet) that
when the candidate is introduced to the Grand Poten­
tate, he receives a severe electric shock. All those to
whose lot it fell, in the casting of lots, are allowed to -
come into the room and be seated.
After a social meeting with the members, each of
which pass around the room and are personally intro­
duced to the officers and members present as well as
the Arabian soldiers, two of the best boxers are left
with the candidate talking, when one says to the other,
I will bet you a dollar that I can guess nearer to this
brother’s age than you can. The other takes the bet.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
The money is placed in the hands of another Noble.
The bettor, after they have made some ridiculous
guesses, asks the age of the person. When "he tells his'
age, they get into a quarrel about it; ea.ch gives the
other the lie. A challenge is then given and accepted.
A ring is formed, two of the candidates are chosen as
seconds, and as soon as the gloves are produced, (large
boxing gloves) the Grand Potentate appears, stops the
fight, fines each of the fighters One Hundred Dollars,
and declares that the seconds (candidates) must fight it
out for their respective clients. That is, supposing A
and B to be the professional boxers, A’s second must
fight with B; and B’s second with A. A ring is formed
and the novice candidates meeting of course with some
skilled Noble, get some rather hard knocks, which the,
Nobles and other candidates enjoy.
While the fighting is going on, some Noble makes
complaint that he has been robbed, his pocket picked.
He had previously put a package, or some valuable
article in the pocket or clothes of one of the candi­
dates. A general search follows; the stolen property is •
found on a candidate who has not been exercised much ‘
and he is at once charged wilh the theft, is pitched on
to by two or three of the Nobles, roughly hustled out-
of the room for trial, stripped of his clothing except a
pair of drawers; he is then blindfolded, and after being
led around the room, is seated on a large sponge fill­
ed with ice water, when the news comes that he has,
been forgiven on account of his good character, which
has just been received by telegraph; he is led out and
invested with his former clothes.
While the foregoing is being enacted, candidates
who have escaped the Prize Fight etc. are conducted
into another room, where they either find several mem-
cers disguised as women, or find them discussing an ex* ,
l
28 .
THE MYSTIC SHEINE,

--- Sayfa 30 ---
im it ia t io n .
SB.
piected visit of “Lady Nobles of the Shrine” or they are
squarely told that there is to be such a visit that even­
ing and a committee may be appointed to receive them
in a proper manner.
Candidate is stripped to shirt, drawers and slippers,
blindfolded, and led around the room several times
when he is halted.
Condu ctor.—(to candidate) This is the place
where our brethren stop to sprinkle the Devil’s Pass
with urine. You will contribute a few drops of urine
to commemorate the time and place where all who past
here renounce the wiles and evils of the world to wor­
ship at the Shrine of Islam: Only a few drops will do.
Candidate begins to obey instructions when the
blinder is jerked from his eyes and he beholds before
him a group disguised as women, with bonneted faces
and capes showing, the rest of their bodies hid by a
screen. He is allowed to escape from the room amid a
roar of laughter from the on-lookers.
Meanwhile, and during these scenes, another
Drama takes place, while the last is going on as follows:
Some member goes out and calls the most timid
candidate aside,; or if there be but one, some delay
takes place, and he is left alone with the member who
should be his friend. The member then hastily en­
deavors to encourage him, and tells him confidentially
that he will not be harmed; that it is all ceremony, etc.
and although organized as a vigilance inquisition a-
broad, in this country it will become entirely a social
order. Then he gives him the password, signs, etc.,
hastily, in confidence and iri full.
When fully confided, he is discovered by some of­
ficer or member who becomes enraged at the member
so disclosing and they have some sharp words; and the
discoverer declares that he will report him to the, Grand
Potentate for censure.
Member replies, “ Do as you please” (this all out­
side). It is then whispered abaut so that the rest of

--- Sayfa 31 ---
the candidates can hear it (if more than one) and opin­
ions are expressed that there will be trouble for such ex­
posure before the candidate sees the end of the ceremo­
nies, etc., or that it was unlawful information given be­
fore the candidate is through the initiation.
(This candidate is then left until last, if there are
more than one).
Meantime the friend (member) who has betrayed
the signs departs to another room, divests himself of
all but his shirt, pants and shoes. Whitening his face ,
and at proper time bound at the wrists, blackened un­
der the eyes and on the lips to give him a ghastly ap­
pearance. Keeps out of sight and awaits the coming
ceremony or clothes himself with a domino and mask
and waits until required (all this should occupy but a
short space of time). Furthermore, another member, a
slender, fragile, smooth faced young man (preferable)
is selected to be robed as a woman or Arab girl. In
white or brown flowing robes, gathered tightly at the
waist, bare arms and neck, female wig or striped silk
handkerchief about the head, face painted pale (with
zinc and bismuth), eyebrows blackened and arched,
under eyelids penciled with India ink to disguise as
much as possible. He is covered with domino and
masked to enter the Temple and seated with a member
of light weight or spare man, one not too prominent or;
well known.
This member has a domino on, beneath which he
has his coat, vest, etc., and white shirt; under the shirt
is buckled a wide, soft padded belt fastened around
under the armpits with two straps from front of should­
ers passing over the back and two from the shoulder
blades; behind all four unite in a ring or swivel at the
back of the neck, ready for harmless execution by hang­
ing at their proper time.
These disguised members, being all prepared, sit
aside in dominoes and masked in some obscure corner
to await the ceremonies. Officers and members all rob­
ed and masked.
SO
THE MYSTIC SHBENB,

--- Sayfa 32 ---
nmruTrow.
s i
Arrangement of the temple. Immediately after
the candidates leave the Temple room a large banquet
table is placed in the position of the Altar, provided
with luncheon or banquet (as can best be done, in vari­
ety, according to ability of body); when all is properly
set a frame is placed upon the table, viz.: Four square
sticks, forming a post for each coi ner, about fourteen
inches or more high, with bars from each corner,
forming a square frame the size of the table. All this
is above the banquet and the supports a black cloth or
cover, elevated in the center, ostensibly forming a tomb.
The cloth is ornamented with sphynx, urn^ crescents,
etc., and should reach to the floor on all sides and be
fringed; this conceals all the table and banquet.
The Laver, Altar ox Incense and all the furniture
are placed about the Temple on each side. In the
North a scaffold is erected of two upright and one hori­
zontal joists,painted black and strong enough to sup­
port the weight of a man when suspended; a hole is m
the center of the horizontal bar and a pulley on the
right corner for a rope to slide over; also a strong peg
on the center of the right perpendicular bar or post on
which to fasten the rope after elevating the man, with
a^clasp on the end of the noose in the center to hook
into the ring at the back of the culprit’s neck.
The gibbet should be high enough to enable the ex­
ecutioners to raise the extremities about three feet from
the floor and leave a space of two or three feet above
the head (all these appointments need cost but a small
sum; the whole equipment has been so arranged as not
to be too expensive, unless extravangant properties are
desired). A member with white robe, skull and skele­
ton-faced mask stands front of scaffold to adjust noose
at proper time. ' Two strong members at the side of
scaffold, robed in black, to elevate the culprit. (Scaf­
fold may have black curtains about it if desired to con­
ceal the executioners at the side).

--- Sayfa 33 ---
82
*1
Furthermore, a headsman’s block is placed in the
South covered with black.
A headsman with a carved
blade battle az, clothed in a scarlet robe gathered at
the waist, with belt and sword, wearing scarlet mask,
’
presides at the block.
Beside the block lies a false
head on the floor with a black cloth covering it (with a
beard to resemble a member, if desired). A small bowl
or dish should also be in readiness on a stand for the
ceremonies of bleeding.
The gong should be attended by some competent
member and the organist at his post. A ll is now in
readiness for second section; the rough or Artificial
Desert.
SECOND SECTION.
The rough or Artificial Desert, etc., is then pre­
pared as follows:
The candidates are hoodwinked and
m stocking feet enter after three loud alarms (violent
blows from the mallet).
A t first they proceed one by
one on carpet, then upon a spread of com husks, then
a strip of stair cover or sheeting strewn with pebbles,
followed by a ladder with close rounds, camp stools
folded and a roller or any rough road most convenient­
ly prepared, out through the hallways, etc., according
to facilities.
During this intercourse drum, life, gong. ‘
organ, rattle, bugle, etc., etc., or any hideous pandemo­
nium instruments desired.
Then persecute and test
candidates as much as they will stand.
Finally they
are returned, one by one, to the Temple again amid the
din, overpowered, laid in a hammock or canvas and
folded in and swung from side to side or thrown up­
ward, carried hastily about and finally placed in some
outer apartment to await the other eandidates.
When
all have passed this ordeal, collect them together in the
ante-room, remove the relics of the desert and at once
place the Temple in order for the last ceremony or
third section.
A ll being in readiness, officers should be at their
posts, executioners at scaffold, skeleton masked in front
THE MYSTIC SEISINS.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
n m u x u n r.
33
o f same, and headsman at the block, etc. t Jn front of
' East seven seats are prepared for seven men called
“ Council of the Inquisition.”
, Before the alarm the Potentate calls seven officers
or members for inquisitors to the East. Potentate oc­
cupies the center; two Rabbans (one on each side); the
Priest occupies the chair ip the East, wielding the scep­
tre; all masked except Potentate and Priest; room
quite dark. Ceremonial Masters are outside with can­
didates, clothed in white robes or dominoes, with shoes
on and not hoodwinked,
THIRD SECTION.
F ir s t Cerem onial M a ste r.—(Outside, strikes thrice
loudly upon the door with a wooden mallet). Oriental
Guide, inside, returns the'alarm, opens the wicket and
says:Why this clamorous alarm?
C erem onial M a s te r.—(One, two or three) candi­
dates pursuing the secrets of the Mystic Shrine.
,
O rien ta l G u id e—Have the Mystic Pass? '
C erem onial M a ste r—Whispers. Nemesis.
O rien ta l G u id e—Let them enter.
Chains drawn; gong sounds low: organ miisic and
1 door is opened. Candidates conducted to front of
•aWest and seated.
G ra n d
Potenta te—My friends, having passed
through the ordeal of traversing the hot sands of the
desert undismayed, you are now returned for the final
ceremonies. But we find ourselves compelled most unex­
pectedly, to hold a secret inquisition to judge and exe­
cute upon a traitorous element within „our Temple. I
must, however, stay those proceedings to briefly invest
you with the knowledge of our secrets.
If it be your desire to decline thp active part you
are sacredly bound to secrecy and silence.
Our mission is to succor the distressed, relieve the
oppressed, protect the innocent and punish the guilty,
equalize station, establish harmony in all creeds, crush
fanaticism and intolerance and perpetuate the welfare
o f mankind.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
84
Crime is running rife over the land; our laws are
deemed inadequate for the emergency and we are ex­
ponents of a vigilance inquisition to promptly execute
and punish the malefactor, the thief, the murderer, the
despoiler of innocence and virtue, the violator of obli­
gation and the desecrator of Masonic vow. Our purpose
is to strike terror to the heart of the criminal class by
bringing them speedily and without mercy to the block
or to the bowtsring of the Mystic Shrine.
“To arrest, judge and execute within the hour, and
thus take the law within our own grasp and summarily
{ranish the malefactor. Blood for blood and life for
ife, and as our fleet-footed justice overtakes and pun­
ishes the evil-doer, aye, even in the heat of misdeed, it
will be a lesson to those who remain and know not the
fate of the departed.
“The day is not far distant when the name and the
escutcheon of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine will
strike a pallid terror to the wild devouring element of
crime, and the thankful prayers of the unprotected will
attest the justice of our cause.
“1 will now invest you with the salutations, signs,
grips and passwords of our order,
WORK OF THIRD SECTION.
C a p ta in o f the G u a rd , (discovering a member with
a female in the Temple in disguise, shouts)— “Most
Noble Prophet and High Priest, a spy, an intruder, a
traitor is in the Temple!”
All arise; confusion. Officers of Ceremonies, Guide
and Priest proceed to the scene.
C a p ta in o f the. G u a rd.—“Most Noble Priest, I have
but now discovered an intruder accompanied by a woman
both without Secret Pass have gained admission into
Temple.”
Pointed out and mask removed:
P rie s t—“By our faith, Nobles, we are betrayed!”
Both are seized by the Oriental Guide and Marshal
and surrounded bv Inquisitors, exclaiming:
“To the executioner with them!”
Ibfewfttfe-—Hold! stand &B apart; disrobe our raarifck
THE MYSTIC SBSOfB.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
85
from that female form} bind and hold her fast.”
Domino and hood taken off and the woman stands
held fast, robed in white and dismayed; bare arms and
neck.
Potenta te (pointing to male member).—“Strip and
,hang that spy without delay.”
Officers roughly strip member to shirt and pants (he
is previously painted pale and haggard and is prepared
for execution as before directed.
Potenta te—“Stranger, have you no defense? If not,
you must meet the death of a spy.”
Culprit shakes his head (No.)
Potentate—“Then let the culprit be executed.”
He is hurried to the scaffold; the executioner, m
skeleton mask, adjusts the noose. He has a loose rope
. then placed about the neck (to appear real).
Priest (kneels before the gallows)—“Thus do we
yield up thy life for our own security and may justice,
peace and mercy abide with thee.”
Executioner places on the black cap; Priest arises
and holds up handkerchief and drops it; gong sounds,
and the victim is suspended in the air. He struggles
an instant and hangs silent and apparently lifeless.
P o ten ta te—“Thus perish all our enemies. Noble
^ Guide, seat that miscreant woman by the block and cut
a deep crescent upon her naked breast. We cannot take
her life,”
She swoons and falls in chair orarms.
O riental G u id e—“Illustrious Grand Potentate, she
has already swooned.”
Potenta te—“The better still; she will not know her
pains. Cut the crescent on her breast and drag her
from our Temple. She’ll not forget the Nobles of the
Mystic Shrine.”
She is dragged in a chair to the the block, a bowl
brought, her; breast bared and a knife is seen in the offi­
cer’s hand. The bowl is held in front and an officer
from behind holds under the arm a rubber bulb with
stem, that holds a pint o f red wine; a cut, a groan
and the blood (w ine) flows into the bowL
The bowl is
INITIATION.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
set on the block, a blood-stained towel is also throw!
down, and she is borne from the Temple in the chair to
an outer chamber.
i¥»est(taking up the bowl)—Most Noble Council of
the Inquisition, now, in testimony of the justice 6f our
cause, let us in this maiden’s blood seal the alliance of
our bond of secrecy and silence. And let this day’s
bloody work in the deepest recesses of every Noble’s
heart be buried:
(Priest and seven Inquisitors drink.)
Curtain in front of scaffold may be drawn and the
executed let down for rest- The officer who detected
the member exposing the work now arises hastily (the
member being all prepared without.)
PHe& t—Illustrious Grand Potentate, I now demand
censure or punishment upon a member (mentioning
name) upon whose case this Inquisitor’s Tribunal has
deliberated for the crime of treason in our midst, expos­
ing our secrets to a friend and candidate within our
very Temple.”
Poten ta te—“Let him be brought before us. ”
Second culprit brought in, stripped (as described) to
shirt and pants.
jPotentate—“ Sir, you have been openly accused' of
treason and betrayal of our faith, not only here but
without our Temple’s walls. The Vigilance Inquisition
have tried, judged and sentenced you; what is your de­
fense?”
‘
O rien ta l G u id e—“Grand Potentate and Inquisitors
of our Council, let me appeal to this tribunal to temper
justice with mercy, and in slight extenuation of this
crime, let me offer this defense: Being loose of
tongue when plied with wine and most earnestly im­
portuned by nis best beloved friend, he, in part, did
yield, all m good nature, but intent on friendship and
and not meaning harm, frivolously related who and i
what we were and the object of our cause. And this
his friend and companion, now comes to beard us in
our lair and exonerate himself by the assumption of our
vows. Therefore, I do opine, their punishment should
be equal and each to assume the wrong or let the nov-
36
THE MYSTIC SHBINB

--- Sayfa 38 ---
rarriATiow.
37
ice assume it all, for ’tis monstrous to leave his friend
to perish for a crime prompted by himself.”
Potenta te (to candidate)—“Stranger Knight thus ac­
cused, arise. What say you to this grave charge?”
Candidate answers (no matter what).
Culprit member—“By my Moslem oath, Illustrious
i Grand Potentate, all that has been said by our .Noble
Guide is true. That I have erred I cannot deny, hut
all that I in confidence imparted to him I am informed
that he has loosely brawled about, hence I must suffer
for his crime.”
Potenta te—“Hold, enough! Most High Prophet and
Priest, to you do I appeal for judement.
Although
our council has before decided, still do I appeal to you.”
P r ie s t (advancing on the floor)—“Grand Potentate
and Council of Inquisitors, our cause is sorely tried,
our Temple and our Shrine in jeopardy, the crescent
turns perpendicular, point and point, and spills its mys­
tic blood; the hourii weep and Justice drops her
scale, for by their fault spies have fallen in our midst.
Our safety commands judgement on them both. . Let
the first in fault and his fellow go to the block together.
All the Inquisitors arise and exclaim: “To the hlockl
to the headsman!”
,
^First and second Ceremonial Masters seize culprit
member and conduct him to the block, then seize candi­
date and conduct him to the West. Take off his robe,
coat, collar, etc., except pants and shirt, same as ouL-
prit member, and bind his hands.
Potenta te—‘‘ Let the the traitor suffer first.”
Culprit is hurried to the block, blindfolded and made
to kneel; head on block (a,false wax or carved head lies
beside block, with black cloth over it, out of sight).
P rie s t (holding up sceptre)—“And now may justice,
peace and mercy abide with you. Strike!” The axe
falls, culprit tumbles on floor, executioner stoops, lifts
black cloth from false head and covers head of culprit,
siezes false head by hair, raises it to view and exclaims:
‘Nemesis!”
Candidate is hoodwinked and made to appoaoh the

--- Sayfa 39 ---
block and lav hie bead upon it.
Priett— “ S old ! Executioner, mark this strangert
neck with the scimetar, but do not slay him.”
The headsman slaps the candidate on the neck with a
damp towel and he is at once taken by force and plao-
ed in the hammock or canvas, carried and placed in a
coffin at the East end of the catafalque, while the cul­
prit and the head are borne into an outer room. Officers
all return.
Potentate— “ Thus doth the evil doer and the malefac­
tor meet with ‘Nemesis’ at the Inquisition of Mystic
Shrine and it now becqmes our duty to deposit the result
of our virgilance in the tomb, isolated from the eyes of
the meddling world, a fit abiding place for the remains
of the unfaithful.
Most Noble Oriental Guide, lest the
secret clasp of our Mystic Catafalque be permaturely
known to our novices, let them be again hoodwinked,
that their hearts may be taught secrecy and their
tongues silence ere they are entrusted with the secrets
of the Mystic Shrine.”
Candidates all blindfolded.
The coffin is then stood
on end or placed at an angle with head on chair, at
end of table or tomb, toward the East; the block and
executioner placed at the West side.
The culprit a-
gain elevated by the noose, skeleton executioner at his
side; the woman seated at the North; officers and mem­
bers gathered around table in tableaux and lights turned
up; black cloth and frame removed from banquet table
and all is in readiness for the finale.
Grand Potentate— “ Now let us rejoice that iniquity
has lain her proud idol in the dust and that justice has
triumphed over sin.
And ever thus let our light so
shine before men that they may behold our good
works.”
Gong; hoodwinks removed; music and general jubilee
at banquet.
Candidate is provided and eats and drinks
from coffin, the culprit also from the gallows, as also tile
female, still in costume, at the North, etc., etc.
A fter general banquet the meeting is closed in a for­
mal manner.
36
THB MYSTIC SHEINE.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
INITIATION.
39
After a general banquet but before the meeting is
formally closed, candidates are required to sign name,
occupation, residence and age when they are instructed
in the secret work as follows:
TH E SALUTE.
Grasp left hands, shake, and
raise tight Hand to side of the face
as if to brush off a fly.
GRAND H AILIN G SALAAM,
The sign is given by facing the
Orient, leaning forward as if ’mak­
ing a low bow, arms raised and ex­
tended palms out, head thrown for­
ward in a reverential and beseech­
ing manner, body bent more than
shown in cut

--- Sayfa 41 ---
40.
THE MYSTIC 8 HEINE.
This sign must be given on entering and retiring
Word of entrance given to Outer.Guardian. Mecca.
, , Word of entrance given tfe Inside Guardian.
> Nemesis.
‘
^
THE END.
N. B.
In different places, this, is worked in, dif
ferent ways, and not always according to the time num
ber of candidates etc. given here.
This is the Stand
ard Work.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Publisher’s Announcement
Ezra A. Cook, who founded this publishing business In 1861,
was unalterably opposed to secret orders. While many of our ,
publications reflect his spirit, our books have been extensively
adopted as text books In conferring the secret work of all
standard orders, and the publishers, In continuing their sale,
believe they are filling a much felt want.
In further justification, we submit the following from the
pen of a noted Masonic authority. This quotation will .natur­
ally apply to treatises upon other secret orders:—
“The objection to treatises and disquisitions on Masonic
subjects, that there is ganger through them ot giving too
much light to the world without, has not the slightest support
from experience. In England, In France, and In Germany,
scarcely any restriction has been observed by Masonic writers,
except as to what Is emphatically esoteric; and yet we do not
believe that the profane world is wiser In those countries than
In our own in respect to the secrets of Freemasonry. In the
face of these publications, the world without has remained'as
ignorant of the aporrheta of our art, as if no work had ever
been written on the subject, while the world within—the Craft
themselves—have been enlightened and instructed, and their
^jviews of Masonry (not as a social or charitable society, but
as a philosophy, a science, a religion), have been elevated and
enlarged.
The truth is that men who are not Masons never read'au­
thentic Masonic works. They have no interest in the topics
discussed, and could not understand them, from a want of
the .preparatory education which the Lod#e alone can supply.
Therefore, were a writer even to trench a little on what may
be considered as being really the ‘arcana’ of Masonry, there
i is no danger of his thus making an improper revelation to
improper persons.”—Mackey, Bncy. of Freemasonry, 1887 ed.,
P. 617.
»
EZRA . A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 43 ---
THE FORESTERS ILLUSTRATED.
The Complete Illustrated Ritual with Installation Cere­
monies.
Paper cover, 35 cents
TEM PLE OF HONOR ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of “The Templars
of Honor and Temperance," commonly called the Temple
of Honor. An historical sketch of the order and an analysis
of its character. A complete exposition of the subordinate
Temple, and the degrees of Love, Purity and Fidelity, by a'
Templar of Fidelity and Past Worthy Chief Templar.
'
Paper covers, price 35 cents
GOOD TEMPLARISM ILLUSTRATED.
A full and accurate exposition of the degrees of the Lodge.
Temple and Council, with engravings showing the signs,
grips, etc.
Paper covers, 35 cents
R IT U A L KNIGHTS OF LABOR ILLUSTRATED.
The complete illustrated Ritual of the Order, including the
“Unwritten Work,” and 'a brief history of the order; also an
article on Anarchism by John V. Farwell, etc.
Paper covers, 35 cents
UNITED SONS OF INDUSTRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of the secret pass­
words, etc.
i
Paper covers, pricq- 25 cents
IMPORTANT INFORMATION— H O W TO ORDER.
Always remit the full amount for your order by Bank Draft
on Chicago or New York Post-office or Express Money Order;
or enclose currency or’ stamps in a Registered Letter (do not
send Coin if you can avoid it). Please do not send personal
checks; if sent, add 10 cents for exchange.
Small orders will be sent by Registered Mail or Insured
Parcel Post if 10 cents extra is remitted with order, and
delivery of books, in good order, is then Guaranteed.
State Binding and Price of Bach book ordered.
f
Terms: Cash With Order.
Write your name and post-office address Plainly and In
Pull, giving street address.'
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 44 ---
KNIGHTS of COLUMBUS
Illustrated
A COMPLETE R ITU A L AND HISTORY OP THE FIRST
THREE DEGREES, INCLUDING A L L SECRET
“ W O RK” , F U L L Y ILLUSTRATED, B Y
A FORMER MEMBER OF THE
ORDER.
This work gives the proper position o f each officer dur­
ing the meetings, the proper manner of conducting the
business of the Knights of Columbus, order of opening
and closing of the Lodge, dress of candidates, ceremony of
initiation; giving the signs, grips, pass words, ete.
Con­
venient pocket size.
Paper Covers, 50.76; Cloth Covers, 51.00
Sent postpaid on, receipt of price. Liberal terms to agents.
THE KLAN INSIDE OUT
By Marion MontevaL
The only authentic story ever
written by one who is familiar with the Klu Elux Klan.
The book is divided into four subdivisions, and the follow­
ing subjects are well represented.
The Origin of the Klan,
Conquests of Masonic Fraternity by the Klan, The Klan
Conquests of the Church, Story of Mr. Rouge, etc., etc.
A book of sensational revelations, startling disclosures,
of political machinations, intrigues and corruption,— shock­
ing exposures of Klan practices.
199 pages bound In heavy wrappers, Postpaid, 51.00
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)*
1350 Np. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Miscellaneous Masonic
FINNEY ON MASONRY.
The character, claims and practical working's of Free­
masonry. By President Charles G. Finney, of ObeTlin Col­
lege. President Finney was a “'bright Mason” but left the
Lodge when he became a Christian. This book has opened
the eyes of multitudes.
Cloth, $1.25; paper coyer, 75 cents
EGGE ORIENT!.
The complete Standard Ritual of the First Tliree Ma­
sonic Degrees in Cypher, with complete Floor Charts of
Initiating, Passing and Raising a Candidate. Special edi­
tions give exact "work” of each State., Pocket size, Full
Roan, Flap,i............................................................................... .$3.60
Cabala—Standard cypher 4th to 7th degrees.....................
3.50
Council of the Orient, cypher 8th to 10th degrees............... 2.60
Knights of the Orient, cypher 11th to 18tb degrees..........., 3.50
Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, paper 75 cents;
cloth ................................................!......................................... 1.36
Raster’s Rook to the Hast, cloth............................................ 200
King Solomon and Kla Followers, Leather...........................2.50
. <•
,
1
1
Amaranth, Rite of Adoption.......................................................  1.25
Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor, cloth.......................3.50
Mackey’s Masonic Ritualist, tuck............................................. 3.00
Sickles’ Masonic Monitor, tuck....................................................2.25
Masonic Facts for Masons.............................................................60
Modern Secret Societies, Blanchard......................................... 1.85
Robert’s Ritual, Knights of Fythlas, paper, b0 cents; cloth 1.00
HOSTILITY OF THE CHURCH O F ROME TO
FREEMASONRY.
The causes investigated; an inquiry into Freemasonry as It
was and is; and criticism as to how far the Order fulfills Its
functions. Paper covers, 26 pages.
Price, $ AO
EZRA A. COO£, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 46 ---
MISCELLANEOUS BOOKS OF INTEREST
L A W OF FINANCIAL SUCCESS.
By Edward E. Beals
The author of this popular book
demonstrates scientifically that financial success results not
from luck, chance or accident but from the operation of a
great LAW; this great law, when understood, can be applied
practically and will benefit all who desire Financial Success.
Bound la cloth ..................................................................§0.75
Paper .................................................................................. 0.35
POPULAR RECITATIONS.
A selection of over 100 dramatic, pathetic and humorous
recitations, suitable for every occasion. Contains many old
favorites, such as "The Face on the Bar-Room Floor”, “Casey
at the Bat", etc.
92 page*, wrappers ........................................................ .§0.25
M ILLS’ UNIVERSAL LETTER W RITER.
An up-to-date treatise on letter writing. Contains choice
specimens of letters on all subjects, business or social: Appli­
cations for Employment, Recommendations, Introductions,
Invitations, Letters of Love, Congratulation, Condolence, and
the art of Secret Writing (Cipher).
lie pages, pictorial cover ................................................§0.35
•o
COMPLETE PALMISTRY.
By Ina Oxenford,. Honorary Secretary of the London
Cheriological Society, and A. Alpheus, Secretary of the
Astrological Society of England. Here we have the simplest
presentation of the Science of Palmistry. All of the dis­
coveries, investigations and researches of centuries are
summed up in this practical treatment on Palmistry. There
is no trait, no characteristic, no inherited tendency that is
not marked on the palm of the hand Character can be traced
with unerring accuracy by following the principles and in­
structions laid down in this book.
215 pages, fully Illustrated, paper covers....................... §0.35 ,
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 47 ---
\
ELKS
A N A U T H E N T IC H IS T O R Y O F T H E B E N E V O L E N T A N D
P R O T E C T IV E O R D E R O F ELKS.
By Chas. Edw ard Ellis
Royal 8vo., decorated cloth, gilt top, 473 pages, colored
frontispiece, numerous portraits.
Originally published at
$5.00.
$3.00
f <
KU KLUX KLAN
secrets exposed
The publication of the hour!
Complete story of the Masked Riders of the Night.
Their
oath of blood and death.
Bound in pictorial wrapper.
Prepaid 25c.
ROBERTS’ RULES OF ORDER
Revised for Deliberative Assemblies.
Part 1 Rules of Order; Part 2 Organization and Conduct
of Business—How business is conducted in deliberation
assemblies, lodges, clubs, etc. 323 pages.
Bound in cloth. Price, Postpaid, $1.50
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago,

--- Sayfa 48 ---
KNIGHT TEMPLARISM ILLUSTRATED.
A full Illustrated ritual of the six degrees of the Council
and Commandery, comprising the degrees of Royal Mas­
ter, Select Master, Super-Excellent Master, Knight of the
Red Cross, Knight Templar and Knight of Malta. A book
of 341 pages.
Paper covers, $1.35; Cloth, $3.00
THE MYSTIC SHRINE ILLUSTRATED.
Revised and enlarged edition. A complete Illustrated Ritual
of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine. This Is a side Masonic
degree conferred only on Knights Templar and on Thirty-two
degree Masons.
Paper cover, 40 cents; Cloth, 75 cents;.Abridged Edition,
Paper cover, 25 cents
ADOPTTVE MASONRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete ritual of the five Eastern Star or
Ladies’ Degrees, by Thomas Lowe, comprising the degrees
of Jephtha’s Daughter, Ruth, Esther, Martha and Electa,
and known as the Daughter’s Degree, Widow’s Degree, Wife s
Degree, Sister’s Degree and the Benevolent Degree.
Paper cover, 60 cents; Cloth, 75 cents
MASONIC OATHS.
By Edmond Ronayne, Past Master of Keystone Lodge, No.
639, Chicago, 183 pages.
Paper cover, price 50 cents.
A masterly discussion of the Oaths of the Masonic Lodge,
illustrating every sign, grip and ceremony of the Masonic
oLodge. This work is highly commended by leading lec­
turers as furnishing the best arguments on the character of
Masonic obligations of any book in print.
FREE MASONRY AT A GLANCE.
By Edmond Ronayne, Past Master Keystone Lodge, No.
639, Chicago, 32 pages. Price, postpaid, 16 cents. It illus­
trates every sign, grip and ceremony of the first three degrees,
and gives a brief explanation of each.
FREEMASONRY EXPOSED.
By Captain William Morgan. The genuine old Morgan
book republished with engravings showing the Lodge-
room, dress of candidates, signs, due guards, grips, etc.
Also portrait of the author and engraving of the monu«
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 49 ---
\
ment erected to his memory at Batavia, N. Y„ in 1882, by
over two thousand contributors.
Paper oover, 35 cents; Cloth, 78 cents.
CONFESSION OF THE MURDER OF MORGAN.
In this Confession Henry L. Valance says that he was one
of the three chosen by lot to drown Capt. Wm. Morgan In
the Niagara River for exposing Free Masonry.
Paper cover, 88 cents each. ’
HISTORY OF THE ABDUCTION AND MURDER OF
“Capt. "Wm. Morgan.”
As prepared by seven committees
of citizens, appointed to ascertain the fate of Morgan. This
book contains Indisputable legal .evidence that Free Masons
abducted and murdered "Wm. Morgan, for no other offense
than the revelation of Masonry.
Price 30 easts
SYMBOLISM OR MYSTIC MASONRY,
and the Greater Mysteries of Antiquity.
By J. D Buck, M. D. (This Is the most popular work ever
written on the subject of Masonic Symbolism. Outlines the
Philosophy of Masonry and explains many of the Symbols.)
“Symbolism” throws a great light upon the hidden meaning
and teachings of Masonic emblems. No o.fflcer or student of
Masonry can afford to be without it. Every page full of
wonders to the Masons.
“Symbolism,” a large, handsomely bound book, deals with
many Masonic symbols and emblems, and more especially the
"Playthings” of Masonry. Profusely illustrated. Chicago,
1925.
Price, Post Paid, 34.00
THE COMPASS AND SQUARE W ITH SYMBOUSM.
A n interesting b o o k devoted to the lost m ean in gs o f the
traditional
sym bols
of
M ason ry.
D ed icated to w o m a n 's
attainm ent o f the M ystic and H ig h e r K n ow led ge.
112 pages, bound in paper with gold stamping, $1.00.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated/
'
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 50 ---
SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.
(TWO BOOKS IN ONE.)
This rare and wonderful book has been translated with
exact copies of over One 'Hundred and Twenty-five Seals,
signs,
Emblems,
etc.,
used by Moses,
Aaron,
Israelites.
Egyptians, etc., in their astounding magical and other arts,
including the period o f time covered by the Old and New
Testaments.
This book will prove a treasure-house of knowledge for
those who desire to delve into antiquity.
128 pages, IBS illustrations, wrappers .................................$0.50
EGYPTIAN SECRETS.
By Albertus Magnus
White and Black Art for Man and
Beast, the book
of Nature and the Hidden Secrets and
Mysteries of L ife Unveiled, being the Forbidden Knowledge
of Ancient Philosophers, Translated from the Original German
and now published in one volume
160 pages, illustrated, paper covers .......................................$0.50
ALI BABA’S FORTUNE TELLER.
A fortune teller with the science of Moses and questions
and answers.
The Mystic Circle alone In this book is worth
the price asked for it.
The contents are so precise and clear
that a child could understand the interpretations of the ques­
tions and answers.
Fortune telling by moles on any part of
the human frame; by the hour of the day, week or month,
dice, dominoes, cards, tea and coffee grounds, the features,
the hair; what your future husband or w ife will have, ,to see
your future husband, dumb cake; fortelling future events,
« lucky articles and animals, and all other well-known tests
used by the best professionals.
85 pages, pictorial cover .............................................................$0.25
ALI BABA’S DREAM BOOK.
Contains an alphabetical list of dreams on every subject,
including the lucky numbers.
A thorough- and complete explanation of dreams and what
they mean, with Policy Player’s Numbers appended to each
definition.
85 pages, pictorial cover.............................................................$0.25
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 51 ---
\
THE FORESTERS ILLUSTRATED.
The Complete Illustrated Ritual -with Installation Cere­
monies.
I
Paper cover, 35 cants
TEM PLE OF HONOR ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete Illustrated ritual of "The Templars
of Honor and Temperance,” commonly called the Temple
of Honor. An historical sketch of the order and an analysis
of its character. A complete exposition of the subordinate
Temple, and the degrees of Love, Purity and Fidelity, by a
Templar of Fidelity and Past Worthy Chief Templar.
Paper covers, price 35 cents
GOOD TEMPLAR1SM ILLUSTRATED.
A full and accurate exposition of the degrees of the Lodge,
Temple and Council, with engravings showing the signs,
grips, etc.
Paper covers, 35 oents.
R ITUAL KNIGHTS OF LABOR ILLUSTRATED.
The complete illustrated Ritual of the Order, including the
“Unwritten Work,” and a brief history of the order; also an
article on Anarchism by John Y. Farwell, etc.
Paper oovers, 35 oents/
UNITED SONS OF INDUSTRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of the secret pass-
words, etc.
Paper oovers, price 35 cents.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION— B O W TO ORDER.
Always remit the full amount for your order by Bank Draft
on Chicago or New York Post-office or Express Money Order;
or enclose currency or stamps in a Registered Letter (do not
send Coin if you can avoid it). Please do not send personal
checks; if sent, add 10 cents for exchange.
Small orders will be sent by Registered Mult or Insured
Paroel Post if 10 cents extra is remitted with order, and
delivery of books, in good order, is then Guaranteed.
State Binding and Price of Bach book ordered.
Terms: Cash With Order.
Write your name and post-office address Plainly and In
Pull, giving street address.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 52 ---
Other Secret Society
Rituals
REVISED KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS ILLUSTRATED.
By a Fast Chancellor. A full illustrated exposition of
the three .ranks of the order, with the addition of the
‘‘Amended, Perfected and Amplified Third Rank.” An
exact copy of the Official Ritual “adopted by the Supreme
Lodge, August 29, 1802, P. P. XXIX.” With the secret
work added. The lodge-room, signs, counter-signs, grips,
etc., are shown by engravings.
Cloth, $1.00; Paper, SO cent*
REVISED RITUAL UNIFORM RANK, K. OF P.
Exact Copy of the Official Ritual Uniform Rank, Knights
of Pythias, authorized by Supreme Lodge Knights of Pythias
of the Wlorld; with Secret Work added. Fully illustrated.
Paper cover, 3S cents.
KNIGHTS OF THE ORIENT ILLUSTRATED.
The full Illustrated Ritual of Ancient Order of the Orient,
or the Oriental degree. This is a side degree, conferred mostly
in Knights of Pythias Lodges.
Paper oover, price 96 cents
SECRET SOCIETIES ILLUSTRATED.
Containing the signs, grips, pass-words, emblems, etc., of
Free Masonry (Blue Lodge to the Fourteenth degree of the
York Rite), Adoptive Masonry, Revised Odd-Fellowship, Good
Templarism, the Temple of Honor, the United Sons of In­
dustry, Knights of Pythias and the Grange, with affidavits,
etc. Over 250 cuts, 99 pages.
Paper covers, 36 cents each.
MODERN WOODMEN OF AMERICA ILLUSTRATED.
Complete Revised Official Ritual of the Beneficiary and Fra­
ternal Degrees, with Unwritten or Secret Work, installa­
tion, Funeral Ceremonies, Odes and Hymns.
Paper covers, price 45 cents.
RED MEN ILLUSTRATED.
The complete Illustrated Ritual of the Improved Order of
Red Men, comprising the Adoption Degree, Hunter’s Degree,
Warrior’s Degree, and Chief’s Degree, with the Odes, etc.
Cloth, 75 cents; Paper cover, 45 cents.
KNIGHTS OF THE MACCABEES ILLUSTRATED.
Complete Illustrated, Ritual of Order, with Unwritten,
Work.
Paper covers, price 45 cents.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 53 ---
\
ELKS
AN AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF THE BENEVOLENT AND
PROTECTIVE ORDER OF ELKS.
By Chas. Edward Ellis
Royal 8vo., decorated cloth, gilt top, 473 pages, colored
frontispiece, numerous portraits.
Originally published at
$5.00.
$3.00
KU KLUX KLAN
secrets exposed
The publication’ of the hour!
Complete story of the Masked Riders of the Night.
Their
oath of blood and death.
Bound in pictorial wrapper.
Prepaid 28c.
THE COMPASS AND SQUARE WITH
SYMBOLISM
A n interesting book devoted to the lost meanings of the
traditional symbols of Masonry.
Dedicated to wom an's
attainment of the Mystic and H igher Knowledge.
112 pages, hound in paper with gold stamping, $1.00.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago