--- Sayfa 1 ---
Draft chapter from An introduction to game theory by Martin J. Osborne. Version: 2002/7/23.
Martin.Osborne@utoronto.ca
http://www.economics.utoronto.ca/osborne
Copyright © 1995–2002 by Martin J. Osborne. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be re-
produced by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from Oxford University Press, except that one
copy of up to six chapters may be made by any individual for private study.
2
Nash Equilibrium: Theory
2.1
Strategic games
11
2.2
Example: the Prisoner’s Dilemma
12
2.3
Example: Bach or Stravinsky?
16
2.4
Example: Matching Pennies
17
2.5
Example: the Stag Hunt
18
2.6
Nash equilibrium
19
2.7
Examples of Nash equilibrium
24
2.8
Best response functions
33
2.9
Dominated actions
43
2.10
Equilibrium in a single population: symmetric games and
symmetric equilibria
49
Prerequisite: Chapter 1.
2.1
Strategic games
A
STRATEGIC GAME is a model of interacting decision-makers. In recognition
of the interaction, we refer to the decision-makers as players. Each player
has a set of possible actions. The model captures interaction between the players
by allowing each player to be affected by the actions of all players, not only her
own action. Speciﬁcally, each player has preferences about the action proﬁle—the
list of all the players’ actions. (See Section 17.4, in the mathematical appendix, for
a discussion of proﬁles.)
More precisely, a strategic game is deﬁned as follows. (The qualiﬁcation “with
ordinal preferences” distinguishes this notion of a strategic game from a more
general notion studied in Chapter 4.)
▶DEFINITION 11.1 (Strategic game with ordinal preferences) A strategic game (with
ordinal preferences) consists of
• a set of players
• for each player, a set of actions
• for each player, preferences over the set of action proﬁles.
11

--- Sayfa 2 ---
12
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
A very wide range of situations may be modeled as strategic games. For exam-
ple, the players may be ﬁrms, the actions prices, and the preferences a reﬂection of
the ﬁrms’ proﬁts. Or the players may be candidates for political ofﬁce, the actions
campaign expenditures, and the preferences a reﬂection of the candidates’ proba-
bilities of winning. Or the players may be animals ﬁghting over some prey, the ac-
tions concession times, and the preferences a reﬂection of whether an animal wins
or loses. In this chapter I describe some simple games designed to capture funda-
mental conﬂicts present in a variety of situations. The next chapter is devoted to
more detailed applications to speciﬁc phenomena.
As in the model of rational choice by a single decision-maker (Section 1.2), it is
frequently convenient to specify the players’ preferences by giving payoff functions
that represent them. Bear in mind that these payoffs have only ordinal signiﬁcance.
If a player’s payoffs to the action proﬁles a, b, and c are 1, 2, and 10, for example,
the only conclusion we can draw is that the player prefers c to b and b to a; the
numbers do not imply that the player’s preference between c and b is stronger
than her preference between a and b.
Time is absent from the model. The idea is that each player chooses her ac-
tion once and for all, and the players choose their actions “simultaneously” in the
sense that no player is informed, when she chooses her action, of the action chosen
by any other player. (For this reason, a strategic game is sometimes referred to
as a “simultaneous move game”.) Nevertheless, an action may involve activities
that extend over time, and may take into account an unlimited number of contin-
gencies. An action might specify, for example, “if company X’s stock falls below
$10, buy 100 shares; otherwise, do not buy any shares”. (For this reason, an action
is sometimes called a “strategy”.) However, the fact that time is absent from the
model means that when analyzing a situation as a strategic game, we abstract from
the complications that may arise if a player is allowed to change her plan as events
unfold: we assume that actions are chosen once and for all.
2.2
Example: the Prisoner’s Dilemma
One of the most well-known strategic games is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. Its name
comes from a story involving suspects in a crime; its importance comes from the
huge variety of situations in which the participants face incentives similar to those
faced by the suspects in the story.
EXAMPLE 12.1 (Prisoner’s Dilemma) Two suspects in a major crime are held in sep-
arate cells. There is enough evidence to convict each of them of a minor offense,
but not enough evidence to convict either of them of the major crime unless one of
them acts as an informer against the other (ﬁnks). If they both stay quiet, each will
be convicted of the minor offense and spend one year in prison. If one and only
one of them ﬁnks, she will be freed and used as a witness against the other, who
will spend four years in prison. If they both ﬁnk, each will spend three years in
prison.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
2.2 Example: the Prisoner’s Dilemma
13
This situation may be modeled as a strategic game:
Players The two suspects.
Actions Each player’s set of actions is {Quiet, Fink}.
Preferences Suspect 1’s ordering of the action proﬁles, from best to worst, is
(Fink, Quiet) (she ﬁnks and suspect 2 remains quiet, so she is freed), (Quiet,
Quiet) (she gets one year in prison), (Fink, Fink) (she gets three years in prison),
(Quiet, Fink) (she gets four years in prison). Suspect 2’s ordering is (Quiet, Fink),
(Quiet, Quiet), (Fink, Fink), (Fink, Quiet).
We can represent the game compactly in a table. First choose payoff functions
that represent the suspects’ preference orderings. For suspect 1 we need a function
u1 for which
u1(Fink, Quiet) > u1(Quiet, Quiet) > u1(Fink, Fink) > u1(Quiet, Fink).
A simple speciﬁcation is u1(Fink, Quiet) = 3, u1(Quiet, Quiet) = 2, u1(Fink, Fink) =
1, and u1(Quiet, Fink) = 0. For suspect 2 we can similarly choose the function
u2 for which u2(Quiet, Fink) = 3, u2(Quiet, Quiet) = 2, u2(Fink, Fink) = 1, and
u2(Fink, Quiet) = 0. Using these representations, the game is illustrated in Fig-
ure 13.1. In this ﬁgure the two rows correspond to the two possible actions of
player 1, the two columns correspond to the two possible actions of player 2, and
the numbers in each box are the players’ payoffs to the action proﬁle to which the
box corresponds, with player 1’s payoff listed ﬁrst.
Suspect 1
Suspect 2
Quiet
Fink
Quiet
2, 2
0, 3
Fink
3, 0
1, 1
Figure 13.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma (Example 12.1).
The Prisoner’s Dilemma models a situation in which there are gains from coop-
eration (each player prefers that both players choose Quiet than they both choose
Fink) but each player has an incentive to “free ride” (choose Fink) whatever the
other player does. The game is important not because we are interested in under-
standing the incentives for prisoners to confess, but because many other situations
have similar structures. Whenever each of two players has two actions, say C
(corresponding to Quiet) and D (corresponding to Fink), player 1 prefers (D, C) to
(C, C) to (D, D) to (C, D), and player 2 prefers (C, D) to (C, C) to (D, D) to (D, C),
the Prisoner’s Dilemma models the situation that the players face. Some examples
follow.
2.2.1
Working on a joint project
You are working with a friend on a joint project. Each of you can either work hard
or goof off. If your friend works hard then you prefer to goof off (the outcome of

--- Sayfa 4 ---
14
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
the project would be better if you worked hard too, but the increment in its value
to you is not worth the extra effort). You prefer the outcome of your both working
hard to the outcome of your both gooﬁng off (in which case nothing gets accom-
plished), and the worst outcome for you is that you work hard and your friend
goofs off (you hate to be “exploited”). If your friend has the same preferences then
the game that models the situation you face is given in Figure 14.1, which, as you
can see, differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma only in the names of the actions.
Work hard
Goof off
Work hard
2, 2
0, 3
Goof off
3, 0
1, 1
Figure 14.1 Working on a joint project.
I am not claiming that a situation in which two people pursue a joint project
necessarily has the structure of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, only that the players’ pref-
erences in such a situation may be the same as in the Prisoner’s Dilemma! If, for
example, each person prefers to work hard than to goof off when the other person
works hard, then the Prisoner’s Dilemma does not model the situation: the players’
preferences are different from those given in Figure 14.1.
? EXERCISE 14.1 (Working on a joint project) Formulate a strategic game that models
a situation in which two people work on a joint project in the case that their pref-
erences are the same as those in the game in Figure 14.1 except that each person
prefers to work hard than to goof off when the other person works hard. Present
your game in a table like the one in Figure 14.1.
2.2.2
Duopoly
In a simple model of a duopoly, two ﬁrms produce the same good, for which each
ﬁrm charges either a low price or a high price. Each ﬁrm wants to achieve the
highest possible proﬁt. If both ﬁrms choose High then each earns a proﬁt of $1000.
If one ﬁrm chooses High and the other chooses Low then the ﬁrm choosing High
obtains no customers and makes a loss of $200, whereas the ﬁrm choosing Low
earns a proﬁt of $1200 (its unit proﬁt is low, but its volume is high). If both ﬁrms
choose Low then each earns a proﬁt of $600. Each ﬁrm cares only about its proﬁt,
so we can represent its preferences by the proﬁt it obtains, yielding the game in
Figure 14.2.
High
Low
High
1000, 1000
−200, 1200
Low
1200, −200
600, 600
Figure 14.2 A simple model of a price-setting duopoly.
Bearing in mind that what matters are the players’ preferences, not the partic-

--- Sayfa 5 ---
2.2 Example: the Prisoner’s Dilemma
15
ular payoff functions that we use to represent them, we see that this game, like the
previous one, differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma only in the names of the actions.
The action High plays the role of Quiet, and the action Low plays the role of Fink;
ﬁrm 1 prefers (Low, High) to (High, High) to (Low, Low) to (High, Low), and ﬁrm 2
prefers (High, Low) to (High, High) to (Low, Low) to (Low, High).
As in the previous example, I do not claim that the incentives in a duopoly are
necessarily those in the Prisoner’s Dilemma; different assumptions about the relative
sizes of the proﬁts in the four cases generate a different game. Further, in this case
one of the abstractions incorporated into the model—that each ﬁrm has only two
prices to choose between—may not be harmless; if the ﬁrms may choose among
many prices then the structure of the interaction may change. (A richer model is
studied in Section 3.2.)
2.2.3
The arms race
Under some assumptions about the countries’ preferences, an arms race can be
modeled as the Prisoner’s Dilemma. (The Prisoner’s Dilemma was ﬁrst studied in
the early 1950s, when the USA and USSR were involved in a nuclear arms race, so
you might suspect that US nuclear strategy was inﬂuenced by game theory; the
evidence suggests that it was not.) Assume that each country can build an arsenal
of nuclear bombs, or can refrain from doing so. Assume also that each country’s
favorite outcome is that it has bombs and the other country does not; the next best
outcome is that neither country has any bombs; the next best outcome is that both
countries have bombs (what matters is relative strength, and bombs are costly to
build); and the worst outcome is that only the other country has bombs. In this
case the situation is modeled by the Prisoner’s Dilemma, in which the action Don’t
build bombs corresponds to Quiet in Figure 13.1 and the action Build bombs corre-
sponds to Fink. However, once again the assumptions about preferences necessary
for the Prisoner’s Dilemma to model the situation may not be satisﬁed: a country
may prefer not to build bombs if the other country does not, for example (bomb-
building may be very costly), in which case the situation is modeled by a different
game.
2.2.4
Common property
Two farmers are deciding how much to allow their sheep to graze on the village
common. Each farmer prefers that her sheep graze a lot than a little, regardless of
the other farmer’s action, but prefers that both farmers’ sheep graze a little than
both farmers’ sheep graze a lot (in which case the common is ruined for future
use). Under these assumptions the game is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. (A richer model
is studied in Section 3.1.5.)

--- Sayfa 6 ---
16
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
2.2.5
Other situations modeled as the Prisoner’s Dilemma
A huge number of other situations have been modeled as the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
from mating hermaphroditic ﬁsh to tariff wars between countries.
? EXERCISE 16.1 (Hermaphroditic ﬁsh) Members of some species of hermaphroditic
ﬁsh choose, in each mating encounter, whether to play the role of a male or a
female. Each ﬁsh has a preferred role, which uses up fewer resources and hence
allows more future mating. A ﬁsh obtains a payoff of H if it mates in its preferred
role and L if it mates in the other role, where H > L. (Payoffs are measured in
terms of number of offspring, which ﬁsh are evolved to maximize.) Consider an
encounter between two ﬁsh whose preferred roles are the same. Each ﬁsh has two
possible actions: mate in either role, and insist on its preferred role. If both ﬁsh
offer to mate in either role, the roles are assigned randomly, and each ﬁsh’s payoff
is 1
2(H + L) (the average of H and L). If each ﬁsh insists on its preferred role, the
ﬁsh do not mate; each goes off in search of another partner, and obtains the payoff
S. The higher the chance of meeting another partner, the larger is S. Formulate this
situation as a strategic game and determine the range of values of S, for any given
values of H and L, for which the game differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma only in
the names of the actions.
2.3
Example: Bach or Stravinsky?
In the Prisoner’s Dilemma the main issue is whether or not the players will cooperate
(choose Quiet). In the following game the players agree that it is better to cooperate
than not to cooperate, but disagree about the best outcome.
EXAMPLE 16.2 (Bach or Stravinsky?) Two people wish to go out together. Two con-
certs are available: one of music by Bach, and one of music by Stravinsky. One per-
son prefers Bach and the other prefers Stravinsky. If they go to different concerts,
each of them is equally unhappy listening to the music of either composer.
We may model this situation as the two-player strategic game in Figure 16.1,
in which the person who prefers Bach chooses a row and the person who prefers
Stravinsky chooses a column.
Bach
Stravinsky
Bach
2, 1
0, 0
Stravinsky
0, 0
1, 2
Figure 16.1 Bach or Stravinsky? (BoS) (Example 16.2).
This game is also referred to as the “Battle of the Sexes” (though the conﬂict
it models surely occurs no more frequently between people of the opposite sex
than it does between people of the same sex). I call the game BoS, an acronym
that ﬁts both names. (I assume that each player is indifferent between listening
to Bach and listening to Stravinsky when she is alone only for consistency with

--- Sayfa 7 ---
2.4 Example: Matching Pennies
17
the standard speciﬁcation of the game. As we shall see, the analysis of the game
remains the same in the absence of this indifference.)
Like the Prisoner’s Dilemma, BoS models a wide variety of situations. Consider,
for example, two ofﬁcials of a political party deciding the stand to take on an issue.
Suppose that they disagree about the best stand, but are both better off if they take
the same stand than if they take different stands; both cases in which they take
different stands, in which case voters do not know what to think, are equally bad.
Then BoS captures the situation they face. Or consider two merging ﬁrms that
currently use different computer technologies. As two divisions of a single ﬁrm
they will both be better off if they both use the same technology; each ﬁrm prefers
that the common technology be the one it used in the past. BoS models the choices
the ﬁrms face.
2.4
Example: Matching Pennies
Aspects of both conﬂict and cooperation are present in both the Prisoner’s Dilemma
and BoS. The next game is purely conﬂictual.
EXAMPLE 17.1 (Matching Pennies) Two people choose, simultaneously, whether to
show the Head or the Tail of a coin. If they show the same side, person 2 pays
person 1 a dollar; if they show different sides, person 1 pays person 2 a dollar. Each
person cares only about the amount of money she receives, and (naturally!) prefers
to receive more than less. A strategic game that models this situation is shown
in Figure 17.1. (In this representation of the players’ preferences, the payoffs are
equal to the amounts of money involved. We could equally well work with another
representation—for example, 2 could replace each 1, and 1 could replace each −1.)
Head
Tail
Head
1, −1
−1,
1
Tail
−1,
1
1, −1
Figure 17.1 Matching Pennies (Example 17.1).
In this game the players’ interests are diametrically opposed (such a game is
called “strictly competitive”): player 1 wants to take the same action as the other
player, whereas player 2 wants to take the opposite action.
This game may, for example, model the choices of appearances for new prod-
ucts by an established producer and a new ﬁrm in a market of ﬁxed size. Suppose
that each ﬁrm can choose one of two different appearances for the product. The
established producer prefers the newcomer’s product to look different from its
own (so that its customers will not be tempted to buy the newcomer’s product),
whereas the newcomer prefers that the products look alike. Or the game could

--- Sayfa 8 ---
18
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
model a relationship between two people in which one person wants to be like the
other, whereas the other wants to be different.
? EXERCISE 18.1 (Games without conﬂict) Give some examples of two-player strate-
gic games in which each player has two actions and the players have the same pref-
erences, so that there is no conﬂict between their interests. (Present your games as
tables like the one in Figure 17.1.)
2.5
Example: the Stag Hunt
A sentence in Discourse on the origin and foundations of inequality among men (1755)
by the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau discusses a group of hunters who wish
to catch a stag. They will succeed if they all remain sufﬁciently attentive, but each
is tempted to desert her post and catch a hare. One interpretation of the sentence is
that the interaction between the hunters may be modeled as the following strategic
game.
EXAMPLE 18.2 (Stag Hunt) Each of a group of hunters has two options: she may
remain attentive to the pursuit of a stag, or catch a hare. If all hunters pursue the
stag, they catch it and share it equally; if any hunter devotes her energy to catching
a hare, the stag escapes, and the hare belongs to the defecting hunter alone. Each
hunter prefers a share of the stag to a hare.
The strategic game that corresponds to this speciﬁcation is:
Players The hunters.
Actions Each player’s set of actions is {Stag, Hare}.
Preferences For each player, the action proﬁle in which all players choose Stag
(resulting in her obtaining a share of the stag) is ranked highest, followed
by any proﬁle in which she chooses Hare (resulting in her obtaining a hare),
followed by any proﬁle in which she chooses Stag and one or more of the
other players chooses Hare (resulting in her leaving empty-handed).
Like other games with many players, this game cannot easily be presented in a
table like that in Figure 17.1. For the case in which there are two hunters, the game
is shown in Figure 18.1.
Stag
Hare
Stag
2, 2
0, 1
Hare
1, 0
1, 1
Figure 18.1 The Stag Hunt (Example 18.2) for the case of two hunters.
The variant of the two-player Stag Hunt shown in Figure 19.1 has been sug-
gested as an alternative to the Prisoner’s Dilemma as a model of an arms race, or,
more generally, of the “security dilemma” faced by a pair of countries. The game
differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma in that a country prefers the outcome in which

--- Sayfa 9 ---
2.6 Nash equilibrium
19
both countries refrain from arming themselves to the one in which it alone arms
itself: the cost of arming outweighs the beneﬁt if the other country does not arm
itself.
Refrain
Arm
Refrain
3, 3
0, 2
Arm
2, 0
1, 1
Figure 19.1 A variant of the two-player Stag Hunt that models the “security dilemma”.
2.6
Nash equilibrium
What actions will be chosen by the players in a strategic game? We wish to assume,
as in the theory of a rational decision-maker (Section 1.2), that each player chooses
the best available action. In a game, the best action for any given player depends,
in general, on the other players’ actions. So when choosing an action a player must
have in mind the actions the other players will choose. That is, she must form a
belief about the other players’ actions.
On what basis can such a belief be formed? The assumption underlying the
analysis in this chapter and the next two chapters is that each player’s belief is
derived from her past experience playing the game, and that this experience is suf-
ﬁciently extensive that she knows how her opponents will behave. No one tells her
the actions her opponents will choose, but her previous involvement in the game
leads her to be sure of these actions. (The question of how a player’s experience can
lead her to the correct beliefs about the other players’ actions is addressed brieﬂy
in Section 4.9.)
Although we assume that each player has experience playing the game, we
assume that she views each play of the game in isolation. She does not become
familiar with the behavior of speciﬁc opponents and consequently does not condi-
tion her action on the opponent she faces; nor does she expect her current action to
affect the other players’ future behavior.
It is helpful to think of the following idealized circumstances. For each player in
the game there is a population of many decision-makers who may, on any occasion,
take that player’s role. In each play of the game, players are selected randomly, one
from each population. Thus each player engages in the game repeatedly, against
ever-varying opponents. Her experience leads her to beliefs about the actions of
“typical” opponents, not any speciﬁc set of opponents.
As an example, think of the interaction between buyers and sellers. Buyers and
sellers repeatedly interact, but to a ﬁrst approximation many of the pairings may
be modeled as random. In many cases a buyer transacts only once with any given
seller, or interacts repeatedly but anonymously (when the seller is a large store, for
example).
In summary, the solution theory we study has two components. First, each

--- Sayfa 10 ---
20
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
player chooses her action according to the model of rational choice, given her be-
lief about the other players’ actions. Second, every player’s belief about the other
players’ actions is correct. These two components are embodied in the following
deﬁnition.
A Nash equilibrium is an action proﬁle a∗with the property that no
player i can do better by choosing an action different from a∗
i , given
that every other player j adheres to a∗
j .
In the idealized setting in which the players in any given play of the game are
drawn randomly from a collection of populations, a Nash equilibrium corresponds
to a steady state. If, whenever the game is played, the action proﬁle is the same Nash
equilibrium a∗, then no player has a reason to choose any action different from her
component of a∗; there is no pressure on the action proﬁle to change. Expressed
differently, a Nash equilibrium embodies a stable “social norm”: if everyone else
adheres to it, no individual wishes to deviate from it.
The second component of the theory of Nash equilibrium—that the players’ be-
liefs about each other’s actions are correct—implies, in particular, that two players’
beliefs about a third player’s action are the same. For this reason, the condition is
sometimes said to be that the players’ “expectations are coordinated”.
The situations to which we wish to apply the theory of Nash equilibrium do
not in general correspond exactly to the idealized setting described above. For
example, in some cases the players do not have much experience with the game;
in others they do not view each play of the game in isolation. Whether or not
the notion of Nash equilibrium is appropriate in any given situation is a matter of
judgment. In some cases, a poor ﬁt with the idealized setting may be mitigated
by other considerations. For example, inexperienced players may be able to draw
conclusions about their opponents’ likely actions from their experience in other
situations, or from other sources. (One aspect of such reasoning is discussed in the
box on page 30). Ultimately, the test of the appropriateness of the notion of Nash
equilibrium is whether it gives us insights into the problem at hand.
With the aid of an additional piece of notation, we can state the deﬁnition of
a Nash equilibrium precisely. Let a be an action proﬁle, in which the action of
each player i is ai. Let a′
i be any action of player i (either equal to ai, or different
from it). Then (a′
i, a−i) denotes the action proﬁle in which every player j except
i chooses her action aj as speciﬁed by a, whereas player i chooses a′
i. (The −i
subscript on a stands for “except i”.) That is, (a′
i, a−i) is the action proﬁle in which
all the players other than i adhere to a while i “deviates” to a′
i. (If a′
i = ai then
of course (a′
i, a−i) = (ai, a−i) = a.) If there are three players, for example, then
(a′
2, a−2) is the action proﬁle in which players 1 and 3 adhere to a (player 1 chooses
a1, player 3 chooses a3) and player 2 deviates to a′
2.
Using this notation, we can restate the condition for an action proﬁle a∗to be a
Nash equilibrium: no player i has any action ai for which she prefers (ai, a∗
−i) to a∗.
Equivalently, for every player i and every action ai of player i, the action proﬁle a∗
is at least as good for player i as the action proﬁle (ai, a∗
−i).

--- Sayfa 11 ---
2.6 Nash equilibrium
21
JOHN F. NASH, JR.
A few of the ideas of John F. Nash Jr., developed while
he was a graduate student at Princeton from 1948 to
1950, transformed game theory. Nash was born in 1928
in Blueﬁeld, West Virginia, USA, where he grew up. He
was an undergraduate mathematics major at Carnegie
Institute of Technology from 1945 to 1948. In 1948 he ob-
tained both a B.S. and an M.S., and began graduate work
in the Department of Mathematics at Princeton Univer-
sity. (One of his letters of recommendation, from a pro-
fessor at Carnegie Institute of Technology, was a single
sentence: “This man is a genius” (Kuhn et al. 1995, 282).)
A paper containing the main result of his thesis was sub-
mitted to the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in November 1949, four-
teen months after he started his graduate work. (“A ﬁne goal to set ... graduate
students”, to quote Harold Kuhn! (See Kuhn et al. 1995, 282.)) He completed his
PhD the following year, graduating on his 22nd birthday. His thesis, 28 pages in
length, introduces the equilibrium notion now known as “Nash equilibrium” and
delineates a class of strategic games that have Nash equilibria (Proposition 117.1
in this book). The notion of Nash equilibrium vastly expanded the scope of game
theory, which had previously focussed on two-player “strictly competitive” games
(in which the players’ interests are directly opposed). While a graduate student at
Princeton, Nash also wrote the seminal paper in bargaining theory, Nash (1950b)
(the ideas of which originated in an elective class in international economics he
took as an undergraduate). He went on to take an academic position in the Depart-
ment of Mathematics at MIT, where he produced “a remarkable series of papers”
(Milnor 1995, 15); he has been described as “one of the most original mathematical
minds of [the twentieth] century” (Kuhn 1996). He shared the 1994 Nobel prize in
economics with the game theorists John C. Harsanyi and Reinhard Selten.
▶DEFINITION 21.1 (Nash equilibrium of strategic game with ordinal preferences)
The
action proﬁle a∗in a strategic game with ordinal preferences is a Nash equilibrium
if, for every player i and every action ai of player i, a∗is at least as good according
to player i’s preferences as the action proﬁle (ai, a∗
−i) in which player i chooses ai
while every other player j chooses a∗
j . Equivalently, for every player i,
ui(a∗) ≥ui(ai, a∗
−i) for every action ai of player i,
(21.2)
where ui is a payoff function that represents player i’s preferences.
This deﬁnition implies neither that a strategic game necessarily has a Nash
equilibrium, nor that it has at most one. Examples in the next section show that

--- Sayfa 12 ---
22
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
some games have a single Nash equilibrium, some possess no Nash equilibrium,
and others have many Nash equilibria.
The deﬁnition of a Nash equilibrium is designed to model a steady state among
experienced players. An alternative approach to understanding players’ actions in
strategic games assumes that the players know each others’ preferences, and con-
siders what each player can deduce about the other players’ actions from their
rationality and their knowledge of each other’s rationality. This approach is stud-
ied in Chapter 12. For many games, it leads to a conclusion different from that of
Nash equilibrium. For games in which the conclusion is the same the approach
offers us an alternative interpretation of a Nash equilibrium, as the outcome of ra-
tional calculations by players who do not necessarily have any experience playing
the game.
STUDYING NASH EQUILIBRIUM EXPERIMENTALLY
The theory of strategic games lends itself to experimental study: arranging for sub-
jects to play games and observing their choices is relatively straightforward. A few
years after game theory was launched by von Neumann and Morgenstern’s (1944)
book, reports of laboratory experiments began to appear. Subsequently a huge
number of experiments have been conducted, illuminating many issues relevant
to the theory. I discuss selected experimental evidence throughout the book.
The theory of Nash equilibrium, as we have seen, has two components: the
players act in accordance with the theory of rational choice, given their beliefs
about the other players’ actions, and these beliefs are correct. If every subject
understands the game she is playing and faces incentives that correspond to the
preferences of the player whose role she is taking, then a divergence between the
observed outcome and a Nash equilibrium can be blamed on a failure of one or
both of these two components. Experimental evidence has the potential of indi-
cating the types of games for which the theory works well and, for those in which
the theory does not work well, of pointing to the faulty component and giving us
hints about the characteristics of a better theory. In designing an experiment that
cleanly tests the theory, however, we need to confront several issues.
The model of rational choice takes preferences as given. Thus to test the theory
of Nash equilibrium experimentally, we need to ensure that each subject’s prefer-
ences are those of the player whose role she is taking in the game we are exam-
ining. The standard way of inducing the appropriate preferences is to pay each
subject an amount of money directly related to the payoff given by a payoff func-
tion that represents the preferences of the player whose role the subject is taking.
Such remuneration works if each subject likes money and cares only about the
amount of money she receives, ignoring the amounts received by her opponents.
The assumption that people like receiving money is reasonable in many cultures,
but the assumption that people care only about their own monetary rewards—
are “selﬁsh”—may, in some contexts at least, not be reasonable. Unless we check

--- Sayfa 13 ---
2.6 Nash equilibrium
23
whether our subjects are selﬁsh in the context of our experiment, we will jointly test
two hypotheses: that humans are selﬁsh—a hypothesis not part of game theory—
and that the notion of Nash equilibrium models their behavior. In some cases we
may indeed wish to test these hypotheses jointly. But in order to test the theory of
Nash equilibrium alone we need to ensure that we induce the preferences we wish
to study.
Assuming that better decisions require more effort, we need also to ensure
that each subject ﬁnds it worthwhile to put in the extra effort required to obtain a
higher payoff. If we rely on monetary payments to provide incentives, the amount
of money a subject can obtain must be sufﬁciently sensitive to the quality of her
decisions to compensate her for the effort she expends (paying a ﬂat fee, for exam-
ple, is inappropriate). In some cases, monetary payments may not be necessary:
under some circumstances, subjects drawn from a highly competitive culture like
that of the USA may be sufﬁciently motivated by the possibility of obtaining a high
score, even if that score does not translate into a monetary payoff.
The notion of Nash equilibrium models action proﬁles compatible with steady
states. Thus to study the theory experimentally we need to collect observations of
subjects’ behavior when they have experience playing the game. But they should
not have obtained that experience while knowingly facing the same opponents
repeatedly, for the theory assumes that the players consider each play of the game
in isolation, not as part of an ongoing relationship. One option is to have each
subject play the game against many different opponents, gaining experience about
how the other subjects on average play the game, but not about the choices of any
other given player. Another option is to describe the game in terms that relate to
a situation in which the subjects already have experience. A difﬁculty with this
second approach is that the description we give may connote more than simply
the payoff numbers of our game. If we describe the Prisoner’s Dilemma in terms
of cooperation on a joint project, for example, a subject may be biased toward
choosing the action she has found appropriate when involved in joint projects,
even if the structures of those interactions were signiﬁcantly different from that of
the Prisoner’s Dilemma. As she plays the experimental game repeatedly she may
come to appreciate how it differs from the games in which she has been involved
previously, but her biases may disappear only slowly.
Whatever route we take to collect data on the choices of subjects experienced
in playing the game, we confront a difﬁcult issue: how do we know when the
outcome has converged? Nash’s theory concerns only equilibria; it has nothing to
say about the path players’ choices will take on the way to an equilibrium, and so
gives us no guide as to whether 10, 100, or 1,000 plays of the game are enough to
give a chance for the subjects’ expectations to become coordinated.
Finally, we can expect the theory of Nash equilibrium to correspond to reality
only approximately: like all useful theories, it deﬁnitely is not exactly correct. How
do we tell whether the data are close enough to the theory to support it? One pos-
sibility is to compare the theory of Nash equilibrium with some other theory. But
for many games there is no obvious alternative theory—and certainly not one with

--- Sayfa 14 ---
24
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
the generality of Nash equilibrium. Statistical tests can sometimes aid in deciding
whether the data is consistent with the theory, though ultimately we remain the
judge of whether or not our observations persuade us that the theory enhances
our understanding of human behavior in the game.
2.7
Examples of Nash equilibrium
2.7.1
Prisoner’s Dilemma
By examining the four possible pairs of actions in the Prisoner’s Dilemma (repro-
duced in Figure 24.1), we see that (Fink, Fink) is the unique Nash equilibrium.
Quiet
Fink
Quiet
2, 2
0, 3
Fink
3, 0
1, 1
Figure 24.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma.
The action pair (Fink, Fink) is a Nash equilibrium because (i) given that player 2
chooses Fink, player 1 is better off choosing Fink than Quiet (looking at the right
column of the table we see that Fink yields player 1 a payoff of 1 whereas Quiet
yields her a payoff of 0), and (ii) given that player 1 chooses Fink, player 2 is better
off choosing Fink than Quiet (looking at the bottom row of the table we see that
Fink yields player 2 a payoff of 1 whereas Quiet yields her a payoff of 0).
No other action proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium:
• (Quiet, Quiet) does not satisfy (21.2) because when player 2 chooses Quiet,
player 1’s payoff to Fink exceeds her payoff to Quiet (look at the ﬁrst compo-
nents of the entries in the left column of the table). (Further, when player 1
chooses Quiet, player 2’s payoff to Fink exceeds her payoff to Quiet: player 2,
as well as player 1, wants to deviate. To show that a pair of actions is not a
Nash equilibrium, however, it is not necessary to study player 2’s decision
once we have established that player 1 wants to deviate: it is enough to show
that one player wishes to deviate to show that a pair of actions is not a Nash
equilibrium.)
• (Fink, Quiet) does not satisfy (21.2) because when player 1 chooses Fink, player 2’s
payoff to Fink exceeds her payoff to Quiet (look at the second components of
the entries in the bottom row of the table).
• (Quiet, Fink) does not satisfy (21.2) because when player 2 chooses Fink, player 1’s
payoff to Fink exceeds her payoff to Quiet (look at the ﬁrst components of the
entries in the right column of the table).

--- Sayfa 15 ---
2.7 Examples of Nash equilibrium
25
In summary, in the only Nash equilibrium of the Prisoner’s Dilemma both play-
ers choose Fink. In particular, the incentive to free ride eliminates the possibility
that the mutually desirable outcome (Quiet, Quiet) occurs. In the other situations
discussed in Section 2.2 that may be modeled as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the out-
comes predicted by the notion of Nash equilibrium are thus as follows: both peo-
ple goof off when working on a joint project; both duopolists charge a low price;
both countries build bombs; both farmers graze their sheep a lot. (The overgrazing
of a common thus predicted is sometimes called the “tragedy of the commons”.
The intuition that some of these dismal outcomes may be avoided if the same pair
of people play the game repeatedly is explored in Chapter 14.)
In the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the Nash equilibrium action of each player (Fink) is
the best action for each player not only if the other player chooses her equilib-
rium action (Fink), but also if she chooses her other action (Quiet). The action pair
(Fink, Fink) is a Nash equilibrium because if a player believes that her opponent
will choose Fink then it is optimal for her to choose Fink. But in fact it is optimal for
a player to choose Fink regardless of the action she expects her opponent to choose.
In most of the games we study, a player’s Nash equilibrium action does not sat-
isfy this condition: the action is optimal if the other players choose their Nash
equilibrium actions, but some other action is optimal if the other players choose
non-equilibrium actions.
? EXERCISE 25.1 (Variant of Prisoner’s Dilemma with altruistic preferences) Each of
two players has two possible actions, Quiet and Fink; each action pair results in
the players’ receiving amounts of money equal to the numbers corresponding to
that action pair in Figure 24.1. (For example, if player 1 chooses Quiet and player 2
chooses Fink, then player 1 receives nothing, whereas player 2 receives $3.) The
players are not “selﬁsh”; rather, the preferences of each player i are represented by
the payoff function mi(a) + αmj(a), where mi(a) is the amount of money received
by player i when the action proﬁle is a, j is the other player, and α is a given non-
negative number. Player 1’s payoff to the action pair (Quiet, Quiet), for example, is
2 + 2α.
a. Formulate a strategic game that models this situation in the case α = 1. Is this
game the Prisoner’s Dilemma?
b.
Find the range of values of α for which the resulting game is the Prisoner’s
Dilemma. For values of α for which the game is not the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
ﬁnd its Nash equilibria.
? EXERCISE 25.2 (Selﬁsh and altruistic social behavior) Two people enter a bus. Two
adjacent cramped seats are free. Each person must decide whether to sit or stand.
Sitting alone is more comfortable than sitting next to the other person, which is
more comfortable than standing.
a. Suppose that each person cares only about her own comfort. Model the situ-
ation as a strategic game. Is this game the Prisoner’s Dilemma? Find its Nash
equilibrium (equilibria?).

--- Sayfa 16 ---
26
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
b.
Suppose that each person is altruistic, ranking the outcomes according to the
other person’s comfort, but, out of politeness, prefers to stand than to sit if the
other person stands. Model the situation as a strategic game. Is this game the
Prisoner’s Dilemma? Find its Nash equilibrium (equilibria?).
c. Compare the people’s comfort in the equilibria of the two games.
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE Prisoner’s Dilemma
The Prisoner’s Dilemma has attracted a great deal of attention by economists, psy-
chologists, sociologists, and biologists. A huge number of experiments have been
conducted with the aim of discovering how people behave when playing the game.
Almost all these experiments involve each subject’s playing the game repeatedly
against an unchanging opponent, a situation that calls for an analysis signiﬁcantly
different from the one in this chapter (see Chapter 14).
The evidence on the outcome of isolated plays of the game is inconclusive.
No experiment of which I am aware carefully induces the appropriate preferences
and is speciﬁcally designed to elicit a steady state action proﬁle (see the box on
page 22). Thus in each case the choice of Quiet by a player could indicate that
she is not “selﬁsh” or that she is not experienced in playing the game, rather than
providing evidence against the notion of Nash equilibrium.
In two experiments with very low payoffs, each subject played the game a
small number of times against different opponents; between 50% and 94% of sub-
jects chose Fink, depending on the relative sizes of the payoffs and some details of
the design (Rapoport, Guyer, and Gordon 1976, 135–137, 211–213, and 223-226). In
a more recent experiment, 78% of subjects chose Fink in the last 10 of 20 rounds
of play against different opponents (Cooper, DeJong, Forsythe, and Ross 1996). In
face-to-face games in which communication is allowed, the incidence of the choice
of Fink tends to be lower: from 29% to 70% depending on the nature of the com-
munication allowed (Deutsch 1958, and Frank, Gilovich, and Regan 1993, 163–167).
(In all these experiments, the subjects were college students in the USA or Canada.)
One source of the variation in the results seems to be that some designs in-
duce preferences that differ from those of the Prisoner’s Dilemma; no clear answer
emerges to the question of whether the notion of Nash equilibrium is relevant to
the Prisoner’s Dilemma. If, nevertheless, one interprets the evidence as showing that
some subjects in the Prisoner’s Dilemma systematically choose Quiet rather than
Fink, one must fault the rational choice component of Nash equilibrium, not the
coordinated expectations component. Why? Because, as noted in the text, Fink is
optimal no matter what a player thinks her opponent will choose, so that any model
in which the players act according to the model of rational choice, whether or not
their expectations are coordinated, predicts that each player chooses Fink.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
2.7 Examples of Nash equilibrium
27
2.7.2
BoS
To ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of BoS (Figure 16.1), we can examine each pair of actions
in turn:
• (Bach, Bach): If player 1 switches to Stravinsky then her payoff decreases from
2 to 0; if player 2 switches to Stravinsky then her payoff decreases from 1 to 0.
Thus a deviation by either player decreases her payoff. Thus (Bach, Bach) is
a Nash equilibrium.
• (Bach, Stravinsky): If player 1 switches to Stravinsky then her payoff increases
from 0 to 1. Thus (Bach, Stravinsky) is not a Nash equilibrium. (Player 2
can increase her payoff by deviating, too, but to show the pair is not a Nash
equilibrium it sufﬁces to show that one player can increase her payoff by
deviating.)
• (Stravinsky, Bach): If player 1 switches to Bach then her payoff increases from
0 to 2. Thus (Stravinsky, Bach) is not a Nash equilibrium.
• (Stravinsky, Stravinsky): If player 1 switches to Bach then her payoff decreases
from 1 to 0; if player 2 switches to Bach then her payoff decreases from 2 to 0.
Thus a deviation by either player decreases her payoff. Thus (Stravinsky, Stravinsky)
is a Nash equilibrium.
We conclude that the game has two Nash equilibria: (Bach, Bach) and (Stravinsky,
Stravinsky). That is, both of these outcomes are compatible with a steady state;
both outcomes are stable social norms. If, in every encounter, both players choose
Bach, then no player has an incentive to deviate; if, in every encounter, both play-
ers choose Stravinsky, then no player has an incentive to deviate. If we use the
game to model the choices of men when matched with women, for example, then
the notion of Nash equilibrium shows that two social norms are stable: both play-
ers choose the action associated with the outcome preferred by women, and both
players choose the action associated with the outcome preferred by men.
2.7.3
Matching Pennies
By checking each of the four pairs of actions in Matching Pennies (Figure 17.1) we
see that the game has no Nash equilibrium. For the pairs of actions (Head, Head)
and (Tail, Tail), player 2 is better off deviating; for the pairs of actions (Head, Tail)
and (Tail, Head), player 1 is better off deviating. Thus for this game the notion of
Nash equilibrium isolates no steady state. In Chapter 4 we return to this game;
an extension of the notion of a Nash equilibrium gives us an understanding of the
likely outcome.
2.7.4
The Stag Hunt
Inspection of Figure 18.1 shows that the two-player Stag Hunt has two Nash equi-
libria: (Stag, Stag) and (Hare, Hare). If one player remains attentive to the pursuit

--- Sayfa 18 ---
28
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
of the stag, then the other player prefers to remain attentive; if one player chases
a hare, the other one prefers to chase a hare (she cannot catch a stag alone). (The
equilibria of the variant of the game in Figure 19.1 are analogous: (Refrain, Refrain)
and (Arm, Arm).)
Unlike the Nash equilibria of BoS, one of these equilibria is better for both play-
ers than the other: each player prefers (Stag, Stag) to (Hare, Hare). This fact has no
bearing on the equilibrium status of (Hare, Hare), since the condition for an equi-
librium is that a single player cannot gain by deviating, given the other player’s be-
havior. Put differently, an equilibrium is immune to any unilateral deviation; coor-
dinated deviations by groups of players are not contemplated. However, the exis-
tence of two equilibria raises the possibility that one equilibrium might more likely
be the outcome of the game than the other. I return to this issue in Section 2.7.6.
I argue that the many-player Stag Hunt (Example 18.2) also has two Nash equi-
libria: the action proﬁle (Stag, . . . , Stag) in which every player joins in the pursuit
of the stag, and the proﬁle (Hare, . . . , Hare) in which every player catches a hare.
• (Stag, . . . , Stag) is a Nash equilibrium because each player prefers this proﬁle
to that in which she alone chooses Hare. (A player is better off remaining
attentive to the pursuit of the stag than running after a hare if all the other
players remain attentive.)
• (Hare, . . . , Hare) is a Nash equilibrium because each player prefers this proﬁle
to that in which she alone pursues the stag. (A player is better off catching a
hare than pursuing the stag if no one else pursues the stag.)
• No other proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium, because in any other proﬁle at least
one player chooses Stag and at least one player chooses Hare, so that any
player choosing Stag is better off switching to Hare. (A player is better off
catching a hare than pursing the stag if at least one other person chases a
hare, since the stag can be caught only if everyone pursues it.)
? EXERCISE 28.1 (Variants of the Stag Hunt) Consider two variants of the n-hunter
Stag Hunt in which only m hunters, with 2 ≤m < n, need to pursue the stag in
order to catch it. (Continue to assume that there is a single stag.) Assume that a
captured stag is shared only by the hunters who catch it.
a. Assume, as before, that each hunter prefers the fraction 1/n of the stag to a
hare. Find the Nash equilibria of the strategic game that models this situation.
b.
Assume that each hunter prefers the fraction 1/k of the stag to a hare, but
prefers the hare to any smaller fraction of the stag, where k is an integer with
m ≤k ≤n. Find the Nash equilibria of the strategic game that models this
situation.
The following more difﬁcult exercise enriches the hunters’ choices in the Stag
Hunt. This extended game has been proposed as a model that captures Keynes’
basic insight about the possibility of multiple economic equilibria, some of which
are undesirable (Bryant 1983, 1994).

--- Sayfa 19 ---
2.7 Examples of Nash equilibrium
29
?? EXERCISE 29.1 (Extension of the Stag Hunt) Extend the n-hunter Stag Hunt by giv-
ing each hunter K (a positive integer) units of effort, which she can allocate be-
tween pursuing the stag and catching hares. Denote the effort hunter i devotes
to pursuing the stag by ei, a nonnegative integer equal to at most K. The chance
that the stag is caught depends on the smallest of all the hunters’ efforts, denoted
minj ej. (“A chain is as strong as its weakest link.”) Hunter i’s payoff to the ac-
tion proﬁle (e1, . . . , en) is 2 minj ej −ei. (She is better off the more likely the stag
is caught, and worse off the more effort she devotes to pursuing the stag, which
means she catches fewer hares.) Is the action proﬁle (e, . . . , e), in which every
hunter devotes the same effort to pursuing the stag, a Nash equilibrium for any
value of e? (What is a player’s payoff to this proﬁle? What is her payoff if she
deviates to a lower or higher effort level?) Is any action proﬁle in which not all the
players’ effort levels are the same a Nash equilibrium? (Consider a player whose
effort exceeds the minimum effort level of all players. What happens to her payoff
if she reduces her effort level to the minimum?)
2.7.5
Hawk–Dove
The game in the next exercise captures a basic feature of animal conﬂict.
? EXERCISE 29.2 (Hawk–Dove) Two animals are ﬁghting over some prey. Each can
be passive or aggressive. Each prefers to be aggressive if its opponent is passive,
and passive if its opponent is aggressive; given its own stance, it prefers the out-
come in which its opponent is passive to that in which its opponent is aggressive.
Formulate this situation as a strategic game and ﬁnd its Nash equilibria.
2.7.6
A coordination game
Consider two people who wish to go out together, but who, unlike the dissidents
in BoS, agree on the more desirable concert—say they both prefer Bach. A strate-
gic game that models this situation is shown in Figure 29.1; it is an example of a
coordination game. By examining the four action pairs, we see that the game has
two Nash equilibria: (Bach, Bach) and (Stravinsky, Stravinsky). In particular, the ac-
tion pair (Stravinsky, Stravinsky) in which both people choose their less-preferred
concert is a Nash equilibrium.
Bach
Stravinsky
Bach
2, 2
0, 0
Stravinsky
0, 0
1, 1
Figure 29.1 A coordination game.
Is the equilibrium in which both people choose Stravinsky plausible? People
who argue that the technology of Apple computers originally dominated that of
IBM computers, and that the Beta format for video recording is better than VHS,

--- Sayfa 20 ---
30
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
FOCAL POINTS
In games with many Nash equilibria, the theory isolates more than one pattern of
behavior compatible with a steady state. In some games, some of these equilibria
seem more likely to attract the players’ attentions than others. To use the termi-
nology of Schelling (1960), some equilibria are focal. In the coordination game in
Figure 29.1, where the players agree on the more desirable Nash equilibrium and
obtain the same payoff to every nonequilibrium action pair, the preferable equi-
librium seems more likely to be focal (though two examples are given in the text
of steady states involving the inferior equilibrium). In the variant of this game in
which the two equilibria are equally good (i.e. (2, 2) is replaced by (1, 1)), nothing
in the structure of the game gives any clue as to which steady state might occur.
In such a game, the names or nature of the actions, or other information, may
predispose the players to one equilibrium rather than the other.
Consider, for example, voters in an election. Pre-election polls may give them
information about each other’s intended actions, pointing them to one of many
Nash equilibria. Or consider a situation in which two players independently di-
vide $100 into two piles, each receiving $10 if they choose the same divisions and
nothing otherwise. The strategic game that models this situation has many Nash
equilibria, in each of which both players choose the same division. But the equi-
librium in which both players choose the ($50, $50) division seems likely to com-
mand the players’ attentions, possibly for esthetic reasons (it is an appealing divi-
sion), and possibly because it is a steady state in an unrelated game in which the
chosen division determines the players’ payoffs.
The theory of Nash equilibrium is neutral about the equilibrium that will occur
in a game with many equilibria. If features of the situation not modeled by the
notion of a strategic game make some equilibria focal then those equilibria may
be more likely to emerge as steady states, and the rate at which a steady state is
reached may be higher than it otherwise would have been.
would say “yes”. In both cases users had a strong interest in adopting the same
standard, and one standard was better than the other; in the steady state that
emerged in each case, the inferior technology was adopted by a large majority
of users.
If two people played this game in a laboratory it seems likely that the outcome
would be (Bach, Bach). Nevertheless, (Stravinsky, Stravinsky) also corresponds to a
steady state: if either action pair is reached, there is no reason for either player to
deviate from it.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
2.7 Examples of Nash equilibrium
31
2.7.7
Provision of a public good
The model in the next exercise captures an aspect of the provision of a “public
good”, like a park or a swimming pool, whose use by one person does not diminish
its value to another person (at least, not until it is overcrowded). (Other aspects of
public good provision are studied in Section 2.8.4.)
? EXERCISE 31.1 (Contributing to a public good) Each of n people chooses whether
or not to contribute a ﬁxed amount toward the provision of a public good. The
good is provided if and only if at least k people contribute, where 2 ≤k ≤n; if
it is not provided, contributions are not refunded. Each person ranks outcomes
from best to worst as follows: (i) any outcome in which the good is provided and
she does not contribute, (ii) any outcome in which the good is provided and she
contributes, (iii) any outcome in which the good is not provided and she does not
contribute, (iv) any outcome in which the good is not provided and she contributes.
Formulate this situation as a strategic game and ﬁnd its Nash equilibria. (Is there a
Nash equilibrium in which more than k people contribute? One in which k people
contribute? One in which fewer than k people contribute? (Be careful!))
2.7.8
Strict and nonstrict equilibria
In all the Nash equilibria of the games we have studied so far a deviation by a
player leads to an outcome worse for that player than the equilibrium outcome.
The deﬁnition of Nash equilibrium (21.1), however, requires only that the outcome
of a deviation be no better for the deviant than the equilibrium outcome. And,
indeed, some games have equilibria in which a player is indifferent between her
equilibrium action and some other action, given the other players’ actions.
Consider the game in Figure 31.1. This game has a unique Nash equilibrium,
namely (T, L). (For every other pair of actions, one of the players is better off
changing her action.) When player 2 chooses L, as she does in this equilibrium,
player 1 is equally happy choosing T or B (her payoff is 1 in each case); if she
deviates to B then she is no worse off than she is in the equilibrium. We say that
the Nash equilibrium (T, L) is not a strict equilibrium.
L
M
R
T
1, 1
1, 0
0, 1
B
1, 0
0, 1
1, 0
Figure 31.1 A game with a unique Nash equilibrium, which is not a strict equilibrium.
For a general game, an equilibrium is strict if each player’s equilibrium action
is better than all her other actions, given the other players’ actions. Precisely, an
action proﬁle a∗is a strict Nash equilibrium if for every player i we have ui(a∗) >
ui(ai, a∗
−i) for every action ai̸ = a∗
i of player i. (Contrast the strict inequality in this
deﬁnition with the weak inequality in (21.2).)

--- Sayfa 22 ---
32
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
2.7.9
Additional examples
The following exercises are more difﬁcult than most of the previous ones. In the
ﬁrst two, the number of actions of each player is arbitrary, so you cannot mechan-
ically examine each action proﬁle individually, as we did for games in which each
player has two actions. Instead, you can consider groups of action proﬁles that
have features in common, and show that all action proﬁles in any given group are
or are not equilibria. Deciding how best to group the proﬁles into types calls for
some intuition about the character of a likely equilibrium; the exercises contain
suggestions on how to proceed.
?? EXERCISE 32.1 (Guessing two-thirds of the average)
Each of three people an-
nounces an integer from 1 to K. If the three integers are different, the person whose
integer is closest to 2
3 of the average of the three integers wins $1. If two or more
integers are the same, $1 is split equally between the people whose integer is clos-
est to 2
3 of the average integer. Is there any integer k such that the action proﬁle
(k, k, k), in which every person announces the same integer k, is a Nash equilib-
rium? (If k ≥2, what happens if a person announces a smaller number?) Is any
other action proﬁle a Nash equilibrium? (What is the payoff of a person whose
number is the highest of the three? Can she increase this payoff by announcing a
different number?)
Game theory is used widely in political science, especially in the study of elec-
tions. The game in the following exercise explores citizens’ costly decisions to
vote.
?? EXERCISE 32.2 (Voter participation) Two candidates, A and B, compete in an elec-
tion. Of the n citizens, k support candidate A and m (= n −k) support candidate B.
Each citizen decides whether to vote, at a cost, for the candidate she supports, or
to abstain. A citizen who abstains receives the payoff of 2 if the candidate she
supports wins, 1 if this candidate ties for ﬁrst place, and 0 if this candidate loses.
A citizen who votes receives the payoffs 2 −c, 1 −c, and −c in these three cases,
where 0 < c < 1.
a. For k = m = 1, is the game the same (except for the names of the actions) as
any considered so far in this chapter?
b.
For k = m, ﬁnd the set of Nash equilibria. (Is the action proﬁle in which
everyone votes a Nash equilibrium? Is there any Nash equilibrium in which
the candidates tie and not everyone votes? Is there any Nash equilibrium in
which one of the candidates wins by one vote? Is there any Nash equilibrium
in which one of the candidates wins by two or more votes?)
c. What is the set of Nash equilibria for k < m?
If, when sitting in a trafﬁc jam, you have ever thought about the time you might
save if another road were built, the next exercise may lead you to think again.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
2.8 Best response functions
33
?? EXERCISE 33.1 (Choosing a route) Four people must drive from A to B at the same
time. Each of them must choose which route to take. Two routes are available, one
via X and one via Y. (Refer to the left panel of Figure 33.1.) The roads from A to X,
and from Y to B are both short and narrow; in each case, one car takes 6 minutes,
and each additional car increases the travel time per car by 3 minutes. (If two cars
drive from A to X, for example, each car takes 9 minutes.) The roads from A to
Y, and from X to B are long and wide; on A to Y one car takes 20 minutes, and
each additional car increases the travel time per car by 1 minute; on X to B one car
takes 20 minutes, and each additional car increases the travel time per car by 0.9
minutes. Formulate this situation as a strategic game and ﬁnd the Nash equilibria.
(If all four people take one of the routes, can any of them do better by taking the
other route? What if three take one route and one takes the other route, or if two
take each route?)
6,9,12,15
20
21
22
23
6,9,12,15
20
20.9
21.8
22.7
A
X
B
Y
Original network.
6,9,12,15
20
21
22
23
6,9,12,15
20
20.9
21.8
22.7
7
8
9
10
A
X
B
Y
Network with new road from X to Y.
Figure 33.1 Getting from A to B: the road networks in Exercise 33.1. The numbers beside each road are
the travel times per car when 1, 2, 3, or 4 cars take that road.
Now suppose that a relatively short, wide road is built from X to Y, giving each
person four options for travel from A to B: A–X–B, A–Y–B, A–X–Y–B, and A–Y–
X–B. Assume that a person who takes A–X–Y–B travels the A–X portion at the
same time as someone who takes A–X–B, and the Y–B portion at the same time as
someone who takes A–Y–B. (Think of there being constant ﬂows of trafﬁc.) On the
road between X and Y, one car takes 7 minutes and each additional car increases
the travel time per car by 1 minute. Find the Nash equilibria in this new situation.
Compare each person’s travel time with her travel time in the equilibrium before
the road from X to Y was built.
2.8
Best response functions
2.8.1
Deﬁnition
We can ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of a game in which each player has only a few
actions by examining each action proﬁle in turn to see if it satisﬁes the conditions
for equilibrium. In more complicated games, it is often better to work with the
players’ “best response functions”.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
34
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
Consider a player, say player i. For any given actions of the players other than i,
player i’s actions yield her various payoffs. We are interested in the best actions—
those that yield her the highest payoff. In BoS, for example, Bach is the best action
for player 1 if player 2 chooses Bach; Stravinsky is the best action for player 1 if
player 2 chooses Stravinsky. In particular, in BoS, player 1 has a single best action
for each action of player 2. By contrast, in the game in Figure 31.1, both T and B are
best actions for player 1 if player 2 chooses L: they both yield the payoff of 1, and
player 1 has no action that yields a higher payoff (in fact, she has no other action).
We denote the set of player i’s best actions when the list of the other players’ ac-
tions is a−i by Bi(a−i). Thus in BoS we have B1(Bach) = {Bach} and B1(Stravinsky) =
{Stravinsky}; in the game in Figure 31.1 we have B1(L) = {T, B}.
Precisely, we deﬁne the function Bi by
Bi(a−i) = {ai in Ai : ui(ai, a−i) ≥ui(a′
i, a−i) for all a′
i in Ai} :
any action in Bi(a−i) is at least as good for player i as every other action of player i
when the other players’ actions are given by a−i. We call Bi the best response
function of player i.
The function Bi is set-valued: it associates a set of actions with any list of the
other players’ actions.
Every member of the set Bi(a−i) is a best response of
player i to a−i: if each of the other players adheres to a−i then player i can do
no better than choose a member of Bi(a−i). In some games, like BoS, the set Bi(a−i)
consists of a single action for every list a−i of actions of the other players: no matter
what the other players do, player i has a single optimal action. In other games, like
the one in Figure 31.1, Bi(a−i) contains more than one action for some lists a−i of
actions of the other players.
2.8.2
Using best response functions to deﬁne Nash equilibrium
A Nash equilibrium is an action proﬁle with the property that no player can do bet-
ter by changing her action, given the other players’ actions. Using the terminology
just developed, we can alternatively deﬁne a Nash equilibrium to be an action pro-
ﬁle for which every player’s action is a best response to the other players’ actions.
That is, we have the following result.
PROPOSITION 34.1 The action proﬁle a∗is a Nash equilibrium of a strategic game with
ordinal preferences if and only if every player’s action is a best response to the other players’
actions:
a∗
i is in Bi(a∗
−i) for every player i.
(34.2)
If each player i has a single best response to each list a−i of the other players’
actions, we can write the conditions in (34.2) as equations. In this case, for each
player i and each list a−i of the other players’ actions, denote the single member of
Bi(a−i) by bi(a−i) (that is, Bi(a−i) = {bi(a−i)}). Then (34.2) is equivalent to
a∗
i = bi(a∗
−i) for every player i,
(34.3)

--- Sayfa 25 ---
2.8 Best response functions
35
a collection of n equations in the n unknowns a∗
i , where n is the number of players
in the game. For example, in a game with two players, say 1 and 2, these equations
are
a∗
1 = b1(a∗
2)
a∗
2 = b2(a∗
1).
That is, in a two-player game in which each player has a single best response to ev-
ery action of the other player, (a∗
1, a∗
2) is a Nash equilibrium if and only if player 1’s
action a∗
1 is her best response to player 2’s action a∗
2, and player 2’s action a∗
2 is her
best response to player 1’s action a∗
1.
2.8.3
Using best response functions to ﬁnd Nash equilibria
The deﬁnition of a Nash equilibrium in terms of best response functions suggests
a method for ﬁnding Nash equilibria:
• ﬁnd the best response function of each player
• ﬁnd the action proﬁles that satisfy (34.2) (which reduces to (34.3) if each
player has a single best response to each list of the other players’ actions).
To illustrate this method, consider the game in Figure 35.1. First ﬁnd the best
response of player 1 to each action of player 2. If player 2 chooses L, then player 1’s
best response is M (2 is the highest payoff for player 1 in this column); indicate the
best response by attaching a star to player 1’s payoff to (M, L). If player 2 chooses
C, then player 1’s best response is T, indicated by the star attached to player 1’s
payoff to (T, C). And if player 2 chooses R, then both T and B are best responses
for player 1; both are indicated by stars. Second, ﬁnd the best response of player 2
to each action of player 1 (for each row, ﬁnd highest payoff of player 2); these
best responses are indicated by attaching stars to player 2’s payoffs. Finally, ﬁnd
the boxes in which both players’ payoffs are starred. Each such box is a Nash
equilibrium: the star on player 1’s payoff means that player 1’s action is a best
response to player 2’s action, and the star on player 2’s payoff means that player 2’s
action is a best response to player 1’s action. Thus we conclude that the game has
two Nash equilibria: (M, L) and (B, R).
L
C
R
T
1 , 2∗
2∗, 1
1∗, 0
M
2∗, 1∗
0 , 1∗
0 , 0
B
0 , 1
0 , 0
1∗, 2∗
Figure 35.1 Using best response functions to ﬁnd Nash equilibria in a two-player game in which each
player has three actions.
? EXERCISE 35.1 (Finding Nash equilibria using best response functions)

--- Sayfa 26 ---
36
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
a. Find the players’ best response functions in the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Figure 13.1),
BoS (Figure 16.1), Matching Pennies (Figure 17.1), and the two-player Stag Hunt
(Figure 18.1) (and verify the Nash equilibria of these games).
b.
Find the Nash equilibria of the game in Figure 36.1 by ﬁnding the players’
best response functions.
L
C
R
T
2, 2
1, 3
0, 1
M
3, 1
0, 0
0, 0
B
1, 0
0, 0
0, 0
Figure 36.1 The game in Exercise 35.1b.
The players’ best response functions for the game in Figure 35.1 are presented
in a different format in Figure 36.2. In this ﬁgure, player 1’s actions are on the hor-
izontal axis and player 2’s are on the vertical axis. (Thus the columns correspond
to choices of player 1, and the rows correspond to choices of player 2, whereas the
reverse is true in Figure 35.1. I choose this orientation for Figure 36.2 for consis-
tency with the convention for ﬁgures of this type.) Player 1’s best responses are
indicated by circles, and player 2’s by dots. Thus the circle at (T, C) reﬂects the
fact that T is player 1’s best response to player 2’s choice of C, and the circles at
(T, R) and (B, R) reﬂect the fact that T and B are both best responses of player 1 to
player 2’s choice of R. Any action pair marked by both a circle and a dot is a Nash
equilibrium: the circle means that player 1’s action is a best response to player 2’s
action, and the dot indicates that player 2’s action is a best response to player 1’s
action.
A1
|
{z
}
T
M
B
A2






















L
C
R
Figure 36.2 The players’ best response functions for the game in Figure 35.1. Player 1’s best responses
are indicated by circles, and player 2’s by dots. The action pairs for which there is both a circle and a
dot are the Nash equilibria.
? EXERCISE 36.1 (Constructing best response functions) Draw the analogue of Fig-
ure 36.2 for the game in Exercise 35.1b.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
2.8 Best response functions
37
? EXERCISE 37.1 (Dividing money)
Two people have $10 to divide between them-
selves. They use the following procedure. Each person names a number of dollars
(a nonnegative integer), at most equal to 10. If the sum of the amounts that the peo-
ple name is at most 10 then each person receives the amount of money she names
(and the remainder is destroyed). If the sum of the amounts that the people name
exceeds 10 and the amounts named are different then the person who names the
smaller amount receives that amount and the other person receives the remain-
ing money. If the sum of the amounts that the people name exceeds 10 and the
amounts named are the same then each person receives $5. Determine the best re-
sponse of each player to each of the other player’s actions, plot them in a diagram
like Figure 36.2, and thus ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of the game.
A diagram like Figure 36.2 is a convenient representation of the players’ best
response functions also in a game in which each player’s set of actions is an interval
of numbers, as the next example illustrates.
EXAMPLE 37.2 (A synergistic relationship) Two individuals are involved in a syn-
ergistic relationship. If both individuals devote more effort to the relationship, they
are both better off. For any given effort of individual j, the return to individual i’s
effort ﬁrst increases, then decreases. Speciﬁcally, an effort level is a nonnegative
number, and individual i’s preferences (for i = 1, 2) are represented by the payoff
function ai(c + aj −ai), where ai is i’s effort level, aj is the other individual’s effort
level, and c > 0 is a constant.
The following strategic game models this situation.
Players The two individuals.
Actions Each player’s set of actions is the set of effort levels (nonnegative num-
bers).
Preferences Player i’s preferences are represented by the payoff function ai(c +
aj −ai), for i = 1, 2.
In particular, each player has inﬁnitely many actions, so that we cannot present the
game in a table like those used previously (Figure 36.1, for example).
To ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of the game, we can construct and analyze the play-
ers’ best response functions. Given aj, individual i’s payoff is a quadratic function
of ai that is zero when ai = 0 and when ai = c + aj, and reaches a maximum in
between. The symmetry of quadratic functions (see Section 17.3) implies that the
best response of each individual i to aj is
bi(aj) = 1
2(c + aj).
(If you know calculus, you can reach the same conclusion by setting the derivative
of player i’s payoff with respect to ai equal to zero.)
The best response functions are shown in Figure 38.1. Player 1’s actions are
plotted on the horizontal axis and player 2’s actions are plotted on the vertical axis.
Player 1’s best response function associates an action for player 1 with every action

--- Sayfa 28 ---
38
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
for player 2. Thus to interpret the function b1 in the diagram, take a point a2 on
the vertical axis, and go across to the line labeled b1 (the steeper of the two lines),
then read down to the horizontal axis. The point on the horizontal axis that you
reach is b1(a2), the best action for player 1 when player 2 chooses a2. Player 2’s best
response function, on the other hand, associates an action for player 2 with every
action of player 1. Thus to interpret this function, take a point a1 on the horizontal
axis, and go up to b2, then across to the vertical axis. The point on the vertical axis
that you reach is b2(a1), the best action for player 2 when player 1 chooses a1.
0
a1 →
↑
a2
1
2c
1
2c
c
c
b1(a2)
b2(a1)
Figure 38.1 The players’ best response functions for the game in Example 37.2. The game has a unique
Nash equilibrium, (a∗
1, a∗
2) = (c, c).
At a point (a1, a2) where the best response functions intersect in the ﬁgure, we
have a1 = b1(a2), because (a1, a2) is on the graph of b1, player 1’s best response
function, and a2 = b2(a1), because (a1, a2) is on the graph of b2, player 2’s best
response function. Thus any such point (a1, a2) is a Nash equilibrium. In this
game the best response functions intersect at a single point, so there is one Nash
equilibrium. In general, they may intersect more than once; every point at which
they intersect is a Nash equilibrium.
To ﬁnd the point of intersection of the best response functions precisely, we can
solve the two equations in (34.3):
a1 =
1
2(c + a2)
a2 =
1
2(c + a1).
Substituting the second equation in the ﬁrst, we get a1 = 1
2(c + 1
2(c + a1)) = 3
4c +
1
4a1, so that a1 = c. Substituting this value of a1 into the second equation, we get
a2 = c. We conclude that the game has a unique Nash equilibrium (a1, a2) = (c, c).
(To reach this conclusion, it sufﬁces to solve the two equations; we do not have
to draw Figure 38.1. However, the diagram shows us at once that the game has a

--- Sayfa 29 ---
2.8 Best response functions
39
unique equilibrium, in which both players’ actions exceed 1
2c, facts that serve to
check the results of our algebra.)
In the game in this example, each player has a unique best response to every ac-
tion of the other player, so that the best response functions are lines. If a player has
many best responses to some of the other players’ actions, then her best response
function is “thick” at some points; several examples in the next chapter have this
property (see, for example, Figure 64.1). Example 37.2 is special also because the
game has a unique Nash equilibrium—the best response functions cross once. As
we have seen, some games have more than one equilibrium, and others have no
equilibrium. A pair of best response functions that illustrates some of the possi-
bilities is shown in Figure 39.1. In this ﬁgure the shaded area of player 1’s best
response function indicates that for a2 between a2 and a2, player 1 has a range of
best responses. For example, all actions of player 1 greater than a∗∗
1 and at most
a∗∗∗
1
are best responses to the action a∗∗∗
2
of player 2. For a game with these best
response functions, the set of Nash equilibria consists of the pair of actions (a∗
1, a∗
2),
all the pairs of actions on player 2’s best response function between (a∗∗
1 , a∗∗
2 ) and
(a∗∗∗
1
, a∗∗∗
2
), and (a∗∗∗
1
, a∗∗∗
2
).
a∗
1
a∗
2
a2
a∗∗
1
a∗∗
2
a∗∗∗
2
a∗∗∗
1
a2
B1(a2)
B2(a1)
A1
A2
Figure 39.1 An example of the best response functions of a two-player game in which each player’s set
of actions is an interval of numbers. The set of Nash equilibria of the game consists of the pair of actions
(a∗
1, a∗
2), all the pairs of actions on player 2’s best response function between (a∗∗
1 , a∗∗
2 ) and (a∗∗∗
1
, a∗∗∗
2
),
and (a∗∗∗
1
, a∗∗∗
2
).
? EXERCISE 39.1 (Strict and nonstrict Nash equilibria) Which of the Nash equilibria
of the game whose best response functions are given in Figure 39.1 are strict (see
the deﬁnition on page 31)?
Another feature that differentiates the best response functions in Figure 39.1
from those in Figure 38.1 is that the best response function b1 of player 1 is not

--- Sayfa 30 ---
40
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
continuous. When player 2’s action is a2, player 1’s best response is a∗∗
1 (indicated
by the small disk at (a∗∗
1 , a2)), but when player 2’s action is slightly greater than
a2, player 1’s best response is signiﬁcantly less than a∗∗
1 . (The small circle indicates
a point excluded from the best response function.) Again, several examples in
the next chapter have this feature. From Figure 39.1 we see that if a player’s best
response function is discontinuous, then depending on where the discontinuity
occurs, the best response functions may not intersect at all—the game may, like
Matching Pennies, have no Nash equilibrium.
? EXERCISE 40.1 (Finding Nash equilibria using best response functions) Find the
Nash equilibria of the two-player strategic game in which each player’s set of
actions is the set of nonnegative numbers and the players’ payoff functions are
u1(a1, a2) = a1(a2 −a1) and u2(a1, a2) = a2(1 −a1 −a2).
? EXERCISE 40.2 (A joint project) Two people are engaged in a joint project. If each
person i puts in the effort xi, a nonnegative number equal to at most 1, which
costs her c(xi), the outcome of the project is worth f (x1, x2). The worth of the
project is split equally between the two people, regardless of their effort levels.
Formulate this situation as a strategic game. Find the Nash equilibria of the game
when (a) f (x1, x2) = 3x1x2 and c(xi) = x2
i for i = 1, 2, and (b) f (x1, x2) = 4x1x2
and c(xi) = xi for i = 1, 2. In each case, is there a pair of effort levels that yields
both players higher payoffs than the Nash equilibrium effort levels?
2.8.4
Illustration: contributing to a public good
Exercise 31.1 models decisions on whether to contribute to the provision of a “pub-
lic good”. We now study a model in which two people decide not only whether to
contribute, but also how much to contribute.
Denote person i’s wealth by wi, and the amount she contributes to the public
good by ci (0 ≤ci ≤wi); she spends her remaining wealth wi −ci on “private
goods” (like clothes and food, whose consumption by one person precludes their
consumption by anyone else). The amount of the public good is equal to the sum
of the contributions. Each person cares both about the amount of the public good
and her consumption of private goods.
Suppose that person i’s preferences are represented by the payoff function vi(c1 +
c2) + wi −ci. Because wi is a constant, person i’s preferences are alternatively
represented by the payoff function
ui(c1, c2) = vi(c1 + c2) −ci.
This situation is modeled by the following strategic game.
Players
The two people.
Actions
Player i’s set of actions is the set of her possible contributions (nonneg-
ative numbers less than or equal to wi), for i = 1, 2.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
2.8 Best response functions
41
Preferences
Player i’s preferences are represented by the payoff function ui(c1, c2) =
vi(c1 + c2) −ci, for i = 1, 2.
To ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of this strategic game, consider the players’ best
response functions. Player 1’s best response to the contribution c2 of player 2 is
the value of c1 that maximizes v1(c1 + c2) −c1. Without specifying the form of
the function v1 we cannot explicitly calculate this optimal value. However, we can
determine how it varies with c2.
First consider player 1’s best response to c2 = 0. Suppose that the form of
the function v1 is such that the function u1(c1, 0) increases up to its maximum,
then decreases (as in Figure 41.1). Then player 1’s best response to c2 = 0, which
I denote b1(0), is unique. This best response is the value of c1 that maximizes
u1(c1, 0) = v1(c1) −c1 subject to 0 ≤c1 ≤w1. Assume that 0 < b1(0) < w1:
player 1’s optimal contribution to the public good when player 2 makes no contri-
bution is positive and less than her entire wealth.
Now consider player 1’s best response to c2 = k > 0. This best response is the
value of c1 that maximizes u1(c1, k) = v1(c1 + k) −c1. Now, we have
u1(c1, k) = u1(c1 + k, 0) + k.
That is, the graph of u1(c1, k) as a function of c1 is the translation to the left k units
and up k units of the graph of u1(c1, 0) as a function of c1 (refer to Figure 41.1).
Thus if k ≤b1(0) then b1(k) = b1(0) −k: if player 2’s contribution increases from 0
to k then player 1’s best response decreases by k. If k > b1(0) then, given the form
of u1(c1, 0), we have b1(k) = 0.
k
k
0
w1
b1(0)
b1(k)
c1 →
u1(c1, k)
u1(c1, 0)
Figure 41.1 The relation between player 1’s best responses b1(0) and b1(k) to c2 = 0 and c2 = k in the
game of contributing to a public good.
We conclude that if player 2 increases her contribution by k then player 1’s best
response is to reduce her contribution by k (or to zero, if k is larger than player 1’s
original contribution)!
The same analysis applies to player 2: for every unit more that player 1 con-
tributes, player 2 contributes a unit less, so long as her contribution is nonnegative.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
42
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
0
c1 →
↑
c2
b1(0)
b1(0)
b2(0)
b2(0)
b1(c2)
b2(c1)
Figure 42.1 The best response functions for the game of contributing to a public good in Section 2.8.4
in a case in which b1(0) > b2(0). The best response function of player 1 is the black line; that of player 2
is the gray line.
The function v2 may be different from the function v1, so that player 1’s best contri-
bution b1(0) when c2 = 0 may be different from player 2’s best contribution b2(0)
when c1 = 0. But both best response functions have the same character: the slope
of each function is −1 where the value of the function is positive. They are shown
in Figure 42.1 for a case in which b1(0) > b2(0).
We deduce that if b1(0) > b2(0) then the game has a unique Nash equilibrium,
(b1(0), 0): player 2 contributes nothing. Similarly, if b1(0) < b2(0) then the unique
Nash equilibrium is (0, b2(0)): player 1 contributes nothing. That is, the person
who contributes more when the other person contributes nothing is the only one
to make a contribution in a Nash equilibrium. Only if b1(0) = b2(0), which is not
likely if the functions v1 and v2 differ, is there an equilibrium in which both people
contribute. In this case the downward-sloping parts of the best response functions
coincide, so that any pair of contributions (c1, c2) with c1 + c2 = b1(0) and ci ≥0
for i = 1, 2 is a Nash equilibrium.
In summary, the notion of Nash equilibrium predicts that, except in unusual
circumstances, only one person contributes to the provision of the public good
when each person’s payoff function takes the form vi(c1 + c2) + wi −ci, each func-
tion vi(ci) −ci increases to a maximum, then decreases, and each person optimally
contributes less than her entire wealth when the other person does not contribute.
The person who contributes is the one who wishes to contribute more when the
other person does not contribute. In particular, the identity of the person who
contributes does not depend on the distribution of wealth; any distribution in
which each person optimally contributes less than her entire wealth when the other
person does not contribute leads to the same outcome.
The next exercise asks you to consider a case in which the amount of the public
good affects each person’s enjoyment of the private good. (The public good might
be clean air, which improves each person’s enjoyment of her free time.)

--- Sayfa 33 ---
2.9 Dominated actions
43
? EXERCISE 43.1 (Contributing to a public good) Consider the model in this section
when ui(c1, c2) is the sum of three parts: the amount c1 + c2 of the public good
provided, the amount wi −ci person i spends on private goods, and a term (wi −
ci)(c1 + c2) that reﬂects an interaction between the amount of the public good and
her private consumption—the greater the amount of the public good, the more she
values her private consumption. In summary, suppose that person i’s payoff is
c1 + c2 + wi −ci + (wi −ci)(c1 + c2), or
wi + cj + (wi −ci)(c1 + c2),
where j is the other person. Assume that w1 = w2 = w, and that each player i’s
contribution ci may be any number (positive or negative, possibly larger than w).
Find the Nash equilibrium of the game that models this situation. (You can cal-
culate the best responses explicitly. Imposing the sensible restriction that ci lie
between 0 and w complicates the analysis, but does not change the answer.) Show
that in the Nash equilibrium both players are worse off than they are when they
both contribute one half of their wealth to the public good. If you can, extend the
analysis to the case of n people. As the number of people increases, how does the
total amount contributed in a Nash equilibrium change? Compare the players’
equilibrium payoffs with their payoffs when each contributes half her wealth to
the public good, as n increases without bound. (The game is studied further in
Exercise 388.2.)
2.9
Dominated actions
2.9.1
Strict domination
You drive up to a red trafﬁc light. The left lane is free; in the right lane there is a
car that may turn right when the light changes to green, in which case it will have
to wait for a pedestrian to cross the side street. Assuming you wish to progress
as quickly as possible, the action of pulling up in the left lane “strictly dominates”
that of pulling up in the right lane. If the car in the right lane turns right then you
are much better off in the left lane, where your progress will not be impeded; and
even if the car in the right lane does not turn right, you are still better off in the left
lane, rather than behind the other car.
In any game, a player’s action “strictly dominates” another action if it is supe-
rior, no matter what the other players do.
▶DEFINITION 43.2 (Strict domination) In a strategic game with ordinal preferences,
player i’s action a′′
i strictly dominates her action a′
i if
ui(a′′
i , a−i) > ui(a′
i, a−i) for every list a−i of the other players’ actions,
where ui is a payoff function that represents player i’s preferences. We say that the
action a′
i is strictly dominated.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
44
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
In the Prisoner’s Dilemma, for example, the action Fink strictly dominates the
action Quiet: regardless of her opponent’s action, a player prefers the outcome
when she chooses Fink to the outcome when she chooses Quiet. In BoS, on the other
hand, neither action strictly dominates the other: Bach is better than Stravinsky
if the other player chooses Bach, but is worse than Stravinsky if the other player
chooses Stravinsky.
A strictly dominated action is not a best response to any actions of the other
players: whatever the other players do, some other action is better. Since a player’s
Nash equilibrium action is a best response to the other players’ Nash equilibrium
actions,
a strictly dominated action is not used in any Nash equilibrium.
When looking for the Nash equilibria of a game, we can thus eliminate from con-
sideration all strictly dominated actions. For example, we can eliminate Quiet for
each player in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, leaving (Fink, Fink) as the only candidate for
a Nash equilibrium. (As we know, this action pair is indeed a Nash equilibrium.)
The fact that the action a′′
i strictly dominates the action a′
i of course does not
imply that a′′
i strictly dominates all actions. Indeed, a′′
i may itself be strictly dom-
inated. In the left-hand game in Figure 44.1, for example, M strictly dominates T,
but B is better than M if player 2 chooses R. (I give only the payoffs of player 1
in the ﬁgure, because those of player 2 are not relevant.) Since T is strictly domi-
nated, the game has no Nash equilibrium in which player 1 uses it; but the game
may also not have any equilibrium in which player 1 uses M. In the right-hand
game, M strictly dominates T, but is itself strictly dominated by B. In this case,
in any Nash equilibrium player 1’s action is B (her only action that is not strictly
dominated).
L
R
T
1
0
M
2
1
B
1
3
L
R
T
1
0
M
2
1
B
3
2
Figure 44.1 Two games in which player 1’s action T is strictly dominated by M. (Only player 1’s payoffs
are given.) In the left-hand game, B is better than M if player 2 chooses R; in the right-hand game, M
itself is strictly dominated, by B.
A strictly dominated action is incompatible not only with a steady state, but
also with rational behavior by a player who confronts a game for the ﬁrst time.
This fact is the ﬁrst step in a theory different from Nash equilibrium, explored in
Chapter 12.
2.9.2
Weak domination
As you approach the red light in the situation at the start of the previous section,
there is a car in each lane. The car in the right lane may, or may not, be turning

--- Sayfa 35 ---
2.9 Dominated actions
45
right; if it is, it may be delayed by a pedestrian crossing the side street. The car in
the left lane cannot turn right. In this case your pulling up in the left lane “weakly
dominates”, though does not strictly dominate, your pulling up in the right lane.
If the car in the right lane does not turn right, then both lanes are equally good; if
it does, then the left lane is better.
In any game, a player’s action “weakly dominates” another action if the ﬁrst
action is at least as good as the second action, no matter what the other players do,
and is better than the second action for some actions of the other players.
▶DEFINITION 45.1 (Weak domination) In a strategic game with ordinal preferences,
player i’s action a′′
i weakly dominates her action a′
i if
ui(a′′
i , a−i) ≥ui(a′
i, a−i) for every list a−i of the other players’ actions
and
ui(a′′
i , a−i) > ui(a′
i, a−i) for some list a−i of the other players’ actions,
where ui is a payoff function that represents player i’s preferences. We say that the
action a′
i is weakly dominated.
For example, in the game in Figure 45.1 (in which, once again, only player 1’s
payoffs are given), M weakly dominates T, and B weakly dominates M; B strictly
dominates T.
L
R
T
1
0
M
2
0
B
2
1
Figure 45.1 A game illustrating weak domination. (Only player 1’s payoffs are given.) The action M
weakly dominates T; B weakly dominates M. The action B strictly dominates T.
In a strict Nash equilibrium (Section 2.7.8) no player’s equilibrium action is
weakly dominated: every non-equilibrium action for a player yields her a payoff
less than does her equilibrium action, and hence does not weakly dominate the
equilibrium action.
Can an action be weakly dominated in a nonstrict Nash equilibrium? Deﬁ-
nitely. Consider the games in Figure 46.1. In both games B weakly (but not strictly)
dominates C for both players. But in both games (C, C) is a Nash equilibrium:
given that player 2 chooses C, player 1 cannot do better than choose C, and given
that player 1 chooses C, player 2 cannot do better than choose C. Both games also
have a Nash equilibrium, (B, B), in which neither player’s action is weakly dom-
inated. In the left-hand game this equilibrium is better for both players than the
equilibrium (C, C) in which both players’ actions are weakly dominated, whereas
in the right-hand game it is worse for both players than (C, C).

--- Sayfa 36 ---
46
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
B
C
B
1, 1
0, 0
C
0, 0
0, 0
B
C
B
1, 1
2, 0
C
0, 2
2, 2
Figure 46.1 Two strategic games with a Nash equilibrium (C, C) in which both players’ actions are
weakly dominated.
? EXERCISE 46.1 (Strict equilibria and dominated actions)
For the game in Fig-
ure 46.2, determine, for each player, whether any action is strictly dominated or
weakly dominated. Find the Nash equilibria of the game; determine whether any
equilibrium is strict.
L
C
R
T
0, 0
1, 0
1, 1
M
1, 1
1, 1
3, 0
B
1, 1
2, 1
2, 2
Figure 46.2 The game in Exercise 46.1.
? EXERCISE 46.2 (Nash equilibrium and weakly dominated actions) Give an exam-
ple of a two-player strategic game in which each player has ﬁnitely many actions
and in the only Nash equilibrium both players’ actions are weakly dominated.
2.9.3
Illustration: voting
Two candidates, A and B, vie for ofﬁce. Each of an odd number of citizens may
vote for either candidate. (Abstention is not possible.) The candidate who obtains
the most votes wins. (Because the number of citizens is odd, a tie is impossible.) A
majority of citizens prefer A to win than B to win.
The following strategic game models the citizens’ voting decisions in this situ-
ation.
Players
The citizens.
Actions
Each player’s set of actions consists of voting for A and voting for B.
Preferences
All players are indifferent among all action proﬁles in which a ma-
jority of players vote for A; all players are also indifferent among all action
proﬁles in which a majority of players vote for B. Some players (a majority)
prefer an action proﬁle of the ﬁrst type to one of the second type, and the
others have the reverse preference.
I claim that a citizen’s voting for her less preferred candidate is weakly domi-
nated by her voting for her favorite candidate. Suppose that citizen i prefers candi-
date A; ﬁx the votes of all citizens other than i. If citizen i switches from voting for
B to voting for A then, depending on the other citizens’ votes, either the outcome

--- Sayfa 37 ---
2.9 Dominated actions
47
does not change, or A wins rather than B; such a switch cannot cause the winner
to change from A to B. That is, citizen i’s switching from voting for B to voting for
A either has no effect on the outcome, or makes her better off; it cannot make her
worse off.
The game has Nash equilibria in which some, or all, citizens’ actions are weakly
dominated. For example, the action proﬁle in which all citizens vote for B is a Nash
equilibrium (no citizen’s switching her vote has any effect on the outcome).
? EXERCISE 47.1 (Voting) Find all the Nash equilibria of the game. (First consider
action proﬁles in which the winner obtains one more vote than the loser and at least
one citizen who votes for the winner prefers the loser to the winner, then proﬁles in
which the winner obtains one more vote than the loser and all citizens who vote for
the winner prefer the winner to the loser, and ﬁnally proﬁles in which the winner
obtains three or more votes more than the loser.) Is there any equilibrium in which
no player uses a weakly dominated action?
Consider a variant of the game in which the number of candidates is greater
than two. A variant of the argument above shows that a citizen’s action of voting
for her least preferred candidate is weakly dominated by her other two actions.
The next exercise asks you to show that no other action is weakly dominated.
? EXERCISE 47.2 (Voting between three candidates) Suppose there are three candi-
dates, A, B, and C, and no citizen is indifferent between any two of them. A tie for
ﬁrst place is possible in this case; assume that a citizen who prefers a win by x to a
win by y ranks a tie between x and y between an outright win for x and an outright
win for y. Show that a citizen’s only weakly dominated action is a vote for her least
preferred candidate. Find a Nash equilibrium in which some citizen does not vote
for her favorite candidate, but the action she takes is not weakly dominated.
? EXERCISE 47.3 (Approval voting)
In the system of “approval voting”, a citizen
may vote for as many candidates as she wishes. If there are two candidates, say
A and B, for example, a citizen may vote for neither candidate, for A, for B, or for
both A and B. As before, the candidate who obtains the most votes wins. Show that
any action that includes a vote for a citizen’s least preferred candidate is weakly
dominated, as is any action that does not include a vote for her most preferred
candidate. More difﬁcult: show that if there are k candidates then for a citizen who
prefers candidate 1 to candidate 2 to ... to candidate k, the action that consists of
votes for candidates 1 and k −1 is not weakly dominated.
2.9.4
Illustration: collective decision-making
The members of a group of people are affected by a policy, modeled as a number.
Each person i has a favorite policy, denoted x∗
i ; she prefers the policy y to the
policy z if and only if y is closer to x∗
i than is z. The number n of people is odd.
The following mechanism is used to choose a policy: each person names a policy,
and the policy chosen is the median of those named. (That is, the policies named

--- Sayfa 38 ---
48
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
are put in order, and the one in the middle is chosen. If, for example, there are
ﬁve people, and they name the policies −2, 0, 0.6, 5, and 10, then the policy 0.6 is
chosen.)
What outcome does this mechanism induce? Does anyone have an incentive
to name her favorite policy, or are people induced to distort their preferences? We
can answer these questions by studying the following strategic game.
Players
The n people.
Actions
Each person’s set of actions is the set of policies (numbers).
Preferences
Each person i prefers the action proﬁle a to the action proﬁle a′ if
and only if the median policy named in a is closer to x∗
i than is the median
policy named in a′.
I claim that for each player i, the action of naming her favorite policy x∗
i weakly
dominates all her other actions. The reason is that relative to the situation in which
she names x∗
i , she can change the median only by naming a policy further from her
favorite policy than the current median; no change in the policy she names moves
the median closer to her favorite policy.
Precisely, I show that for each action xi̸ = x∗
i of player i, (a) for all actions of
the other players, player i is at least as well off naming x∗
i as she is naming xi,
and (b) for some actions of the other players she is better off naming x∗
i than she is
naming xi. Take xi > x∗
i .
a. For any list of actions of the players other than player i, denote the value of
the 1
2(n −1)th highest action by a and the value of the 1
2(n + 1)th highest
action by a (so that half of the remaining players’ actions are at most a and
half of them are at least a).
• If a ≤x∗
i or a ≥xi then the median policy is the same whether player i
names x∗
i or xi.
• If a > x∗
i and a < xi then when player i names x∗
i the median policy is
at most the greater of x∗
i and a and when player i names xi the median
policy is at least the lesser of xi and a. Thus player i is worse off naming
xi than she is naming x∗
i .
b. Suppose that half of the remaining players name policies less than x∗
i and
half of them name policies greater than xi. Then the outcome is x∗
i if player i
names x∗
i , and xi if she names xi. Thus she is better off naming x∗
i than she is
naming xi.
A symmetric argument applies when xi < x∗
i .
If we think of the mechanism as asking the players to name their favorite
policies, then the result is that telling the truth weakly dominates all other actions.
An implication of the fact that player i’s naming her favorite policy x∗
i weakly
dominates all her other actions is that the action proﬁle in which every player

--- Sayfa 39 ---
2.10 Equilibrium in a single population: symmetric games and symmetric equilibria
49
names her favorite policy is a Nash equilibrium. That is, truth-telling is a Nash
equilibrium, in the interpretation of the previous paragraph.
? EXERCISE 49.1 (Other Nash equilibria of the game modeling collective decision-
making) Find two Nash equilibria in which the outcome is the median favorite
policy, and one in which it is not.
? EXERCISE 49.2 (Another mechanism for collective decision-making) Consider the
variant of the mechanism for collective decision-making described above in which
the policy chosen is the mean, rather than the median, of the policies named by the
players. Does a player’s action of naming her favorite policy weakly dominate all
her other actions?
2.10
Equilibrium in a single population: symmetric games and symmetric
equilibria
A Nash equilibrium of a strategic game corresponds to a steady state of an in-
teraction between the members of several populations, one for each player in the
game, each play of the game involving one member of each population. Some-
times we want to model a situation in which the members of a single homogeneous
population are involved anonymously in a symmetric interaction. Consider, for
example, pedestrians approaching each other on a sidewalk or car drivers arriv-
ing simultaneously at an intersection from different directions. In each case, the
members of each encounter are drawn from the same population: pairs from a
single population of pedestrians meet each other, and groups from a single pop-
ulation of car drivers simultaneously approach intersections. And in each case,
every participant’s role is the same.
I restrict attention here to cases in which each interaction involves two partic-
ipants. Deﬁne a two-player game to be “symmetric” if each player has the same
set of actions and each player’s evaluation of an outcome depends only on her
action and that of her opponent, not on whether she is player 1 or player 2. That
is, player 1 feels the same way about the outcome (a1, a2), in which her action is
a1 and her opponent’s action is a2, as player 2 feels about the outcome (a2, a1), in
which her action is a1 and her opponent’s action is a2. In particular, the players’
preferences may be represented by payoff functions in which both players’ payoffs
are the same whenever the players choose the same action: u1(a, a) = u2(a, a) for
every action a.
▶DEFINITION 49.3 (Symmetric two-player strategic game with ordinal preferences) A
two-player strategic game with ordinal preferences is symmetric if the players’
sets of actions are the same and the players’ preferences are represented by payoff
functions u1 and u2 for which u1(a1, a2) = u2(a2, a1) for every action pair (a1, a2).
A two-player game in which each player has two actions is symmetric if the
players’ preferences are represented by payoff functions that take the form shown

--- Sayfa 40 ---
50
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
in Figure 50.1, where w, x, y, and z are arbitrary numbers. Several of the two-player
games we have considered are symmetric, including the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the
two-player Stag Hunt (given again in Figure 50.2), and the game in Exercise 37.1.
BoS (Figure 16.1) and Matching Pennies (Figure 17.1) are not symmetric.
A
B
A
w, w
x, y
B
y, x
z, z
Figure 50.1 A two-player symmetric game.
Quiet
Fink
Quiet
2, 2
0, 3
Fink
3, 0
1, 1
Stag
Hare
Stag
2, 2
0, 1
Hare
1, 0
1, 1
Figure 50.2 Two symmetric games: the Prisoner’s Dilemma (left) and the two-player Stag Hunt (right).
? EXERCISE 50.1 (Symmetric strategic games) Which of the games in Exercises 29.2
and 40.1, Example 37.2, Section 2.8.4, and Figure 46.1 are symmetric?
When the players in a symmetric two-player game are drawn from a single
population, nothing distinguishes one of the players in any given encounter from
the other. We may call them “player 1” and “player 2”, but these labels are only
for our convenience. There is only one role in the game, so that a steady state is
characterized by a single action used by every participant whenever playing the
game. An action a∗corresponds to such a steady state if no player can do better by
using any other action, given that all the other players use a∗. An action a∗has this
property if and only if (a∗, a∗) is a Nash equilibrium of the game. In other words,
the solution that corresponds to a steady state of pairwise interactions between the
members of a single population is “symmetric Nash equilibrium”: a Nash equi-
librium in which both players take the same action. The idea of this notion of
equilibrium does not depend on the game’s having only two players, so I give a
deﬁnition for a game with any number of players.
▶DEFINITION 50.2 (Symmetric Nash equilibrium) An action proﬁle a∗in a strategic
game with ordinal preferences in which each player has the same set of actions is
a symmetric Nash equilibrium if it is a Nash equilibrium and a∗
i is the same for
every player i.
As an example, consider a model of approaching pedestrians. Each participant
in any given encounter has two possible actions—to step to the right, and to step
to the left—and is better off when participants both step in the same direction
than when they step in different directions (in which case a collision occurs). The
resulting symmetric strategic game is given in Figure 51.1. The game has two
symmetric Nash equilibria, namely (Left, Left) and (Right, Right). That is, there

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Notes
51
are two steady states, in one of which every pedestrian steps to the left as she
approaches another pedestrian, and in another of which both participants step to
the right. (The latter steady state seems to prevail in the USA and Canada.)
Left
Right
Left
1, 1
0, 0
Right
0, 0
1, 1
Figure 51.1 Approaching pedestrians.
A symmetric game may have no symmetric Nash equilibrium. Consider, for
example, the game in Figure 51.2. This game has two Nash equilibria, (X, Y) and
(Y, X), neither of which is symmetric. You may wonder if, in such a situation, there
is a steady state in which each player does not always take the same action in every
interaction. This question is addressed in Section 4.7.
X
Y
X
0, 0
1, 1
Y
1, 1
0, 0
Figure 51.2 A symmetric game with no symmetric Nash equilibrium.
? EXERCISE 51.1 (Equilibrium for pairwise interactions in a single population) Find
all the Nash equilibria of the game in Figure 51.3. Which of the equilibria, if any,
correspond to a steady state if the game models pairwise interactions between the
members of a single population?
A
B
C
A
1, 1
2, 1
4, 1
B
1, 2
5, 5
3, 6
C
1, 4
6, 3
0, 0
Figure 51.3 The game in Exercise 51.1.
Notes
The notion of a strategic game originated in the work of Borel (1921) and von Neu-
mann (1928). The notion of Nash equilibrium (and its interpretation) is due to
Nash (1950a). (The idea that underlies it goes back at least to Cournot 1838, Ch. 7.)
The Prisoner’s Dilemma appears to have ﬁrst been considered by Melvin Dresher
and Merrill Flood, who used it in an experiment at the RAND Corporation in Jan-
uary 1950 (Flood 1958/59, 11–17); it is an example in Nash’s PhD thesis (see Kuhn
and Nasar 2001), submitted in May 1950. The story associated with it is due to
Tucker (1950) (see Strafﬁn 1980). O’Neill (1994, 1010–1013) argues that there is no

--- Sayfa 42 ---
52
Chapter 2. Nash Equilibrium: Theory
evidence that game theory (and in particular the Prisoner’s Dilemma) inﬂuenced
US nuclear strategists in the 1950s. The precise analysis of the idea that common
property will be overused was initiated by Gordon (1954). Hardin (1968) coined
the phrase “tragedy of the commons”.
BoS, like the Prisoner’s Dilemma, is an example in Nash’s PhD thesis; Luce and
Raiffa (1957, 90–91) name it and associate a story with it. Matching Pennies was
ﬁrst considered by von Neumann (1928). Rousseau’s sentence about hunting stags
is interpreted as a description of a game by Ullmann-Margalit (1977, 121) and
Jervis (1977/78), following discussion by Waltz (1959, 167–169) and Lewis (1969, 7,
47).
The information about John Nash in the box on p. 21 comes from Leonard (1994),
Kuhn et al. (1995), Kuhn (1996), Myerson (1996), Nasar (1998), and Nash (1995).
Nash’s PhD thesis is reprinted in Kuhn and Nasar (2001). Hawk–Dove is known
also as “Chicken” (two drivers approach each other on a narrow road; the one who
pulls over ﬁrst is “chicken”). It was ﬁrst suggested (in a more complicated form)
as a model of animal conﬂict by Maynard Smith and Price (1973). The discussion
of focal points in the box on p. 30 draws on Schelling (1960, 54–58).
Games modeling voluntary contributions to a public good were ﬁrst consid-
ered by Olson (1965, Section I.D). The game in Exercise 31.1 is studied in detail by
Palfrey and Rosenthal (1984). The result in Section 2.8.4 is due to Warr (1983) and
Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian (1986).
Game theory was ﬁrst used to study voting behavior by Farquharson (1969)
(whose book was completed in 1958; see also Niemi 1983). The system of “ap-
proval voting” in Exercise 47.3 was ﬁrst studied formally by Brams and Fish-
burn (1978, 1983).
Exercise 16.1 is based on Leonard (1990). Exercise 25.2 is based on Ullmann-
Margalit (1977, 48). The game in Exercise 29.1 is taken from Van Huyck, Bat-
talio, and Beil (1990). The game in Exercise 32.1 is taken from Moulin (1986, 72).
The game in Exercise 32.2 was ﬁrst studied by Palfrey and Rosenthal (1983). Ex-
ercise 33.1 is based on Braess (1968); see also Murchland (1970). The game in
Exercise 37.1 is taken from Brams (1993).