--- Sayfa 1 ---
L e e d s M e t r o p o l i t a n Un i v e r s i t y Pr e s s
Leeds Metropolitan
University Press

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Peaceful Coexistence
Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world
www.GulenConference.nl
Leeds Metropolitan
University Press
London,2007

--- Sayfa 4 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

2

First published in Great Britain 2007
© Leeds Metropolitan University Press

Distributor
Dialoog Academie
Rochussenstraat 221-223
3021 NT Rotterdam, The Netherlands
info@dialoogacademie.nl
www.dialoogacademie.nl

Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, criticism or review, as permitted
under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or
transmitted, in any form or by any means or process, without the prior permission in writing of the holders
or their agents. Except for reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency, photocopying of whole or part of this publication without the prior written permission of
the copyright holders or their agents in single or multiple copies whether for gain or not is illegal and
expressly forbidden. Please direct all enquires concerning copyright to the publishers.

ISBN 978-0-9555017-7-7

--- Sayfa 5 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

3

PREFACE
It is my pleasure, on behalf of the sponsors and organizers, and of the Editorial Board and Organizing
Committee, to present the proceedings of the International Conference on Peaceful Coexistence:
Fethullah Gülen’s initiatives for peace in the contemporary world, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
22-23 November 2007.
The need for peaceful coexistence among the people of various cultures has long been recognized. The
much publicized failures in relations in recent years, which are both a cause and effect of the situation
in many parts of the world should spur all right-minded people to re-double their efforts to sustain
the hope for peaceful coexistence. By focussing on Gülen’s ideas and practice, this Conference aims to
explore the appeal and impact of the Gülen movement’s worldwide initiatives to help people respond
creatively to the profound social changes that are taking root everywhere. These changes make the
world an increasingly integrated place, while its people juggle different, often divided identities. A
particular focus will be the movement's long-established and ongoing projects dedicated to improving
North–South and East–West relations, and to building trust and cooperativeness among the people of
different faith traditions.
Fethullah Gülen is an Islamic scholar and peace activist whose ideas have inspired many people to
undertake charitable works, especially in education and dialogue. After thirty years of activism in the
field they now constitute one of the most effective and influential worldwide civic movements of the
21st century. They work to construct a culture of harmony and lasting peace by founding non-
denominational educational institutions and so encourage intercultural dialogue and understanding.
Their work makes a practical contribution to constructive, positive relations between the West and the
East, the North and the South, with special focus on issues such as democracy, multiculturalism,
globalization, citizenship, and intercultural dialogue in the context of secular modernity.
The Conference Call for Papers attracted 170 abstract submissions. The Editorial Board read each of
them and selected those most pertinent to different aspects of the Conference theme. Authors of the
selected abstracts were then invited to submit full text of their work in good time for further review by
the Editorial Board. Each paper was then read and discussed by at least three members of the Board.
The authors of the 32 finally selected papers were duly notified of acceptance or, in some cases, for the
need to re-submit with minor revisions. With the introduction we have 33 papers in this volume. 32
papers will be presented in eight panels over two days.
In the first part entitled “Reason and Faith in Gülen's Philosophy”, Professor Richard K. Khuri’s paper
makes a fourfold movement back and forth between emphasis on Oneness as Mystery and Oneness as
revealed, for which Gülen uses the words Ehadiyet and Vahidiyet. It begins with the Daoist approach
to Mystery, moves into the Sufi elaboration of this in conjunction with the Islamic emphasis on
revelation, continues with the Kantian retreat back into Mystery in view of the modern aversion to
religious authority and explicit religious discourse, and ends with Gülen’s synthesizing thought in the
light of lessons learned both from the distant past and from the increasingly apparent shortcomings of
modernity. Professor Howard Wettstein’s paper explores the synthesis between the extremes that the
middle way represents and proposes that we use these diverse images in a practical way, to nurture
religious development, to stimulate growth in our relationship to God. Mr Jerome D. Maryon puts

--- Sayfa 6 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

4
that Gülen’s potential contribution to co-existence will be assured only when it is recognized,
philosophically and theologically, as an intrinsic truth of human development.
“Envisaging Dialogue from Theological Perspective” is our second part where Dr Sevket Yavuz and
Professor Davut Ayduz underline that for Muslims, who share the aim of defeating the doom-laden
fear-rousing predictions of a long class of traditions, Gülen’s insights and parameters can be
reconstructed. They argue that especially commitment to dialogue and tolerance should build up our
spiritual capital so that we can adhere to the perennial values and understand the wisdom codes of
out respective traditions. Ms Efrat E. Aviv’s paper deals with similarities between the ideas of two
religious leaders, Fethullah Gülen and Rabbi Abraham HaKohen Kook, with emphasis on their ideas
of the state and tolerance. Dr Ian Fry puts that the Gϋlen Movement can become the launch pad for a
continuing dialogue in parallel with a global programme of collaborative reassessment because of
initiatives it has already taken: notably its education and conference programmes and proposals to
establish joint Muslim–Christian universities. Dr Terry Mathis shows that Jewish and Christian
Scriptures, somewhat in keeping with the Qur’an, allow for interfaith relationships that are respectful
and peaceful.  His paper concludes with some consideration of why the adherents of Christian and
Jewish traditions seldom take their Scriptures to advocate interfaith dialogue and how the work of
Mr.Gülen suggests a way forward to create more such understanding and dialogue.
In the third part entitled “Gülen Between East and West”, Ms Kate Kirk and Mr Gurkan Celik, by
amalgamating two perspectives on dialogue and tolerance issues — one rooted in Islam, the other in
secular early-Enlightenment — show that although different they can together point to the same goal.
They suggest that both Gülen and Spinoza’s philosophies can inform public debates, policy
development and community-building strategies in western European countries, like the Netherlands,
with their growing Muslim populations as the amalgamation of Gülen’s Islamic and Spinoza’s secular
perspectives on tolerance and dialogue have the potential to contribute to the ‘peaceful coexistence’ of
secular and Islamic residents. Professor Thomas Michel’s paper shows that Gülen is one of the
modern Muslims who have appropriated Rumi’s attitudes and integrated them into their own
understanding of Islamic faith and practice. Michel writes that the correspondence of Mevlana to
Gülen is that of kindred spirits who, across the centuries, share an interpretation of the Qur’anic
message as well as a commitment to communicate that message effectively to people of their
respective ages. Professor Richard Penaskovic argues that Gülen may be a bridge toward better
understanding between Islam and the West because of his views on peace, tolerance, and interfaith
dialogue and because of his optimistic view of the future relations between the two aforementioned
blocs. Dr Klas Grinell’s paper argues for the need for not only interfaith dialogue, but dialogue
between different strands of critiques of the border building modernity.
In the following part “Framing Paths to Citizenship: Gülen in Redefining Integration”, Mrs Nazila
Isgandarov investigates the identity crisis among Muslims in the West as a part of the identity crisis in
Western society generally, and asks how the views of Gülen help Muslims to deal with this crisis. Mr
Fatih Tedik discusses the potential of the Gülen Movement to contribute to the integration process of
Turkish community in the UK in the medium-term and the Muslim community as a whole in the long-
term. Dr Araxs Pashayan writes that it is not Christian and Islamic civilizations that clash in Europe
but post-Christian secular/liberal values and Muslim traditional values, arguing that the only
alternative for sectarianism, isolation and radical relativism is interfaith and intercultural
dialogue. In the fourth paper of this part, Professor Paul Weller emphasizes that although the debates
have often, and unfortunately, been constructed in terms of a conflict between ideologically Islamist
and ideologically secularist positions, there are other more constructive ways forward that promote

--- Sayfa 7 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

5
equity for religious minorities, inclusivity on the part of the state, and participation in civic society. In
exploring such alternatives, Weller brings perspectives from the teaching of Gülen, into critical
interaction with seven recently published theses on religion and public life in the UK and Europe that
have been developed by Weller over the past quarter of a century of practical and academic
engagement with issues of religious diversity and public life.
“Motivating Peaceful Coexistence: Understanding Gülen's Pluralism” is the conference’s fifth part. In
this part Professor Karina V. Korostelina considers dialogue about the formation of common secular
identity (national or regional) as a tool for the development of peaceful co-existence between Muslim
and non-Muslim groups in a secular context. Mr Erkan Toguslu analyses the circulation of both Gülen
and Tariq Ramadan’s ideas among the younger generation, their education and dialogue initiatives,
and the cassettes of lectures that have opened up a space where ideas about human civic
responsibility, democracy, citizenship, pluralism, dialogue and tolerance can take root. In a similar
vein, Mr Heydar Shadi discusses the approaches, sources and arguments of Gülen and Abdul Karim
Soroush as contemporary Muslim scholars on religious pluralism and tolerance. Mr Gurkan Celik, Ms
Kate Kirk and Mr Yusuf Alan’s paper is an exposition of Gülen’s model of peaceful coexistence. Based
on qualitative analysis of his writings, conversations, sermons and public speeches, the authors
distinguish four dimensions of peace — eternal peace, inner peace, interpersonal or inter-communal
peace, and global peace — not from a theoretical perspective, but as a practical guideline for those
who seek to pursue peace. The authors argue that these four dimensions of peace are possible only
when accompanied by moral values, mutual knowledge and acceptance of cultural and religious
identity and they present Gülen’s idea of education as a practical means to achieve peace, and his
dialogue approach as an alternative for dispute resolution and as a tool for building a culture of peace
between and within societies.
In “Anatolian Muslimness in Practice (1): Gülen's Initiatives for Dialogue and Education” which is our
sixth part, we have first Jonathan Lacey who focuses on a Gülen-inspired society based in Ireland,
namely the Turkish Irish Educational and Cultural Society (TIECS). Mr Lacey draws on ethnographic
work and qualitative interviews that he conducted with members of TIECS. He argues that TIECS and
the Gülen community practice ‘Turkish Islam’ which has Sufi principles at its core, promoting
tolerance and reason as the keys to peaceful coexistence. Professor Victoria Levinskaya’s paper
reflects on Turkish influence and specifically the ideas of Gülen and his community on formation of
identity and values in Central Asia. She argues that Gülen’s ideas and writings will be used by Central
Asian nations for further development in the region in order to create a better society based on
religious tolerance and modern values, and alert to the importance of education and the pursuit of
knowledge, and to the positive role of religion and spiritual life in forming a peaceful and harmonious
social order. In the same part, Mr Mark Scheel suggests that the vision embodied in ‘communitarian’
philosophic approach has close parallels with much of the peaceful, educational, spiritual and moral
philosophy found in the work of the Gülen Movement and in much of modern Turkish culture and
society as a whole. Mr Emre Demir’s paper examines the individual and collective de-stigmatization
strategies of the Gülen Movement in France and Germany. Demir concludes that the total absence of
religious discourse in the movement’s educational establishments constitutes the most interesting and
paradoxical feature of the movement’s strategy: by softening the visibility of their religious
identification, the movement look for recognition in the public sphere in Germany and France in
order to build an educational network in these countries.
In the next part entitled “Anatolian Muslimness in Practice (2): Gülen's Ideas in Western Context”,
Mr Farhod Alimuhamedov’s paper is about the conditions of inter-ethnic, inter-religious and inter-

--- Sayfa 8 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

6
class relations in Gülen schools and their operation in non-Turkish and non-Muslim settings.
Alimuhamedov argues that the example of Gülen schools in Russia could be useful for ethnically
changing societies like the French one. Professor Gabriel Pirický underlines in his paper that Gülen is
one of charismatic Muslims of our time who try to ‘open windows’ of true dialogue and to overcome
the image of furor Islamicus commmunicated by the European media. His paper investigates the
possibilities of peaceful coexistence of all humankind as seen from Central European perspective by
focusing on the ideas and attitudes of the Czech Catholic priest Tomáš Halík and Slovak Catholic
missionaries in Azerbaijan. In the next paper of the part, Professor Tom Gage compares the seminal
ideas of Gülen and the late James Moffett in their efforts to engage students with the domain of
knowledge inclusive and beyond the cognitive. The hypothesis underlying Gage’s paper is that
Moffett’s work in improving reading and writing is congruent with and complementary to Gülen’s
mission to foster, enhance, and develop students’ tolerance, attitudes of inclusivity and mutual good
will. Professor Ian G. Williams’ paper in the same part examines the contribution of Fethullah Gülen
in his writings and their outworking in schools, their curricula and universities associated with his
name towards global peace and understanding, based upon field work in the UK, Turkey, the USA, the
Caucasus, and Africa.
In the last part of the conference, we look at the Muslim World which includes Muslims of the West.
The part’s title is Transforming the Muslim World: Gülen in Re-Conceptualisation "the Muslim
Citizen". Mrs Tineke Peppinck’s research paper elaborates the question of what the vision of Fethullah
Gülen is with regard to renewal and modernization, what the historical context is for this vision and
what relevance this has for the Dutch context. She emphasizes the development and participation of
the Turkish community as a pioneer group in Dutch society and in the development of Dutch youth
into ‘world citizens’, tolerant towards other beliefs and cultures, a programme fully in line with the
vision of Gülen and the Gülen Movement’s role models. Professor T. Steve Wright suggests that there
is much to learn from the Gülen emphasis on interfaith sharing based on spiritual awareness rather
than social, political or economic gain, reminding that this very role may be seen as a threat by others
who do not share that humanitarian agenda. Wright’s paper argues that in the midst of their spiritual
and practical teaching, the Gülen community should take inspiration from Western groups who apply
peaceful non-violent action for social change in the face of repression. Mr Ozcan Keles underlines in
his paper entitled “Promoting Human Rights Values in the Muslim World: Towards An Inclusive
Civilization in Gülen’s Thought and Practice” that human rights values are a persistent theme of
Fethullah Gülen’s thought and tajdid and expressed by the Gülen movement through example. As
Gülen’s views on democracy, pluralism, human rights and freedom of belief directly promote human
rights values and norms, Keles argues that Gülen’s ideas will enable and empower the periphery in
Muslim societies to influence the centre ground and open the way for wider enjoyment of freedom
and human rights. It is obvious that the Gülen’s tajdid will also help Western Muslims to come to
terms with the western values vis-à-vis , pluralism, human rights and freedom of belief. In the final
paper of the conference, Professor Leonid R. Sykiainen argues that Gülen opens the way for the
Muslim world to benefit from modern democratic models of governance.
The quality and relevance of the papers read at Conference owes much to the conscientious and
patient scrutiny of the Editorial Board, and their collective effort to maintain high standards of
information and argument. I would like to express thanks and appreciation to all the Editors on behalf
of the Conference sponsors and organizers, especially the Organizing Committee.
I would like to extend thanks to all those, not named here, who have helped to make this Conference
happen. My personal thanks and appreciation go to each member of the Organizing Committee —

--- Sayfa 9 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

7
Tercan Basturk, Gurkan Celik, Yusuf Alan, Kate Kirk, Sedat Metinulu, Onder Cetin, Serafettin Pektas,
Serdal Tunc, Iris Creemers, Battal Karakaya, Isa Özler, Murat Celik, Saniye Dilara and Erkan Toguslu
— the principal driving force behind this Conference. I am very grateful also to our sponsors for
helping and enabling us to put together what will surely prove to be a most worthwhile and
stimulating academic enterprise.
Please note that papers have not been copy-edited but are provided in advance circulation of the
conference as draft copies to facilitate meaningful discussion during the conference.
Dr Ihsan Yilmaz
Conference Convenor

--- Sayfa 10 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

8
EDITORS

DR IHSAN YILMAZ
BA in politics and international relations from Bogazici University, Istanbul. PhD in law in 1999 from
SOAS, University of London. 1999–2001: Research Fellow at the University of Oxford where he
undertook two separate research projects: the Turkish diaspora in London, and the faith-based
movement of Fethullah Gülen, its neo-ijtihad and renewal of Islam. Since 2001 he has been teaching
comparative law, legal sociology, Islamic law and Turkish politics at the University of London.
Research interests: Turkish diaspora, Turkish politics, Islamic movements, Muslim minorities,
Muslim legal pluralism, neo-ijtihad and the Gülen movement. He has published his work in scholarly
journals such as British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, The Middle East Journal, Journal of
Ethnic and Migration Studies, Muslim World, International Journal of Turkish Studies, Journal for
Islamic Studies and Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs. He recently convened another conference on
the Gülen Movement: Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement, 25-27
October 2007, House of Lords, SOAS and LSE, London, UK.

MR JEAN MICHEL CROS
Researcher and lecturer at the National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) in France, and an
advisor to the Strasbourg Urban Community. Main interests: Islam in France, Muslim minorities and
the role of Islam in Western culture. His publications include contributions in the collective works: J.
Picano (ed.), L’Islam (Marseille: Ellipses, Coll. Culture et Histoire, 1996) and F. Fregosi (ed.) Les
Conditions d’exercice du culte musulman en France: analyse comparé à partir d’implantations
locales de lieux de culte et de carrés musulmans (Agathe Petit, 2004). He is a regular contributor at
www.oumma.com, an electronic publication very popular amongst the French Muslim community.

PROFESSOR KHALED ABOU EL FADL
Professor of Law at the UCLA School of Law, where he teaches Islamic Law, Immigration, Human
Rights, International and National Security Law. Dr Abou El Fadl, author of ten books and over fifty
articles on Islamic law and Islam, is an accomplished Islamic jurist and scholar. He previously taught
Islamic law at the University of Texas at Austin Law School, Yale Law School and Princeton
University. He holds degrees from Yale University (BA), University of Pennsylvania Law School (J.D.)
and Princeton University (MA, PhD).

PROFESSOR ERIC GEOFFROY
Professor in Arabic and Islamic Studies at the University Marc Bloch in Strasbourg and an eminent
French expert on Islam and Sufism. He is the author of several books and many articles, and has
participated in numerous academic and interfaith conferences in Europe and the Middle East. Among
his best known publications are: Jihad et contemplation: vie et enseignement d’un soufi au temps des
croisades (Paris, 1997), and Initiation au soufisme (Paris, 2003).

--- Sayfa 11 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

9
PROFESSOR ANDREAS KINNEGING
Professor in Philosophy of Law at the University of Leiden, and President of the Board of the Edmund
Burke Stichting, the well-known Dutch conservative group. Raised as a Catholic, he graduated in
political science from the Catholic University of Nijmegen, and then worked for a time at the Dutch
Ministry of Finance. He is the editor of the new Nicolai Hartmann’s Ethics (3 vols., 2001–2004), the
author of a collection of essays Geography of Good and Evil (published in Dutch, 2005), and of the
book (also in Dutch, 2006) Education in Crisis.

REVD. DR JOHNSTON MCMASTER
Lecturer and Programme Coordinator of Education in the Irish School of Ecumenics, Trinity College
Dublin, and Chair of the Northern Ireland Youth Service Curriculum and Policy Development at the
Joined in Equity, Diversity and Interdependence (JEDI). (Doctorate of Ministry at Garrett-
Evangelical Seminary in North Western University, Illinois.) Among his areas of expertise and
research are: broadcasting; public theology; socio-political Biblical hermeneutics; Celtic spirituality
and contemporary social ethics; communities of reconciliation; overcoming violence: a faith
perspective; the shape of faith in a post-Christendom era.

PROFESSOR THOMAS MICHEL, SJ
Currently Secretary for Inter-religious Dialogue for the Society of Jesus and Ecumenical Secretary for
the Federation of Asian Bishops’ Conferences. Professor Michel was director of the Islamic Office of
the Vatican’s Council for Inter-religious Dialogue for 13 years. He belongs to the Indonesian Province
of the Jesuits. He regularly conducts seminars on Christian–Muslim relations in Indonesia, the
Philippines and Malaysia. He has written much on the thought of Said Nursi and M. Fethullah Gülen.

PROFESSOR PAOLO NASO
Professor in Political Science at La Sapienza University (Rome); there, and at the Gregorian Pontifical
University Cultures and Religions Institute, he teaches a graduate course in Religious Historical
Science. He is director of the TV show Protestantesimo (RAI-2) and of the magazine Confronti.

PROFESSOR TON NOTTEN
Professor (from 2002) at Rotterdam University in urban education and youth policy issues and also
part-time professor (from 1998) in andragology (specially adult education and intercultural issues and
urban studies) at Vrije University Brussels.  He studied theology and philosophy, and later social
sciences, in particular andragology, at the University of Amsterdam (PhD 1988, on ‘Rationality and
the Beautiful Ambition’). He has always combined scientific work and professional education. At the
University of Amsterdam, he was an assistant and associate professor in the theory and history of
adult education, and taught social education at the University of Professional Education in
Amsterdam. He is the author (writing in Dutch, English and other languages) of over 250 learned
articles in journals and books.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

10
PROFESSOR KLAUS OTTE
A world authority on religion and culture, Professor Otte has published extensively in his field. Hewas
awarded a special medal of honour by the President of Germany in Berlin in 1999 for his
distinguished services to the church and society. Throughout his career he has combined the duties of
Professor in Systematic Theology with pastoral work as a minister in local churches. As well as other
places, he served as minister in Mehren, Germany. He was Professor in Systematic Theology in
Beirut; in Kyoto and Osaka, where he taught Culture and Theology; and then distinguished professor
at universities in Basel, Mainz and Frankfurt, specializing in the Ontology of Universal Religion. He
has always striven to bring his cultural and theological knowledge and expertise to bear on the work of
the church.

PROFESSOR EMILIO PLATTI
Professor in Islamic Studies at the Catholic University Leuven (KUL) and the Catholic University
Louvain (UCL). As a Dominican father, he is also a member of Institut Dominicain d’Études
Orientales du Caire (IDEO), and Institut Catholique de Paris. His research interests include: Islam
and politics, Islamic theology and inter-religious dialogue. He is the author of Islam: étranger?,
L’Islam parmi nous, L’Islam: ennemi naturel?, Yahya Ibn Adi: Theologien chrétien et philosophe
arabe, Wat Gelooft Enn Goede Moslim. He has also contributed many articles to learned journals and
books in French, Dutch and English.

PROFESSOR REV. SIMON ROBINSON
Professor of Applied and Professional Ethics, Leeds Metropolitan University, Associate Director,
Ethics Centre of Excellence, and Visiting Fellow in Theology, University of Leeds. Educated at Oxford
and Edinburgh universities, Professor Robinson entered psychiatric social work before ordination in
the Church of England in 1978. He served in university chaplaincy at Heriot-Watt and Leeds
universities, developing research in areas of applied ethics and practical theology. Ongoing research
interests: religious ethics and care; interfaith pastoral care; professional ethics; ethics in higher
education; spirituality and professional practice; corporate social responsibility; and ethics in global
perspective. Among his publications: Moral Meaning and Pastoral Counselling; (ed. with Chris
Megone) Case Histories in Business Ethics; Living Wills; (with Kevin Kendrick and Alan Brown)
Spirituality and Healthcare; Ministry Amongst Students; (ed. with Clement Katulushi) Values in
Higher Education; (with Ross Dixon, Chris Preece and Kris Moodley) Engineering, Business and
Professional Ethics.

PROFESOR EMERITUS KAREL STEENBRINK
Studied Christian and Islamic theology at the Radboud University of Nijmegen and the Darussalam
College of Gontor, Indonesia; his doctoral dissertation (1974) was on Islamic education in Indonesia.
1981–1988: Lecturer at the State Academy of Islamic Studies in Jakarta and Yogyakarta. He taught
‘orientalism’ in the Western tradition in Islamic studies, at the special request of Professor Mukti Ali,
Minister of Religion in Indonesia and a scholar well-known for inter-religious engagement. 1992–
1993: Visiting Professor at the Institute of Islamic Studies, McGill University (Montreal). 1989–2007:

--- Sayfa 13 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

11
at Utrecht University as Professor of Intercultural Theology and as a researcher for the Centre for
Inter-religious and Intercultural Studies (IIMO). He has published widely on Islam and Christianity
in Indonesia and more recently also on Qur’an interpretation. Among his works are: Catholics in
Indonesia 1808–1942 (Leiden: KITLV, 2 vols, 2003–7); a series on Jewish and Christian prophets in
the Islamic tradition: Adam Redivivus: Muslim elaborations of the Adam saga with special reference
to the Indonesian literary traditions (Zoetermeer: Meinema, 1998); and Jezusverzen in de Koran
(2006).

PROFESSOR DAVID THOMAS
Professor of Christianity and Islam at the University of Birmingham. His main interests: Islamic
theology and philosophy; the history and theology of Christian–Muslim relations; Islam and culture;
and textual studies in Arabic. Among recent publications: ‘Dialogue with other Faiths as an Aspect of
Islamic Theology’ in T. L. Hettema and A. van der Kooij (eds.), Religious Polemics in Context (Assen,
The Netherlands, 2004); Muslim-Christian Polemic during the Crusades: The Letter from the People
of Cyprus and Ibn Abi Talib’s Response; (ed. with R. Ebied) The History of Christian-Muslim
Relations, 2 (Leiden, 2005); ‘Receiving and Acquiring Wisdom in Islam’, Journal of Chinese
Philosophy 33 (2006). He is currently working on ‘Christian Doctrine in Islamic Theology’. He is the
editor for entries on Islam in The Encyclopaedia of the Bible and its Reception; general editor of
Christian–Muslim Relations: a Bibliographical History, 1; and editor of the journal, Islam and
Christian–Muslim Relations.

DR PIM VALKENBERG
Christian theologian working in the department of Theology and Religious Studies at Radboud
University in Nijmegen; also teaching as affiliate professor at Loyola College in Baltimore, MD. Dr
Valkenburg’s research focuses on Christian–Muslim dialogue in the context of Abrahamic
partnership, both in the present and in the past. His publications include: Words of the Living God
(Leuven 2000), a dissertation on St. Thomas Aquinas; The Three Rings (Leuven, 2005) on Abrahamic
dialogue in the Middle Ages; Sharing Lights on the Way to God (Amsterdam/New York, 2006) on
Muslim–Christian dialogue and theology, including a reading of texts by al-Ghazali, Said Nursi and
Fethullah Gülen from the perspective of a comparative theology.

PROFESSOR PAUL WELLER
Professor of Inter-religious Relations at the University of Derby and Head of Research and
Commercial Development in its Faculty of Education, Health and Sciences; Visiting Fellow in the
Oxford Centre for Christianity and Culture at Regent’s Park College, University of Oxford; and Vice
Chair of the Multi-Faith Centre at the University of Derby. Current interests: issues in the
relationships between religion, state and society. Recent publications: Time for Change:
Reconfiguring Religion, State and Society (London: T. & T. Clark, 2005) and ‘Fethullah Gülen,
Religions, Globalization and Dialogue’, in R. Hunt and Y. Aslandoğan (eds.), Muslim Citizens of the
Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Somerset, NJ: The Light Inc. and IID

--- Sayfa 14 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

12
Press, 2006). He is editor of Religions in the UK: Directory, 2007–2010 (Derby: University of Derby
and Multi-Faith Centre at the University of Derby, 2007).

PROFESSOR EMERITUS ANTON WESSELS
Professor Emeritus in History of Religion, in particular Islam, at the Free University Amsterdam. He
studied theology and comparative Religion at the Free University Amsterdam, University of Utrecht
and Leiden, and Cairo University. His doctoral thesis was on ‘The Image of the Prophet Muhammad
in Modern Arabic Literature’. He was associate professor of Islamic Studies at the Near East School of
Theology in Beirut. He is the author of many articles and books in Dutch, English, Italian and
Indonesian. Among his English publications: A Modern Arabic Biography of Muhammad (Leiden: E.
J. Brill, 1972); Images of Jesus. How Jesus is Perceived and Portrayed in non-European Culture
(London: SCM Press/ Grand Rapids: Erdmans, 1990); Understanding the Qur’an (London: SCM
Press, 2000; Europe. Had it Ever been Really Christian?; Arab and Christian? Christians in the
Middle East (Kampen: Pharos Press, 1995); Islam in Stories (Leuven: Peeters, 2002); Muslims and
the West. Can They Be Integrated? (Leuven: Peeters, 2005).

--- Sayfa 15 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

13
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE

        3
EDITORS
8
Dr Ihsan Yilmaz
8
Mr Jean Michel Cros
8
Professor Khaled Abou El Fadl
8
Professor Eric Geoffroy
8
Professor Andreas Kinneging
9
Revd. Dr Johnston McMaster
9
Professor Thomas Michel, SJ
9
Professor Paolo Naso
9
Professor Ton Notten
9
Professor Klaus Otte
10
Professor Emilio Platti
10
Professor Rev. Simon Robinson
10
Profesor Emeritus Karel Steenbrink
10
Professor David Thomas
11
Dr Pim Valkenberg
11
Professor Paul Weller
11
Professor Emeritus Anton Wessels
12

Introduction

SOCIAL INNOVATION FOR PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE: INTERCULTURAL ACTIVISM
FROM RUMI TO GÜLEN
IHSAN YILMAZ
25
1. Introduction

       25
2. Rumi and Gülen’s Main Message and Acceptance of the Other
26
3. Socio-Cultural and Political Activism for Peaceful Coexistence
30
4. Social Innovation for Peaceful Coexistence and Its Discontents
35
5. Concluding Remarks: Renewed Peaceful Coexistence Message of Rumi Today and Gülen’s Initiatives
40

Part 1: Reason and Faith in Gülen's Philosophy

INTERSECTIONS OF WAYS TOWARDS TOLERANCE AND COEXISTENCE: FROM DAOISM
AND SUFISM TO KANT AND GÜLEN
RICHARD K. KHURI
45

RATIONAL RELIGION: GÜLEN’S MIDDLE WAY
HOWARD WETTSTEIN
57

--- Sayfa 16 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

14
BALANCING THE CANDLE ON THE RIGHT PATH
JEROME D. MARYON
67
Abstract
67
1. Introduction
67
2. “My chcemy Boga!”
68
3. Deus suam gloriam non quaerit propter se, sed propter nos.
71
4. “Only a concept embracing the whole in its wholeness can be called truly scientific.”
81
5. Tout ce qui monte, converge.
86

Part 2: Envisaging Dialogue from Theological Perspective

TURNING FROM DOOM-LADEN SOOTHSAYINGS TO MUTUAL COMMUNICATION
AND WISDOM (TA`ARUF)
SEVKET YAVUZ AND DAVUT AYDUZ
89
Abstract
91
1. Prologue & Methodological Postulates
92
2. Epistemic and Historical Prolegomena: From Clash and Chaos To Peace and Cosmos
94
2.1. From Veni, Vidi, Vici to Mutuality and Wisdomization
94
2.2. From Theoria To Praxes or Textual Precepts and Historical Manifestations
96
2.3. From Chaos and Doomsday Soothsayings to Wisdomization and Cooperation (Ta ‘âruf) in the
        “Global Village”
100
3. Conclusions and suggestions
105

‘THE LIGHT OF TOLERANCE’— BETWEEN RABBI ABRAHAM KOOK AND HOJA
EFENDI FETHULLAH GÜLEN
EFRAT E. AVIV
107
Abstract
107
1. Introducation
108
2. A brief summary of their lives
108
2.1. Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook (1865-1935)
108
2.2. Fethullah Gülen (b.1938)
110
3. Analogies between Rabbi Kook and Fethullah Hoca
113
3.1. Their Personalities
113
3.2. Nationalism
114
3.3. Education and Educational Synthesis
114
3.4. Concern for Their Students
116
3.5. Religion and Science - Religion and Philosophy
117
3.6. Tolerance and the Attitude towards Atheists
118
3.7. The Element of "Light" as Expressed in Poetry
119
4. Conclusion
120

--- Sayfa 17 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

15
A WIDER ROLE FOR THE GÜLEN MOVEMENT CONSISTENT WITH THE PLACE OF THE
QUR’AN AND ISLAM IN THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGIOUS UNDERSTANDING:
A FUNDAMENTAL THEOLOGICAL REASSESSMENT
IAN FRY
121
Abstract
121
1. Introduction: An overview
122
2. History and Systematic Religion
127
3. The Concept of Divine Covenant: Stage 1 – Evolution of an Idea
129
4. The Concept of Divine Covenant: Stage 1 – Evolution of an Idea
135
5. The reality of Shared Covenant: a requirement for dialogue and reassessment
140
6. The Way Ahead, and a Wider Role for the Gülen Movement?
143

SACRED SCRIPTURES AND INTERFAITH DIALOGUE
TERRY MATHIS
153

Part 3: Gülen between East and West

OPENING THE ROAD TO DIALOGUE: AN AMALGAMATION OF GÜLEN’S AND SPINOZA’S
IDEAS ON TOLERANCE AND DIALOGUE APPLIED TO THE SITUATION OF MUSLIMS IN
THE NETHERLANDS
KATE KIRK AND GURKAN CELIK
167
Abstract
169
1. Introduction
170
2. Becoming Dutch: Muslim Citizens and Dutch Integration Policies
171
3. Anti-Muslimism in the Netherlands
174
4. Dialogue and Tolerance: Spinoza and Gülen
178
5. Conclusions and Discussion
181

FETHULLAH GÜLEN: FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF RUMI
THOMAS MICHEL
183
Abstract
183
1. The need for a modern spirituality
183
2. 1. Rumi as the model of tolerance and dialogue
184
2.2. Rumi as one of the great saints produced by Islam.
185
2.3. Rumi as the saint who longed to be united to God.
187
2.4. Rumi as teacher of virtue.
189

M. F. GÜLEN: A BRIDGE BETWEEN ISLAM AND THE WEST
RICHARD PENASKOVIC
193
Abstract
193
1. Introduction
194
2.1. Thesis 1: We Live In a Global World
194

--- Sayfa 18 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

16
2.2. Thesis 2: Islam and the West Have Become Estranged From One Another
195
2.3. Thesis 3: Dialogue is the Key
197
2.4. Thesis 4: Love Conquers All
198
2.5. Thesis 5: The Future Looks Hopeful
199
3. Concluding Observations
200

BEYOND EAST AND WEST: FETHULLAH GÜLEN AND ‘BORDER’ THINKING
KLAS GRINELL
203
Abstract
203
1. Introduction
203
2. Modernity as Border Building
204
3. Gülen as a Border Transgressor
205
4. Turkey as a Borderland
205
5. Gülen on the Western Side of the Border
206
6. Gülen’s Theory of Science
207
7. Border Gnoseology
208
8. Border Dialogue
210
9. Civilisations?
212
10. Something Bordering to a Conclusion
213

Part 4: Framing Paths to Citizenship: Gülen in Redefining Integration

IDENTITY AS A MAJOR FACTOR IN INTEGRATION TO THE WESTERN SOCIETY
NAZILA ISGANDAROV
215
Abstract
217
1. Introduction: Importance of the Problem
217
2. Literature Review
219
3. Research Questions and Hypotheses
221
4. Identity Crisis in the West
221
5. Identity Crisis among Muslims in the West
223
6. Gülen’s Approach to Eliminate the Identity Crisis among Muslims
225
7. Conclusion
227

MOTIVATING MINORITY INTEGRATION IN WESTERN CONTEXT:  THE GÜLEN
MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
FATIH TEDIK
229
Abstract
229
1. Introduction: Theoretical Incentives of the Gülen Movement for Integration
229
2. Turks in the United Kingdom
231
3. Gülen Movement’s Initiatives in Britain
234
4. Concluding Remarks: Gülen Movement in Practice
236

--- Sayfa 19 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

17
INTEGRATION OF MUSLIMS IN EUROPE AND GÜLEN MOVEMENT
ARAXS PASHAYAN
239
Abstract
239
1. Introduction
239
2. The Gülen Movement: Theory and Practice
240
3. Turkish Community in Germany and Islamic Identity
243
4. Turkish integration in Germany and Gülen Movement
244
5. Conclusion
246

DIALOGICAL AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESOURCES: PERSPECTIVES FROM
FETHULLAH GÜLEN ON RELIGION AND PUBLIC LIFE
PAUL WELLER
247
Abstract
247
1. The European and Netherlands Context
248
2. European Context for Religion(s), State and Society
249
3. Old Models and Their Alternatives
251
4. Theses on Religion(s), State and Society: A Conversation with Gülen
252
5. “The Importance of Not Marginalizing Religions from Public Life”
252
6. “The Need to Recognize the Specificity of Religions”
254
7. “The Imperative for Religious Engagement with the Wider Community”
255
8. “The Need for A Reality Check”
257
9. “The Need to Recognize the Transnational Dimensions of Religions”
258
10. “The Importance of Religious Inclusivity”
260
11. “The Imperative of Inter-Religious Dialogue”
261
12. Conclusion
262

Part 5: Motivating Peaceful Coexistence: Understanding Gülen's Pluralism

DIALOGUE AS A SOURCE FOR PEACEFUL CO-EXISTENCE BETWEEN MUSLIM AND
ORTHODOX CHRISTIANS IN A SECULAR STATE
KARINA V. KOROSTELINA
267
Abstract
269
1. Introduction
269
2. Gülen’s Approach to Dialogue
270
3. Negotiating Identities
271
4. Identity Dialogue
275
5. Conclusion
277

--- Sayfa 20 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

18
REFLECTIONS ON EUROPEAN MULTICULTURALISM, ISLAM AND PEACEFUL
COEXISTENCE: TARIQ RAMADAN AND FETHULLAH GÜLEN
ERKAN TOGUSLU
279
Abstract
279
1. Introduction
279
2. Making of Muslim Youth and the New Islamic Intellectuals: Speaking for Western Muslims
280
3. Ijtihad and Islamic Renaissance
282
4. European Islam and Citizenship
285
5. Civility That Matters
286
6. A Possible Peaceful Coexistence
287

INTERFAITH DIALOGUE AND RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE IN CONTEMPORARY
ISLAMIC THOUGHT: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN AND ABDUL
KARIM SOROUSH
HEYDAR SHADI
289
Abstract
289
1. Introduction
289
2. Fethullah Gülen’s Views on Religious Pluralism and Tolerance
290
2.1. Definition and Background
290
2.2. Arguments
291
3. Dr Soroush’s Views on Religious Pluralism and Tolerance
292
3.1. Definition and Background
292
3.2. Arguments
293
4. Comparison and Conclusion
294

GÜLEN’S PARADIGM ON PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE: THEORETICAL INSIGHTS
AND SOME PRACTICAL PERSPECTIVES
GURKAN CELIK, KATE KIRK AND YUSUF ALAN
297
Abstract
297
1. Introduction
297
2. “Moderate” Islam and Peaceful West
300
3. The Middle Way and the Nature of Human Being
302
4. Four Dimensions of Peace from Gülen Perspective
303
4.1.  Eternal Peace
303
4.2.  Inner Peace
304
4.3.  Interpersonal and Intercommunal Peace
305
4.4.  Universal Peace
307
5. Peaceful Coexistence through Universal Education
308
6. Dispute Resolution through Dialogical Approach
309
7. Concluding Remarks
311

--- Sayfa 21 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

19
Part 6: Anatolian Muslimness in Practice: Gülen's Initiatives for Dialogue
               and Education

INVESTIGATING THE CONTRIBUTION OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN THROUGH THE
ACTIVITIES OF A GÜLEN-INSPIRED RELIGIO-CULTURAL SOCIETY BASED IN
IRELAND
JONATHAN LACEY
313
Abstract
315
1. Introduction
315
2. Islam in Ireland
317
3. Turkish Islam
319
4. Fethullah Gülen and Turkish Islam
320
5. The Gülen Movement and Turkish Islam in Germany: Prospects for Integration?
321
6. TIECS’ Attitudes to Integration
323
7. TIECS, Dialogue and Turkish Islam
326
8. Conclusion
328

RESEMBLANCE OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN'S IDEAS AND CURRENT POLITICAL
DEVELOPMENTS IN UZBEKISTAN
VICTORIA LEVINSKAYA
331
Abstract
331
1. Introduction
331
2. Islam in Central Asia
332
3. Islam after the Independence. (1990s). “Turkish-Islam”
334
4. Educational Vision of Fethullah Gülen and Establishment of the Network of his Schools in
     Central Asia
336
5. Worsening of the Relationships between Turkey and Uzbekistan and Its Negative Effect on
     Dissemination of Gülen’s Ideas
338
6. Fethullah Gülen’s Community and Development of Civil Society in Central Asia
340
7. Concluding Remarks
342

A COMMUNITARIAN IMPERATIVE: FETHULLAH GÜLEN’S MODERN TURKEY AS A
MODEL
MARK SCHEEL
345
Abstract
345
1. Introductory Overview
345
2. A Century of Turmoil
346
3. The Third Way
347
4. The Turkish Connection
347
5. A Communitarian Cousin
348
6. A Communitarian Fertile Ground
349
7. The Challenge of Community in America
350
8. A Blueprint for Action
352
9. Concluding Summary
353

--- Sayfa 22 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

20

NEW RELIGIOUS SOCIABILITIES IN EURO-ISLAM: THE ORGANIZATIONAL LOGICS
AND RECOGNITION POLITICS OF GÜLEN MOVEMENT IN FRANCE AND GERMANY
EMRE DEMIR
355
Abstract
355
1. Introduction
355
2. Islamic Movements as Socialization Agents in Europe
356
3. The Gülen Movement in Germany and France
358
3.1. The Settlement Process of Gülen Movement in Europe
358
3.2. Organisational Structure of the Gülen Movement in Europe
359
3.3. Stigma Correction Strategies of the Gülen Movement
361
4. Concluding Remarks
369

Part 7: Anatolian Muslimness in Practice: Gülen's Ideas in Western
              Context

PEACEFUL MUSLIM–NON-MUSLIM CO-EXISTENCE IN A SECULAR CONTEXT
FARHOD ALIMUHAMEDOV
371
Abstract
373
1. Introduction
373
2. Gülen and “His Schools”
374
3. The Missions of “Missionary Schools”
375
4. Case study: Schools in contemporary Russia
377
5. Academic results
378
6. Human Relationship
379
7. Conclusion: The Movement in Europe
380

SEARCHING FOR A NEW UNITY OF THOUGHT (FIKIR BIRLIĞI) AMONG PEOPLE OF
DIFFERENT RELIGIOUS AFFILIATIONS: VOICES FROM CENTRAL EUROPE
GABRIEL PIRICKÝ
383
Abstract
383
1. Introduction
384
2. Delusive History?
384
3. Tomáš Halík and the Idea of a Link between the Secular West and Islam
386
4. Abrahamic Religions: Coexistence, Tolerance and Dialogue
388
5. The Empowerment of School Manuals
391
6. The Salesians of Don Bosco in Azerbaijan
392
7. Towards Unity of Basic Principles
394

--- Sayfa 23 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

21
HARMONIC LEARNING: THE CONGRUENT EDUCATION MODELS OF FETHULLAH
GÜLEN AND JAMES MOFFETT
TOM GAGE
397

THE VISION OF EDUCATION WITHIN PLURALISTIC SOCIETIES IN THE THOUGHT OF
FETHULLAH GÜLEN: THE CONTRIBUTION OF NON-DENOMINATIONAL EDUCATION
TOWARDS INTER-RELIGIOUS AND COMMUNAL UNDERSTANDING, PEACE AND
IDENTITY. A STUDY OF CONTRASTS IN THE UK, TURKEY AND THE USA
IAN G. WILLIAMS
407
Abstract
407
1. Introduction
407
2. The Context: Europe
408
3. A Counter Movement
411
4. “And the wind is blowing”
412
5. Conclusion
414

Part 8: Transforming the Muslim World: Gülen in Re-Conceptualisation
              "the Muslim Citizen”

FROM ‘NEW MAN’ TO ‘WORLD CITIZEN’: THE REPLICATION OF FETHULLAH
GÜLEN’S RENEWAL VISION IN THE DUTCH CONTEXT
TINEKE PEPPINCK
417
Abstract
419
1. Introduction
420
2. Turkey as Indivisible Unity
420
3. Risale-i Nur
421
4. Gülen-Inspired-Schools
422
5. A Threat to Democracy?
422
6. Imitation of Western modernity
424
7. The ‘New Man’
425
8. Gülen’s Vision in the Dutch Context
426
9. Tolerance and Dialogue
427
10. Being a Good Example
428
11. Concluding Remarks
429

NOW MORE THAN EVER: MAKING NON-VIOLENT CHANGE IN A GLOBALISED
WORLD
T. STEVE WRIGHT
431
Abstract
431
1. Introduction
431
2. Peace by Peace?
432
3. Cultures of Peace
438

--- Sayfa 24 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

22
4. Evolution of Tire Peace Concept—Especially in Western Peace Research: Six Stages
439
5. Sharp’s Tactics & Politics of Non-violence
441
6. Brian Martin & The Dynamics of Backfire
442
7. Gülen’s Non-Violent Spiritual Paths & Practices
443
8. Conclusions
445

PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS VALUES IN THE MUSLIM WORLD: TOWARDS AN
INCLUSIVE CIVILIZATION IN GÜLEN’S THOUGHT AND PRACTICE
OZCAN KELES
447
Abstract
447
1. Introduction
447
2. Gülen’s Influence and Tajdid
448
2.1. The Gülen Trio-Formula: Devout-Intellectual-Alim
449
2.2. Gülen movement: Collective Tajdid
451
2.3. Gülen Movement’s Influence in Turkey
453
3. Human Rights Values in Gülen’s Thought
456
3.1. Human Rights
456
3.2. Incremental (tedriji) Ijtihad in the Making: Apostasy in Islam
459
4. Gülen’s Influence in the Muslim World
461
4.1. Gülen on the Muslim World
462
4.2. Gülen’s Influence in Muslim World
465
4.3. Movement’s Relief Charity: Phase of Adoloscence
468
5. Conclusion
469

THE RELEVANCE OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN’S THOUGHTS FOR DEMOCRATIC
REFORMS IN THE MUSLIM WORLD
LEONID R. SYKIAINEN
471
Abstract
471
1. Introduction
471
2. “Today Islam is not understood properly”
472
3. Regarding Islam as A Political Force and An Instrument for Terrorism
473
4. Democracy and Islam: Are They Opponents or Allies?
475
5. Consultation and Human Rights as Key Directions of Political Reforms
477
6. Diversity and Dialogue as Indispensable Prerequisites for Political Reforms and Domination of
    Democracy
479
7. Conclusion
480

NECESSITY AND IMPORTANCE OF INTERCULTURAL-INTERRELIGIOUS DIALOGUE
AND INITIATIVES OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN
NİYAZİ ÖKTEM
483
1. Introduction
483
2. Intellectually, Who is Fetullah Gülen?
484
3. Journalists and Writers Foundation
485

--- Sayfa 25 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

23
3. 1. Abant Platform
485
3. 2. Intercultural Dialogue Platform
486
4. Conclusion
488

BIBLIOGRAPHY
489

--- Sayfa 26 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

24

--- Sayfa 27 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

25
Introduction
SOCIAL INNOVATION FOR PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE:
INTERCULTURAL ACTIVISM FROM RUMI TO GÜLEN
IHSAN YILMAZ 1

1. Introduction
Even though some Muslims all over the world have been radicalised as a result of being challenged
and influenced by the juggernauts of modernity, nationalism, imperialism and neo-colonialism in
addition to being harshly subject to ignorance, poverty and dissension, overwhelming majority of
Muslims still believe that respect for diversity as exemplified in the discourses and practices of
Mevlana Jalaluddin Rumi and many others is a religious obligation. When we came to the modern
times, such an understanding and tradition are being represented in the Turkish context by Sufis and
scholars like Mevlana Khalid-i Bağdadi, Bediüzzaman Said Nursi, Muhammed Lutfi and recently
Fethullah Gülen.
Gülen who has achieved his message to be heard not only nationally but also globally has frequently
been compared with Rumi, the most resonant voice of Islamic mysticism in the West. It will not be
wrong to argue that Gülen is today’s most prominent representative of apolitical Turkish Islam or
Anatolian Muslimness based on socially activist but tolerant Sufism (tasawwuf) once represented by
activist scholars like Rumi. These Muslim scholars are social innovators –to use the modern
terminology- who endeavour to address the pressing spiritual, social and cultural needs of the masses
in the tune with their respective Zeitgeists without radically departing from the tradition and
authentic religious sources thereby by continuing to credibly influence the masses.
In this introduction, I opted to compare Gülen’s social-cultural activism and his understanding of
peaceful coexistence to that of Rumi because of exemplary role of both in establishing dialogue and
building peace between Muslims and non-Muslims. As known, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific & Cultural Organization (UNESCO) marks 2007 as 'Mawlana Year'. This celebration is to
honour the 800th anniversary of the birth of the great spiritual leader of Islam, Mawlana. Although
Rumi lived about 800 years before Gülen, they both lived in cosmopolitan environments and thus
both made intercultural dialogue their main tool of social innovation and conflict resolution for social
inclusion, coherence and peaceful coexistence. They inspired the lives and practices of their students,
sympathisers, followers, scholars, and the larger community to contribute to solutions that better the
world. Put differently, they both served to re-read and renew (tajdid) religion, faith and society. They

1 BA in politics and international relations from Bogazici University, Istanbul. PhD in law in 1999 from SOAS, University of
London. 1999–2001: Research Fellow at the University of Oxford where he undertook two separate research projects: the
Turkish diaspora in London, and the faith-based movement of Fethullah Gülen, its neo-ijtihad and renewal of Islam. Since
2001 he has been teaching comparative law, legal sociology, Islamic law and Turkish politics at the University of London.
Research interests: Turkish diaspora, Turkish politics, Islamic movements, Muslim minorities, Muslim legal pluralism, neo-
ijtihad and the Gülen movement. He has published his work in scholarly journals such as British Journal of Middle Eastern
Studies, The Middle East Journal, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, Muslim World, International Journal of
Turkish Studies, Journal for Islamic Studies and Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs. He recently convened another
conference on the Gülen Movement: Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement, 25-27 October
2007, House of Lords, SOAS and LSE, London, UK.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

26
also endeavoured to strike the delicate balance between serving the community, solving pressing real
problems, challenging threats to coherence of society and staying away from politics & instrumentalist
use of religion in daily politics.
I will briefly endeavour to show in this introduction that both Rumi and Gülen have the same main
message vis-à-vis acceptance of the other and peaceful coexistence and that they both employed
similar instruments such as socio-cultural activism, education and intercultural dialogue. As noted by
several academics, both Rumi and Gülen, if unintentionally, maximised their social impact with their
altruism, devotion, piety, dedication and knowledge helping them to inspire similar initiatives in their
surrounding communities.
It goes without saying that both are of the same tradition despite the differences in contexts, shapes,
formats, appearances and minute tempo-spatial details. For instance, as I will try to show, Gülen is
socially very active -in contrast to the stereotypical Sufi or mutasawwif images- to have his discourse
implemented and practiced within the wider society, just like Rumi. Likewise, both men have been
accused of seeking political power although when analysed in detail it will be seen that their
discourses and practices have little to do with daily politics.
I will compare and contrast concisely main messages of the two men first, then will proceed to analyse
their socio-cultural and political activism for peaceful coexistence. Then, before concluding by giving
an account of today’s renewed peaceful coexistence message of Rumi and focusing on Gülen’s
initiatives in line with this renewed message, I will briefly look at the two men’s almost similar social
innovations for peaceful coexistence and their discontents.

2. Rumi and Gülen’s Main Message and Acceptance of the Other
Social and political conjuncture was very turbulent when Rumi emerged. It was a period in which so
many conflicts and disorders were being experienced one after the other. There was first a great deal
of dissidence and anarchy as a result of the marginal Babai movement. People were also fed up with
the continuous assaults, pillage and invasions of the Mongols and Crusaders. As to the
administration, the Seljuks state was significantly weakened and getting deteriorated, fastened by the
inability to cope with internal conflicts, divisions and mismanagements. The other powerful state, the
Kharzamshahs, which once fought against the Genghis Khan’s armies and stopped them and defended
the Muslims, then turned against and were fighting the Anatolian Seljuks and organizing territorial
incursions and invasions. Benefiting from the chaotic atmosphere and lack of authority in the region
neighbouring communities were exploiting the circumstances for their own material and political
interests.
During this period Rumi emerged as a powerful activist character and scholar. Not only he talked
about but also actively produced an atmosphere of dialogue and tolerance through his lyrics, poetry
and of course, followers. Through tolerance and compassion, he was conveying his message, which
clarifies the relation of man to his/her Creator, and one’s relation to the others and fellow beings.
Humanity, love, compassion, tolerance, respect for, openness to and acceptance of the other in their
otherness and dialogue are fundamentals of Rumi’s thought and practice. The world was a global
village even in Rumi’s time and he was fully aware of this reality:

--- Sayfa 29 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

27
Still, this whole world is but a house, no more. Whether we go from this room to that room or
from this corner to that corner, are we still not in the same house? 2
Empathy which is essential for peaceful coexistence in the global village is another essential
cornerstone of his practice as beautifully emphasized in one of his discourses:
A westerner lives in the West. An oriental comes to visit. The westerner is a stranger to the
oriental, but who is the real stranger? Is not the oriental a stranger to the entire western
world?3
He also drew his listeners’ attention to the mother of all evils –ignorance- and underlined that
education and dialogue are only remedies. He communicated something through his writing that has
attracted spiritual seekers from almost every religion in the world, for hundreds of years. Rumi’s
discourse is composed of tolerance, positive reasoning, goodness, charity and awareness through love,
looking with the same eye on Muslims, Jews, Christians and others alike:
Come, come, whoever you are...
Come and come yet again...
Come even if you have broken your vows a thousand times
Wanderer, idolater, worshipper of fire...
Ours is not a caravan of despair,
This is the date of hope,
Come, come yet again, come.
Even in his day, Rumi was sought out by many, from famous scholars to ordinary villagers. When he
passed away in 1273, Muslims, Christians, Jews, Arabs, Persians, Turks and Romans honoured him at
his funeral, and men of five faiths followed his bier. The flood of people in the funeral was the sign of
that he was understood well even in his lifetime and that he was a sound foundation for the
communities. Rumi’s discourse and practice teach us how to reach inner peace and happiness so we
can finally stop the continual stream of hostility and hatred and achieve true global peace and
harmony.4
Below quote shows how Rumi’s main message is continued by Fethullah Gülen:
… if we exclude certain periods and individuals, the Turks’ interpretation of what Islam allows
to be interpreted is correct and positive. If we can spread globally the Islamic understanding of
such heroes of love as Niyazi-i Misri, Yunus Emre, and Rumi, if we can extend their messages of
love, dialogue, and tolerance to those thirsty for this message, everyone will run toward the
embrace of love, peace, and tolerance that we represent.5 Those who perceive religion as being
contradictory to science and reason are the afflicted; they are unaware of the spirit of both
religion and reason. Moreover, it is absolutely fraudulent to hold religion responsible for
clashes between different sections of society. Conflicts between peoples and groups of people
arise from ignorance, from ambition for personal advantage and profit, or from the vested
interests of particular groups, parties, or classes. Religion neither approves nor condones such

2 Rumi, Discourses of Rumi, Fihi Ma Fihi ,Tr. By A. J. Arberry, Discourse 12, p. 99.
3 Ibid.
4 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jalal_ad-Din_Muhammad_Rumi
5 Gülen, Love and Essence of Human Being, p. 29.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

28
qualities and ambitions.6 In a world becoming more and more globalized, we are trying to get
to know those who will be our future neighbors.… One of the most important factors here is to
eliminate factors that separate people…such as discrimination based on color, race, belief, and
ethnicity.… Education can uproot these evils. …We are trying our best to do this.7
As Thomas Michel conludes in his paper entitled “Fethullah Gülen: Following in the Footseps of
Rumi” in this book, “(i)t is not an exaggeration to say that Gülen is a modern Muslim thinker and
activist whose life work of promoting an Islamic appreciation of love, tolerance, and universal peace is
in fact a renewed interpretation for our times of the central insights of Mevlana.”
Sufism (tasawwuf) has played a major role in Gülen’s life and spiritual intellectual scholarly
upbringing. A new chronological and intellectual biography of Gülen gives details about Gülen’s
spiritual, scholarly, and intellectual background: Gülen was a student of Alvarli Efe Muhammed Lutfi,
a great Sufi-master of his time. Under Alvarli’s instruction, Gülen studied Arabic, Islamic
jurisprudence, and exegesis. Muhammed Lutfi was also Gülen’s first teacher in Sufism. On his own
account, Gülen was much affected by his teacher Muhammed Lutfi, especially from his piety,
devotion, and ascetic lifestyle. It is from Muhammed Lutfi that he first learnt the importance of
devotion to others, selflessness and altruism. Again, his respect for the great Sufi masters, including
Rumi, is attributable to Alvarli.8
Gülen sees humans as God’s special and very important creatures:
Humans, the greatest mirror of the names, attributes and deeds of God, are a shining mirror, a
marvellous fruit of life, a source for the whole universe, a sea that appears to be a tiny drop, a
sun formed as a humble seed, a great melody in spite of their insignificant physical positions,
and the source for existence all contained within a small body.  Humans carry a holy secret that
makes them equal to the entire universe with all their wealth of character; a wealth that can be
developed to excellence.9
He underlines that:

6 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1958/12/
7 Ünal and Williams 2000: 329–331.
8 See in detail Dialogue Society (forthcoming) A Short Chronological & Intellectual Biography of Fethullah Gülen. London,
UK: Dialogue Society. It should be underlined that Gülen’s Sufi understanding refers the pre-institutionalized period,
mostly to the first and second century of Islam. Gulen does not have tariqah (Sufi order ) and he is not a Sufi as the term
understood especially in the west. As Dogan Koc (2005) explains in Gülen’s understanding, Sufism was characterized by
spiritual people seeking to follow in the footsteps of the Prophet, and his companions by imitating their lives. Sufis
eventually established orders under different scholars, and institutionalized it by establishing regulations and rules in each
tariqah.. That is why Saritoprak (2001) calls Gülen “a Sufi in his own way”: “(e)arly Sufis had neither orders nor even Sufi
organizations. Rabia, Junayd, Muhasibi, Bishr, Ghazali, Farid al-din Attar, and even Rumi did not belong to a tariqah.
However, they were Sufis” (Saritoprak 2001: 6). As Gökçek (2005) puts Gülen does not establish a tariqah, but he lays
down basic principles for a Sufi life in the modern world. According to Gülen, Sufism’s practical dimension is more
important than its historical or terminological definitions or institutional structures (Koc 2005). In his own words,
“(s)ufism is the path followed by an individual who, having been able to free himself or herself from human vices and
weakness in order to acquire angelic qualities and conduct pleasing to God, lives in accordance with the requirements of
God’s knowledge and love, and in the resulting spiritual delight that ensues (Gülen, 1999: p.xiv).
9 Fethullah Gülen, “Human Beings and Their Nature” Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Ed. M. Enes
Ergene (New Jersey: The Light Publishing, 2004), 112.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

29
Compassion is the beginning of being; without it everything is chaos. Everything has come into
existence through compassion and by compassion it continues to exist in harmony. . . .
Everything speaks of compassion and promises compassion. Because of this, the universe can
be considered a symphony of compassion. All kinds of voices proclaim compassion so that it is
impossible not to be aware of it, and impossible not to feel the wide mercy encircling
everything. How unfortunate are the souls who don’t perceive this . . . Man has a responsibility
to show compassion to all living beings, as a requirement of being human. The more he
displays compassion, the more exalted he becomes, while the more he resorts to wrongdoing,
oppression and cruelty, the more he is disgraced and humiliated, becoming a shame to
humanity.10
A man of compassion does not hesitate to be open to all and to enter into dialogue with all. As Celik
and Valkenberg (2007) explain, Gülen proposes dialogue as a method to be used in building and
establishing a culture of peace among co-religionists, people of different ethnic, racial and cultural
backgrounds. He sees dialogue as a framework of mutual acceptance and respect of each other’s
identity. They describe this as the first stage of Gülen’s dialogue concept: accepting the others in their
own position. The second stage involves respecting the position of the other(s),and the third stage is
the concept of sharing values in the context of the other(s). Gülen’s conviction is that humanity
ultimately will be led to peace and unity by recognizing and accepting social, cultural, and religious
diversity, an exchange of mutual values and union in collaboration.
Gülen sees diversity and pluralism as a natural fact. He wants those differences to be admitted and to
be explicitly professed. Accepting everyone in their otherness, which is broader and deeper than
tolerance, is his normal practice.11
The Prophet says that all people are as equal as the teeth of a comb. Islam does not discriminate
based on race, color, age, nationality, or physical traits. The Prophet declared “You are all from
Adam, and Adam is from earth. O servants of God, be brothers (and sisters)”.12 Those who close
the road of tolerance are beasts who have lost their humanity... forgiveness and tolerance will
heal most of our wounds, but only if this divine instrument is in the hands of those who
understand its language. Otherwise, the incorrect treatment we have used until now will create
many complications and continue to confuse us.13 Islam recognizes all religions previous to it. It
accepts all the prophets and books sent to different epochs of history. Not only does it accept
them, but also regards belief in them as an essential principle of being Muslim. By doing so, it
acknowledges the basic unity of all religions. A Muslim is at the same time a true follower of
Abraham, Moses, David, Jesus, and of all other Hebrew prophets. This belief explains why both
Christians and Jews enjoyed their religious rights under the rule of Islamic governments
throughout history (Gulen 2001a: 137).
He believes that dialogue is a must today, and that the first step in establishing it is recognising but
transcending the past, disregarding polemical arguments, and giving precedence to common points,

10 M. Fethullah Gülen, Towards the Lost Paradise, (London: Truestar, 1996), 40–2.
11 See in detail, Unal and Williams, the Advocate of Dialogue, op. cit ., pp. 256-258.
12  Gülen 2001a: 134.
13 M. Fethullah Gülen, “Forgiveness,” The Fountain 3 (April–June 2000), 4–5.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

30
which far outnumber polemical ones.14 In his opinion, a believer does not hesitate to communicate
with any kind of thought and system; while one foot should remain at the centre the other could be
with other ‘seventy-two nations’ (Rumi’s famous metaphor); Islam does not reject interaction with
diverse cultures and change as long as what is to be appropriated does not contradict with the main
pillars of Islam.
…different beliefs, races, customs and traditions will continue to cohabit in this village. Each
individual is like a unique realm unto themselves; therefore the desire for all humanity to be
similar to one another is nothing more than wishing for the impossible. For this reason, the
peace of this (global) village lies in respecting all these differences, considering these differences
to be part of our nature and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences. Otherwise, it
is unavoidable that the world will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes, fights, and the
bloodiest of wars, thus preparing the way for its own end.15 If one were to seek the true face of
Islam in its own sources, history, and true representatives, then one would discover that it
contains no harshness, cruelty, or fanaticism.  It is a religion of forgiveness, pardon, and
tolerance as such saints and princes of love and tolerance as Rumi, Yunus Emre, Ahmed Yesevi,
Bediüzzaman and many others have so beautifully expressed.16
Gülen firmly believes that the road to justice for all is dependent on the provision of an adequate
education. He envisions a twenty-first century in which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual
dynamic that will revitalise long-dormant moral values; an age of tolerance, understanding, and
intercommunal & international cooperation that will ultimately lead, through inter-cultural dialog
and a sharing of values, to greater understanding and peaceful coexistence. He believes that “the
Islamic social system seeks to form a virtuous society and thereby gain God’s approval. It recognizes
right, not force, as the foundation of social life. Hostility is unacceptable. Relationships must be based
on belief, love, mutual respect, assistance, and understanding instead of conflict and realization of
personal interest” (Gülen 2001a, 137).

3. Socio-Cultural and Political Activism for Peaceful Coexistence
Rumi strongly underlines that humans –even if they are dervishes- should not ignore the laws of this
universe and doctrine of causes, not to sit around heedlessly waiting for Allah’s favour, but rather to
exert themselves endlessly in order to transform this broken world into the world of peace and justice:
I am looking all over the world for students of action so that I can teach action. I am looking all
over the world for anyone who knows action, but I find no student of action—only of words 17
His activism is different from stereotypical Sufi remoteness to socially active units and personalities:
Those who always feel themselves in the presence of God do not need to seclude themselves
from people.  Such people, in the words of Rumi, are like those who keep one foot in the sphere
of Divine commandments and turn the other, like a compass needle, throughout the world.

14 Ibid.
15 Gülen 2004a: 249-250.
16 M. Fethullah Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Light: Somerset, N.J., 2004, pp. 58-59.
17 A. J. Arberry, Discourses of Rumi, Fihi Ma Fihi, Discourse 16, p. 133-134.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

31
They experience ascension and descent at every moment.  This is the seclusion recognized and
preferred by the Prophets and saints.18
It is obvious that living in the world but not of the world was his main action plan and road map:
The Amir (the ruler), surprised by an unexpected visit from Rumi, said: “Master, how gracious
of you to honor me in this way. I never expected this. It never even entered my mind that I could
be worthy of such an honor. By rights I should be standing night and day in the ranks and
company of your servants and attendants. I’m not even worthy of that. How gracious this is!”
Rumi said: It is all because of your lofty spiritual aspirations. The higher and greater your
rank and the more you become occupied with important, exalted worldly affairs, the more you
consider yourself to have fallen short of your spiritual purpose. You are not satisfied with what
you have achieved, thinking that you have too many obligations. Since none of these
attainments can blind you from that divine attainment, my heart is moved to serving you. And
yet for all that, still, I wanted to pay you formal honor as well.19
Rumi’s activism included his spiritual guidance to the rulers, including the invading Mongols. Rumi
gained much love and respect from the sultans, viziers, and kings. These men of high positions were
very eager to see him. However, Rumi seldom accepted their invitations. He spent most of his time
with the poor and needy. He had disciples who were sultans and viziers but also a lot of disciples from
amongst the poor and common folk.20
In Rumi’s time, invading Mongols’ basic policy was decentralization, and this included support for
local Sufi groups that were less doctrinaire and more open to the non-Muslim population than the
madrasah-based Seljuk orthodoxy had been. In effect, Sufi lodges became populist civic spaces. In
response to this, Rumi tried to reduce the gap between ‘ulama Islam’ and folk Islam.
Rumi communicates many things, multiple meanings, at many levels, simultaneously; he provides
explanations and keys to unlock the meaning of reality; all the words, all the stories and explanations
he conveyed say nothing more than reality, which has been expressed so far by all the great masters of
the tasawwuf tradition in Islam.  He communicated through the power of literature what he learned
from the madrasah to the hearts of the people around him, as well as the religious and political elite.21
Rumi’s Mesnevi is for both well-educated people and people with little education.22
He was part of the urban elite in the cosmopolitan capital city of Konya. He was also involved in the
political struggles of his time in one way or another. He was in contact with the rulers. On this, he
states that:
Mohammed, the great Prophet, once said, “The worst of scholars are those who visit princes,
and the best of princes are those who visit scholars. Wise is the prince who stands at the door of
the poor, and wretched are the poor who stand at the door of the prince.” Now, taking the
outward sense of these words, people think that scholars should never visit princes or they will

18 M. Fethullah Gülen, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism, Fairfax, Va.: The Fountain, 1999, p. 19.
19 A. J. Arberry, Discourses of Rumi, Fihi Ma Fihi, Discourse 5, p. 34.
20 Can, p. 92.
21 Ugur 2004, p. 332.
22 Can, p. 26.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

32
become the worst of scholars. That is not the true meaning. Rather, the worst of scholars are
those who depend upon princes, and who revolve their life and purpose around the attention
and favor of princes. Such scholars take up learning in hopes that princes will give them
presents, hold them in esteem, and promote them to office. Therefore, such scholars improve
themselves and pursue knowledge on account of princes. They become scholars from their fear
of princes. They subject themselves to the princes’ control. They conform themselves to the plans
that princes or a prince visits them, still in every case they’re the visitors, and it is the prince
who is visited. However, when scholars do not study to please princes, but instead pursue
learning from first to last for the sake of truth—when their actions and words spring from the
truth they have learned and put to use because this is their nature and they cannot live
otherwise—just as fish can only thrive in water—such scholars subject themselves to the control
and direction of God. They become blessed with the guidance of the prophets. Everyone living
in their time is touched by them and derives inspiration from their example, whether they are
aware of the fact or not. Should such scholars visit a prince, they are still the ones visited and
the prince is the visitor, because in every case it is the prince who takes from these scholars and
receives help from them. Such scholars are independent of the prince. They are like the light-
giving sun, whose whole function is giving to all, universally, converting stones into rubies and
carnelians, changing mountains into mines of copper, gold, silver and iron, making the earth
fresh and green, bringing fruit to the trees, and warmth to the breeze. Their trade is giving,
they do not receive.23
His book “Letters” composed of 147 letters written to the political authorities shows Rumi’s personal
relationships with various authorities of his violent era, using extant letters to suggest his skill at
combining diplomacy with pastoral counseling. Like all of his other books, Rumi did not write these
letters himself. He dictated them.24 Some of the discourses are addressed to the Seljuk vizier Muin al-
Din Pervane (d. 1277).
His Fihi Ma Fihi is full of examples of his contact with and guidance to the rulers:
My purpose in speaking this way to the Amir (the ruler) was so that he could see the matter
correctly, and accept the will of God humbly. He has fallen out of an exceedingly high state into
a low state, yet in this way he may grow. Life can show the most wonderful things, but behind
all of them lies a trap should we forget the source of this wonder. God has devised this plan so

23 Discourses (Fihi Ma Fihi), Discourse 1, p. 3-5.
24 Can, p. 36.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

33
that we will learn not to claim, out of arrogance and vanity, these ideas and plans as our
own.25
In short, Rumi was not a politician but a spiritual guide who was perfectly aware of the realities of the
mundane world, essential to be an influential spiritual guide. Even though he did not deal with daily
politics, he faced and is still facing political accusations, such as seeking political power or being a spy.
A significant renewal of Gülen vis-à-vis tasawwuf is his emphasis on socio-cultural and even political
action which is as vital as belief can only be sustainable if it is supported with these actions. For
Gülen, just like Rumi, living in the world but not of the world, allowing no inner attachment to it is the
basic blueprint of the individual’s whole social action.26 Gülen also reiterates Rumi’s compass
metaphor: “Our right foot is fixed upon the center of the truth while our left foot is rotating in and
around the seventy-two nations”.27 In Gülen’s view -as strongly emphasized by Rumi more than 7
centuries ago- action is an inseparable aspect of tasawwuf, and Muslims should be actively involved
in the community, share their experience with others, strive to help others and bring peace to the
global village.28
Toguslu (2007) explains that although Gülen is against hedonism and he regards altruism as the
criteria of life according to the ideal man which require the effort of follower as developing the
detachment from the pleasure and seductive needs, a socially active intellectual and aesthetic
dimension is accepted and -even more- encouraged by Gülen. Even though in Gülen’s view the
pleasure in this world is considered ephemeral and he and his sympathizers do not pursue the
hedonism because they believe that they are sent to this world to enhance devotion and to seek God’s
contentment, Gülen’s sympathizers do not abstain from the social life, the pleasure and entertainment
like going to the cinema or theatre, listening to the music…29 But they like to live meaningfully an
aesthetic Muslim life. Paradoxically, these ascetic body and soul which participate actively in daily life

25 Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, p. 11. See for more: Discourse 3: “The Amir said: “Night and day my heart and Soul are intent
upon serving God, but because of my responsibilities with Mongol affairs I have no time for such service.” Rumi answered:
Those works too are work done for God, since they are the means of providing peace and security for your country. You
sacrifice yourself, your possessions, your time, so the hearts of a few will be lifted to peacefully obeying God’s will. So this
too is a good work. God has inclined you towards such good work, and your great love for what you do is proof of God’s
blessing. However, if your love of work were to weaken, this would be a sign of grace denied, for God leads only those who
are worthy into those right attitudes that will earn spiritual rewards.” Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, p. 19; “After the Amir left,
someone said: “When the Amir comes, the Master utters mighty words. The words never stop, because he is a master of
words. Words flow from him without interruption.” Rumi said: If in winter time the trees do not put forth leaves and fruit,
people should not think they are not working. They are continually at work. Winter is the season of gathering; summer is
the season of spending”, Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, p. 95; After the Amir arrived, Rumi said: I’ve been longing to call on you.
But, knowing you were busy with the interests of the people, I spared you the trouble”, Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, Discourse
12, p. 98; “The Amir of Rum said: “The unbelievers used to worship and bow down to idols. Now we are doing the selfsame
thing. We go and bow down and wait upon the Mongols, and yet we consider ourselves Muslims. We have many other idols
in our heart too, such as greed, passion, temper, envy, and we are obedient to all of them. So we act in the very same way as
the unbelievers, both outwardly and inwardly, and we consider ourselves Muslims!” Rumi answered: But here is something
different; it enters your thoughts that this conduct is evil and utterly detestable. The eye of your heart has seen something
incomparably greater that shows up this behavior as vile and hideous. Brackish water shows its brackishness to one who has
tasted sweet water, and things are made clear by their opposites”, ”, Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, Discourse 17, p. 138
26 Komecoglu, p. 39.
27 Zaman, 3 July 1996. Camci and Unal, pp. 140-141.
28 Gokcek, 2006, p. 173-174.
29 Toguslu 2007.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

34
are considered better than the ascetic who is absent from worldly life.30 In other words, Gülen
endeavours to redefine the Muslim personality at the most subjective level that is analogous to Sufi
subjectivity, but also different from stereotypical Sufi remoteness to socially active units and
personalities.31
Gülen echoes Rumi also in telling us not to ignore the laws of the universe, not to sit around aimlessly,
but rather to exert all our energies to change this world into a world of peaceful coexistence and
justice.32 Gülen’ ideal man, man of action, does their best until this world is turned into paradise; and
also struggle for a better world, to be stopped by nothing except death itself.33
Gülen continues a long tradition of seeking to address the spiritual needs of people and to provide
some stability in times of turmoil. Like many previous figures, including Rumi, he is wrongly
suspected of seeking political power.34 Like Rumi, rather than advancing political ambitions, creating
an Islamic ethic as a manner or conduct of individuals’ life is the main objective of Gülen. Gülen’s
objective is also to foster an ethic that is similar to Max Weber’s ‘worldly asceticism,’ an activist
pietism -composed of sincerity, worship, moderation, modesty, following the prophet’s example and
encouraging the good and discouraging the bad- with a tendency toward the rationalization of social
relationships.35
For Gülen, religion is primarily a private or a communal matter, not a political or state matter. He
reiterates that Islam as a religion should not be reduced to being a political party identity. He is very
critical of political Islamism and the ‘instrumentalization’ of religion in politics:
When those who have adopted Islam as a political ideology rather than a religion in its true
sense and function, review their activities and attitudes they claim to be based on Islam,
especially political ones, will discover that they are usually moved by personal or national
anger, hostility, and other similar motives… A Muslim’s beginning point must have an Islamic
basis. In the present situation, Muslims cannot act out of ideological or political partisanship
and then dress this partisanship in Islamic garb, or represent mere desires in the form of ideas.
If we can overcome this tendency, Islam’s true image will become known.36
As concisely analysed by Ozdalga, the perspective taught by Gülen is based on activism, stirred up, as
well as controlled, by pietism. This “activist pietism” describes a new feature in Turkish religious life.
In conformity with Weber’s concept, Gülen’s “pietistic activism” is based on a critical “rejection of the
world” but not the “flight from this world” that is characteristic for escapist mysticism.  It is based on
activism.  It is an ethic that finds the certification of salvation by deeds performed in this world and is
based on a paradox as it includes a critical rejection of the world while simultaneously calling for

30 Toguslu 2007.
31 Ugur Komecoglu, A sociologally interpretative approach to the Fethullah Gülen community movement, Istanbul: Bogazici
University, 1997 (Unpublished MA thesis), p. 17; see also see also Ugur Komecoglu, ‘Kutsal ile kamusal: Fethullah Gülen
cemaat hareketi’. Nilufer Gole (ed) Islamin yeni kamusal yuzleri (New public faces of Islam), Istanbul: Metis, 2000.
32 Cetin, Peaceful Heroes, Dallas.
33 Agai, Gülen’s Islamic Ethics of Education, 2002, pp.39-40.
34 Aras and Caha, ‘Turkish Islam’s’, op. cit; see in detail Altinoglu, Fethullah Gülen, op. cit.
35 Elisabeth Ozdalga, ‘Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gülen’s Inspired Piety and Activism,’
Critique, 17 (2000): 84–104.
36 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1336/13/

--- Sayfa 37 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

35
involvement in the world in rationally structured social activities. These activities include the building
of schools instead of mosques, investing in secular education instead of religious instruction,
encouraging economic enterprises and requesting sympathisers to invest in education, encouraging
educational and economic enterprises to support each other, promoting individual and collective self-
criticism, and supporting critically minded planning for future projects. Gülen’s activist pietism,
therefore, builds on a delicate balance between rejection of this world on the one hand, and a desire to
rebuild a new social order by peaceful, constructive means, on the other. Without the religious sense
of duty on which it builds, there most likely would have been less constructive accomplishments.37
The distinction between political ambition and religious activism is crucial for a correct
understanding of Gülen’s mission.38 For instance Gülen does not see the world in political terms and
does not draw imaginary boundaries. As skilfully expressed by Klas Grinell in this book, Gülen is a
“border transgressor”. By employing ijtihad, he bases this border transgressing understanding on –
and also extends to- the Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh). He does not divide the world by employing
mutually exclusive concepts of dar al-harb (abode of war) and dar-al Islam (abode of Islam, peace)
but sees it as an almost coherent place, as it were, that needs to be served continually by utilising the
concept dar al-hizmet (abode of service to humans, thereby God):
If one’s intention is to serve Islam by presenting a good example, then one can stay wherever
one desires, says Abdullah Aymaz, former editor in chief of the daily Zaman and Gülen’s close
friend and colleague for more than thirty years. Gülen stresses that wherever a Muslim is, even
outside a Muslim polity, he or she has to obey the lex loci, to respect others’ rights and to be just,
and has to disregard discussions of dar al-harb and dar al-Islam. In Gülen’s understanding,
umma is more of a transnational sociocultural entity, not a politicolegal one. He hopes that this
sociocultural entity will be instrumental in bringing general universal peace.39

4. Social Innovation for Peaceful Coexistence and Its Discontents
Rumi’s respect for all religious traditions was not always popular in his day, and often provoked
criticism from the more dogmatic.40 While some criticized his openness to the other, some other
claimed that he was a traitor, a spy and not even a Muslim.
Siraj al-Din of Konya was a man of grudge and to hurt Rumi and to discredit him in the eyes of the
public, he sent one of his disciples to pressurize Rumi in public whether or not he actually said that he
was with seventy-two sects and creeds. Siraj al-Din advised his disciple to insult, curse, and swear at
Rumi if he admitted to saying those words. That man came and asked Rumi: “It has been claimed that
you said: ‘I am with seventy-two sects and creeds.’ Is that true?” Rumi did not deny what he had said.

37 Elisabeth Ozdalga, ‘Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gülen’s Inspired Piety and Activism,’
Critique, 17 (2000): 84–104.
38 Elisabeth Ozdalga, ‘Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gülen’s Inspired Piety and Activism,’
Critique, 17 (2000): 84–104.
39 Author’s interview with Abdullah Aymaz, 3 Sept. 2000, Istanbul.
40 A. J. Arberry, Discourses of Rumi, Fihi Ma Fihi, vii.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

36
He replied: “Yes, that is what I said.” That man immediately started to swear and curse at Rumi. Rumi
only smiled at him and said: “In spite of all that you are saying, I am also with you.”41
Even today some westerners see him unorthodox or even outside the banner of Islam.42 The idea that
Rumi cared little for orthodox Islam has been put forward by translations of poems attributed to
Rumi which were actually not composed by him and which express ideas that are not characteristic of
him.43 Some writers have even claimed or suggested that Rumi really was not a Muslim, because they
believed that the line, "na tarsâ na yahûd-am man na gabr-am na musalmân-am" ("I am not a
Christian, a Jew, a Zoroastrian, or a Muslim") expressed Rumi's true attitude toward Islam. But this
poem is not in the earliest manuscripts and so probably is not a genuine Rumi poem.44 Rumi's actual
approach to Islam is clarified by the following quatrain composed by him:
I am the servant of the Qur'an as long as I have life.
I am the dust on the path of Muhammad, the Chosen one.
If anyone quotes anything except this from my sayings,
I am quit of him and outraged by these words.
In an article written by Seyyed Hossein Nasr entitled "Rumi and the Sufi Tradition," he states that
"(o)ne of the greatest living authorities on Rûmî in Persia today, Hâdî Hâ'irî, has shown in an
unpublished work that some 6,000 verses of the Dîwân and the Mathnawî are practically direct
translations of Qur'ânic verses into Persian poetry”.45
At a recent event in Strasbourg on Rumi, Professor Eric Geoffrey asserted that due to today's
judgmental stance towards Muslims, Rumi's Islamic roots were being ignored by many.46 Geoffrey
explained that although the work and thinking of Rumi had gained prominence in the West over
recent years, most Western sources took Rumi out of the context of his Islamic roots. He also noted
that in both the US and the EU, Sufism was being stripped of its links with Islam and being presented
as a sort of "new age religion." Geoffrey referred to these efforts as a form of "religious racism" and
noted that it was the Prophet Mohammed and the Qur'ân which had provided the sources for Rumi's
humanist understanding, one which is so universal as to still be fitting in today's world.47
Rumi was also accused of being too soft against the Mongols. Some – a recent example being
Professor Mikail Bayram- claim that he was a spy of Mongols,48 showing that in times of turmoil it is
very difficult to maintain a moderate stance.49 Avni Ozgurel, as many others, refutes these claims:

41 Can, p. 89.
42 See also El-Zein A. (2000) “Spiritual Consumption in the United States: the Rumi phenomenon”, Islam and Christian-
Muslim Relations, Volume 11, Number 1, 1 March 2000 , pp. 71-85. This study shows how Rum’s work is taken nowadays
out of the Muslim Sufi tradition into an elusive spiritual movement which the author terms the 'New Sufism'.
43 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jalal_ad-Din_Muhammad_Rumi
44 Ibid.
45 Ibid.
46 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/2321/22/
47 Ibid.
48 http://www.kuranislami.com/save/mikail_bayram_mevlana_mogollarla_iliski.rtf

--- Sayfa 39 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

37
We know that Prof. Mikail Bayram is against Rumi’s philosophy and his Islamic
understanding. He previously claimed at a TV programme that “Rumi was raising individuals
who were inclined to be submissive to imperialism and was a representative of Iranian Sufism;
that is why the West gives importance to him but at the final analysis Rumi’s ideas would only
help colonisation of Anatolia, thus were harmful”... In Rumi’s time, the Sultan was Giyaseddin
Keyhusrev who to be a Sultan himself poisoned his father Alaaddin Keykubat who unified
Anatolia under Seljuk rule. And, in Keyhusrev’s time, the state was deteriorated and Anatolia
was in bloodshed. I mean the infamous Babai rebellion.... While Rumi was warning Keyhusrev
in Konya to rule properly so that the state would not be destabilised, some other religious
leaders were staging the biggest rebellion in Anatolian history... After all these turmoil and
Mongolian occupation, it is true that Rumi inclined towards to Mongols. If Prof Bayram said
that Rumi sided with the Mongols and criticised who opposed this, he would be deemed right.
The main reason of Rumi’s this attitude was that if Mongols were opposed, Anatolia’s
unification would deteriorate further, impossible to be revived again but (if left alone) the cruel
Mongolian power would be dissolved in Anatolia’s spiritual environment. He was right.
Although Mongols came to Anatolia with an uproar; they disappeared and history never
recorded a ‘Mongol retreat’. 50
Mikail Bayram also claimed at an ultra-nationalist TV programme that Rumi’s friend Shams was also
a spy of Mongols. When asked of the proof of this allegation, Bayram replied that Shams, in his book
Makalat, fiercly criticisize the ones who oppose Mongols. The presenter asks him again “Is this the
proof?” and Bayram’s reply is “Yes”.51 Bayram also alleges that Rumi had Nasreddin Hodja, his own
son and Ahi Evran killed.52
Like Rumi, Gülen also is a social innovator for peaceful coexistence and like Rumi, his social
innovation is not without its discontents. As noted above, Rumi’s tradition of intercultural dialogue as
the most important method of social innovation to tackle enmity stemming from prejudice and
ignorance is also Gülen’s tradition. Thus, intercultural dialogue all over the world is the main agenda
of the Gülen movement as the papers in this book by Richard Khuri, Sevket Yavuz, Davut Ayduz,
Terry Mathis, Efrat Aviv, Ian Fry, Kate Kirk, Gurkan Celik, Thomas Michel, Richard Penaskovic, Klas
Grinell, Paul Weller, Karina Korostelina and Jonathan Lacey elaborate on in detail.
In the countries where Gülen’s followers and sympathisers reside they establish intercultural dialogue
organizations, associations and societies, utilizing the concept of dar al-hizmet (country of service to
humanity). They all believe that interfaith and intercultural dialogue is a must to reach a lasting
universal peace (sulh-u umumi).53
Gülen pioneered in the establishment of the Journalists and Writers Foundation in 1994, well before
mushrooming of dialogue activities in the post-9/11 world, the activities of which to promote dialogue

49 Rumi was not a fan of Mongols: “Someone said: ‘The Mongols also believe in the resurrection and say that there will be a
judgment.’ Rumi said: They lie, desiring to be accepted by Muslims. If they really believe in the resurrection, where is the
evidence to prove it?”, Rumi, Discourses, Fihi Ma Fihi, p. 121.
50 Avni Ozgurel, Was Mevlana an Agent of Mongols?, Radikal, 4 December 2005.
51 See for a transcript of the programme, http://www.biroybil.com/showthread.php?t=3525 visited on 4 November 2007.
52 http://www.haber7.com/haber.php?haber_id=123747, http://www.biroybil.com/showthread.php?t=3525 visited on 4
November 2007, visited on 4 November 2007.
53 See in detail Yilmaz 2003.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

38
and tolerance among all strata of the society receive warm welcome from almost all walks of life. The
Foundation also works as a think-tank in related issues. The movement tries to bring all scholars and
intellectuals regardless of their ethnic, ideological, religious and cultural backgrounds (The Abant
Platform). This platform is the first of its kind in Turkish history where intellectuals could agree to
disagree on sensitive issues such as laicism, secularism, peaceful co-existence, and faith & reason
relations. For instance, in 2007, the Abant Convention’s theme was Alevis in Turkey.54
Gülen’s dialogue and peaceful coexistence discourse has also led to the establishment of new
institutions like the Dialogue Society established in 1999 in London or the Rumi Forum, the Rumi-
inspired foundation established in 2000 in Washington DC. Such enterprises underscore the
ambition to consolidate and make manifest the trend toward a general but a renewed Rumi form of
humanism.55 There are now hundreds of dialogue associations and charities all over the world
founded by the movement’s Muslim and non-Muslim volunteers motivated by Gülen’s teachings.
Through these charities, these volunteers initiate and engage in interfaith and intercultural dialog
with people of different faiths, backgrounds, and cultures. They have been organising events to
commemorate Rumi and hosting whirling-dervish events. Only in the United Kingdom, as Fatih Tedik
explains in his paper in this book, the Dialogue Society organizes several whirling dervishes
programmes each year in several cities of the country, including but not limited to the famous
Wembley Arena, Oxford University’s Ashmolian Theatre and Hackney Empire.56
Similar to Rumi, Gülen’s message of openness and dialogue is not without its discontents. Staunch
enemies of the Gülen movement come from three segments: a. Marxist/Maoist left, b. anti-religious
artificial-nationalists57 and c. religio-nationalists. These are distinguished from the critiques in that
their allegations and accusations are not supported by evidence, refuted by legal verdicts and are
otherwise inconsistent.58
These antagonists reiterate that “the Papacy has ‘bought’ some community (movement) in Turkey to
produce an adulterated and reformed Islam without shari’a, fiqh, sunnah and laws”.59 They negatively
react to the Gülen’s visit to the Vatican City to meet with the Pope as they consider it a humiliation.60
They allege that some groups are the secret agents of the Papacy in Turkey. They also repeatedly claim
that some secret agreements between ‘a group’ and the Papacy and also the Orthodox Church has
been reached that Halki Seminary will be re-opened and when the conditions are right, some Greeks
(Rum) will immigrate to Turkey.61 They also strongly state that the Muslims who advocate dialogue
with Christians and Europeans are either naïve, or ignorant or, for worse, traitors. They even imply
that Gülen is not a Muslim at all but a secret cardinal of the Catholic church.62 An extreme leftist daily

54 See, www.gyv.org.tr
55 Ozdalga, 2003, pp. 70-71.
56 See in detail, www.dialoguesociety.org
57 Aslandogan, Defamation as Smokescreen, Oklahoma, 2006.
58 Ibid.
59 Mehmet Sevket Eygi ‘Turkic world’, Milli Gazete, 5 May 2000. Daily Milli Gazete belongs to political Islamist Necmettin
Erbakan’s National Outlook (Milli Gorus) movement.
60 Saritoprak and Griffiths, People of the Book, Muslim World, 2005, p. 336.
61 Eygi, ‘Secret agreement with papacy’, Milli Gazete, 26 May 2000.
62 See, several issues of religio-nationalist Haydar Bas Group’s daily Yeni Mesaj, www.yenimesaj.com.tr. It is probable to
read such a ‘comment’ in any issue of the daily.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

39
regularly claims that Gülen is a man of the Korean originated Moon Church.63 An ultra-nationalist
argues that “the CIA agents such as Graham Fuller and Paul Henze are pupils (murid) of Gülen”.64
These groups together with artificial nationalists (ulusalcilar) claim that Anatolia will be
Christianized and some people in Turkey are helping the Christians in this mission.65 The support of
the Turkish old elite or buraucratic oligarchy to these groups is a publicly known reality and the
allegations against the Gülen movement are regularly extended to the ruling AK Party in the old elite’s
fight against the emergence of the new elite, democratisation, transparency and accountability of
Turkey and its official institutions.
In the words of Ozdalga (2003: 61), no other religious personality gives rise to such intense contempt
and rejection among strongly committed laicists, bureaucratic oligarchy and old elite as he does.
This view is the more difficult to understand given that Gülen’s adherents, without exception,
are characterized by unobtrusiveness and humbleness. However, it is exactly this withdrawal
that is raised to support arguments about the dangers of the movement. His antagonists look
upon Gülen as being almost omnipotent, possessing, according to them, secret powers to
challenge any political authority. A single word from him—so it is thought—would be enough to
rally a sufficient number of political parties to attempt to topple the government. To be sure,
this phantasmagoria is nourished by dread, bordering on panic, of religious reactionaries
(irtica), combined with ignorance about what the Gülen community really does.66
Gülen is not suggesting any radically different or heterodox interpretation of Islam, but re-reads a
conventional Hanafi/Sunni understanding.67 When looked closely there are -naturally- many
similarities between the discourses of Gülen and Rumi and many other Muslim scholars of the past.
Thus, Ozdalga concludes that:
So it does not seem to be the content of the religious interpretation as such, but the very existence
of a new relatively strong group, filled with religious fervour and claiming a place in the public
arena that annoys the establishment. This new element is perceived as being an anomic force, a
force that challenges the norms and values, the order of the established hegemonic elite
community. Thus, it is not religion per se that is at the root of the conflict. On the contrary,
religion has been used as a “false ideology” to displace the real threat. From the Established-

63 Cumhuriyet, 3 December 2000.
64 Necip Hablemitoglu, Yeni Hayat, N. 52.
65 For an analysis of pro-globalization and anti-globalisation Islamic movements in Turkey, see, Ahmet Kuru (2005)
“Globalisation and diversification of Islamic movements: Three Turkish cases”, in Political Science Quarterly, V. 120, N. 2,
pp. 253-274. Kuru analyses Gulen, Haydar Bas and Erbakan’s National Outlook (Milli Gorus) movements and concludes
that “(t)he Gulen movement and the younger generation of the late Milli Gorus¸ movement developed positive attitudes
toward globalization because they benefited from international opportunities and they had tolerant normative
frameworks… The Haydar Bas¸ movement, the early Milli Gorus¸ movement, and the elders of the late Milli Gorus¸
movement developed antiglobalization views because they did not benefit from international opportunities and had
intolerant normative frameworks (religio-nationalism in the first case and political Islamism in the second and third
cases)”, Kuru 2005, p. 273.
66 Ozdalga (2003: 61).
67 Ozdalga (2003: 61).

--- Sayfa 42 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

40
Outsider perspective, the key to the problem seems to lie in the threat posed to the existing power
balance and established status hierarchy.68

5. Concluding Remarks: Renewed Peaceful Coexistence Message of Rumi Today and
Gülen’s Initiatives
Rumi’s discourse and practice vis-à-vis peaceful coexistence and his tradition of intercultural activism
as the most important method of social innovation to tackle ignorance and to improve cooperation for
a more cohesive society live in the thought and practice of Gülen. It is, thus, not a coincidence that
their antagonists’ accusations are also of similar nature and content.
Millions inspired by Gülen put his discourse into practice all over the world. The greatest advantage in
the prospect of achieving this is that Gülen has an alim background. It is true that he is an influential
leader but he is first of all an expert of Islamic theology (kalam), Qur’ânic exegesis (tafsir), science of
hadith (usul-u hadith) and Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh) similar to Rumi as we have seen above.
Through his sermons, teachings, books and activities, Gülen has inspired a whole generation in
Turkey and abroad and has reduced the gap between ulama (high) Islam and folk Islam. For the
lasting peaceful coexistence, Gülen has encouraged his followers and sympathisers to establish
educational and intercultural dialogue institutions in and outside of Turkey. These people –following
in the footsteps of Rumi- are also active participants in society and perform public service by
establishing schools, charities and hospitals. The community’s enthusiasm for establishing secular
schools in both the Muslim and non-Muslim worlds, specifically schools serving people of all faiths
and nationalities, is unprecedented not only among Sufis but all faith-based groups and movements,
thus, socially innovative. Instead of being isolated from the society, they try to reconcile their spiritual
life with their worldly one, following Gülen’s discourse.69 These schools aim to instil -through the
good example of teachers, educators, and staff- universal values such as honesty, cooperation,
freedom, happiness, humility, love, respect, responsibility, and acceptance of the other.
The movement’s schools in areas where ethnic and religious conflicts are escalating, such as Albania,
Kosovo, Macedonia, the Philippines, Banda Aceh, Northern Iraq, Darfur and South-eastern Turkey
have played remarkable peacemaking roles in decreasing levels of conflict in these areas.70
Through its schools and outlets the Gülen movement is spreading an Anatolian Muslimness; a
renewed Rumi practice of Islam that emphasises love, empathy, mutual respect and enrichment,
intercultural activism, education and social innovation for a cohesive society. With the help of the
schools in about 100 countries all over the world, many people, not only Muslims, are getting a good
and quality education in a multicultural, multi-faith environment so that in future they will continue
to be open to dialogue and they will hopefully attain good socio-economic status within their societies.

68 Ozdalga, Redeemer or Outsider, Muslim World, 2005, pp. 441-442.
69 Mandaville states that “in the case of Turkey’s Gülen movement… we find elements of Sufi spirituality fused with socio-
economic liberalism in a highly successful transnational educational project. Dozens of Gülen-sponsored schools,
emphasizing a modernist curriculum against a backdrop of ‘non-invasive’ Islamic morality, now operate throughout much
of the Balkans and Central Asia”, Peter Mandaville (2003) “What does progressive Islam look like?”. ISIM Newsletter.
Leiden: ISIM. 33-34. p.34.
70 Saritoprak, Nonviolence, Muslim World, 2005, p. 423. See also Kalyoncu 2007.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

41
As Thomas Michel puts, in line with Gülen’s firm belief that the road to justice for all is dependent on
the provision of an adequate education, in addition to the formal education carried out in schools, the
movement has also pursued non-formal education through television and radio channels, newspapers
and magazines, cultural and professional foundations. 71
It will not be wrong to suggest that Gülen is renewing the message of Rumi in accordance with
contemporary tempo-spatial needs of the masses for a lasting peaceful coexistence through education
and dialogue. Given that Rumi’s discourse and practice are deeply rooted in Islam, Gülen could be
said to be renewing Islam (tajdid), which is another dimension of his social innovation.
Arabic proverb puts that “el-merru aduvvu ma jahila”, one is enemy of whom s/he does not know.
Thus, if each side knows each other, it is probable that tensions will ease or tensions will not even
emerge. With its innovative projects, schools, activities and aid programmes72 almost all over the
world, from Cambodia, Bangladesh to Mali, Philippines, Lebanon and Argentina, the movement itself
becoming a bridge between cultures, countries, nations and faiths.
It has also been observed that students from Gülen schools do not feel that they are lost between
cultures. On the contrary, they been, to borrow Roger Ballard’s concept, “skilfully navigating between
cultures” or surfing on the inter-cultural-net, may be just as Rumi did many centuries ago like a
compass with one foot on one faith & culture, the other travelling worlds. What is more, as Harun
Tokak -Chairman of the Journalists and Writers Foundation and a companion of Gulen for more than
35 years- beautifully expressed in his column in Daily Yeni Safak on 4 November 2007, Gülen’s
sympathisers do not only say “Come, come, whoever you are” but they also actually go to people
whoever/wherever they are.
As a result of the movement’s innovative projects, a new generation with quality education, well-
versed in a few languages and with prospects of good jobs and high socio-economic status has been
raised. Three main enemies of humanity and mothers of all incoherence, terror, anarchy and conflict
(ignorance, poverty and disunity) will be overcome in the long run if Gülen projects succeed. In my
humble opinion, Gülen movement is a good start to counter radicalism and radicalisation in the long
run. Without such an educational and dialogue project, society’s increasing problems of radicalism
and radicalisation cannot be solved. One expects that these self-confident new generations who study
in pluralist non-denominational multicultural and multifaith environments where Rumi and Gülen’s
peaceful coexistence ethos prevails will be not be inclined to radicalism. If education and dialogue do
not work to build and maintain a cohesive society, nothing will work.

71 Thomas Michel (2006) Said Nursi’s Views on Muslim-Christian Understanding. Istanbul: Soz. 70.
72 Kimse Yok mu Association is the major aid organization of the movement and has been active in the last few years.. It has
helped earthquake victims in Bandah Aceh Indonesia, Pakistan and so on; sent aid in goods and cash to Lebanon after the
recent Israeli onslaught, www.kimseyokmu.org.tr. One can expect that this aid association will increase its activities
throughout the world.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

42

--- Sayfa 45 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

43

Reason and Faith in Gülen's Philosophy

PART
1

--- Sayfa 46 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

44

--- Sayfa 47 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

45
INTERSECTIONS OF WAYS TOWARDS TOLERANCE AND
COEXISTENCE: FROM DAOISM AND SUFISM TO KANT AND
GÜLEN
RICHARD K. KHURI 73

Abstract
Fethullah Gülen’s crucial insistence on the need to distinguish between the Hidden and revealed
aspects of Oneness has favourable repercussions for the deepening of coexistence at many levels,
especially between religion and secularism, and between the various world religions. The paper
therefore makes a fourfold movement back and forth between emphasis on Oneness as Mystery
and Oneness as revealed, for which Gülen uses the words Ehadiyet and Vahidiyet. It begins with
the Daoist approach to Mystery, moves into the Sufi elaboration of this in conjunction with the
Islamic emphasis on revelation, continues with the Kantian retreat back into Mystery in view of
the modern aversion to religious authority and explicit religious discourse, and ends with Gülen’s
synthesizing thought in the light of lessons learned both from the distant past and from the
increasingly apparent shortcomings of modernity. Both Kant and Gülen, each in his own way,
demonstrate a renewed ability to express Transcendence, the first with almost complete emphasis
on the Hidden (or noumenal), the second with a careful balance between the Hidden and the
revealed. With both thinkers, we end up with an idiom that stresses the total openness of the
Infinite/Eternal while sustaining the sense that one is guided through a life potentially full of
meaning. With regard to coexistence, what results is that different religious paths, traditional and
non-traditional, can each retain their character while sharing a deep recognition of their common
pursuit.

- I -
Among the many ways that humanity finds itself at seminal crossroads, the alternative between
dialogue and clash of civilizations looms large. A crucial and subsidiary divide within that alternative
lies between religious coexistence and conflict. While almost all eyes are fixed upon the political
developments that have bearing on future relations among different religions, there is an altogether
different determination. One way that human beings have fought — and fought hard — over their
divergent views of religion passes through their conception of transcendence, of what has also been
called “ultimate reality”, “truth”, and “the Logos”.  In particular, the question is (1) whether these may
be viewed in absolutist terms and (2) whether it is possible to be explicit about the Absolute.
Whenever religion is essential to religious conflict (rather than incidental when the dispute is social,

73 Professor of Philosophy, Religion, and Cultural Studies at the Lebanese American University. PhD in philosophy from the
University of California at Berkeley. He is the author of Freedom, Modernity, and Islam: Toward a Creative Synthesis
(Syracuse University Press, 1998), and several academic papers dealing with philosophy and contemporary science, some
published by the American Institute of Physics and the New York Academy of Science. His papers on freedom have been
published by Brill, on phenomenology by Kluwer, on the philosophy of art by the American Catholic Philosophical
Association, and on the philosophy of Seyyed Hossein Nasr by the Open Court Press. He has also written a series of literary
and critical essays for the international newspaper al-Hayat.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

46
economic, or political), the reason seems to be that the adherents of two or more religions are
absolutists who also believe they have definite, explicit accounts of the Absolute that unfortunately
happen to be at serious odds – or that one or more groups of absolutists decide to “rectify the wrongs”
of those who are religious, but for whom absolutism is nevertheless an alien concept (something
hardly uncommon since Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism, and many Hindu interpretations, besides
aboriginal religions across the world, are not absolutist, certainly not in the Abrahamic sense).
The same is true of the conflict between religion and science in modern times. It has either arisen
because religious absolutism has been transposed into areas of inquiry better left to scientists, or
because some kind of scientific absolutism has (comically) taken on a quasi-religious aspect. Only
thus can we explain religious officials indignant over the proof that Earth is not flat, or scientists who
imagine themselves certain that God — or any other manifestation or naming of transcendence – are
fictions that “grown up” human beings ought to leave behind.
How humans conceive transcendence and how explicit they think they can be about it is hence central
to the future of coexistence between the various religions of the world (above all the world religions)
as well as that between religion and science, and religion and secularism. An overly explicit absolutist
conception of transcendence, in view of the excesses to which it obviously leads and has led, will often
cause — and has caused -genuinely concerned enlightened human beings to overreact to the point of
attempting to abolish religion altogether (or at any rate create a system so thoroughly secularized as
to sustain the hope that religion will whither away someday). Such has been the case of modern
Turkey. What is particularly interesting about Turkey is that it has reached the stage where both sides
in a conflict that had threatened to tear the country apart are finding more nuanced and considered
approaches to secularism and Islam. This is the context for the significance of the thought of
Fethullah Gülen.  Here, of course, we shall limit ourselves to what is relevant to the foregoing. Before
we turn to a leading contemporary Islamic reformist, however, a setting needs to be provided for the
always difficult discussion of transcendence (which will henceforth be used as shorthand for the nexus
of terms already mentioned, such as “ultimate reality”, “truth”, and “the Logos”). The whole history of
philosophy and religious thought (including mysticism) may be surveyed most fruitfully in that
regard. But for our purposes, it will suffice to begin with one of the most ancient recorded beginnings,
namely in ancient China, and pause with Rumi and Kant before we reach our final destination.

- II -
My Master Teacher! My Master Teacher!
He judges all life but does not feel he is being judgemental;
he is generous to multitudes of generations
but does not think this benevolent;
he is older than the oldest
but he does not think himself old;
he overarches Heaven and sustains Earth,
shaping and creating endless bodies

--- Sayfa 49 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

47
but he does not think himself skilful.
This is what is known as Heavenly happiness.
The words belong to Chuang Tzu, twice over (Chuang Tzu, 107). They occur in his book, and they are
also a direct quote of his own words within his book. He was the first major Daoist after Lao Tzu and
is believed to have lived during the fourth century BCE. The verse is typical of the Daoist insistence on
the impossibility of expressing what is truly beyond in our terms. It is also shows typical Daoist
ambiguity. The words may equally refer to a great (human) sage, or the Ultimate Sage (The I Ching is
also ambiguous in the same way). But there is nothing ambiguous about the intent, which is to remind
us that the Ultimate Judge is no judge at all viewed from “the other side”, the Ultimate Work (of
Creation) is no work at all, the Immortal is forever young, and so on. Logically, we are faced with
paradox upon paradox. Yet in our words, if we are really referring to transcendence, we must be
paradoxical.  Elsewhere, Chuang Tzu argues that
words have value but only in terms of their meaning.  Meaning is constantly seeking to express
what cannot be said in words . . . (Chuang Tzu, 115)
Ibn ‘Arabi, Rumi, and many Sufi thinkers will find their own Islamic rendition of such timeless
awareness. Transcendence cannot be limited in any way by our words. It is fundamentally open. It is
openness itself.  One of the many recurring paradoxes at this level involves the convergence of
complete emptiness with perfect fullness.  Buddhism refuses to speak in any theistic terms and
acknowledges only the “Great Emptiness”.  Precisely so, it acknowledges the greatest imaginable
plenitude, or — we should say — unimaginable plenitude. Note the apparent precariousness: We
normally associate emptiness with nothingness. Literally, by talking about emptiness at the highest
ontological-spiritual level, we seem to be implying the abyss that frightens masses of humanity into
the rush to transform it into something closer, something they are more comfortable with, something
seemingly fuller – and so they promptly lose the depth of what it was they had fearfully, through
misunderstanding, been staring into. On the contrary the abyss, just so, has the openness to allow the
most gigantic creature to fly, as is narrated in the opening passage of Chuang Tzu’s book (Chuang Tzu,
1-3). Similarly, for us, an apparent emptiness is the right state, not only to begin a proper awareness
of transcendence, but also to live rightly and happily:
Empty, still, calm, plain, quiet, silent, non-active, this is the centredness of
Heaven and Earth and of the Tao and of Virtue.  The Emperor, king, and sages
rest there.  Resting, they are empty; empty, they can be full; fullness is fulfilment.
From the empty comes stillness; in stillness they can travel; in travelling they
achieve.  In stillness they take actionless action.  Through actionless action they
expect results from those with responsibilities.  Through actionless action they are
happy, very happy . . .  Empty, still, calm, plain, quiet, silent, actionless action is
the foundation of all life.  (Chuang Tzu, 106-7)
Being (of the world and everything in it), wisdom, just rule, right action, and human action – all these
have their root in stillness (a view also found in Parmenides, Plotinus, and the Upanishads).  Again,
we are far from the common misunderstanding of stillness as lifelessness. On the contrary, what is
intended by Chuang Tzu and other ancient sages is a stillness that underpins the very possibility of
life, that is “more alive” than life itself, as Plotinus might put it. How far such stillness and clarity are
from the noise and frequent anger that accompany the insistence on presenting and representing
Transcendence in terms generally accessible to human beings!

--- Sayfa 50 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

48
Anyone who has undertaken a demanding task such as writing a literary essay, playing a piece of
music, or performing a dance, understands that such tasks are only accomplished successfully when
they feel effortless. There is a sense in which work that demands a maximum intensity does not feel
like work at all as it flows. And it only flows when one is free from other distractions, when one
becomes “still” in one’s relaxed concentration on the task at hand. The more profound the work, the
more capacious one must be to get it done.  From the everyday point of view, one becomes “empty” to
make room for the work.  The more “empty” one is, the better the work that gets done. This
contemplative or meditative state in action can then be extended into the areas of human and divine
governance, where good human governance refers both to self-mastery as well as wise and just rule
over society at large. More pertinent for our immediate purposes, it is this same meditative-
contemplative state that occasions an adequate human awareness of Transcendence and makes it
virtually impossible either to descend into the inferno of religious conflict or tread on turf well
covered by broadminded science.
There is a kind of scepticism that is a blessing for humanity: In saying that whatever words we try to
assign literally to Transcendence will come across as nonsense, one does not thereby dismiss
Transcendence. Rather, one heeds it.  For how can it be otherwise? How can Transcendence fail to
turn contradictory and worse when reduced to what our words can convey literally? In this as well,
Transcendence shows Its love for humanity. For to be beyond human expression is to be open to
many kinds of expression, each offering a new perspective, each helping us on our way so long as we
do not mistake the perspective for the whole.

- III -
As far as we are able to ascertain, Rumi never read the work of ancient Chinese sages.  He knew
neither Lao Tzu nor Chuang Tzu. He did not have to, for what is timeless is available equally to
whoever finds a path to it. And so it was that Rumi wrote, in the Mathnavi:
Whatever you can think is perishable.
That which enters no thought, that’s God!  (M II 3107)
The unthinkability of Transcendence is another way to state that for thought of the ordinary kind,
which readily expresses itself in our language, God is nothing and nowhere. Indeed, the Arabic word
‘adam often comes up in Rumi’s and other Sufi writings, a word normally translated as “nothingness”
or “non-being”  (In spoken Arabic, something that is ‘adam is of the lowest quality). Rumi sees ‘adam
as the Buddhists saw the Great Void: To us in our everyday stance, It is nothing, yet everything
emerges from It.  In his Diwan-i kabir, he writes:  “To be nothing is the precondition of Being.”  (D
2642)
Waves of being come out of it constantly,
so that from their movement a hundred mills are set in motion.  (D 155)
Being and non-being are brothers, as contrasts are hidden in each other:
Did not the Qur’an say (Sura 31:18):  “He brings forth the living from the dead”?  (M  V  1018-9)

--- Sayfa 51 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

49
We are dealing here with the ultimate paradox. Existence, all of existence, presupposes what from its
standpoint can only be metaphorically termed “non-existence” for it to be possible.  Parmenides had
already noted the mysterious link between Being and Non-being, so much so that all his affirmations
of Being had to be made against the backdrop of a contrast with Non-being. And the misinterpretation
began almost immediately!  Is Non-being literally nothing, so that, as Parmenides seemed to state it
and Plato would do so again in the Sophist, the question arises: “How can Non-being be?” Or is it
Non-being in the sense of beyond Being, so that only when we are confined to Being, as we usually
are, we have no choice but to use that strange term Non-being? The ancient Chinese already
understood this difficulty, and so they had two words, Wu for Non-being (or Beyond-being, a key
concept in the mystical-philosophical theology of Ibn’Arabi), and Yu for Being. A Chinese can easily
understand that Wu is more encompassing than Yu.
In philosophy, it is dialectics that enables the thinker, faced with a hopeless tangle within a certain
domain of thought, to see that domain as a domain, in other words as bounded and relatively limited,
beyond which there has to be another realm, less limited, intimated by the very recognition of
boundaries. The less limited realm is invisible within those boundaries. It vanishes. The dialectical
thinker, from Heraklitus and Parmenides to Hegel and Nietzsche, risks reliance on (and places trust
in) what ordinarily vanishes and thereby finds he is able to think more deeply. The Sufi risks himself.
Before God, he vanishes. In vanishing, he becomes a universal or cosmic Self in an Islamic rendition
of the Hindu motif, namely the unity of Atman and Brahman. When the Sufi returns to himself and
tries to find words for Transcendence, he has recourse only to paradox, symbolism, and metaphor.
Rumi revelled in paradox. From the interplay between Being and Non-being, other paradoxes
followed abundantly.  Faithful to his Muslim heritage, Rumi associated those paradoxes with the
Names (and attributes) of God that for Ibn ‘Arabi (with whose work Rumi was familiar) were the
origin of everything in the world (Chittick, 47-58). Thus in our terms, God is at once merciful and
wrathful, at once beautiful and powerful, at once the giver of life and death - but only in our terms.
The Sufi whose mysticism culminates in direct awareness of Non-being is thereby aware of the
dissolution of those paradoxes “from the other side”. However, from the side of ordinary mortals like
ourselves, they must ever remain paradoxical.
The “problem” with Transcendence, from the general human standpoint, is that it eludes common
expression and only resolves itself in contradiction and paradox. To the common eye, It vanishes. Yet
humans have an innate longing for Transcendence and many among them find Its elusiveness
intolerable. So it is that Christianity and Islam have gained a wide following.  In claiming Revelation,
they have brought Transcendence into the human domain with greater clarity, or so the faithful
believe. Even if we suppose for the sake of argument that there is indeed greater clarity about
Transcendence as a result of Revelation, this has come at a price, the extent of which will perhaps be
better evaluated by future generations.
That explicitness about Transcendence has been exploited by those more interested in power than
religion ought not detract from the legitimacy of the longing for Transcendence to “come out of
hiding”, at least to some degree. After all, emergence from deep ambiguity into the light of clarity is
how the ancient Greeks understood “truth”, as their word “aletheia” suggests. As the disclosure of
what is normally hidden, the sense of aletheia is lost to our modern word “truth”. In Arabic, the
relation between al-haqiqa (‘truth’ in our sense) and al-haqq (‘truth’ in the sense of ‘ultimate reality’,
also a metaphor for God) is closer to the spirit of aletheia than modern English. However, in Greek
mythology and the worldview forever preserved by it, the Hidden has to be persuaded, cajoled,

--- Sayfa 52 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

50
sometimes even tricked into disclosure. The notion of the Hidden wanting to disclose Itself was novel.
It was introduced by the Abrahamic religions in conjunction with pagan mystical thinkers like
Plotinus.
The foregoing can be refined further. For the ancient Greeks, what first came out of the primordial
Chaos (“Non-being” in our sense) was Love. All other differentiation on the way to order (Cosmos)
came afterwards. Since Love is what most primordially brings forth the Cosmos, there is already an
implicit sense that a kind of desire is crucially at work in emergence from the Chaos. If we wish to be
more precise, it is not the notion of the Hidden wanting to disclose Itself that was introduced by the
Abrahamic religions, but a more explicit affirmation of Love. Thus we have the setting for the famous
divine pronouncement that, while believed to be part of Revelation, is actually not in the Qur’an, but
is rather a hadith qudsi:
I was a hidden treasure and I wanted to be known, so I created the world!
All Sufis gave pride of place to this pronouncement. So far, so good. To see the world itself and much
that is in it as full of signs signifying Transcendence in no way leads to the idea that humanity is now
in possession of the truth about the Hidden and should therefore make sure that everyone is set along
the right path. For those of us who are concerned with tolerance and coexistence, the question now
becomes: To what extent can the Hidden be explicit without endangering communal harmony and
peace, without subjecting individual human beings to repeated abuse in Its name?  We can see where
the problems begin. For example, so far as individuals are concerned, Abrahamic theodicy repeatedly
assures those whose lot in life is cruelly unfortunate that they are “part of God’s plan” and ought to see
their allotment through a broader perspective. Even a man like Rumi, so obviously filled with Love,
succumbs to the temptation to urge those upon whom the worst evils are visited to praise God for His
hand in their fate. Is this acceptable? Is it humane? Meanwhile, whole communities have been
crushed — by Christians and Muslims alike — as a consequence of the Abrahamic belief that the truth
about Transcendence is known, which becomes the basis for passing judgment on every other form of
human life. Recipients of a negative verdict are rarely in an enviable position.  Is this an act of love?
Such questions stirred the passions of those who sought to change the direction of human life in
Europe more than five hundred years ago. And for all their success, we still find ourselves gathered at
many meetings in order to discuss issues pertaining to tolerance and coexistence.  No doubt, it is
unsatisfactory for a more tolerant environment to arise at the expense of religion. It would not be so
tolerant in any case if it must be intolerant to religion.  However, what seems to be necessary is a more
mindful approach to Transcendence, an acceptance that the Hidden must largely remain so, at least
so far as the possibility of explicit and detailed statements is concerned. And if one must feel oneself
in possession of the Truth, then let this not lead to the temptation to impose such truth on others. The
Hidden, even when revealed, is never revealed completely, nor can It, given human limitations. Thus
Christians and Muslims both acknowledge Mystery. The concept of Mystery is the key to the depth
and breadth of Abrahamic tolerance at the religious level.

- IV -
With Kant, we have perhaps the most sophisticated modern outlook that at once acknowledges the
importance of both science and religion. Kant was at the same time a contributor to science (in his
younger years) and an outstanding metaphysician. Transcendence is consistently acknowledged

--- Sayfa 53 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

51
throughout his philosophy, in its epistemological, metaphysical, ethical, and aesthetic phases. It
sometimes makes a humble appearance in the course of a complex and rigorous argument, sometimes
a grand entrance as more general statements are made about human beings, the world, and lies
beyond. Above all, since we have just concluded the section about Rumi with an affirmation of the
importance of Mystery for the consolidation of coexistence and tolerance, Kant offers us a modern,
philosophical rendition of Mystery in the manner that he approaches Transcendence. The
transcendent (or noumenal) is unknowable, ineffable to our everyday empirical mindset and
methods.  Yet It shapes and motivates our scientific undertakings, our moral lives, and art. We have
“presentiments” of Transcendence in our affirmation of freedom, the immortality of the soul, the
moral good, the beautiful, and the Supreme Being. Kant’s philosophy offers us an excellent example of
dialectics as discussed earlier.  Again and again, in great detail, his philosophy lays out various
domains of inquiry and living that seem to have strict boundaries, yet are only laid out successfully
owing to our ability to transcend them. This is why Kant has no problem at all accommodating
himself to the most comprehensive and unfettered scientific undertakings. Wherever science arrives,
this will only add to the means by which Transcendence radiates Its Presence silently. In Kant, the
silence with which we address Transcendence is therefore not the silence of dismissive sceptics, but
that of genuine respect. For us, then, Kant offers a model of coexistence between religions (because of
the centrality of Mystery in his view of Transcendence and the dogged of an explicitness that he
believes would be futile for human beings to attempt), as well as between religion and science
(because of the complete openness to science just mentioned). Therefore, any serious evaluation of
Fethullah Gülen’s philosophy in that regard ought to pass through the Kantian legacy.
However, as we have noted in a series of questions raised towards the end of Section III, the early
modern period that began (philosophically and scientifically) with Bacon and Descartes and was
ended by Kant as he propelled modernity into its latter stage (which continues to shape contemporary
life) was marked decisively by repugnance over the excesses of religious institutions and organizations
that had gained widespread power over the lives of most Europeans. We need only bear in mind three
interrelated motivations for secular attitudes:  Religious wars, especially the 1618-1648 conflict;
nation building, driven by strong rationalist yearnings after the Thirty Years’ War (Toulmin, 69-80,
89-129); and the successes of scientists in improving public health and increasing rigour and
precision in the human understanding of nature, particularly the physical world, after religious
authorities had opposed the undertaking of free inquiry into, say, the anatomy and physiology of the
human body with a view to a better grasp of the nature of illness and wellbeing.
Against the backdrop of developments that would define modernity in both its early and latter stages,
Kant could hence only be vigorously opposed to any explicit statement of religious doctrine, to any
claim about Transcendence that is epistemologically grounded. For Kant, when it comes to
Transcendence, nobody can claim to have the truth or any clarity about It whatsoever. Even if
Transcendence matter most to us, even if knowledge be bathed with transcendent intimations at its
limit that drive it onward and forward, even if morality be ultimately impossible without It, even if art
and nature reveal purpose and harmony that suggest It, Transcendence cannot be known.  What can
be known about nature ought to be left to the natural sciences. Philosophy qua theory of knowledge
simply shows how the scientific pursuit of knowledge within the empirical world is metaphysically
well grounded.
We are back to our ancient beginnings, with the movement appropriately modified. Again, we are left
wondering how the human longing for explicitness and clarity regarding Transcendence can be
fulfilled constructively, with due regard for the unprecedented need for coexistence and tolerance in

--- Sayfa 54 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

52
our globalized world. Let us then recapitulate the movement with regard to the deepest foundation for
tolerance and coexistence through Kant:
-
In ancient times, as evidenced in pre-Socratic, neo-Platonic, Hindu, Buddhist, Daoist, and
Aboriginal awakenings, there was an accommodation with the ambiguity and opacity of
Transcendence and comfort with the idea that the Chaos or the Empty are indeed respectively a
Chaos beyond all order (and so sustaining every conceivable order) and an Emptiness fuller than
all plenitude (and so sustaining plenitude). There was no question of conflict between religion
and the study of nature, for all was encompassed within the broadest and most open outlook
imaginable.
-
With the emergence of revealed (Abrahamic) religion, the idea took hold that human beings now
have the truth about Transcendence (Note as well the crucial idea that truth is something that
can be “had” in the first place, and how this differs radically from the ancient Greek notion of
truth as disclosures of the Hidden, with emphasis always on the Hidden rather than the
disclosed). It is well known that as soon as Christianity became a state religion, no other
possibilities for religious expression were allowed except for Jews for obvious Biblical reasons.
Scientific and free philosophical inquiry were also suppressed or integrated into the overall views
of the Church.  Islam was initially far more tolerant than Christianity on all counts. The Qur’an
stipulated that followers of other Abrahamic faiths be treated with respect, and this was extended
to Hindus, Buddhists, and others as Islam spread across Asia. Meanwhile, the Qur’an’s explicit
urgings to study Nature combined with Muslim exposure to ancient holistic and intellectual
traditions to create a vast cultural flowering that reached its zenith during the 9th and 10th
centuries CE, and would be repeated during the early Ottoman centuries and sporadically in
places like Cordoba and Samarqand.  However, for reasons that are now fairly well understood,
many of which are internal (meaning not related to imperialism/colonialism), this flowering
came to an end and eventually, many of the motivations for the modern rebellion in Europe took
hold of Muslim aspirations (Khuri, 213-276).
-
The modern rebellion, for its part, was often unable to distinguish between religious
organizations and institutions, and religion itself, perhaps because the Catholic Church had
habituated Europeans so much to the idea that the two cannot and ought not be separated. Thus,
whatever might be fairly blamed on institutions was attributed to religion as such, with the result
that modern methodology and practice all too frequently suppressed or ignored a human concern
so central that it is possibly at the heart of what it is to be human. Even Kant can be said to have
kept Transcendence “safely” locked within a Mystery that would not allow any conceivable
practical abuse.  However, several historical developments combined to cast doubt on once all-
powerful institutions that had reinforced indifference or hostility to religion. It should be noted,
however, that the reality was always far more complicated. The USA in effect knowingly
encouraged religious life by keeping the state away from it. Religious symbolism was maintained
at the top of the British monarchy, since the monarch is also head of the Church of England. The
Federal Republic in Germany has taxation policies that indirectly support the various churches.
So the main examples in Europe of states opposed to religion were France and the Soviet Union
— as well as Kemalist Turkey at least until 1950.  So what has re-emerged is not so much religious
life as a more serious attitude towards it.
-
The post-modern phase, then, has two relevant aspects, the one more sceptical than ever, the
other more mindful of religion. Now, however, the requirement is for religious life to encapsulate

--- Sayfa 55 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

53
the lessons that must be learned from a long authoritarian past as well as the extremism of the
present. Specifically, the question here is whether a contemporary way has been found for
Transcendence to regain its resonance and place without the kind of explicitness that gives rise to
misinterpretation and abuse, in short to intolerance. This is the historical-existential setting for
the consideration of the thought of Fethullah Gülen.

- V -
In the thought of Fethullah Gülen, one finds several ways that Transcendence as Mystery is indeed
heeded so that It regains Its resonance in a contemporary spirit, in particular with regard to the great
care shown for the promotion of tolerance and coexistence. We may single out three moments in such
renewal: In the first place, Gülen highlights a faculty by which one finds continuity with the Hidden;
second, and crucially, Gülen highlights a mediating level between the Hidden and the disclosed (or
the Unseen and the seen in the Islamic conception); and third, Gülen directly emphasizes the Hidden
within the many faces and modalities of the Divine. Let us see how.
In a book that collects many of his writings on fundamental questions and topics, namely Toward a
Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Gülen almost from the beginning turns to what many
modern philosophers have avoided. He talks about the inner depths hidden within each one of us and
relates those depths directly to the Hidden.  In the spirit of what has been argued throughout this
paper, what is truly profound within human beings remains invisible to a positivistic ideology.  In our
words, it vanishes. Yet from its ancient beginnings and clearly so in the Socratic stance, the
importance of what seems to vanish had been acknowledged. For one thing, there was the Delphic
oracle “Know thyself”, for which Socrates had the utmost reverence.  The Socratic dialogues preserved
by Plato are exemplary on showing how what is superficially elusive is also decisive, not only at a
deeper level, but because it is depth itself. Socrates relentlessly wanted the inner spirit of his
interlocutors to come forth, and because this does not happen through argument alone, the
arguments always seemed to fail to reach their conclusion. But it is an instructive failure. Among all
levels of irony known attributed to Socrates, the greatest might well be this: In their failure, his
arguments reveal what is most important about human beings, which is whatever it is that allows
them to know themselves. Thus, Gülen writes
Our interest in our environment and our love for humankind — that is, our ability to embrace
creation — depends on knowing and understanding our own essence, our ability to discover
ourselves, and to feel a connection with our Creator.  In parallel with the ability to discover and feel
our inner depths and hidden potential within our essence, we will be able to appreciate that others
also possess the same potential.  Moreover, because these inner values are directly related to the
Creator, and because a respect for the riches that are hidden in every creature is nurtured, we will
start to see every living thing from a different perspective and in a different manner.  (Gülen, 6).
With a few words, Gülen is able to encapsulate so many crucial interconnected insights.  He does not
waste time on arguing for the depth that he affirms because of the long history that shows the futility
of such argument and the readily available example of Socrates, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Marcel, and
others whose work instigates awareness of depth in the sincere and open-minded reader who has not
yet forsaken that perennial human potential.  Thus, Gülen feels free to go ahead and further affirm the
intimate link between human and divine inwardness. At its most profound, all inwardness is one in
the mystical philosophy.  However, Gülen is not content to leave things at that. He wishes to extend

--- Sayfa 56 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

54
such human potential to all human beings and to make this the basis for the solidarity that cuts across
religious, sectarian, cultural, ethnic, and other lines. Even more, he extends inwardness to all life,
hence anchoring sensitivity to the environment far more substantially than in ordinary
environmentalism. Our inner aspect, the presence of the Hidden within every one of us, becomes the
strongest possible basis for tolerance, coexistence, and care for the environment.
Emphasis on the Hidden, on Mystery, within the overall approach to Transcendence is unproblematic
for Gülen because there is an inherent continuity with the hidden within all human beings, actually
within all being.  In a manner characteristic of the Sufi mindset, upon attainment of the overall vision
and union that underpin mystical thought, the duality hidden/disclosed pervades all being and
connects them to what is beyond Being. The hidden and the disclosed are themselves two aspects of
the divine (as we shall see). And — setting Abrahamic mysticism apart from other mystical traditions
— the Hidden, crucially, wills disclosure.
As for what it is that allows human beings to become aware of themselves as harbouring such hidden
treasures, Gülen did not have to reinvent the wheel for it has already been said many times. However
we may mean it, there is soul; and just as a compass is always oriented towards the magnetic north, so
does the soul turn towards God (Gülen, 11).

- VI -
Quite often, however, thought genuinely turned towards Mystery in intense mindfulness of the
integrity of Transcendence leaves us without a bridge between the Hidden and the disclosed.
However, this is not the case with Gülen. The strength of mystical thought is, having a view of Reality
“from the inside”, however fleeting, it is then able to proceed through a graded dynamic that expresses
the turning of Reality from  “inside” to “outside”. Instead of the Platonic duality of Forms (or Ideas or
Archetypes) and beings in the world that are instantiations of those Archetypes, Gülen follows in the
footsteps of a trinitarian tradition stretching from Plotinus to Ibn ‘Arabi. For in addition to
Archetypes, called Âyân-i Sabite in Turkish, and the physical entities (for which no technical name is
usually given, not even in Plato), there is the mediating level, the world of images, or Alem-i Misal
(Eris, 134). Archetypes become physical entities through images.  It is not accidental that ‘image’ is
related to ‘imagination’. Our creative imagination is what helps us make the turn successfully beyond
the physical. This is universally true. How much art is there that is far from explicitly religious, yet it
invites us to behold the material in a “dematerialized” state? Art, dreams, other imaginings — these
are the pole with which we vault over the empirical world. Kant acknowledged this in his third
critique, when he turned to art and explained as clearly and rigorously as he could how it transformed
the rules through which judgements of beauty are made. This could only be done through what he
termed “genius”, which among other things involves an exceptional imagination (Kant, 1987, 9-67 and
174-188).
Many philosophers have strangely failed to pay sufficient attention to the imagination, which
reinforced the modern predicament with regard to the apparently insurmountable barrier between
the individual subjective consciousness and the external world. However, Sufi thinkers, like post-
Kantian Idealist and Romantic philosophers and poets, were able since Ibn ‘Arabi to posit an
“imaginal world” that lies between the Hidden and the disclosed. Ibn ‘Arabi colourfully called that
world the barzakh or Isthmus, which was readily adopted by Gülen (Eris, 136). An isthmus readily
suggests a world between two others, and we might try to imagine the emergence of a cosmic shore of

--- Sayfa 57 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

55
possibility from the Mystery of Beyond-being behind which the contours of the physical universe
begin to form. This imaginary cosmic shore is a world in transition, where the images have formed but
have yet to become materialized. This pre-existing tendency to physical form is surprisingly finding
recognition among some contemporary astronomers and physicists.
Gülen adds another dimension to Ibn ‘Arabi’s notion of the barzakh. For him, not only is the imaginal
world ontologically between the mysterious Source and physical entification (or taayyün), but it is
spiritually between earthly life and the afterlife (Eris, 136). The mediating spiritual domain in Gülen’s
mystical ontology strikes one as being rather more compassionate and appealing than the traditional
notion of limbo. This reminds us that the role of mercy should not be overlooked in Gülen, although it
is not immediately related to our chosen subject. Nevertheless, mercy is a central concept in his
thought and, of course, it informs his commitment to tolerance and coexistence.

- VII -
We now turn to the third moment in Gülen’s renewal of the human connection with Transcendence:
his emphasis on Mystery or the Hidden even as he also acknowledges what Transcendence reveals to
Muslims. As he evokes the sophistication of Ibn ‘Arabi’s mystically grounded ontology, Gülen makes
some fundamental conceptual distinctions of his own.  Of special interest is that between Ehadiyet
and Vahidiyet (Eris, 125-8). The two terms take full advantage of the subtleties that can be expressed
through the derivation of different words from the same Arabic root (In fact all of the technical terms
in Gülen that we have mentioned are Arabic in origin, Turkified only phonetically). They both pertain
to the word for ‘One’ or ‘Oneness’. The reason why Gülen needs two terms is his need to distinguish
between the aspect of Oneness by which it envelops multiplicity, and that by which Oneness shows
Itself in multiplicity. To the extent that Oneness envelops multiplicity (which is our world), It cannot
be known. It is incomprehensible. Nothing can be said about It. In the Kantian sense, It is the purely
noumenal. To the extent that Oneness reveals Itself, It is not only known but desires to be known. The
phenomena are signs of the One turning outward in a primordial act of Love.
In this way, Gülen is able to heed both the demands of Mystery and the demands of the faithful.
Mystery forever and inherently abides with and within Itself in a manner beyond the reach of all but
those whose mystical commitments have led them to the One. Even then, they are unable to say
anything definite about It. Ek-stasis in ancient Greek automatically evokes a state outside of oneself.
One is at a loss for words and only symbols accessible to initiates — and then only indirectly — begin
to convey the depths that have been attained. The purely noumenal aspect of the One, always
encompassing the phenomena and all words and qualities conceivable to humanity, is hence always
open, always available for another path or another interpretation. In and of Itself, it guarantees
coexistence and tolerance. For who dares claim to be in possession of the final word about It?
On the other hand, Gülen remains faithful to his Islamic calling and so heeds the significance of
Revelation. The same Oneness that embraces all Being and so is Beyond-being at the same time has
left traces with all beings — for which ‘soul’ has been used in reference to humans — thus enabling
them to rise to an awareness of connectedness with It; and to add emphasis to Its outward turn, It has
“spoken” to the faithful, thus letting Itself be known in a manner accessible to human beings.
Intolerance begins only when the Word of Oneness is taken literally and interpreted in partisan
language (“Us believers against them unbelievers”). It begins when humans, their being confined and

--- Sayfa 58 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

56
their existence impoverished for a great variety of reasons, individual and collective, psychological
and political, act as though they were not the fortunate repositories of traces of the outward Turn
taken by Oneness — in short, as though their souls were asleep.  For nobody with a living soul needs
to assert his spirituality in opposition to those he deems in error. This is what is often forgotten by
those who wish to emphasize that the Hidden has willed Its disclosure to some extent: They only
remember the words of disclosure (and often fail to remember them particularly well and more often
still are oblivious to their true meaning) and forget about the hidden treasure within not only each one
of us, as Gülen so aptly reminds us, but there as a sign of its Origin in all beings, so that we have
abundantly what it takes for us to coexist with all forms of life and with our environment.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

57
RATIONAL RELIGION: GÜLEN’S MIDDLE WAY
HOWARD WETTSTEIN 74

Abstract
This paper explores “the middle way.” Talk of a middle way harkens back to Aristotle’s Golden
Mean, and in my own Jewish tradition to Maimonides. I explore the synthesis, if that is the right
word, between the extremes that the middle way represents. I delineate two models of integration,
the first, theoretical compromise. The second way, which I prefer, leaves the extremes and the
truths they emphasize in place.  Consider the alleged conflict between science, in the broadest
sense, and religion. The problem with religious fundamentalism and also what we may call
“scientism” is the claim to the exclusive possession of the truth. My approach is to leave in place
what seems plain, that both sides possess truth, and to see the middle-way as a practical-reason
project, one that emphasizes context. A parallel example is the apparent conflict between ethical
universalism and particularism. Rather than decide between these, or produce a theoretical third
position, we should give great weight to universalism ⎯ seeing all people as of equal value and
ethical significance ⎯ and particularism ⎯ with its attention to our families and ethnic and
religious communities. The idea is to give appropriate weight to each of these depending upon
context, and allowing each to call a halt to the dominance of the other. Finally, I apply my
approach to the middle way to basic theology, to the discordant scriptural anthropomorphic
characterizations of God. I propose that we use these diverse images in a practical way, to nurture
religious development, to stimulate growth in our relationship to God. What the religious
traditions give us, or so I argue, is not so much a theory of God, as a route to holiness.

…just as God wove the universe like a lace on the loom of love, the most magical and charming
music in the bosom of existence is always love.75
Fethullah Gülen has made a major contribution to “Islamic Modernism.” My project here is to
generalize to a view one might call religious modernism, or even better, rational religion. I have been
stimulated by Gülen’s thought to reflect in some of the ways indicated in this paper. Needless to say,
Gülen is not responsible for the directions my own reflections take me. But I am grateful for the
stimulation, and for all the good that the Gülen movement has stimulated during these dark times.
My own orientation is traditional or even Orthodox Judaism. But “orthodoxy” is the wrong expression
for the sort of wonderful constellation of backward and forward looking thinking that Gülen

74 Professor of Philosophy, and Director of the University Honors Program at the University of California, Riverside.
Graduated in philosophy from Yeshiva College; MA and PhD, the City University of New York. Dr Wettstein has published a
number of papers on the philosophy of language, and two books; Has Semantics Rested On a Mistake? and Other Essays
(Stanford University Press, 1991) and The Magic Prism: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (Oxford University Press,
2004). He is a senior co-editor (with Peter French) of Midwest Studies in Philosophy; and has edited a number of other
books including Themes From Kaplan (Oxford University Press, 1989, co-edited) and Diasporas and Exiles (University of
California Press, 2002). Over the last decade he has worked on philosophy of religion, on which he is currently preparing on
a book, and published papers on topics like awe, doctrine, the problem of evil, and the viability of philosophical theology.
75 Fethullah Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, p. 8.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

58
advocates and with which I feel great sympathy. The idea of a middle way of course brings to mind
Aristotle’s talk of the golden mean, and in the context of Jewish thought brings to mind the great
medieval Aristotelean, Maimonides, who would feel much sympathy I think for Gülen’s middle way.
It is striking that both religious fundamentalists and anti-religious “scientistic” thinkers agree on so
much: for example, that science and religion are fundamentally opposed, that enlightened reason is
dramatically at odds with traditional revelation (no matter which religious tradition is in question).
Each of these schools discerns the truth found in his favored domain; but each ignores the important
truth in his opponents’ domain. The middle way refuses to sacrifice either truth.
The middle way ⎯ as Professor Kuru helpfully points out ⎯ is not a marriage of convenience, a sort of
compromise. It is a principled outlook, one that acknowledges multiple truths. I would suggest that
complete truth is an ideal, one beyond the human ken. There is no way to escape our human
limitations ⎯ which is not to sneeze at the substantial progress we can make. It is sometimes
suggested that with Divine help, for example, revelation, we can sidestep our limitations. There is
surely an element of truth in this. At the same time, who but us, with our limitations, is to decide
between the various versions of Divine help that are proffered?
A fundamental question about any such middle-way position is the nature of the synthesis we wish to
achieve. How exactly are scientific truth and religious values to be integrated ⎯ if “integrated” is the
right word? I want to suggest two different models and to advocate one of them. But first, I want to
generalize the problem of radical oppositions. Let’s add a few such oppositions to our list, as there is
something general I want to say about such apparently polar contrasts.
Closely related to the oppositions already mentioned are materialism/spiritualism, and
rationalism/mysticism.
To
move
to
a
dimension
closer
to
ethical,
we
can
mention
worldliness/asceticism. Even more centrally ethical is the opposition universalism/particularism, the
question of our ethical attitudes towards human beings as such as opposed to our more immediate
brethren, say in the Islamic community, or in the Jewish or Christian communities. I would even add
⎯ going out a bit on a limb perhaps ⎯ reverence/irreverence, although there matters get more
complicated.
The first model ⎯ not my favored one ⎯ is one of integration. The idea is that there is some sort of
blending, a finding of harmony, a unification of the extremes. I’m reminded here of a Rabbinic
Midrash, a discussion of another opposition: that between God’s lovingkindness and his demand for
justice. The Midrash suggests that the unification of these, their harmony, is not to be found on earth,
but in the world to come. Interestingly, there is a related discussion in the Talmud in which it is said
that God prays. The Talmudic interlocutor inquires ⎯ incredulously we may imagine: What does God
pray? The answer is this: God prays that his demand for justice is overwhelmed by his loving
kindness. This, I take it, is a distinctively Jewish sort of reflection; I’m not sure that there is anything
parallel in Islam (or Christianity) ⎯ I’m eager to discuss this. But it puts in bold relief the
hopelessness of the quest for a perfect worldly resolution of these oppositions.
Here’s another suggestive example. There is a Hasidic adage that a person should carry in his pocket
two pieces of paper: “I am but dust and ashes,” and “The world was created for me.” I used to think
that the really difficult trick is to get both of these highly dissonant messages on the same piece of
paper; to live a life that is not so compartmentalized, that integrates the superficially incompatible
messages.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

59
Maurice Friedman suggested to me that it would be better to leave them on separate sheets, maybe
even in different pockets. The imagery of a single piece of paper suggested to Friedman what he took
to be a bad idea: that the philosophic job is to render these insights coherent, to articulate an inclusive
principle. What one needs is rather a kind of practical skill, the ability to negotiate experience
respecting both truths — that is, both images, each of which illuminates human experience.
Universalism/particularism: When one considers the very different demands of an ethical
universalism as opposed the stance of various particularistic views that give ethical weight to one’s
own people or religious community, it may be tempting to seek a principled way to decide various
questions that arise, that is a theoretical way to work one’s way between the competing demands. This
would be a form of what I called integration, a theoretical integration of the two poles. My alternative
is that we focus instead on the truth to be found at the extremes. We need not “average them out” or
find a theoretical treatment that states the one comprehensive truth. Rather, once noting the multiple
truths, we can focus our attention on the practical ability to carry on in light of those truths.
To begin with the power of power of universalism, all people ⎯ and not only “my group” ⎯ are
created in and reflections of God’s image, and a violation of another person is a violation of God’s
image and thus (at the very least symbolically) of God. To violate a person is to profane God’s name.
Such a view has something important in common with modern liberal individualism, namely, the
irreducible value of the individual. But for the modern individualist, such value is the sole locus of
ethical significance. Accordingly, the ethical significance of being a member of a people, or of a
religious community is problematic; one needs to work hard, too hard, within such a liberal
framework to give significance to one’s people, even perhaps to members of one’s family. My child,
after all, is no more a person than anyone else.
While there is much in contemporary liberal individualism that I respect, it is for me ethically
significant in the first instance that I am a member of a family/people/religious community. I care,
and I’m right to care, about the latter in a way that’s more immediate than my care for humanity. At
the same time, while there may be a time and a place for focus, even exclusive focus, on one’s own
family and ethnic or religious community, one can never forget that such particularism constitutes
only as aspect of one’s ethical being. What we have seen in recent times among fundamentalists across
the religions is a runaway particularism, an insensitivity to the other that should strike us an ethically
unacceptable, sometimes quite horrible.
What seems to me important, in reflecting on the multiple truths, universalist and particularist, is the
thought that this is no real polar opposition; there is the potential here for a coherent approach.
However, the sort of coherence we are after is not necessarily theoretical coherence in the form of an
inclusive principle. More important is the ability to negotiate experience, appealing to one idea or the
other when fitting, allowing each to call a halt when we are nearing excessive attention to the other.76
Of course, I have not shown ⎯ nor could I, nor would I wish to ⎯ the impossibility of producing a
kind of super-principle, one that delineates the experiences in which one or the other of the opposing
ideas is applicable. However, we don’t even know the shape, so to speak, of such a principle. Do we, or
ought we, have any confidence that the cases fall under some illuminating formula? Think about the
cases in which one’s universalistic scruples might usefully be brought into play. Ought we to be

76 The matter seems related to the Aristotelian outlook on ethics that gives pride of place to practical skill over articulated
principle.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

60
confident that all share some common feature or features, other than, of course, being cases in which
particularism should not be getting undue weight? Even if one identified a plausible candidate
principle, isn’t it likely that it would have to be gerrymandered repeatedly to meet the needs of novel
cases? While there remains the possibility of an inclusive principle, there is reason to be skeptical.77
I turn to the application of this sort of thinking ⎯ my own take on the middle way⎯to our original
opposition: science and religion. Science in the broadest sense ⎯ and as Gülen emphasizes, this
includes the social sciences as well ⎯ are the key to unlocking the nature of nature, including human
nature. Of course we do find in Scripture some claims about matters of fact, historical events and the
like. But such claims, as I see it, are, as we say in philosophy, “defeasible.” This attitude expresses
itself dramatically in Maimonides radical ⎯ too radical for many ⎯ attitude to creation ex nihilo.
Maimonides roundly criticizes the Aristotelian proofs for the eternity of matter and espouses a belief
in the religious tradition’s conception of creation ex nihilo. But he adds the thought ⎯ this is the
radical part ⎯ that if the Aristotelian proofs had really been good, he Maimonides would have
immediately accepted them and would have proceeded to reinterpret scripture. The scriptural
characterization of creation would have remained crucially important for Maimonides ⎯ there would
be much to learn from it about the universe and our place in it ⎯ but we would no longer read it as an
account of the actual process of creation.
So what we know by human reason is what we know, and religion does not come to tell us otherwise.
Again this is not because religion loses some battle with science but rather because the world ⎯ and
not only Scripture ⎯ is God’s book, and we have been given the (of course fallible) gift of reading the
book of nature. But values are another matter. Of course there are some values immediately
implicated in science’s reading of God’s book of nature, values like intellectual honesty and integrity,
openness to new ideas, and the like. But broader ethical, moral, and personal values are another
matter. The modern world ⎯ I gratefully live in a liberal democracy — emphasizes values like (as in
the American constitution) life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Not for a moment to belittle
these, what about the values that are focal in the religious tradition, like awe, love, and gratitude?
Those of us who have tasted God’s love and who live with a sense of awe as a background condition of
our lives, who attain with God’s help a sense of centeredness, who feel God’s providence ⎯ we know
what religion provides. This is no replacement for something science provides, not at all. It is perhaps
a replacement or, better, a supplement to what modern culture provides. But we need not feel any
sense of bifurcation between the religious sides of our lives and our interest in science and more
broadly our interest in the gifts of modern culture. These too ⎯ including music and the arts ⎯ are
God’s gifts.
If there is any sense of priority here between science (and we might include the other products of
modern culture) and religion, I would distribute it. With respect to facts on the ground, including the
nature of the natural world, priority goes of course to science in the broadest sense. Not because it
ever achieves the final word, but because it is our God-given guide to nature. With respect to values in
the broadest sense, with respect to providing a framework for life, priority goes to religion.
What I’m advocating ⎯ and without being a Gülen scholar, I hope that what I say is at least broadly in
his spirit ⎯ is unfortunately far removed from what is perhaps the dominant trend, certainly in

77 This brings to mind Ludwig Wittgenstein’s discussion of family resemblance in Philosophical Investigations. As with
Wittgenstein’s example’s, there may well be some more or less trivial common features that constitute necessary conditions.
All games are human activities, but that is beside the point.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

61
Orthodox Judaism, and other forms of emphatically traditional religion. What I find is a gap: those
who share the sort of attitude towards western culture I’ve been espousing tend to either reject
religious tradition outright or else exhibit weakness in their religious practice and knowledge of
traditional religious texts. Those who are steeped in the traditional texts ⎯ and in Judaism that
means (at the highest level) Talmud ⎯ tend to a fundamentalist outlook, a lack of appreciation of the
value, even the religious value, of western culture; it also often means a parochial attitude with respect
to “the other.”
I conclude this aspect of my discussion with a related reflection on the middle way, one suggested by
Professor Kuru’s discussion of taqwa, what in Hebrew we call hashgacha, divine providence, what
Kuru refers to as being in God’s safe-keeping. To quote Kuru:
Derived from wiqaya, meaning protection, taqwa means to be in safe-keeping or
protection of God. This has two aspects. The first is that a man fears God and
obeys Him by performing His commands and refraining from his prohibitions.
The second aspect of taqwa is that, by studying nature and life and discovering
God’s laws controlling them, people find scientific knowledge and order their
lives. The establishment of sciences depends upon the discovery of these laws. In
order to be under the safe-keeping of God, the true religion and sciences should be
combined, for they are two faces or two expressions of a single truth.
Kuru’s last point is one I have already expressed some skepticism about: Whether or not science and
religion are expressions of a single truth seems to me complicated, for reasons discussed above. We
certainly do not have language to express any such single truth. We have multiple languages, scientific
and religious. But his central point seems to me both deep and important. Let me begin with a remark
about Maimonides, on the topic of divine providence, divine protection.
Maimonides writes that divine protection at the individual level depends upon one’s knowledge of
philosophy, including for Maimonides one’s knowledge of “natural philosophy,” that is, scientific
knowledge. I always thought that Maimonides here, indeed as elsewhere, overemphasizes intellect. He
argues, for another example, that the intellect constitutes the bridge between man and God; this
always seems to me an overemphasis on the purely cognitive. But Kuru’s quote helped me to see the
truth in Maimonides position on providence.
Consider the contrast between one who has advanced knowledge of the laws of nature and one whose
knowledge is quite primitive. Or think of the difference between our culture⎯with respect for
example to medicine⎯and that of the medievals. Our knowledge quite simply provides quite a
measure of protection for our well-being. And if one is thinking about science as “our reading of God’s
book of nature,” then our being diligent readers of this book means that we are extended considerable
protection. My daughter recently gave birth (excitingly to her first child and my first grandchild). But
she became ill with an infection that used to be (and still is in many parts of the world) a leading killer
of women, post-delivery. Medical science made her recovery almost trivial, an example of God’s
lovingkindness and protection.
But the scientific side is only one side of the matter, as Kuru emphasizes. From the point of view of
traditional religion, the sort of divine protection just discussed is only a part of the story of
providence. A deep engagement with God’s ways provides a centering of one’s life, protection from, or
at least divine fellowship with respect to, the inevitable dark aspects of life, as well as a powerful and
heightened sense of life as meaningful, rich, significant. Without such a religious sensibility, one can

--- Sayfa 64 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

62
attain some protection from scientific knowledge, as discussed above. But one is not yet brought
under God’s wings, as it were.
As I say, one does not need to see these aspects as expressions of a single truth. God can be One
without reducing the multiplicity of his teachings and commandments to anything so unitary.
So far I have been discussing the middle way, and two models for the nature of the synthesis. My idea
has been that instead of seeking a theoretical resolution, a single conceptual truth that resolves the
apparent conflict, we remain at the conceptual level with different sorts of truths. There is no
incoherence, but the coherence is not to be found in a conceptual resolution, but rather in practical
know-how, the ability to work with two different perspectives, relying on the appropriate one in a
given context.
I now want to extend my analysis to a basic area of theology. Here I am out on a limb, perhaps alone. I
do not suppose that I am elaborating Gülen’s thought or indeed Islamic thought, although I will be
quite interested in the reactions of scholars of Islam. What I say derives somewhat from my Jewish
perspective, although my view is by no means the usual outlook even in that context.78
It is I will explore another and very different sort of opposition, actually a series of them, the variety of
discordant images of God found in traditional sources, like the Bible, Qur’an, etc. I am no expert in
the Qur’an, and so I’ll restrict my discussion to the Bible. But I am most interested in reactions from
Islamic practitioners and scholars.
Let’s consider some of the great variety of anthropomorphic images of God in biblical literature, as
well as in the elaboration of that literature in Rabbinic sources like the Talmud: God is a loving and
nurturing, even if demanding, parent; a benevolent judge/ruler who does not forget acts of loving
kindness and generously and lovingly passes on the rewards to one’s progeny; a righteous judge who
has access to our deepest secrets and who rewards and punishes accordingly; king of the universe, to
be treated with lordly deference; bridegroom; husband; woman in labor; angry, regretful, even
vengeful, remembering the sins of the parents and visiting them upon even distant generations.
It is tempting ⎯ subsequent to the philosophical/theological discussions beginning in the medieval
period ⎯ to dismiss such characterizations as simply figurative; the Bible, we are told by the
medievals, speaks figuratively; it speaks in the language of men. However, it’s quite striking to a
student of the Talmud that such anthropomorphic characterization does not decline even in Talmudic
times (0-600 C.E.), a period characterized by the most rigorous and analytical development of Jewish
law. The same figures who think almost hyper-analytically about law talk about God in these
picturesque ways, ways that proved almost an embarrassment to the later philosopher/theologians of
medieval times.
My idea ⎯ somewhat contrary to the philosophical tradition ⎯ is not to dismiss, but rather to give
great significance to, such anthropomorphic characterizations. Indeed, they play a crucial role in
living a religious life. The great power of religion to affect life seems crucially related to seeing God as
loving, caring, sometimes disappointed in us, sometimes even angry. People’s religious lives revolve
around these traits of God; the focus of the religious practitioner is hardly the austere God of the

78 I have been much helped in my revolt against the usual mode of Jewish theology by the seminal work of Abraham Joshua
Heschel. iSee his Moral Grandeur and Spiritual Audacity, Abraham Joshua Heschel, ed. Susannah Heschel (New York,
1996).

--- Sayfa 65 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

63
philosophers ⎯ beyond all such anthropomorphic characterization ⎯ no matter how much the latter
may appeal to certain philosophical instincts.
The philosopher/theologians I mentioned ⎯ Maimonides is probably the most highly regarded
among Jewish thinkers ⎯ were of course exercised by a fundamental problem: Even given the
practical, pastoral importance of the anthropomorphic imagery, still what is God really like? Can He
be truly characterized in such human terms? Biblical poetry (and poetic prose) is one thing, but the
theoretical characterization of God is quite another thing.
My work in the philosophy of religion ⎯ including a book I’m currently writing ⎯ has much to do
with this contrast between styles of theology: Biblical/Rabbinic anthropomorphic characterization vs.
the purification project of the medievals. I mention the topic here because it’s another context for the
sort of issue I’ve been discussing in this paper. The Biblical rendition of God issues in many,
divergent, characterizations of God, in addition to the somewhat discordant hint that He is somehow
beyond all of this. But neither the Bible nor Rabbinic literature is much exercised with how to put
these different pictures together; how to theorize away the apparent diversity. That’s worth more than
a moment’s notice.
So again we have a domain in which there are conflicting ideas, each of which possesses a kind of
truth or validity. And I will argue here as I have earlier in this paper that these tensions are to resolved
not by discovering a higher order principle, but by the acquisition of a practical ability or skill, a kind
of “knowing how.” The agent develops a sense of balance, the ability to call upon the idea appropriate
to the situation at hand. Let me explain.
Think of the diverse, sometimes conflicting, images of God as profiles, each a view from a perspective.
Each profile, each perspective, is crucial for the religious life. Each has validity. Each illuminates in its
own way. There are situations in which the image of God as nurturing parent is salient. In other
situations other imagery may be salient, perhaps God as an impartial judge, or as a friend, or as
creator of heaven and earth, or as one you have wronged, or as the parent of one you have wronged.
There are still other situations in which two or more profiles of God are all somehow salient. Some of
these may be very pleasant; as if one were taking in several varieties of beauty at once, or through
several sensory modalities. Some of these situations, though, may be troubling, confusing. Such
situations are analogous to one who works for his father-in-law, who also happens to be his teacher,
landlord, and plays unnamed other roles in his life.79 One can readily imagine situations that become
quite complicated and confusing. One doesn’t quite know where one stands.
It is striking to me that until the medieval period ⎯ and with it the influence of philosophy on the
religious tradition ⎯ the resolution of the tension between the conflicting images and ideas gets little
to no theoretical attention, at least within the Jewish context. For theoretical resolution — at least a
leading candidate for such a resolution — would involve an account of the entity that lies behind the
profiles, an account of how these could possibly be perspectives on the same being. Rabbinic tradition
seems focused not on what we might call “the theory of God,” but rather on the plane of action. The
images of God are indeed images of One God; their discordance is superficial. Their coherence,
however, reflects itself in a life informed by all of these images.

79 I have been helped in thinking about the diversity of images of God in the Bible, and the implications thereof by the work
of  M.  Halbertal and A. Margalit in their book, Idolotry (Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1996).

--- Sayfa 66 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

64
The religious life involves a combination of practical abilities or skills that are grounded in
understanding, intuitive if not articulate. The religious life also involves habits, behavioral and
affective. All of this requires education, training, and practice. As is our way with such things, some
are more given to it, more gifted at it, some will take to it more easily than others, others may come
along more slowly, but may attain greater heights in the end.
One stage in religious development is understanding the many different human relationships in terms
of which these very different profiles of God are formulated: developing a sense of what it is to relate
to another as child to parent, as subject to monarch, as defendant to judge, as creature to creator, as
lover, as friend, and so on. Developing a sense of these with their directions reversed is also of great
utility: parent to child, monarch to subject, and so on. The more vivid one’s grasp, the more deeply
one sees into these relationships, the farther along one is in this stage of the training. Some of this
understanding requires the accumulation — sometimes years — of experience. This education is a
lifelong affair.
The next step — not that these need to be separated in time — is the application of this growing
understanding to the relationships between people and God. One needs to think about and practice
seeing oneself in relation to God as child to parent, with the variety of complications that entails; and
to think about it from both sides of the relationship. And as lover to lover, friend to friend, judged to
judge, and all the rest.
The payoff of one’s work — the propriety and caring for others, the comfort and solace, the elevation
and dignity that are the concomitants of developed religious character — depend upon one’s ability to
negotiate the world feeling and acting in ways appropriate to just such relationships. One needs to feel
and act as if one has a Godly parent, a Godly lover or friend, a Godly judge who sees all, a creator of
inexorable laws of nature that proceed as if we didn’t exist, even — I suspect — an angry, even
vengeful Godly ruler — this last being more complicated and controversial.
Of course, one doesn’t feel and act in these ways all the time, or all at the same time. Part of the skill —
what takes training, practice, and experience — is to call upon, or be called upon by, the appropriate
image at the appropriate time, sometimes a single image, sometimes multiple ones. The latter can be
confusing, disconcerting, and it can be wonderful, sometimes both. At the death of a parent, for
example, many of these images may strike: God as creator of inexorable laws of nature; God as friend
and comforter; (and since belonging and community becomes so important at such times) God as
focal point — glue, as it were — of the religious community, a community that extends horizontally —
the present community — and vertically — the community over time; and perhaps others.
Ritualized prayer—something that also takes training and practice if it is to be more than mechanical
(and even if it is merely mechanical)—provides another example of the sometimes confusing but
wonderful multiplicity. In prayer, when it works, many of the magnificent images are summoned. One
is provided with the opportunity of experiencing these relationships and of reflecting upon them,
seeing more deeply into them, seeing new aspects all the time.
That there are multiple images, that they seem discordant — properties that make theory seem very
far away — are thus rationalized. We don’t do so by finding a theoretical account of God that puts the
images in their right place. Rather the miscellany, the mixed multitude of robustly anthropomorphic
ideas and images, facilitate the religious life.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

65
I will close with some personal experiences, ones that illustrate for me something of the middle way.
These do not reflect all of the issues discussed above; the middle way touches so many domains. But
they do reflect especially my discussion of universalism and particularism. I will mention two
experiences, both related to my life as a university professor.
I read this year an astounding account of the Palestinian experience, Once Upon a Country, by Sari
Nusseibeh. It was a transforming experience, but one even exceeding by a related experience I will
mention below. I went to Jerusalem this past June, to study Talmud, my practice for the past decade,
and to engage in philosophical/theological/political discussions with Jerusalemites, again as I have
for a decade every summer. Upon arriving I sent Dr. Nusseibeh an e-mail asking to see him, and we
were able to set up a meeting at his office. He is President of Al Quds University in East Jerusalem.
My talk with Nusseibeh was astounding. As a Jew and an American, I am not privy to first-hand
versions of Palestinian experience. I hear of that experience only through various filters. Dr.
Nusseibeh and I talked philosophy for a while, and then we discussed the political situation. I very
much appreciated his great insight, and his ability ⎯ rare in the Jewish community and the
Palestinian community ⎯ to cut through the mythologies and show a genuine concern primarily for
his own people but also for the other side.
At one point I asked, “What can I do to help?” His answer was astounding: “Palestinians need more
philosophy. Come and give a lecture to our students.” I spent July back in the United States but my
daughter who lives in Israel gave birth, as I mentioned before, in August and so my wife and I
returned to Jerusalem. And my lecture at Al Quds materialized. It was a day I and my wife will never
forget, the incredible beauty of East Jerusalem, a sense, even if only preliminary, for the people, the
responses⎯some friendly, some wary, some a bit hostile, but all respectful⎯to my lecture. My wife
and I made friends with several students who invited us to their homes, and a Professor of Islamic
Studies invited me back to speak with his department. I don’t know what anyone can do about the
deep divisions, social, political, religious, in the region. But human contact seems like a crucial step.
A second sort of experience concerns my teaching at the University of California, Riverside, my home
campus. I teach, usually every year, a Introduction to Philosophy course that focuses on philosophy of
religion. The population by university serves is very mixed, socially and religiously. My students are
Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Buddhist, Confucian, Hindu, etc. And I work hard in a very large class of
some 300 students (as well as in the discussion sections) to get them to speak up, and to talk to one
another. There was an ugly incident on campus a few years ago that concerned the verbal attack of
one religious group on another, and there was great alienation across campus. At that very time,
students in my classroom were speaking with great respect across these very lines. I commented to
them about how our class is very much not like “the real world,” and how precious was what we were
creating together.
I am the Director of the University Honors Program at UCR, and I and other faculty members
occasionally give small seminars on special topics. My dream, and I’ve made some, but only some,
progress in implementing it, is to conduct a seminar on peace in the middle east, and to take a
number of students to Israel/Palestine to meet the respective communities and to experience the
respective universities.
I very much look forward to the educational and social experience of engaging with people who are
steeped in the thought of Fethullah Gülen.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

66

--- Sayfa 69 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

67
BALANCING THE CANDLE ON THE RIGHT PATH
JEROME D. MARYON 80

Abstract
M. Fethullah Gülen is a globally important historical figure for three reasons: (1) his
postmodernist re-appropriation of the ancient theoretical roots of Turkish Islām [Türk
Müslümanlıĝı]; (2) his practical call that this re-appropriation become the property of Turks at
every level of understanding; and (3) his vision that such re-appropriation would not only re-
vitalize Turkish communities, but also enhance the dialogue of the world’s great faiths, and, as all
civilizations are founded on faith, enhance the prospects for peace in the world: pace Huntington,
not a clash, but an alliance of civilizations. Gülen’s importance flows from a threefold
development. (1) He builds on foundations from Maturidi to Said-i Nursi, affording ample
exegesis of Qu’ranic prescriptions for moral duty: following the straight path: al-sirāt al-
mustaqīm. (2) He insists (a) theoretically,  Islām is the umma wasat [ummeten vasatan], “the
‘middle way’ of absolute balance,” e.g., between rationalism and mysticism, and (b) practically,
that individuals make choices according to situations, requiring free use of intelligence (v. Abant
Platform, July 1998), and its keen development, esp. in natural and social sciences. (3) Given the
polymorphism of consciousness and the fragmentation of culture, he recognizes that we proceed
like the blind men in Rumi’s elephant parable: we need a candle; but it won’t be ideological;
Gülen refuses to have religion’s role be decided by the political; instead, he insists on the absolute
Transcendence of the middle way, of the need for us to keep our balance on the way, and for us to
understand that balance in terms of our own intrinsic development, our “candle,” be it, e.g., in
common sense, medicine, or physics. That balanced candle is crucial. Gülen’s potential
contribution to co-existence will be assured only when it is recognized, philosophically and
theologically, as an intrinsic truth of human development. This is the gravamen of our inquiry.

1. Introduction
M. Fethullah Gülen is a globally important historical figure for three reasons: (1) his postmodernist
re-appropriation of the ancient theoretical roots of Turkish Islām [Türk Müslümanlıĝı]; (2) his
practical call that this re-appropriation become the property of Turks at every level of understanding;
and (3) his vision that such re-appropriation would not only re-vitalize Turkish communities, but also
enhance the dialogue of the world’s great faiths, and, as all civilizations are founded on faith, enhance
the prospects for peace in the world: pace Huntington, not a clash, but an alliance of civilizations.

80 Jerome D. Maryon, Esq. leads the legal-political part of the team serving Boston College, Harvard, MIT, etc., in
developing America’s first interdisciplinary course on the multidimensional costs of the “War on Drugs;” in spring ’08, he’ll
teach the law, policy, and strategy portions: Federal legislation and law enforcement, high incarceration and recidivism
rates, and the complex role of the American intelligence community abroad. He’ll draw on his record as Federal
Commissioner: to date, none of his judicial draft opinions has been reversed by the U.S. Supreme Court. He’ll also draw on
an extensive academic development: a perfect Poli Sci 4.0, a First Honours Diploma in Pontifical Studies, French and
American law school, and a first-place tie in his class at the U.S. Naval War College. Finally, Jerome will draw on his
community leadership, esp. in Muslim-Jewish-Christian dialogue, emphasizing America’s need to restore common reason
to public policy debate.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

68
Gülen’s importance flows from a threefold development. (1) He builds on foundations from Maturidi
to Said-i Nursi, affording ample exegesis of Qu’ranic prescriptions for moral duty: following the
straight path: al-sirāt al-mustaqīm. (2) He insists (a) theoretically,  Islām is the umma wasat
[ummeten vasatan], “the ‘middle way’ of absolute balance,” e.g., between rationalism and mysticism,
and (b) practically, that individuals make choices according to situations, requiring free use of
intelligence (v. Abant Platform, July 1998), and its keen development, esp. in natural and social
sciences. (3) Given the polymorphism of consciousness and the fragmentation of culture, he
recognizes that we proceed like the blind men in Rumi’s elephant parable: we need a candle; but it
won’t be ideological; Gülen refuses to have religion’s role be decided by the political; instead, he
insists on the absolute Transcendence of the middle way, of the need for us to keep our balance on the
way, and for us to understand that balance in terms of our own intrinsic development, our “candle,”
be it, e.g., in common sense, medicine, or physics.
That balanced candle is crucial. Gülen’s potential contribution to co-existence will be assured only
when it is recognized, philosophically and theologically, as an intrinsic truth of human development.
This is the gravamen of our inquiry.
Unlike the substantive reviews of the work and life of M. Fethullah Gülen, this essay is merely a
propaedeutic. We seek, not to introduce Gülen to a Western audience, but to alert sagacious Western
readers to the need to meet him.
Our sketch unfolds in two parts. In part one (Sections I and II), we aim to remind the secularist and
materialist Western readers that, contrary to Chairman Mao’s obiter dictum, “Power flows from the
barrel of a gun” (a dictum followed by a number of adventurers in the Middle East), power can have
an entirely invisible and indeed, unimaginable, source, a source as near at hand as our own horizons
of inquiry, and yet as far beyond us as the ways of God. In part two (Sections III and IV), we very
briefly recall the severe context and several of the accomplishments of M. Fethullah Gülen, the
prophetic voice from eastern Anatolia, who has done more than any one else within the House of
Islām to remind both East and West that this power is ours only upon submission to the will of God, a
submission that is by no means arbitrary, but rather that demands the full exercise of our reason as
well as our faith. It is the measure of Gülen’s accomplishment that he has not only created the greatest
civil movement in the history of the Ottoman lands, Arabic and Turkish alike, but that he has also
reminded the West, ever so quietly, of the primacy of charity. The House of Service or Dar al-Hizmet
may become, not only the glory of Turkey, but an inspiration to the world.

2. “My chcemy Boga!”81
Skeptics of conferences on peaceful co-existence and the practical impact of inter-faith dialogue
ignore not only the power of belief (reasoned and loving reliance on the Unseen), but a major lesson
of Late Modernity.
A. Doubting Thomases82 arch a skeptical eyebrow when they hear of international conferences on
peaceful co-existence that are predicated on inter-faith dialogue. Their rebuttal is brief: Assisi.83

81 This is the opening of a very popular Polish hymn, sung in utter defiance of the Communist regime, to this effect: We
want God in our families, in our churches, in our schools. More succinctly: “Potrzebujemy Boga!” – “We want God!”

--- Sayfa 71 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

69

82 The term, once re-appropriated, points us toward a Muslim cognate and thus to a neglected concurrence of heart-and-
mind values among the Ahl al-Kitab, the People of the Book, with the House of Islām.
   “Doubting Thomas” derives form the Gospels’ last earthly encounter with the Risen Jesus, John 20:19-29, at 27-29. Jesus
had previously appeared to the disciples when Thomas was not present; they had recounted His visit in wonder, but
Thomas had refused to believe them unless he could physically examine the wounds from the Crucifixion. A week later, the
disciples re-assembled, with Thomas, and Jesus returned, first wishing them Shalom/Salām.
   “27 Then He told Thomas, ‘Reach out your finger and examine My hands; reach out your hand and put it into My side.
And do not persist in your disbelief, but become a believer.’ 28 Thomas answered with the words, ‘My Lord and my God!’ 29
Jesus told him,
   ‘You have believed because you have seen Me.
   Happy [are] those who have not seen and yet have believed.’”
(Raymond Brown, tr., Anchor Bible) Fundamentalists would construe the text as one demanding “blind faith.” Yet, nowhere
in the Gospels (cf. the verbal Injīl) does Jesus speak capriciously. Here, too, His rebuke of Thomas is not based on a failure
of Thomas to believe everything he hears, but rather, very precisely, on his failure to consider closely, i.e., to judge himself,
the judgment of his most esteemed contemporaries: his fellow disciples. Thomas elevates the evidence of his senses above
his judgment – though we all of us know how often our unaided senses can mislead us .It is only when Thomas’s senses are
confronted with the physical truth that he utters the great profession of faith, “My Lord and my God!”
   Sharpening the point, Thomas is depicted in St. John’s Gospel as one of the most discerning and courageous of the
disciples. His failure at this instant reflects how we can all of us, when confronted in heart-and-mind with a divine
challenge, seek refuge in the senses: in denial of the Transcendent. Perhaps Caravaggio caught this internal division of ours
best. In a Baroque masterpiece, The Incredulity of St. Thomas, c.1601-02 (original in the Neues Palais, Sanssouci, Potsdam;
close copy by Caravaggio, authenticated 2006, from l’Église Saint-Antoine, Loches, Touraine), we are struck first by
Thomas’s own division: even as Christ guides Thomas’s hand into His chest wound, Thomas himself looks away, as though
he has just come to realize his failure. He has tested the Lord, rather than himself.
   This is the most copied work of Caravaggio’s. Thomas stands in for all of us; and lest the point be missed, he is
accompanied by two decidedly ordinary-looking disciples, equally entranced by the evidence of the senses. So ordinary are
the three disciples, that their clothes are old; Thomas’s shirt is splitting at the shoulder. These are no privileged
professionals; these are the salt of the earth.
   Twenty centuries of commentary on St. John’s story are best summed up in Glenn W. Most, Doubting Thomas
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Un. Pr., 2005, 2007).
   Once we re-appropriate to ourselves the call to test, not the Lord, but ourselves, in every walk of life, then we can rise to
the convergence of heart and mind values with Islām. In the Qur’ān, as in the Hebrew and Christian Bibles, the infinite
nature of God’s Transcendence demands extraordinary concentration and judgment; for most often, God will be described
in terms that are immanent, familiar, even familial. As in the Old and New Testaments, so too there are verses in the Qur’ān
that have recourse to anthropomorphic metaphors in describing our direct contact with Allāh, e.g., 20:5 (“the Most
Gracious rose over the Throne”), 38:75 (“whom I have created with both My hands”), 81:19-25 (the Prophet [pbuh] saw
Allāh in the clear horizon”). More often, though, the contact is intermediate, conducted though the Archangel Gabriel
(Jibrīl); but even in direct contact, the emphasis remains, always and everywhere, on the infinite Transcendence of Allāh,
and the grace of His transmission of truth to Muhammad and thus to us, e.g., in 81:19-25, supra: “Neither does He withhold
grudgingly a knowledge of the Unseen.” Those who demand special physical proof are “too proud” and thus, even at the Last
Trump, the ultimate physical vindication, they will find “no joy” (25:21-22).
   Like all Jews and Christians, all Muslims are called upon to acknowledge the works of God “visible and invisible,” and to
act accordingly. The point is well put by Imām Yahya ibn Sharaf al-Nawawi (A.H. 631-676/A.D. 1234-1278), in the second of
his famous Forty Hadīths. The Archangel Gabriel interrogates the Prophet, so as to instruct the faithful –
   “[Gabriel] said: ‘Then tell me about al-Ihsān.’ [Muhammad] said: ‘It is to worship Allāh as though you are seeing Him and
while you see him not, yet truly He sees you.”
   Al-Ihsān: the perfection of virtue, or benevolence: accepting less from others than is one’s due, giving more to others than
is their due, and, as the very highest level of al-Islām, of submissive good deeds, it means comporting one’s life in complete
conviction of the benevolence of the unseen God. This leads to the discipline of heart-and-mind together, and thus to
tasawwuf, consciousness of God (spiritual development), to Sufism, and, ultimately, to Gülen.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

70
“Twenty years after the famous Prayer for Peace, what evidence is there of its effectiveness?” Then,
hearing that part of our conference turns on “reconciling and balancing reason and faith,” the
skeptics’ response becomes one of outright dismissal: “What has reason-with-revelation, a private
construct, a belief of individuals, to do with the great affairs of state? What has faith to do with
reality?”
B. The question has been asked and answered. In May, 1935, the French Foreign Minister, Pierre
Laval, a consummate practitioner of Realpolitik,84 visited Stalin; he attempted to advise the
Communist dictator to restore some freedom of worship to Catholics in his domain, so as to gain favor
with the Pope. Stalin famously retorted, “The Pope? How many divisions has he got?”85
History returned the answer in Victory Square, Warsaw, on 2 June 1979. The Polish Communist
government, originally established by Stalin’s divisions, tried to control the crowd movement and
press coverage of the Pilgrimage of Pope John Paul II.86 But 2,000,000 Poles lined the route from the
airport to Victory Square; 1,000,000 crowded into the Square itself for the Papal Mass. Having failed
to dissuade the crowds, the regime ordered all cameras to ignore them and focus exclusively on the
Pope.
Consequently, viewers throughout Eastern Europe, while perfectly focused on John Paul during his
homily, could still hear the extraordinary and unbroken chant of the laity, suddenly intoxicated with
liberty: “My chcemy Boga!” – “We want God!” And then, at the moment that the Pope elevated the

    Rather than blind faith, this discipline requires the highest level of judgment, superseding at once the defects of the
senses and the weaknesses of the flesh. This is our life opened powerfully to the grace of God. Jewish scholars speak of
lovingkindness (hesed) and judgment (gevurah) brought into balance or harmony (tiferet). As Pope John Paul II put it, in
words that could have been recited by Gülen, it is a judgment that is vindicated in right action –
   “The true and proper meaning of mercy does not consist only in looking, however penetratingly and compassionately, at
moral, physical, or material evil: mercy is manifested in its true and proper aspect when it restores to value, promotes and
draws good from all the forms of evil existing in the world and in man.”
John Paul II, P. (1980) Dives in Misericordia, 6 (Rome: Vatican).
83 The First World Day of Prayer for Peace was convened by Pope John Paul II in Assisi on 27 October 1986. As he
concluded, “This day at Assisi has helped us become more aware of our religious commitments. But it has also made the
world, looking at us through the media, more aware of the responsibility of each religion regarding problems of war and
peace.” Address of John Paul II to the Representatives of the Christian Churches and Ecclesial Communities and of the
World Religions, Basilica of St. Francis, 27 Oct 1986, 6 (Rome: Vatican).
84 Laval, four times Prime Minister, sought in May, 1935, to balance the resurgence of Germany by forging a purely
Realpolitik alliance of France with Great Britain, Mussolini’s Italy, and Stalin’s Russia; this entailed, inter alia, giving the
Italian fascist army a free hand in Abyssinia, and trying to reduce Stalin’s persecution of believers so as to mitigate the
Church’s fierce anti-Communism. The Abyssinian appeasement was leaked and Laval was forced to resign; he only returned
to  ministerial politics once the Wehrmacht had overrun France; as Vice Premier and then Prime Minister of Vichy France,
he repeatedly offered more concessions to Hitler than he demanded; Laval was captured, tried, and executed in 1945.
85 Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. I: The Gathering Storm (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, 1948), 135.
86 Elected the first Polish Pope in October, 1978, Karol Wojtyła asked permission to plan to return to his native land on 8
May 1979, so as to celebrate the 900th anniversary of the martyrdom of Saint Stanisław Szczepanowski, a victim of the
Polish King, Bolesław II (rather as Archbishop Thomas à Becket would later be martyred by King Henry II of England).
Stanisław represented the highest convergence of theological and political morality; most Polish kings had been crowned
while kneeling before his sarcophagus. Fearful of that symbolism, the Communist authorities, under Party Secretary
Edward Gierek, banned the Pope from Poland for the month of May, and strictly prescribed his routes and his media
coverage in June. Then, thinking to control the crowds, they ordered all Warsaw cabs in for inspection, froze the public bus
service, and declared there were no extra trains available. Having unwittingly advertised their fear, they made Poles all the
more determined to attend the papal pilgrimage; John Paul drew the largest crowds in the nation’s thousand-year history.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

71
consecrated Host, a million Poles fell silent and fell on their knees – and with them, the Soviet empire
began to fall.

3. Deus suam gloriam non quaerit propter se, sed propter nos.87
The power of belief is the common heritage of the People of the Book. The first Revelation in Islām
affirms not only the majesty and generosity of Allāh, but His concomitant concern that we pursue
knowledge unreservedly (cf. “even to China”). Islāmic theologians’ late Medieval deprecation of
science was as much a Qur’ānic as a strategic and political failure. Re-appropriation of Qur’ānic
scientific and cognitional value will come, not from preoccupied power elites, but from those who
“withdraw and return,” historically inspired by Gülen, for he is the first theologian in Post-Modern
Islām to focus on our deepest yearning: for the unrestricted love and knowledge of God. Though
universal, our yearning is rarely addressed by Western politicians and academicians; instead, it may
be our own thought experiment that leads us to affirm it anew. As Ancient and Modern Chinese
history demonstrates, this is an affirmation that can only be invited, never commanded. But the
invitation, like the power of belief, should never be underestimated.
A. The central issue of the intersection of power and faith was put starkly in a World Affairs Council
exchange in Washington, DC. The guest was a Saudi fighter pilot and Prince; the interlocutor was an
American Navy lawyer. The lawyer led off by observing that on Laylat al-Qadr, the Night of
Measures,88 when the Prophet Muhammad (Sallallahu alayhi wa sallam),89 received the very first
revelation from the Archangel Gabriel, the premium was placed not only on the majesty and

87 Saint Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae (S.T.), II-II, q. 132, a.1 ad 1. Here, in the Second Part of the Second Part
(Secunda Secundae Partis), Thomas discusses in sequence the three theological virtues – Faith, Hope, and Charity – and
then the four cardinal virtues – Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance. Drawing heavily on his Muslim, Jewish, and
Classical forebears in philosophy, as he does throughout the Summa, Thomas seeks to strike a balance in our conduct
within each of the virtues, a balance between excesses and deficiencies of the given major virtue (a positive habit that has
become second nature); thus, in his examination of Fortitude, QQ 123-140, his analysis turns in Q. 132 to vain glory (inani
gloria); he begins with the inquiry, whether the desire of glory is a sin (Utrum appetitus gloriae sit peccatum)? Though he
specifically invokes SS Augustine and Matthew, the gravamen of his response (italicized here, and the subtitle in the text,
supra), the centrality of God’s glory, could have been penned by Gülen.
   “Reply to Obj. 1. As Augustine says on John 13:13, ‘You call Me Master and Lord; and you say well.’ (Tract. lviii in Joan.):
‘Self-complacency is fraught with danger of one who has to beware of pride. But He Who is above all, however much He
may praise Himself, does not uplift Himself. For knowledge of God is our need, not His: nor does any man know Him unless
he be taught of Him who knows.’ It is therefore evident that God seeks glory, not for His own sake, but for ours. In like
manner a man may rightly seek his own glory for the good of others, according to Matt. 5:16, ‘That they may see Your good
works, and glorify Your Father Who is in Heaven.’”
   The works of Gülen are replete with warnings to those in service (hizmet) not to seek personal acclaim, much less socio-
economic preference: service of Allāh is all. Here again the consistency of God’s Revelation to humanity, a cardinal precept
of Islām, leads to the high convergence we would expect: v., e.g., the central injunction for all Jesuits to act for “the greater
glory of God”: “Ad majorem Dei gloriam.”
88 Laylat al-Qadr is more popularly rendered in the Anglo-American world as the “Night of Power,” a very honorific
translation (understandably, given the context of transmission that night), by Abdullah Yusuf Ali. Some have objected to the
non-literal translation, but the sense of majesty and awe comes through quite clearly.
89 “May God bless him and grant him peace,” usually abbreviated “saw” directly from the Arabic or “pbuh” in English (for
“Peace be upon him”); the beautiful reverence that Muslims demonstrate in repeating the phrase after every use of his name
is a central feature of Islāmic culture, but one that requires different expression in the Western cultures, which avoid verbal
repetition; e.g., English writers traditionally show reverence by capitalization: Prophet.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

72
generosity of God, but also on His concomitant concern that we learn: “… Recite90 in the name of your
Lord, Who is the Creator; who created man from a clot. Recite! And your Lord is most bountiful. (He
Who taught) the use of the pen taught man what he did not know.” (Qur’ān 96:1-5) The Qur’ān
consistently affirms that God is all-knowing,91 that He requires us to exercise our minds as much as
our hearts,92 and that this requirement is universal: “God is the light of the Heavens and the earth.
…neither of the East nor of the West… God doth guide whom He will to His Light; …” (24:35) Most
succinctly, 20:114: “…My Lord, advance me in knowledge: Rabbi, zidni ‘ilma!”

90 Cf. Imām al-Bukhāri, The Beginning of the Revelation.
   The famous first command to the Prophet, “Iqra!”, is traditionally translated as “Recite!”, in part because there was no text
provided by Gabriel and in part due to Muhammad’s illiteracy; but the verb, which gives rise to the verbal noun, “Qur’ān,” is
bivalent: it also means, “Read!”  (The Qur’ān is now both a holy recital and a holy reading.) The recitations of the Prophet,
echoed by his closest successors, were eventually committed to writing, at which point the premier command gained a new
depth of meaning, for literate generations of Muslims were led not only to read but to turn over the sacred text, to study it in
comparative ways not easily accessible via a memorized text; v. Walter J. Ong, S.J., for the epistemic differences between
oral cultures and “chirographic” cultures: the cultures, precisely, of the “pen.”
   The Enlightenment had assumed a linear progression form oral to written civilization – a gradual yet irreversible ascent –
but that blithe reading of history could not envisage the recent and accelerating reversion to a more oral form of expression
in Western culture, i.e., a “concomitant pattern of progress and decline,” a pattern driven technologically in America by the
telephone, then the television, and now the Internet, especially e-mail. Since the Second World War, the level of public
discourse in the United States has undergone a steady but popularly unremarked decline in both sentence structure and
vocabulary; e.g., what was once the unique preserve of the campaign button and the bumper sticker has now become the
standard fare of political discourse; and this decline in public sophistication of debate occurs not by some imposition form
above, but by popular acquiescence. Political handlers warn their candidates that Americans no longer vote so much for
those whom they admire (the aspirational vote) as for those with whom they feel most comfortable: Who is most like us?
Contrast, e.g., the level of regular public expression conscientiously adopted by President John F. Kennedy, the twelfth-
grade level, so as to preserve a natural sense of complexity in the issues under public consideration, with the level of
vocabulary and sentence length preferred by the incumbent president in his unscripted Q.-&-A.: the fifth-grade level.
   On a separate, global point, the Night of Power also reminds us that earthly power-mongers in any age and culture
notoriously disdain personal study and public complexity; the simplistic black-and-white contrasts that they hammer home
in public discourse best serve their (sometimes unwitting) drive to accrue more power, usually by vilification of others, both
foreign and domestic, and then by a concomitant demand for more support.
   It is instructive in this global civilizational context to consider that the first revelation to Muhammad should put a
premium on the rise to literacy, the necessity for a complex understanding, and the power of discovery and communication;
all symbolized by the pen.
91 Many of the “99 Names” of Allāh emphasize one aspect or another of His omniscience, e.g., Al-‘Ālim, the All-Knowing,;
Al-Khabīr, the All-aware; Al-Hakīm, the All-Wise.
92 Just in the opening sūrahs (chapters) of the Qur’ān, some of the best-known verses (āyāt) on the centrality of the quest
for understanding and how it pleases Allāh include 2:269, 3:190-191, 29:20, 39:9, 41:53, and 58:11. The Ahādīth or Sayings
of the Prophet, especially the ranking of the hadīth qudsī (pure hadith, i.e., the rare saying that not only enjoys the best-
authenticated chain of transmission – isnād – but also is considered by the first witnesses to have been a reiteration by
Muhammad of a direct revelation), reinforce the twofold message that religious knowledge must bear fruit (number 6 of the
famous “40 Sayings”) and that for those whose reflective and fruitful lives have recommended them to the Mercy of Allāh,
the pleasures of Paradise are beyond their knowledge, even beyond their imagination (37). Most succinctly: “Whoever
follows a path seeking knowledge, Allāh will make his path to Paradise easy because of  it.”  (Ibn ‘Abbas, in three collections
of Sayings)

--- Sayfa 75 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

73
“How was this epistemological imperative so narrowed as to be nearly discounted in many fields of
inquiry in the course of the last seven centuries?93 And what but that long lack of a universal scope of
inquiry, especially in science, could account for the eclipse of the Golden Age of Islām?”
This is not the expected level of discourse in the corridors of Washington. But the first Arab astronaut
is a man of many talents, as open-minded as he is decisive, as reflective as he is straightforward.
His Royal Highness, Prince Sultan Salman Abdulaziz Saud, graciously acknowledged that the ‘ulamā’
– the scholastic and judicial scholar-leaders of Sunni and Shi’īte Islām alike – had virtually restricted
the scope of public research to the book of the Qur’ān, to the detriment of studying the “book” of
nature. This failure was not only scientific, and thus eventually strategic and political, but it was also
Qur’ānic: the failure to investigate God’s creation was in clear derogation of the divine command.
Since he, as a Saudi, had been the first Muslim to orbit the earth, the Prince naturally hoped that his
Kingdom would lead the worldwide Islāmic community – the ummah – in developing a new,
personalized understanding, a neo-ijtihad, of modern scientific values implicit in the Qur’ān.94 This
would revolutionize the deep popular ambivalence, particularly on the Arab street, about “Western”
science.
Moreover, being one of the most sporting members of the Royal Family, as well as one of the most
computer-adept, Prince Sultan was well placed to inspire Saudis – just as he inspired his interlocutors
in NASA and DC. But revolutions in theoretical and practical political philosophy rarely proceed from
the power center of society (recall the French, Soviet, and Chinese Revolutions, all led by elite
outsiders, or the popular revolutions of 1989).95 Instead, the elder members of the Royal Family
decided to have Sultan chair the Benevolent Association for Handicapped Children, and then to
become,  in one of the most closed lands on earth, the Minister of Tourism.
B. Unlike the unfortunate Prince – a prophet without honor in his own land - it would be M. Fethullah
Gülen, this humble man from a village near Erzurum, who would be given the opportunity to issue the
historic invitation that could make all the difference in Islāmic faith and society. And the very first
indication of his genius was precisely his understanding that he could only offer an invitation.
Let’s recall a neutral, non-Islāmic example of the difference between invitation and command, even at
the royal level. During the Warring States Era in Ancient China (c.475-221 B.C.),96 there unfolded
under rare royal auspices the single greatest set of exchanges among all the schools of philosophy
during the long “Contention of a Hundred Schools of Thought;”97 this occurred at a special academy,

93 The reduction of inquiry was twofold: on the one hand, a long theologico-philosophical debate resulted, after al-Ghazzali,
in the effective closing of most philosophical and empirical inquiry, in favor of a uniquely Islamic theologico-jurisprudential
discourse; on the other hand, the terms of that discourse were restricted to the methods and scope of inquiry of schools of
thought that had already matured centuries before, i.e., during the early part of  the Golden Age; the combination of those
two reductions will be the sense in which we use the controversial term, the “closing of the gates of ijtihad.”
94 Cf. Islam, Postmodernism, and Other Futures: a Ziauddin Sardar Reader, Schail Inayatullah & Gail Boxwell, eds.
(Sterling, VA: Pluto Pr., 2003); I am indebted to Ertuğrul Cubuku for introducing me to his thought.
95 Two of the few revolutions to be led by large numbers of the ruling elite, Britain’s Glorious Revolution of 1688 and
America’s War for Independence, 1775-1783, were, in the realm of political theory, essentially conservative movements, as
both sought, albeit in different ways and with different structures resulting, to vindicate the “ancient liberties” of
Englishmen.
96 Pinyin transliteration: Zhan4-guo2 Shi2-dai4.
97 Bai3-jia1 zheng1-ming2.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

74
the Jixia Palace of Learning.98 King Wei of Qi99 founded the Academy, and his son, Pi Qiang, King
Xuan of Qi,100 raised the level of discourse on philosophical, legal, moral, and strategic concerns to
their highest level by making it clear that there would be no royal favorite positions, but rather a clear
preference for vigorous debate. King Xuan understood that if his academy became famous throughout
China, then the prestige of his kingdom, the caliber of scholars it would attract, and the ideas they
could give him for increasing the strength of the kingdom would all be considerably enhanced.
Indeed, the Kingdom of Qi prospered for another century.101 It was this very model that came to mind
when, in the winter of 1956-57, the Modern communist “Red emperor,” Mao Zedong, proclaimed, “Let
a hundred flowers bloom; let a hundred schools of thought contend.”102 Chinese intellectuals, aware of
the Ancient precedent but also aware of the ideological intolerance of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP), were reluctant to take Mao at his word. He publicly remonstrated with them: bureaucrats
needed feedback. They began to criticize, first gingerly in the spring, then vigorously in June and July,
1957, decisions by CCP officials that were demonstrably harmful to the nation. But this was far more
than what Mao had anticipated; he not only cut off the “Hundred Flowers Campaign,” but launched
an “Anti-Rightest Campaign” – those whom he had pressured in the spring to speak their mind now
paid for it with prison sentences. Until he died in 1976, no public criticism of Mao would be tolerated,
not even during the extraordinary famine brought on by his Great Leap Forward or the
unprecedented ravages of the Red Guard during his Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. Wei and
Xuan had brought peace and plenty to their kingdom by their cultivation of unrivalled free horizons of
public discourse; but Mao, after the failure of the Hundred Flowers Campaign, brought such suffering
upon the Chinese people as they had not known in any era, and so Deng Xiaoping found it possible to
replace most of Mao’s draconian economic and cultural regimen in just a few years, permitting in
non-political and non-legal domains freedoms beyond the dreams of ’57. In 1976, China stood among
the poorest nations in the world; today, her wealth, productivity, and U.S. Treasury bill holdings are
such that no White House or Treasury decisions can be taken without careful consideration of the
response of Zhongnanhai. Xuan stands twice vindicated.
C. “The wishes and demands of human beings are boundless and their expectations are infinite.
Even if the whole world were to be given to humanity, its appetite would not be satisfied nor would
its ambitions cease.”103 The assertion is bold; given its scope, Gülen implicitly challenges a line of
development in Western philosophy extending all the way from Aristotle104 – “All humans by nature
desire to know” - to Gadamer.105 For while Gadamer explores in great depth the gap between human
“horizons” (personal or cultural sets of attitudes, beliefs, desires), which are often in flux but which
can nonetheless be entered (his famous “fusion of horizons”) if we are willing to embrace an alien

98 Ji4-xia4 Xue2-gong1.
99 Qi2 Wei1 Wang2.
100 Qi2 Xuan1 Wang2.
101 Qi was the last state to fall to Qin, in 221 B.C.; the King of Qin, having united all China, then declared himself Qin2
Shi3Huang2 Di4 – Qin, the First Emperor. He would serve as an implicit role model for Mao. In both cases, many of their
signature policies, as well as their complete centralization of power, died with them.
102 “Bai3 hua1 qi2-fang4; bai3 jia1 zheng1-ming2.”
103 M. Fethullah Gülen, “The Inner Profundity of Humankind,” in The Fountain, issue 52, Oct-Dec 2005, 4-7, at 6, ii.
104 “Pantes anthropoi tou eidenai oregontai phusei.” Metaphysics 980a. [N.B. Anthropoi, not andres: not just “men”]
105 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode: Grundzüge einer philosophischen Hermeneutik (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr,
1960; 6. Auflage, 1990). Gesammelte Werke, Bd. 1; Truth and Method, tr. J. Weinsheimer & D.G. Marshall (NY: Crossroad,
2d. rev. ed., 1989).

--- Sayfa 77 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

75
vision, Gülen asserts that we are always and everywhere called to transcend our horizon qua horizon,
to transcend it utterly, toward the unconditionally infinite horizon, that of Allāh. Likewise, against
Aristotle, Gülen affirms that we are called to essay this transcendent act not only intellectually, but
also socially and spiritually. Gülen implicitly concurs with Pascal: “Le Dieu d’Abraham, d’Isaac et de
Jacob, non des philosophes et des savants.” 106 Self-transcendence cannot be restricted to the rational
plane of existence; the call to transcendence permeates every aspect of our life; and so we may
discover that this omni-dimensional call comes, not from the god of the philosophers, the god of
Reason, but from the God Who makes Himself known in history, the God of Revelation. For
Revelation not only affirms Reason, but transcends it: “My ways are not your Ways.”107 Revelation
bids us attain our highest accomplishments – and confirms our unspoken suspicion that even they
will not prove sufficient in our life. Gülen thus continues, “Explicitly or not, human souls expect
another eternal abode, not to mention the fact that they hanker for the continuation of this transient
world.”108 In other words, while we cling to this world and its glittering prizes, at the very same time,
our deepest yearning is not for any reward, but for redemption: for the unrestricted love and
knowledge of God.
To Gülen, our threefold openness – intellectual, social, and spiritual – may be merely implicit in a
Modern culture, but it is nonetheless universal. Like the “book of Nature,” it serves as a perpetual
invitation to turn to Allāh (in specifically Sunni Turkish terms, ihtida). The openness of our desire is
the key to our conversion (in more general terms of personal transformation, dönüşüm). We all of us
want to know and to be known; we all of us want to love and to be loved; and we want to do this, not
only in the visible company of our neighbors, but also in cooperation with any invisible ground for our
existence. For as we all of us discover, regardless of culture, or of upbringing, we are none of us
necessary beings, and we most certainly none of us created ourselves: we are merely contingent
beings. The primal question of our existence is whether this contingency is purely material – a blind
product of cosmic reactions – or if this contingency is as reasonably and lovingly designed as it is
intelligible and awe-inspiring. If there is a ground to our existence, then it utterly transcends us, now
and forever. And its expectations would be equally transcendent to anything our ego could imagine.
Thus far sheer openness brings us: merely following our primal question brings us to the possibility of
conversion, a threefold conversion, at once reasonable, moral, and spiritual. To discover the
contingency of our existence is to inquire, eo ipso, as to the possibility of a necessary ground to our
existence; and to ask that question just as ineluctably entails the concomitant question, What would
such a ground require? In sum, openness entails its own process. We begin by asking the universal
question, Are we merely a cosmic “fluke,” or is there a transcendent origin for life in the universe? We
rapidly discover that answers have varied, particularly in Modernity; and yet, if we persist, we also
discover that, by virtue of that very inquiry, we transcend all spatio-temporal concerns: we affirm
horizons of desire beyond our work-a-day world and beyond all possible rewards in our world.
To grow beyond our earliest egotistic eruptions – our temper tantrums as a 2-year-old – and beyond
our easy-going inquisitiveness as a 10-year-old, beyond even our intense self-preoccupation as a 16-
year-old, is to turn to face death and then, and only then, the meaning of life. It is to transcend the

106 Blaise Pascal, Mémorial, Pensées: “The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not of the philosophers and the intellectuals.”
Pascal draws on Exodus 3:6 and Matthew 22:32.
107 Isaiah 55:8-9: For My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are My ways your ways, says the Lord. As high as the heavens
are above the earth, so high are My ways above your ways and My thoughts above your thoughts.
108 Gülen, op. cit.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

76
sensationalism of our entertainment media and the cynicism of our mass culture. It is to discover that
our horizons trump virtually anything on offer on the silver screen or in the corridors of power. And
then we discover, if we persist, that our openness not only entails its own process, a process that has
carried us far beyond the restricted horizons of a materialistic culture, but that that process itself is
normative. Regardless of culture or upbringing, our questions carry us toward conversion.
This initially most open horizon, this unrestricted yearning in our formative years, serves as Gülen’s
most fundamental postulate, just as it could serve for any individuals who reflect upon their
existential situation, anywhere, anytime. For regardless of whether an adult ultimately affirms, blurs,
or denies the goal of this initial yearning — regardless of whether the adult chooses to follow the path
of atheism, agnosticism, polytheism, or theism — the fact of our primal openness and inquiry, our
initial state of desire, is attested by all cultures, historic or prehistoric, from the glorious cave
paintings of Lascaux to the defeat of Leninism. Yet, currently in the West, this primal horizon is rarely
acknowledged in our private but predominant mode of work-a-day existence; even more
discouragingly, in the public, civic dimension, it is almost never developed by our political and
strategic elites, much less even mentioned in our laïcist lecture halls; it is as though that which is
deepest, because it is also the most potentially divisive, must never be addressed. Moreover, if these
professional and public silences were not daunting enough, the maintenance of this open horizon in
early adulthood requires not only an initial counter-cultural decision by individual Westerners —  a
decision against all the subtle pressures to conform to the silences of professional and public
discourse — but, because we are intrinsically dynamic creatures, moving instinctively either to
confirm or deny our own potential bases for responsible living, the maintenance of our horizon also
requires an arduous self-examination by each of us, individually, if it is ultimately to be confirmed. By
our nature, we cannot stand pat. We must find the means to confirm or deny our decision for what
constitutes our own responsible way through life. And if we do find the means to confirm a
responsible way through life, we may well find that, far from standing still or even shrinking, our
horizon actually expands. Even as we affirm our hard-won decision, we begin to value and affirm the
hard-won decisions of others. Commitment is inherently expansive — as depth calls to depth.
For Westerners now seeking to come to grips with the gifts of Gülen, we need, before all else, to
understand why it is that his gifts are universal. When Gülen speaks to Erzurum and Izmir, why
should Paris and New York pay heed? What is it that he has encouraged Turks to appropriate to
themselves that we, too, should make our own? The single best Post-Modern method of such self-
appropriation of how it is that we initially think and feel in terms of an unrestricted horizon – of how,
despite the pervasive cynicism and sensationalism, we grope forward in our quest for a hint of the
knowledge of God, of the love of our Redeemer — is perhaps that of Bernard Lonergan, Insight.109
While we cannot hope to do justice here to one of the most demanding works of philosophy in our era,
we may try to show how it re-orients us in our practical lives. A simple thought experiment, tracing
four steps in the every-day life of a tourist in Turkey, may be the quickest way to confirm this, to
confirm that following our questions is a normative and universal method, a method that Gülen is re-
developing for Turkey and all the ummah.

109 Collected Works of Lonergan, vol. 3, Insight: A Study of Human Understanding, F.E. Crowe & R.M. Doran, eds.
(Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Pr., [1957], 5th rev. ed., 1992, 2000); hereafter, Insight.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

77
Step 1: Recalling our most basic mental state.
Let’s imagine that we are at Kuşadası, lying on one of the beaches or in an old hammam (hamam).
Between taking plunges in the Aegean or following the sequence of the warm, hot, and cooling rooms,
respectively, we are pretty much immersed in brute physical experience (deneyim or tecrübe), with
very little in the way of thought: this is about as close as we come to the realm of sheer animal
extroversion. This is also the realm, when we later reflect back on it, of naïve realism, of the mistaken
notion that “seeing is knowing.” For even though we discovered as children that our senses repeatedly
deceive us (e.g., when we see an oar “bend” in the water), nonetheless, in our every day, common-
sense preoccupations, our work-a-day world, we do not take those experiences and raise them to the
level of systematic, theoretical reflection — it hardly seems practical to reflect upon those subtly
formative discoveries, indeed, “only philosophers do that!” Far easier to alternate between the
practical necessities of work and, for the rest of the time, to immerse ourselves in sensory pleasure!

Step 2: Examining how we transcend that most basic state.
Moving up the coast, we come to the ruins of Troy (Truva); we hear the tour guide explain how
Heinrich Schliemann, excavating the site in the late 19th century, mistook levels I and II for the actual
level that dates from the time of the Trojan War, now held to be level VIIa. We not only see the ruins
and hear the guide — we not only experience the incoming data of sense – we begin to add to our
experience on a wholly new level: for as those data come in, something else happens in our
consciousness. As we hear how Schliemann, an amateur archaeologist who was more of a
businessman on the make, not only dug indiscriminately, thus destroying much of the layering, but
probably planted “finds” (e.g., Priam’s treasure), it hits us, all of a sudden, that archaeology is nothing
like what we imagined. It is not a simple digging down through neat cross-sections of old towns, it is
not an uncovering of what was just waiting to be seen; it is much more of an active reconstruction of
those ancient and truly ruined sections. This is an “Aha!” moment, this is a moment of insight. It
shocks us: we feel the shock. We want to test the feeling: it needs spelling out, it needs understanding.
In other words, after the first level of experience, there follows a second and rapidly sequenced two-
part level of insight (sezgi) and understanding (anlama or anlayış). We ask, “What is it?”
(traditionally, Quid sit?). We study the brief printed explanations around the site. But we want to be
sure of our understanding: “Is it so?” (An sit?). We may buy a couple of books or, better yet, talk to a
professional archaeologist. We want to answer all the questions that reasonably come to mind: we
want a virtually unconditioned answer to our question, “Is it really so?” In other words, we move up to
a third level, to judgment, to a virtually unconditioned affirmation or rejection of our initial insight.
This judgment is analogous to a judge’s verdict (hüküm), for it requires us to sift all the relevant,
material, and probative evidence, pro and con, before we can render an objective decision to affirm or
reject our initial insight; it is a final determination, very much like a judge’s — only it is more
demanding, since our own personal prejudices are very much likely to affect the decision without us
having any professional training to detect and isolate them. (How often do we care to be professional
about ourselves?) And if we are often blind to our own prejudices, how much more often are we blind
to our own processes of thought; how often do we fail to reflect, not just on the data of sense, but on
the data of consciousness! Seeing the archaeological site is not knowing; processing all the relevant
questions about archaeology is knowing: our judgment is our affirmation of reality. We do not know
the world by what we see, or even by what we think we understand; we know it only by what we affirm
beyond a reasonable doubt. Our world is ultimately not a realm of animal extroversion (a realm that is

--- Sayfa 80 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

78
already real and out there now, as it were). Nor is it a world of ideal forms. It is a world of judgment, a
world of substantiated meaning. Once we proceed through the natural but arduous method of
following our questions, once we rise from experience through insight-and-understanding, so as to
achieve judgment, then we know something of reality, something about the world suggested by the
data of sense; and by the very same measure, once we turn that process on itself, once we examine our
own mode of knowing, then we know something of the data of consciousness, something of the
invariant pattern of human judgment (a judgment that cannot be refuted without self-refutation: I
judge that I do not judge). This accomplishment is as rare as it is beautiful, as good as it is true; we
might even call it the archaeology of the mind! For what we have dug up and appropriated to
ourselves is no less than our own mind, the mind that is unrestricted, the mind that seeks the
eternally true, the eternally good, the eternally beautiful. Having appropriated it through a process
that transcends the mere data of sense, a process that turns on the data of consciousness, a
consciousness that has been verified as a virtually unconditioned truth, we have appropriated our
judgment of reality in a manner that is, in Modern and Post-Modern parlance, thoroughly “critical.”
Though we may never have heard the phrase before, we find that we are, not naïve realists, nor
idealists, but “critical realists.”

Step 3. Affirming that our deepest horizons are also the most potentially divisive
 Continuing north, we come at last to Istanbul and the world-famous museum of Hagia Sophia
(Ayasofya). Inside, over the southwest vestibule, we find the restored mosaic of the Virgin and Child,
flanked by the great Emperors Constantine I and Justinian I. We also find two women standing before
it: an Eastern Orthodox nun visiting from the Balkans, and a Shi’īte tourist from Qom, in full chador.
They are looking at the same mosaic, but they are not seeing the same thing. Is this the Mother of the
last great Prophet before Muhammad, or, as the mosaic asserts, Mater Theou: the Mother of God?

Step 4. Affirming that these deep divisions are not the end of our inquiry.
At the third level, the level of judgment, the tourist and the nun will silently disagree with each other.
There is, however, a fourth level, the level of permanent decision, where they begin once again to
converge. For at the level of decision (karar), at the point of a lifetime’s commitment, they may each
resolve to live in love with God – unrestricted love – and thus, concomitantly, to live in love with their
neighbors. Everything is offered up, as Justinian offers a model of Hagia Sofia and Constantine, of
Constantinople itself. And in the beauty of this mosaic, our very resolve is refreshed.
Thus our four steps and our four levels. Through experience, insight-and-understanding, judgment,
and decision, we can come to a love - a peace - that surpasses understanding. This is an exceedingly
hard-won peace. Lonergan was fond of remarking that “knowledge makes a bloody entrance;” how
much more painful is the decision to follow where that knowledge points: to unrestricted love!
The four steps are as easy to read as a tourist map. But the four levels are as difficult to ascend as, say,
Mount Ararat. For they require us to strip away everything but the barest necessities for reflection,
and then, as we mount through the levels of reflection, to let nothing loosen our grip on those
necessities, the necessities of appropriating to ourselves, at every step of the way, our own mode of
thought, a mode that is invariant through all cultures and faiths, a method that thus serves as a bridge
between all the sons and daughters of Abraham, and beyond – that unites all the children of God.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

79
To recap: What did I hear and see at Troy? What insight did that experience trigger? How well did I
spell out that insight in my own understanding? More difficult still: Did that understanding answer all
the pertinent questions? Can I now affirm that understanding, judge it to be as complete as I can
make it under the circumstances, that is, virtually unconditioned? Most difficult of all: what does this
relatively simple process of a tourist’s judgment reveal about judgment per se? What does it tell me
about my mind? And my heart? Or the heart of the lady from Qom?
It may be that Western philosophers and theologians will find that the method of Lonergan gets us
beyond the fashionable rhetoric of “choice”: Stanislaus chooses to be Catholic; Stanley, to be Jewish;
and Selim, to be Muslim. For our politically correct rhetoric of choice in the West requires nothing
more than a facile tolerance of other choices; choice entails no method, and thus no rigorous method
of life decision — and thus, too, no possibility of profound respect for the permanent-commitment
decisions of others. Choice is little more than the dinner-menu decision writ large. Against the
egotistic demands of individuals, the appetites of nations, and the momentous risk of the clash of
civilizations, choice is no choice at all.
It may be, too, that Western analysts will test this critically realist method and then find, in their own
judgment, that it begins to open our horizon to the gifts of Gülen. This finding is not a fusion of
horizons, but  a transcendence of our own parochial views; for Gülen points, never to himself or to his
own worldview (much less to a “choice of lifestyle”), but to the infinite: to the God who is All-Mighty,
All-Merciful — and utterly Mysterious.
If we have experienced and reflected upon that Mystery, an experience and reflection that is at once
joyous, sorrowful, glorious, and even luminous, then we have made a profound life-decision, one that
enables us to follow the alien words and the identical processes of Gülen. Only through judgment do
we know judgment. Only through our own life’s resolve can we esteem another’s. Only when depth
calls to depth do we find convergence.
We have suggested how difficult the process of intellectual self-appropriation is, that is, the process of
intellectual conversion. We shall see that the processes of moral and spiritual conversion are no less
demanding — but, fortunately for the peace of humanity, much more often undertaken!
In approaching Gülen, we may say, with Lonergan, that the only authentic objectivity is authentic
subjectivity. And only through authentic subjectivity do we find convergence; it takes a Gandhi to
wisely, delicately, keenly appreciate the Gospel; a Merton, the Dalai Lama.
This quality of convergence – aynı noktada birleşme — is one of the most attractive qualities of Rumi.
For when one of the greatest poets of a civilization and one of its most enduring spiritual leaders is
also one of its most open individuals — not in the fashionable sense of sampling other choices, but in
the enduring expression of an existential apprehension of value — then we all of us potentially may
find ourselves attracted to him in turn. The openness of genius is itself an inspiration. Sensing it in
our depths, we may well resolve to go and do likewise. Like the nun from Skopje and the tourist from
Qom, we may resolve to go forth to love and serve the Lord and one another.
And no desire could be more democratic. For this effective appreciation, this resolve, just like its
antecedent life-decision, can only be sown and cultivated between an individual’s soul and her Maker.
No principality, no philosophy, can pre-determine it.
For neither that decision nor that convergence can be commanded. Here, we begin to discover the
intensely practical value and difficulty of conversion. It is not a matter of power but of individual

--- Sayfa 82 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

80
cultivation — and, if we are exceedingly lucky, of a culture that rightly adjudges and therefore
encourages such unbounded cultivation.110 But mass culture, in any of its manifestations, e.g.,
American or Arabian, shows no such luck, be it intellectually, morally, or spiritually: only the
technological genius that immediately accrues more wealth and prestige to the culture is popularly
adored. (“Ivory tower” genius is just as readily dismissed in Riyadh as in Washington; what is wanted
is useful, applicable genius: applicable to power.) There is an irony here, for technological progress is
dependent upon a key portion of the very intellectual conversion that it blithely dismisses: it depends
upon the individual stepping out of the dominant industrial perspectives and envisioning a problem
in an unprecedented way: it requires an imagination it cannot create, much less control.
Prince Sultan knew that there was nothing uniquely “Western” about science; subatomic particles
function no differently in a Japanese reactor than in a French reactor; or, as Aristotle put it, fire burns
the same in Persia as in Greece.111 But Greece discovered science, Persia did not; the difference was
not in the laws of science, but in the laws of society, the customs that define that horizons of inquiry.
The extraordinarily broad and deep horizons of Athenian society led not only to the development of
democracy, but to the expectation of full citizen participation, both in the informal public
philosophical and prudential debates in the Agora, the marketplace, and in the formal legal and
political deliberations of the Ekklesia, the Assembly, and the Dikasteria, the jury courts. Indeed,
Pericles instituted public jury payments so as to ensure the participation of (relatively poor) daily
wage-earners — any Athenian citizen who imagined that he could take a free ride on communal
responsibility and look only to his own affairs was called by his neighbors an “idiotes”- a word that
serves not only as the obvious root of our Modern “idiot,” but also as the unadvertised basis of our
Hobbesian-Lockean social contract: What’s in it for me? And yet, as in Ancient Athens, so too in Post-
Modern America: that culture flourishes most in which each individual discovers and contributes his
or her best; and it is only the highest horizons that invite the apex of discovery and contribution.
The outline of the great gifts of Gülen may now be identified: his life-long drive to empower the
average Turk, first in the understanding and perfection of individual faith, then in the understanding
and perfection of science in society, and finally, the renewal of society itself. Like Prince Sultan, Gülen
understands that there is nothing exclusively Western about science, that there are very good
historical and theological reasons rather than exclusively scientific reasons why the High Middle Ages
in Western Europe took the first hints of empiricism from the ummah and pursued them, at the very
moment that the ‘ulamā’ began to discourage such inquiries. Unlike the unfortunate Prince, Gülen has
been afforded the opportunity to issue the historic invitation that makes all the difference in faith and
society: to re-open our full horizons of desire, our horizons of knowledge, of love, and of service. The
gifts of Gülen set in sharp relief the crassness of the technological imperative and, even more starkly,
the failure of the technocrats’ own self-understanding. What Gülen boldly proposes is no less than a

110 Such cultures, though rare, span the globe in their emergence: the Warring States period in Ancient China, Athens from
Pericles to Aristotle, 5th to 7th-century Ireland, 8th to 11th-century Damascus-Baghdad, 13th-century Bologna, Paris, Cologne,
Oxford, and Cambridge, 15 to 16th-century Istanbul under the Ottomans,  17th to 18-century France, England, & Scotland;
19th-century Germany and America, are just a few of the societies that encouraged an extraordinary profusion of individual
quests on the intellectual, moral, and/or spiritual planes.
111 Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, V.7.1134b24-1135a5: the famous passage challenging the facile notion of the Sophists
that all justice is merely a matter of convention. As Aristotle rightly judged, it is not only the laws of nature, but our own
deepest intellectual aspirations, that are universal. Along with the Jewish Prophets, the Confucian scholar-gentlemen, the
Hindu Brahmins, the Buddhist saints, it has been the work of subsequent philosophers, theologians, lawyers, and
statesmen, East and West, to extend his judgment to the moral and spiritual spheres.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

81
new Turkish leadership of the ummah, but a leadership based, this time, not on military and
administrative genius, but on the earlier and enduring genius of a Yunus Emre, a Rumi, a native
depth, a genius that is as theoretical as it is practical, as powerful as it is spiritual.
If it works for some seventy million Turks, be they Sunni or Alevi, Jewish or Christian, then that will
be because the moving genius — the spirit of the enterprise — is founded on universal aspirations.
But if they are universal, how can we Westerners continue to ignore them?

4. “Only a concept embracing the whole in its wholeness can be called truly scientific.”
In 1963, Niyazi Berkes, albeit in exile, wrote one of the best encomiums to the Kemalist regime; he
urged that the regime had never intended to force secularism upon the masses, and thereby eradicate
Muslim belief, but rather, by means of an incremental secularization, to deliver them to a more
enlightened Islām.112 Ordinary Turks would not be deprived of the resources of faith, but would
instead update their faith: just as the sultanate and the caliphate had been swept away, so too
superstition and folklore would yield to the methods of science; society would be thoroughly
secularized, but the government would insure, though its Directorate of Religious Affairs (Diyanet),
that individuals would be led to a Modern set of beliefs and rituals. Berkes noted that the attempt to
enforce revised rituals, from introducing Turkish music to banning Arabic, failed; he did not
recognize, however, that the philosophy of governmentally-inspired faith was a contradiction in
terms: once again, deep faith can only be invited, not commanded. Nor did he fully recognize that the
Western predicates for the effort, predicates dating from 19th-century positivism and materialism,
were not only exhausted in Europe and America, and thus anachronistic, but they were also
reductionistic: their attempt to make all aspects of public life, and even private religious ritual,
conform to “dictates” of science, had nothing to do with the work of Einstein, Bohr, Heisenberg, et al.,
but represented instead a form of scientism, a false reading and over-extension of scientific method to
fields in which it had no natural application. Einstein famously held that “God does not play dice”
with the laws of the universe; he did not tell us what God might play in a mosque.
At the same time, the Kemalist Revolution did thoroughly understand that the Ottoman-style
importation of Western machines would be insufficient, that the technology would have to be adopted
as well, and that this would require, in addition, an internalization of Western philosophy.113
Technologically, and thus philosophically, and thus, too, politically, Turkey would have to modernize
and this would require some degree of Westernization, though all of this would be determined by the
guardians of the new Republic, the Army. As a former New York Times reporter from Istanbul has
observed, “Today [the Turkish Army] is a victim of its own achievements. So successfully has it
encouraged Turkey’s integration in the world that ever more Turks want to escape from its political
power, which has become intrusive and suffocating. They have learned the lessons of democracy and
now want to live by them.”114 Unfortunately, the brass does not altogether realize how far the society
has evolved, or how much Turkey, by virtue of its success, now serves as a role model and, thus, how

112 Niyazi Berkes, The Development of Secularism in Turkey, with a new Introduction by Feroz Ahmad (NY: Routledge,
[1963], 1998).
113 Sina Akşin, “The Nature of the Kemalist Revolution,” in David Shankland, ed., The Turkish Republic at Seventy-Five
Years: Progress – Development – Change (Huntington, Cambridgeshire: The Eothen Press, 1999), 14-28.
114 Stephen Kinzer, Crescent and Star: Turkey between Two Worlds (NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2001), 165.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

82
much it could help reshape its geopolitical environment. “Rather they see a nation surrounded by
enemies and populated by simpletons who are easily manipulated.”115 Worse yet, the Kemalists
outside the Army, the previously protected ruling elite in Ankara, who regard themselves as the
aydınlar, the enlightened ones, have long treated all manifestations of faith among the vast rural —
and now urban — majorities as signs of hopeless backwardness; while the Army worries about
regional trends, the secular elite condemns most domestic political  developments.116 Not seeing
democracy in action, but rather irtica, an upsurge in reactionary religion and obscurantism, the
Kemalists feel caught in a Kulturkampf117 — and just like Bismarck’s original culture war, they have
shown no willingness to understand, much less dialogue with, the vast opposition. Looking back upon
the 1920s and ’30s, when Atatürk swept away much of the opposition to modernization, the Kemalists
today feel an uncanny “nostalgia for the Modern” — a nostalgia that, ironically, is itself reactionary.118
Then again, in regional terms, the secularists certainly have reason to worry. In the great arc of Islām,
from Morocco to Indonesia, the “two great trends of democratization and identity assertion” studied
by Esposito and Voll are a particularly volatile combination.119 Not only are they “concurrent and
vital,” but they are also fairly immune to secular Western influences; witness the victory of Hamas in
the Palestinian election of January, 2006, and the increased popularity of Hezbollah in southern
Lebanon after the summer war of 2006. Part of this upsurge is due, in yet another historical irony, to
the decline of the ‘ulamā’ in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, for it was the failure to come
to grips with Modernity of that relatively quietistic scholasticism that cleared the way for the rise of
the Muslim activist intellectuals in the late twentieth century.120 Moreover, this activism, when not
reducing faith to political imperatives, tends to reduce politics — and an aggressive military strategy
— to a thoroughly fundamentalistic form of faith, one first articulated in virulent rejection of all
aspects of Modern social life (except technology), in the early eighteenth century.121 In sum, “Islamic
reformism tended to become a legacy that was not developed and applied systematically, but instead
employed or manipulated on occasion, in a diffuse and ad hoc fashion, when convenient by
individuals, nationalist movements, and Islamic organizations.”122
Among Western scholars of the Middle East and of Islam, there is thus a general tendency to accept
two of the major observations of Khaled Abou El Fadl. On the one hand, he notes the similarities
between the ostensibly literalist “puritans” of the era of al-Ghazali, whom that great theologian
described as “hadith hurlers — they use the inherited tradition and law to silence their opponents and

115 Id., 168.
116 Nicole and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey (Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press, 1998), 316,
340.
117 Heinz Kramer, A Changing Turkey: the Challenge to Europe and the United States (Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press, 2000), 66, 68-69.
118 Esra Özyürek, Nostalgia for the Modern: State Secularism and Everyday Politics in Turkey (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2006).
119 John L. Esposito and John O. Voll, Islam and Democracy (NY: Oxford University Press, 1996), 15.
120 J. L. Esposito and J. O. Voll, Makers of Contemporary Islam (NY: Oxford University Press, 2001), 16.
121 John Obert Voll, Islam: Continuity and Change in the Modern World (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1982, 2nd
ed. 1994), 374.
122 John L. Esposito, Islam: The Straight Path (NY: Oxford University Press, rev. 3rd ed., 2005), 145.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

83
to stunt critical or creative thinking.”123 Those so-called puritans124 did not prevail in the first
millennium of Islām. On the other hand, today, the “traditional institutions of Islam that historically
acted to marginalize extremist creeds [e.g., the Khawarij, Qaramites, and Assassins] no longer
exist.”125 The upshot is that Western scholars are deeply divided about the prospects and prescriptions
for democracy within much of the house of Islām.126 What agreement there is concerns the current
perilous state of authoritarian stability through much of the region127 — and the lack of tools among
Western powers to move those regimes toward a democratic opening that would not deliver a newly
retrograde form of puritanical rule: that would not thrust the Mideast out of the frying pan and into
the fire.
What is missing in this literature is, first, the sociological phenomenon of the rise of the House of
Service: of the great neighbor-oriented Islām inspired and led by Gülen. Second, because this is
missing, Western political science and strategic literature too often describe an unacceptable
alternative: either continue to support the authoritarian regimes or take a huge gamble on “Islamist”
neo-puritan regimes. Third, political science and strategic projections for the mid-term future of the
Mideast lack both philosophical and, surprisingly, theological depth. Edward Saïd, in Orientalism,128
famously decried the Western colonial and postcolonial penchant for viewing the Near East and
especially Islām as the “Other;” in yet another bitter irony, the one thing that Western social scientists
have not been able to do, at least not in American political discourse, is to portray just how much the
context for development in the Mideast is “other” than the starting suppositions in Anglo-American
history. Whether it was discussions of “options” in Iraq in 2002, or Egypt in 2004, or Palestine in
2005, discussions emanating out of Washington revealed scant acquaintance – or concern – with
conditions on the ground. Sheer American will power cannot overcome such ignorance.129
Contrast that very sorry picture with this slim but fairly representative excerpt from Gülen himself:

123 Khaled Abou El Fadl, The Great Theft: Wrestling Islam from the Extremists (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco,
2005), 97.
124 There is a growing literature to suggest that the service organization founded by Gülen leads a new Puritanism in
Anatolia; v., e.g., Selcuk Uygur, “’Islamic Puritanism’ as a Case of Economic Development: the Case of the Gülen
Movement,” in the Proceedings of the London conference, Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press, Oct 2007), 176-186 while there are marked comparisons with the
capitalist emphasis of the Northern European Protestants in general and the Swiss-Dutch-Scottish-New England
Presbyterians in particular, nonetheless, there are community values among the Anatolians, particularly the very strong
emphases on community growth and neighborly responsibility, to say nothing of dialogue with other faiths, that are quite
distinct from the patterns of Calvin’s Geneva or Winthrop’s Boston.
125 El Fadl, op. cit., 102.
126 See, e.g., Khaled Abou el Fadl, et al., Islam and the Challenge of Democracy: A Boston Review Book, ed. Joshua Cohen
and Deborah Chasman (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004).
127 One author who has suggested that those authoritarian regimes have been more successfully entrenched than the
political science and strategic literature generally realize is Steven A. Cook, Ruling But Not Governing: The Military and
Political Development in Egypt, Algeria, and Turkey (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007).
128 Edward W. Said, Orientalism (NY: Vintage/Random House, 1979).
129 (The Council on Foreign Relations has described the lack of a well developed, indigenous liberal leadership alternative in
most Arab polities; Washington failed to grasp that point when it touted its great democracy initiative for the Middle East
from 2002 to 2005; already, by 2006, the initiative was in retreat and potential liberal allies among the Arab intelligentsia
were back where they started: silenced, imprisoned, even tortured. Washington’s emphasis on American will power and
high-tech allure proved to be very thin reeds when pushed against the desperate politics of a culturally and theologically
angered region.)

--- Sayfa 86 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

84
If Muslims want to end their long humiliation and help establish a new, happy
world at least on a par with the West, they must replace old-fashioned positivistic
and materialistic theories with their own thoughts and inspirations. Aware of their
past pains and troubles, they must exert great efforts to define these problems and
cure them.
A true concept of science will join spirituality and metaphysics with a
comprehensive, inclusive view that affirms the intrinsic and unbreakable relation
between any scientific discipline and existence as a whole. Only a concept
embracing the whole in its wholeness can be called truly scientific.130
This is, indeed, far removed from 19th-century positivism; Gülen’s sense of science per se accords well
with the discoveries of Heisenberg and even late 20th-century chaos theory and complexity theory.
And his sense of the whole is not only well grounded by analogy to the most advanced physics, but it
also ties in, and very directly, with the genuine democratic aspirations of people of faith, Muslim or
otherwise. In Western terms, we might distinguish his sense of theological democracy as one whereby
a Catholic may appropriate to herself one after another of the great teachings of the Church, rather as
John Henry Newman did: slowly, prayerfully, reasonably, resolving the difficulties without ever
making them into doubts. In the Islamic literature, perhaps the most invigorating example of this is
offered by Ihsan Yilmaz, “Inter-madhhab Surfing.”131
As Paul Weller has just observed, “…Gülen employs a hermeneutic which is more in line with the
classical traditions of the interpretation of Islam, and quite different from the ‘flat’ approach of
modern Islamists.”132
At the same time, Gülen manages to keep a balance between his emphasis on the need for Muslims to
become fully at home with contemporary science and the need for Muslim community leaders to
develop those classical theological traditions anew. It is not merely a matter of Muslims becoming
comfortable with a much more realistic sense of science than scientism ever afforded; nor is an
awareness of current scientific methods and findings among well educated Turks sufficient to
“balance” their expression of faith. The balance does not operate at all in that way. No individual
maintains a bifurcated pair of horizons, one that would need to be constantly juggled. Instead, the
balance that Gülen advocates is one that goes to the heart of each discipline: the chemistry professor
should be every bit as immersed in his lab work as in his prayer life, and should not seek to construct
an artificial divide between them, or, for that matter, an equally artificial set of premature parallels

130 M. Fethullah Gülen, “The Horizons of the Soul: Metaphysical Thought,” in Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love
and Tolerance, Foreword by Thomas Michel (Somerset, NJ: The Light, 2004), 148-151, at 150.
131 Ihsan Yilmaz, “Inter-madhhab Surfing, Neo-Ijtihad, and Faith-Based Movement Leaders,” in The Islamic School of Law:
Evolution, Devolution, and Progress, ed. Peri Bearman, Rudolph Peters, and Frank E. Vogel (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2005), 191 ff. Cf. Gülen, “Why Prophets Are Sent,” in Gülen, The Messenger of God: Muhammad
(Somerset, NJ: The Light, 2005), 21 ff. Cf. Gülen, “Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will,” in The Essentials of
the Islamic Faith (Somerset, NJ: The Light, 2005), 89 ff. Cf. Thomas Michel, “Turkish Islam in Dialogue with Modern
Society: the Neo-Sufi Spirituality of the Gülen Movement,” in Islam and Enlightenment: New Issues, ed. Erik Borgman and
Pim Valkenberg (London: SCM Press, 2005), 71-80.
132 Paul Weller, “Robustness and Civility: Themes from Fethullah Gülen as Resource and Challenge for Government,
Muslims and Civil Society in the United Kingdom,” in the Proceedings of the London conference, Muslim World in
Transition: Contributions of The Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press, Oct 2007), 268-284, at
280.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

85
between them. The experience in each discipline, be it in pursuit of a new scientific result or in the
most profound prayer (not “Here are my desires” prayer), yields its own intrinsic methods and
results: the book of nature will point, in its own time and its own way, toward the book of Scripture.
Although Islām rarely invokes a logic explicitly equivalent to that of natural law theory in the West,
the sense of profound unity underpinning Creation and Revelation is nonetheless there: Prince Sultan
and Gülen would agree that the abandonment of empirical research was first and foremost a failure to
understand the unity of God’s complex Creation, a failure to honor each part of that Creation in its
own terms.
It was the theological misunderstanding that, ever so subtly, entailed the decline and fall of the
Islāmic world and, eventually, of its last and greatest power, the Ottoman empire. For the God Who
calls upon all Muslims to “Recite!” immediately reminds them that He has given them the pen: He has
given them the means to record all knowledge. Allah’s first Revelation is, in short, a powerful call to
mind the whole of Creation. For the gift of the pen was unrestricted: the Prophet was not instructed
by the Archangel to jot down the words of Revelation; indeed, Muhammad could not read or write. In
that moment of fear and trembling – that experience of the mysterium tremendum et fascinans
(Otto) that Muhammad underwent, time and again, for years on end, fearing that he could not endure
it, that he would be crushed by the Archangel, or by the burden of the revelations, or by the Meccans’
rejection of his message (Armstrong is very good on this) -  the Prophet was at no point concerned to
stop and scribble. That is not why the Archangel led off with the pen. Muhammad was scarcely likely
to forget what he heard if he did not “jot it down” – Revelation is not a shopping list - jotting cannot,
under any interpretation, be the meaning of the pen.
Sometimes, the import of the symbolism is buried in plain sight. Recall the “Aha!” moment of St.
Augustine who, after years of frustration in reading and re-reading the twin accounts of Creation, set
forth at the beginning of Genesis, suddenly realized that the poetic description there, even within the
admittedly broad interpretive span of mythopoetry, is not a declaration of a once-for-all sequence of
six 24-hour days of divine labor (as it were: the divine “Fiat!” is not labor, but Sophia, divine wisdom,
certainly permits us to use the image of Her at work). Rivers do not suddenly teem with fish; reeds
along the riverbanks take time to grow; animals even take years to mature and reproduce; Genesis is
not an image of a static Creation, where everything bursts out in full growth, as Athena bursts from
the head of Zeus: no, Creation is the setting in motion of all things; Creation is, in a measure,
continuous; so much was now clear to Augustine, and it was again tested and accepted as virtually
unconditioned by Aquinas; now if the West had pursued Augustine’s insight and understanding and
had judged its potential aright in the natural sciences in the High Middle Ages, as it took up
empiricism from its Muslim and Jewish forebears, then the agonies of the Victorian era and the
idiocies of the creationist fundamentalists could all have been averted: if, and only if, Medieval
scientists had matched their inquiries into the natural world to the sophistication of their theology.
The West had the implication of ongoing Creation – and missed it for ages. The Eat had the
implication of the pen – and missed it for ages.
Neither East nor West took its theology seriously enough to apply it to the whole. Neither of us
minded Creation as God suggested we should. But the divine suggestion was just that: a small voice
the night, an invitation.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

86
It becomes clear that there was a dim but persistent popular grasp of the import of the pen: witness
the popular but informal hadīth that we should pursue knowledge “even to China.” The whole world,
human and natural, bears witness to the glory and the complex care of God.
Such a world is very, very complex and multifaceted. But even so, it has no room for the preaching of
hatred against one’s neighbors or of despair for oneself.
To mind the whole is to be not only true to one’s theology and to one’s science, it is to be true to one’s
heart and mind. For to mind the world is to refuse to condemn any part of it, be it the neighbor’s
power or one’s own powerlessness.
To mind the whole is to discover that, for all our differences of belief and speech, our minds and
hearts function in precisely the same way. Each and every one of us undergoes, each and every day,
the immemorial process of experience, insight, understanding, judgment, and decision.
Undergoing that process, we have the opportunity to turn, at every moment, and see that our horizon
of inquiry is unlimited: it is made for infinity, it is made in the image of God. Our hearts and minds
will not rest until they rest in God.
And with that realization, with Augustine and Gülen, we discover that there is no place in this world
for a “clash of civilizations” — that the lifespan of a reed, or the power of the pen that is made from it,
attests at once to the foresight and the continuity of God’s Creation: the reed that becomes the pen
that inscribes the subatomic particles making up the reed — this is deep knowledge, and if we are
graced, this is even deeper awe, and wonder, and, finally, love.
It is said that there is no real knowledge of the part without antecedent knowledge of the whole. As
Socrates points out at the end of the Theaetetus, there is no knowledge of the circle by its parts: for is
it just two semi-circles? But then what are they, if not four quarter circles? And what are they …
reductio ad absurdum!
It is even more properly said that there is no knowledge of the whole without love. For such
knowledge comes only through great labor.
We struggle to grasp an iota of the complexity of Creation: a jot and a tittle. And in our jotting, there is
joy; but the greatest joy of all, as in a cave outside Mecca, requires no jotting whatsoever: the joy of the
presence of God.
Gülen has renewed that call to joy like no one else in Muslim Modernity. He stands alongside the
spiritual giants in the House of Islām, great souls like Rumi and Yunus Emre. Like them, he speaks
directly to the needs of our age; like them, he speaks for all time.

5. Tout ce qui monte, converge.
It was a French paleontologist, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, S.J, who observed, “Everything that rises,
converges.”
If we attend to our own processes of heart and mind, if we follow our own unrestricted desires to
know and be known, to love and be loved, if we accept once again that our horizons (unlike our
attainments) are infinite, then we can understand, and affirm that understanding with judgment and

--- Sayfa 89 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

87
lifetime decision, with Teilhard and Gülen, that Allāh, in His infinite wisdom, has created our
diversity the better that we may compete with one another – compete in goodness.
Not all will agree with us. Some, whether power-mongers or victims of fear, will persecute the likes of
Gülen. Even when he most practices what he preaches – as sublime as that practice can be.133 And
that is when we can affirm our own understanding of Gülen, affirm it to be virtually unconditioned,
for no more questions obtain, affirm it for this ultimate reason – “Despite the hardships that Gülen
faced during the process of accusations, spiritual persecution and exile, he never sought revenge.”134
Beyond the three reasons for his being an important historical figure, reasons that are already well
articulated in the literature, Gülen stands forth ultimately as a man of infinite peace – a man of God.
And that is why the West should come to know him. There is no greater accolade, no greater power,
for there is no greater invitation.

133 Ihsan Yilmaz, “Ijtihad and Tajdid by Conduct: the Gülen Movement,” in M. Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito, eds.,
Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2003), 208-237.
134 Zeki Saritoprak, “Gülen and His Global Contribution to Peace-Building,” in the Proceedings of the London conference,
Muslim World, op. cit., 632-642, at 639.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

88

--- Sayfa 91 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

89

Envisaging Dialogue from
Theological Perspective

PART
2

--- Sayfa 92 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

90

--- Sayfa 93 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

91
TURNING FROM DOOM-LADEN SOOTHSAYINGS TO
MUTUAL COMMUNICATION AND WISDOM (TA`ARUF)
SEVKET YAVUZ 135  AND DAVUT AYDUZ 136

Abstract
Doom-laden forecasts like Huntington’s projected ‘clash of civilizations’ use imaginary fears as a
mechanism to condition individuals and societies to accept the division of the world, especially
its future energy supplies, in favour of those who currently wield power and supremacy.
Previously the NATO and Warsaw Pact blocs were used to maintain ‘blocs’; now the ‘clash of
civilizations’ is being used to make ‘blocs’ along religious/cultural lines. Division and conflicts are
generally based on unreal fears of the other, by means of which the emotions of the masses are
channelled into whatever direction suits the wielders of power. All the revealed religions, from
the first prophet, Adam, to the last, the Prophet of Islam, in their true nature reject the conflict-
building tendencies that lead humans to war and bloodshed. Briefly, religion means cosmos or
‘universal order’ and bringing ‘order’ to the chaotic experiences in human history in the world.
Islam, by its very name, affirms peace, safety, and happiness for all humankind. In Islam, as in
any other religious traditions, war is incidental; peace is the norm. On the other hand, to prevent
chaos from undermining cosmos, wars become necessary at times. In Islam war is regarded as a
natural but incidental feature of human collective life; the incidental necessity of it is balanced by
its being subject to certain principles and constraints. Islam proposes justice and peace for all the
world’s peoples, and through certain precepts sets up a ‘firewall’ designed to protect religion, life,
property, mind, and generation. The world needs to encourage an ethos of peace and dialogue
between Muslims and non-Muslims so as to maintain the an orderly, harmonious co-existence in
the global village. It needs to discourage and battle against all clash-centred discourses and
practices. With the resuscitating breath of love and peace inherent in all religions, preserved and
well-maintained in Islam as in the Abrahamic traditions generally, humanity may be able, for all
our sakes, to strengthen order and enfeeble chaos. For Muslims, who share the aim of defeating
the doom-laden fear-rousing predictions of a long class of traditions, Gülen’s insights and
parameters can be reconstructed again. In particular, commitment to dialogue and tolerance
should build up our spiritual capital so that we can adhere to the perennial values and
understand the wisdom  codes of out respective traditions.

135 Sevket Yavuz: His MA. (1996) and PhD (2002) were from Temple University, PA, USA and he made his post-doctoral
studies (2003-4) at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, in Berlin, Germany. He is now working as Assistant Professor of the
History of Religions, Comparative Religious Thought and Anthropology of Religion at Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University,
Canakkale Turkey. His main interests: Methodological foundations and practical manifestations of religions, Post/modern
philosophy, religion and sacred, interreligious dialogue. Recent publications: Existence in a Post/Modern World and
Resistance of the Tradition: Amishes (2007), Neo-Conservatives: Religion and the "Other" in Neo-Cons (2007);
Contemporary Buddhist Sects and Movements (ed. by S. Gündüz, 2007), The Pentecostalists (ed. by S. Gündüz, 2007).
136 Davut Ayduz: Since 2002 Professor in Theology at the Sakarya University. (Graduate in Islamic sciences, Ataturk
University; PhD in theology, University of Marmara, Istanbul in 1992.) 1993: lecturer in the Theology faculty, University of
Harran; Assistant Professor Theology at the Sakarya University (1993) and Associate Professor (1996). 1994/5: a period of
research in Egypt; then lecturing in Baku from 1997–2000.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

92
1. Prologue & Methodological Postulates
The future is always predestined from “now” and “here”. One of the future predictions was that the
future will be the age of knowledge. The futurists or other future-readers are pretending to be an
augur; thus, rather than objective estimations and predictions, the whims and wishes of the reader are
over imposed on the future. Therefore, these kinds of future-reading praxes are only contingencies
without any real content and context. Yet based on these kinds of future-readings, humans are led to a
psyche of supplication and thus await something in accord with what was read before. This psyche in
the end forms a mode of practical preparation and strife. Once a target is determined; then all means
and projects to get this target are utilized vastly and professionally.
At this juncture, Huntington's theory can be deconstructed in the aim to negate all doomsday
fantasies and soothsayings.137 The “doomsday” fantasies and fears conditioning societies and
individuals seem to be just an apparatus to parcel out the future existence and energies of the world at
the hands of those upholding power and supremacy. Through these kinds of projects, or more
correctly, predictions, humans are conditioned to get aligned along the line of the holders of economic
powers. Just as the blocs of the Cold War aligned around the NATO and Warsaw were just ephemeral
entities to get humanity divided, by now the thesis of the clash of civilizations is being discoursed and
practiced by referring to certain religio-cultural sensivities. Hence, these types of clash scenarios help
the holders of imperial power control the less-privileged parts of the world.
As a matter of fact, the ethos of tension and conflict is always beneficial for the unjust upholders of
power in history. Conflicts are generally based on phantasmic fears, an imaginary other, by which the
masses are goaded whatever these power wants to canalize. All religions from the message of Adam to
that of the Prophet of Islam in their pristine nature can and may never wish enmity and conflict,
rejecting all conflictual tendencies that lead humans to wars and bloodsheds. Briefly, religion means
cosmos and “cosmicizing” all the chaotic experiences in the world in human history. As such, Islam,
with its very label, means and declares peace, safety, and happiness for all humankind. In Islam, like
any other religious traditions, war is accidental; where peace in the cosmos is essential. On the other
hand, lest chaos besieges cosmos in the cosmos wars at times becomes necessary. Be it defensive, or
protective for chaos, wars are conditioned with some fundamental principles. In Islam war is regarded
as natural-but-accidental feature of human nature and in order to balance it Islam put principles and
restrictions. Islam proposing justice and world peace establishes a “firewall” in the aim to protect
one's religion, life, commodity, mind, and generation through certain precepts.
Lastly, humanity with Muslims and non-Muslims needs an ethos of peace and dialogue in order to
maintain the cosmic situation of our existence in the global village, degrading all clash-centric
discourses and praxes. With the resuscitative breath of love and peace inherent in all religions,
refurbished well in Islam in particular, and in Abrahamic traditions in general, humanity may able to
cosmicize chaos for the sake of itself and make the bleak futurists unwarranted in the case of the

137 Samuel Huntington, "The Clash of Civilizations," in Foreign Affairs (Summer 1993). Later his article was published as a
book with the same title. Samuel Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Order (New York:
Touchstone, 1997). In the nearly same vein with its epistemic and apocalyptical tones, Francis Fukuyama wrote an article,
entitled "The End of History? in the National Interest (Summer 1989), later published as a book with the same title, The
End of History and the Last Man (New York: The Free P, 1992).

--- Sayfa 95 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

93
chaotic prediction of our world. For Muslims, in the aim to reach such a telos of “cosmicizing cosmos”,
the following insights and parameters can be reconstructed again for the war-torn, hoary world:
Islam… lays the ground for a relation with all peoples, not only with Jews and
Christians whose prophets are confirmed in the Qur'an. Having once been the
recipients of revelation, and of a revelation that is identical to that of Islam,
the whole of mankind may be recognized by Muslims as equally honored, as
they are, by virtue of revelation and also as equally responsible, as they are, to
acknowledge God as the only God and to offer Him worship, service, and
obedience to His eternal laws.138
Or more recently, as Gülen indicates in his masterpiece, İnancın Gölgesinde II (Under the Shadow of
the Faith-II):
Our age is an age of positive sciences together with the epistême molded with
inspiration wrought with thought and culture. Our people can only catch up,
communicate with and respond to the contemporary age through wielding
these aspects of life as if four or five-dimensioned angels. What we need for is
thought as much as inspiration, inspiration as much as experience,
experience as much as love and ardor.139
At this juncture, the following thesis can be encapsulated: On the threshold of the quagmire leading
universal existence to global perdition and doom, to universal inequities and oppressions, and the
like, mutuality, communality, cooperative and proactive praxis enhanced by dialogues and alliances is
a both cosmic and cosmicizing solution to our fragmented and debased existence at the expense of
doomsday soothsayings. Theoretically, grace and love cannot be counted and thus are not squeezed
into certain formula or categories, whereas hate and enmity can be categorized and squeezed into
certain formulae through practical and existential manifestation in the daily lives of human being.
Furthermore, it is also important to accentuate that all power and hegemony-tainted discourses and
praxes are essentially and pragmatically diabolized and manifested through spiritually attuned
umbrellas and supra-structures. Hence, what is in conflict, clash, or doomed is, to a great extent, the
wish and will to power and otherize human beings for the sake of predominance.
For the sake of brevity, dialogue and tolerance should be our eternal spiritual capital through which
the world may able to get cosmicized in a continuous manner. By resuscitating the perennial values
and mutual wisdimization codes, the whole world may be able to get resuscitated. This resuscitation
can be made possible by communicative and dialogue-centric strives of the members of the
Abrahamic religions. By doing so, a new mode of existence and peace may one day prevail in our war-
torn world. In other words, dialogue that sets the path for “mutual communication and wisdomization
(ta‘âruf) has been a necessary mode of existence for several centuries; but it is a quintessential asset
since the beginning of this century. In this study, the following questionnaire will be sought to answer:
Why does humanity need an ethos harboring mutual communication and wisdimization through
dialogue in our precarious existence? To what extent and to what degree can one anticipate a more
just, equitable, and fraternizing epistême by way of dialogue and mutual understanding? What is the

138 Isma'il Raji al Faruqi, “Islam and Other Religions” in The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences vol. 2, no. 1
(1985).
139 M. Fethullah Gülen, İnancın Gölgesinde-II (İstanbul: Nil Yayınları, 1994), CD-ROM.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

94
rationale for “cosmisizing the chaos at the expense of cosmos and order? And most importantly to
what extent do the notions of Gülen support this goal of “cosmicizing chaos through mutuality and
communication?

2. Epistemic and Historical Prolegomena: From Clash and Chaos To Peace and Cosmos
2.1. From Veni, Vidi, Vici to Mutuality and Wisdomization
Are the religions of the world for the disparity of human being? At the outset, religious traditions
have, as if, been the cause of all conflictual tendencies and inclinations. Nevertheless, a judgment
something like this is not correct and cannot be evinced. What is witnessed on the scene is in fact the
paraphernalization of religion/sacred in favor of power struggles, politico-economic hegemonies, and
so forth. The existential ramification of this situation can be seen also in religious “contact instances”.
For instance:
When different religions or ideologies met in the past, the main purpose was
to overcome an opponent, because each was completely convinced that it
alone knew the secret of human life.140
Living no longer in “isolated islands”, humanity have to come to contact with each other. The “contact
zones” are now expected to be prepared through dialogue and communication. Hence, “(d)ialogue, as
the term is used today to characterize encounters between persons and groups with different religions
or ideologies, is something quite new under the sun.”141  If the genealogy of dialogue in the 20th
century is reconsidered, the following statement seems appropriate in showing its general rationale
and program:
The impetus for dialogue in the contemporary world has generally come from Christians,
and secondly from Jews. Thus it is natural that when Islam enters into dialogue, it is most
likely to be first with Christians and then Jews. To be sure, the need for dialogue between
Islam and Hinduism and even Buddhism is underlined almost daily in the newspaper
reports of mutual hostility and killings. But it is overwhelmingly the encounter with the

140 Leonard Swidler,  “Islam and the Trialogue Of Abrahamic Religions” in  Cross Currents, vol. 42 Issue 4 (Winter 92/93),
444-6.
141 Swidler, ibid., 444.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

95
other two Abrahamic religions, Judaism and Christianity, that has been the motor driving
Islam toward dialogue.142
The reason why some of those who resist dialogue can be given, it would seem, to the lack of
knowledge in the extent and content of the dialogue. In the aim to clarify this activity, it is important
to know what dialogue is not as well as what it is.
This process or act is not a new mode of syncreticism, nor an attempt to form a new religion; rather it
is an attempt to search for mutual initiatives for peace and congruity in a tolerance and understanding
ethos without constraint while preserving differences. By virtue of its emphasis on mutuality and
alterity, the practice of dialogue does not aim to proselytize or to make concession. Thus, this practice
may not be a missionary activity; whereas s/he is able to share each other’s religious experience in
this practice. Hence, dialogue and missionary activities are drastically different activities; because the
latter activity regards the collocutor as a prey and acts accordingly and calls any means for changing
collocutor’s belief and way of life. Thus, what dialogue aims at is just presentation of one’s experience
and conviction in a mutually constructive setting. This presentation, as indicated before, comprises
mutual recognition and understanding without any pressure and insistence. On the other hand,
dialogue enables one, to some extent, to communicate the one’s religious beliefs and thoughts. It can
even enhance the scope and depth of one’s religious experience. Only at this juncture can dialogue
and missionary activity overlap. It is obvious that every religion, by and large, wants to expand its
followers as many as possible; nevertheless this “want” should not and may not be put in the activities
of dialogue. This is because dialogue does not mean to reject or proselytize “other”; but to wish the
collocutor’s adherence to a right way and a right conduct (hidayah in Islam).
What is more, it is essential that the issues causing conflicts and intense discussions be avoided;
rather the common grounds that religions share be emphasized and brought forth. 143

142 Leonard Swidler,  “Islam and the Trialogue of Abrahamic Religions” in  Cross Currents, vol. 42 Issue 4 (Winter 92/93),
444-53. Here also Swidler gave a brief history of Trialogue: “(T)he longest-lived (1978-84), most organized trialogue, see the
report by Eugene Fisher, "Kennedy Institute Jewish-Christian-Muslim Trialogue," Journal of Ecumenical Studies 19, no. 1
(Winter 1982): 197-200. In April, 1989, another ongoing trialogue, this time international, sponsored by the Journal of
Ecumenical Studies and the National Conference of Christians and Jews, held its first, very successful three-day meeting;
the fifth was held in January, 1993 in Graz, Austria. A dialogue between Muslims and Hindus has been launched, but only
on a relatively small scale to date. One such between Riffat Hassan and Kana Mitra was sponsored by the Journal of
Ecumenical Studies in 1985 and was published in Leonard Swidler, ea., Religious Liberty and Human Rights in Nations and
Religions (New York and Philadelphia: Hippocrene Books and Ecumenical Press, 1986), 109-42. A miniature dialogue
between Islam and Buddhism also took place at the same conference between Mohammed Talbi and Masao Abe and was
published in ibid.; both are reprinted in Leonard Swidler, ea., Muslims in Dialogue (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press,
1992).” Swidler, ibid., 444-5.
143  Niyazi Öktem, Kulturlerarasi Diyalog Sempozyumu, İstanbul Büyük Şehir Belediyesi, 7-8 Mart 1998, (İstanbul)163-164.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

96
2.2. From Theoria To Praxes or Textual Precepts and Historical Manifestations
A. Wisdomization Precepts in the Islamic Sources
a. Mutuality and Cooperation among Humankind according to the Qur'ân and the
Sunnah of the Prophet of Islam
aa. Wisdomization and Mutuality in the Qur’ân
There are myriad verses and ahâdith (traditions of the Prophet) in the Qur'ân and in the Hadith
collections pertaining to dialogue and tolerance. In these authentic sources, save some occasional
situations, as a rule peace and tolerance are main traits of Islamic ethics and thought. One can easily
grasp in these sources an ethos of tolerance; forgiveness, dialogue, and embracing one’s heart all the
cosmos in many verses and hadiths. This ethos expresses the pluralist character of the Islamic
sources. To illustrate this, the Qur'ân repeatedly emphasizes goodness (khayr); hence it make this
concept paradigmatic framework as “peace is principal goodness” (al-sulh khayrun) (al-Nisâ /4: 128).
This also proves both the epistemological and ontological structure of Islam, which means peace,
surrender, and safety. That is to say, without forming these virtues and features one cannot be a real
Muslim. Additionally, the very concept of “Islam” denotes to embrace and approach the cosmos,
human being, and eco-system with love and respect.
In addition, in the Qur'ân all religions are the same in their essence; hence, the hadith of the Prophet
makes it clear in the following manner: “The religions of us as prophets are single” 144. In this respect,
a Muslim should believe in God, His angels, and the books He sent as well as the Prophets teaching
these books without discrimination (al-Baqarah/2: 285; Âl ‘Imrân /3: 84). In the same way, the
Prophet is ordered in the Qur'ân to follow up the path of the past prophets (Al-An ‘âm/6: 90; al-Nahl/
16: 123). The path reinstated in the Qur'ân very clearly (al-Mâidah/5: 48), recovering of what is
adumbrated in the previous scriptures.
The Qur'ân commands in many verses the Prophet, “sent as a paradigm of universal grace”, to act in a
tolerant way and communicative way while spreading the message. Its parameter in the vein of
dialogue and communication is summarized well in the following verse:
Say: "O People of the Book! Come to common terms as between us and you:
that we worship none but Allah; that we associate no partners with Him; that
we erect not, from among ourselves, Lords and patrons other than Allah." If
then they turn back, say ye: "Bear witness that we (at least) are Muslims
(bowing to Allah's Will)." (Âl ‘Imrân /3: 64)
What is more, it is also important to emphasize here that in the Islamic sources the method and
means of wisdomization are well explicated. Hence:
And dispute ye not with the People of the Book, except with means better
(than mere disputation), unless it be with those of them who inflict wrong
(and injury); but say, "We believe in the Revelation which has come down to
us and in that which came down to you; our Allah and your Allah is One; and
it is to Him we bow (in Islam)." (Al-‘Ankebût/29: 46).

144 Ebu Abdillah Muhammed b. İsmail, Sahih-i Buharî, “Anbiyâ”, 48, İstanbul.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

97
Therefore, it is not an Islamic conduct and ethics to cut off our relations with the People of the Book,
or behave harshly, or look down on them. This mode of conduct and praxis apparently contradicts the
main character of Islam in general, and of the Qur'ân in particular. In other way, the Qur'ân reinstates
this rule in this way:
Allah forbids you not, with regard to those who fight you not for (your) Faith
nor drive you out of your homes, from dealing kindly and justly with them:
for Allah loveth those who are just. (Al-Mumtahinah/60: 8)
This verse was revealed in time of very tense relations with the pagans of Mecca. Despite this tense
occasion, it is noteworthy to point out its insistence on goodness, fairness, and justice.
Moreover, with the logic of the verse “the religion before Allah is islam (submission to the Divine
Will)” (Âl ‘İmrân /3: 19), all prophets in human history are preacher of the Divine Message. By virtue
of this fact, it may be easier and possible to establish dialogue with those who follow the path of the
prophets before the Last Prophet.
On the other hand, it is not a compulsory thing to establish dialogue among the fellows of religions;
rather in the Qur'ân, there are advices to behave the best possible just and moral way with those who
do not fight with Muslims.
Neither in the Qur'ân, nor in the Sunnah of the Prophet does any order ban the mutual and
communicative relations with anyone. This kind of regulations firstly contradicts the very nature of
the Qur'ânic message. To exemplify how the Qur'ân wants from Muslims to act the other, the
following verses can be given:
…But if ye forgive and overlook, and cover up (their faults), verily Allah is Oft-
Forgiving, Most Merciful. (Al-Taghabûn/ 64: 14).
And:
Tell those who believe, to forgive those who do not look forward to the Days
of Allah: it is for Him to recompense (for good or ill) each People according to
what they have earned. (Al-Jâthiyah/45: 14).
For the sake of brevity, the Qur'ân clearly declares forgiveness, tolerance and mutuality in its whole
ontological and moral framework.
ab. Practical Manifestation: Wisdomization in the Life and Discourses of the Prophet of Islam
The Prophet of Islam is a paradigmatic model for Muslims in their daily life as well as in their
relations with the members of other religions. He used to behave non-Muslims in a very positive and
embracing manner on the grounds of being human. Of course the source of this tolerance and
indulgence is the Qur'ân, forming the consciousness of its first Receptor and its followers. Hence, this
kind of communicative interaction is expected to be an inherent habit in Muslim character. Upon the
migration to Madinah, the Prophet established a universal peace constitution, forming the equality of
non-Muslims with Muslims in terms of law and administration.145 In its egalitarian and inclusive
spirit, this first constitution has not been surpassed yet by any other universal constitution. Multi-

145 Muhammed Hamidullah, Islam Peygamberi, (trans. By .Salih Tug), Ankara 2003, I, 190.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

98
cultural and multi-religious attitudes were the main trait of the early Muslim community, enabling to
live side by side peacefully with the People of the Book in Madinah.
To illustrate the praxes of dialogue and cooperation between Muslims and non-Muslims, the
following cases can be remembered: During his first prophetic experience in Mecca, the Prophet came
across to some Christians. One of them was Waraqa b. Nawfal, who console him and his wife,
Khatijah, by mentioning the challenge of the prophets by their community based on the Gospel
manuscripts he owned.146
Furthermore, during his Meccan phase, on the issues not regulated with revelation he used to act in
accordance with praxes of the People of the Book opposing the associators of Mecca. 147 As a rule, the
relations of the Prophet with Christians in Mecca were peaceful and communicative; hence, they
console and support each other physically and psychologically. For instance, in the third year of his
prophetic mission the Christian (East) Roman Empire was defeated by the pagan Sasanid Empire.
This defeat news saddened Muslims due to the fact that the former was the “People of the Book”.
Upon this episode, a verse was revealed heralding the feat of the Book-Owned Rûms/Romans in a
near future and thus consoling Muslims (Al-Rûm/30: 1-5).
In addition, the Prophet was inclined to migrate first to Abyssinia, whose ruler was a Christian. On
the occasion of strict oppressive regulations practiced by the pagans of Mecca, he wanted the Muslims
to migrate to a near Christian country. He expresses his emotions by saying:
If you want and able to do, do seek refuge in Abyssinia; for in the land of the
ruler of Abyssinia no one is oppressed. That place is a secure and suitable
place and stay there till God give easiness.148
Compared to the Meccan period, in Madinah Muslim-Christian relations become intense and hectic. The
reason for this intensity was the process of founding a state in Madinah and the practices of the Prophet
to spread the Islamic message throughout the region, be it states, tribes, groups, or individuals. These
diplomatic interactions also explain these dense interactions with the Christians of the era.
As for the relations with the Jews, another group from the People of the Book, it came to its crescent
when the Prophet migrated to Yathrib (622). In the would-be capital of the first Islamic state, then al-
Madinah al-Munawwarah, Jews alongside the Arabs used to live for centuries. In the first phase, the
Prophet needs to regulate the relations and rights and responsibilities of emigrant Meccans, native
Arabs and the Jews of Madinah. In terms of education, justice, economy, military, and the like, the
new community needed to get organized and regulated. Thus, by bringing together the head of groups
and tribes the Prophet formed a regulation of city-state, the first written constitution, which has been
handed down to nowadays.
This regulation consists of nearly fifty articles, in many of which the Jews were mentioned. In the 2.
and 25. articles of the constitution, the Jews along with the Muslims of Mecca and Madinah were
regarded as “ummah” (community). In the 25. clause, the Jews and their allies have religious
freedom. Briefly, the state and its constitution prove the way to live various races and creeds together
under an administration.

146 Buhârî, “Bedu’l- Vahy”, 3.
147  Buhârî, Libâs 70; Ebu Huseyin Muslim Ibn-i Haccac, Sahih-i Müslim, İstanbul 1955, Fedâil 90.
148 M. Hamidullah, İslam Peygamberi, I, 109.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

99
In Islamic sources, there are many occasions in which the relations between Muslims and Christians
are treated intensely. The Prophet himself appointed many non-Muslims as state functionary,
technician, contractor, soldier, etc. What the Prophet used to search while giving duties to individuals
was trustworthiness and competence only. He made many commercial contracts with non-Muslims
having these attributes. He used to purchase foodstuffs and debt from Jewish merchants. In one of
the verses, this situation explains like this:
Among the People of the Book are some who, if entrusted with a hoard of
gold, will (readily) pay it back; others, who, if entrusted with a single silver
coin, will not repay it unless thou constantly stoodest demanding, because,
they say,” There is no call on us (to keep faith) with these ignorant (Pagans)."
But they tell a lie against Allah, and (well) they know it. (Âl ‘Imrân/ 3: 76)
The Qur'ân gives privileges to the People of the Book compared to those people without any religious
books. For instance, in the matters of marriage and diet the People of the Book were treated defiantly.
Muslims may able to marry with Jewish or Christian women and these ladies were able to keep their
religious beliefs as it was before. Unlike those of associators, foods served and meats of lawful animals
slaughtered by the People of the Book are welcome to consume by Muslims.
The paradigm set by the Qur'ân and the Sunnah has been followed by Muslims throughout centuries
and this paradigm of tolerance was in turn responded by non-Muslims as well, mutually saddening
and collaterally rejoicing.

b. A General Wisdomization Panorama in Islamic History till the 9-11 Phenomenon
Muslims in history treated other religions and members of other religions on the basis of religion;
namely, following the precepts instituted by the Qur'ân and the Sunnah of the Prophet and thus the
treatment of the People of the Book was highly tolerant and constructive imitating these precepts.
When the historical experiences of the three Abrahamic religions were closely scrutinized, one can
easily grasp the foundations of mutuality and wisdomization within these religious traditions. In
particular, Islamic civilization with its pristine core (tawhîd and its existential manifestation justice),
molding pot (socio-cultural and spatial variables), and forms (the Qur'ân and its practical expression,
the Sunnah of the Prophet of Islam) set a perennial paradigm for later socio-political and cultural
entities in forming and interacting with the other. For instance, the Islamic Turkish states in history,
in general, used to treat others in a very tolerant and positive manner, respecting their respective
religions. Guided both by humanitarian reflexes and religious tenets, they made multi-culturality and
multi-religiosity a kind of mode of life as strongly expressed in Muslim history and discoursed in the
Islamic religious texts. Hence, non-Muslims were free to act and think according to their religious
affiliations. These kinds of historical praxes were not just conjectural decisions of the rulers, sultans,
or viziers; rather in these states the rights and freedoms of non-Muslims alongside Muslims were
protected by Islam as divine endowment, not as a grant permitted by rulers or sultans as in the law of
the Western world, which were dependent upon the whims of kings or administrators. Because of this
historical context, laicism in the West emerged long after from the Muslim world as a philosophical
system in order to protect the freedom of religions and of conscience.
What is more, the scholars of Islamic jurisprudence used to classify the world into Dâr al-Harb
(Abode of War) and Dâr al-Islâm (Adobe of Peace); whereas in the Ottoman State the world was

--- Sayfa 102 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

100
regarded as Dar al-Sulh (Adobe of Reconciliation) aiming at preserving the rights of those who live in
the state and making all the citizens of the Ottoman land. That is to say, the concept of Dâr al-Sulh
made a very strong effect in the administrative and cultural structure of the state and hence many
cultures and religions were able to live side by side throughout centuries.
Briefly then tolerance and indulgence in Muslim history were kind of handed down to upcoming
generations in the scene of history, refurbished by the Qur'ân and the Sunnah throughout centuries.
The Ottoman State, shaping nearly 600 years’ political life of the world, gets more and more attention
of especially multi-national state as a source of inspiration and admiration. Its ability to rule and to
come together many nations and myriad religions peacefully on a vast geography inherited from both
the East Roman Empire and Muslim polities has been studied by today’s multi-national politico-
economic complexes.
Today’s multi-national polities are interested in the multi-national and religious character of the
Ottoman State and its ability and competence to rule them for centuries. One of the reasons why the
Ottoman State has been able to stay in these lands was the role of the non-Muslim population
especially in the Balkans. Administrating justly and fairly, the Ottomans were able to hold sway on
these lands. Just as the Jews of Spain oppressed by the Spanish kingdom were rescued from the
tyranny of the kingdom, they were settled down in the Ottoman lands. This episode and fair
administrative conducts made them loyal to the state.149
Like the Muslim Turkish states before, the Ottomans treated, to a great extent, non-Muslims as
recognized and respected entities, not tolerated minorities; respecting religious values and tenets of
every group. The Ottoman State protected the rights of non-Muslims as proved by records of the court
(Şer'iyye Sicilleri), of non-Muslim communities, and especially special archival documents of the
Christian minority. As an ethnic mosaic, the Ottomans State was composed of 22 different nations
and religions and able to live side by side for centuries. As such it represents the most noteworthy
Muslim multi-cultural and multi-religious experience in history. With respect to today’s chaotic ethos
that even two ethnic entities may hardly live together, this paramount example can be fathomed in a
tolerant ethos emanated from the Ottoman society in these centuries. The reason for this success was
that the Ottomans, as a rule, did not interfere with the matters of different communities, leaving them
free in terms of religion, language and ethnicity. 150

2.3. From Chaos and Doomsday Soothsayings to Wisdomization and Cooperation (Ta
‘âruf) in the “Global Village”
A. Wisdomization vs. Otherization: Some Evaluations and Suggestions
In order to achieve a new cosmos-yet-haunted with doomsday sayings the ethos of mutual
communication and cooperation, or briefly wisdomization (ta ‘âruf), it seems necessary to
disassociate the politico-economic and martial encroachments from the socio-cultural and civic
wholes. Besides this disassociation, one can also find the sources of chaos in tribal environment,
authoritarian attitude and behaviors, literalist reading, colonial domination, the processes and

149 Yusuf Halacoğlu, “Osmanlı Devleti'nde Gayrimüslim Vakıf ve Dinî Teşekküllerin Statüsü”, Osmanlı’da Hoşgörü, Birlikte
Yasama Sanatı , İstanbul: Gazeteciler ve Yazarlar Vakfı Yay., 2000,. 127-129.
150 Ziya Kazıcı, “Osmanlı Devletinde Dini Hoşgörü”, Kültürlerarası Diyalog Sempozyumu, İstanbul 1998, 106-109.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

101
impacts of westernization, and so on. In the aim to decipher the generic sources of dividing/excluding
and integrating/including elements in religious communities necessitates mutuality an cooperation
among societies and religious communities by reconstructing relations and interactions on an equal
footing and level.
In order to reread correctly cultural heritages of humanity and live peacefully in inter and intra-
civilizational context of the new “global village”, it would seem salient to understand the genealogy
and content of exclusionary and otherization challenges. At this point, the problem is this: Why and
how are these challenges the extant cases especially during the Neo-colonial era (1945-2000) and
New-hegemonic “aeon” with imperial slants (2001-…). For instance, what are the historical and social
causes that resuscitate, for instance, some important Islamic terms, such as jihâd (holy struggle),
takfîr (religious repudiation), irtidâd (apostasy), sabb (blasphemy) especially after the post-
September 11 catastrophic event? At this juncture, the following question can be asked:  do the
upholders of power really consent with the revocation of the processes that “force God’s Hand to the
Doomsday”? Are the policies of new hegemonic-yet-imperial agendas embedded into this “economy of
war” based on an either-or mentality?  To which end are the “pupil and vicegerent” of the Divine led?
To give an example: in such a context that relates the Muslim world, though there are several modern
Islamic attitudes are being voiced in multi-cultural mode, there are also exclusivist trends reinserting
themselves in the face of “theorizing and actualizing terror”. Especially in the post -September 11 era,
intellectual efforts in the Muslim world are, by and large, headed towards to find concrete solutions in
order to prevent possible conflicts and otherings. On the other hand, the invasions and
encroachments of the   following the 9-11 phenomenon became intensified and globalized; thus, the
solution for this globally oriented case may be also a globally extended one.
All answers to these questions are always to be “collateral” in nature. Thence, humanity needs firstly
to get back the moral, egalitarian, and fraternal quintessence and manifestation; secondly, or more
aptly, concomitantly, it needs to form a new cosmos through and with the mutually communicative-
communicative objectification of religious determinant. Hence, instead of applying historically bound
and existentially reappropriated phantasmic concepts of Post/modern “mini”-narratives ontologically
and categorically, these concepts can be postulated as attributive modes applicable to situations,
persons, etc. regardless of nominal creedal affiliations. Briefly, in the aim to reach a global peace, it is
necessary to have peace among cultures and religions of the world. The way leading to this objective
passes through both a new hermeneutics realigning these erstwhile epistêmic concepts, drastically
connected to the yesterday’s conflictual war ethos, and a new existence and behavior that obstructs
the processes of otherizations working with the ritual return of the diabolos to the temporal existence
of humanity.
The epistemological and methodological path for this telos can be as follows: Firstly, consecrated
archetypal interpretation of the other that forms overall epistême in each culture is to be
deconstructed. These interpretations bear, to a great extent, the imprints of the era in which they were
formed. Thence, (a) these interpretations can be directly related to the theological, denominational,
and politico-economic affinities of the exegete/ interpreting subject; hence, they can be disassociated
from the pure religious/sacred domain in order to make them less durable; (b) new epistêmic
prototypes may not be collective and whole-sale labeling in nature applied in educational and politico-
diplomatic policies; (c) in the aim to avoid the phenomenon of “theorizing terror”, a  new epistême
that creates a new existential cosmos can  be harbored.  Namely, rather than trumpeting the so-called
“the war on terror” and dividing human existence into two polar sides (the good vs. the evil), it would
be more humanly and civilized manner to discourse the herald of love, passion, mutual respect, and

--- Sayfa 104 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

102
most importantly globally mutual sharing. Since reaction breeds drastic reactions, the praxes of
“terrorizing terror” are to be avoided, lest the “othering” archetypal repetitions revisited by the
“terrorized other”.
Secondly, this deconstruction process is to be made with the guise of “reconstruction” poised to
actualize a new cosmos and epistême. To do this, it would be necessary to relegate the geneses of
othering interpretations to various variables in history, such as political, economic, personal, etc.; and
the reconstruction of new epistemic modalities can be objectificied in line with the “creational
fraternity” (ukhuwwah khalqî) of human beings, a “perennial epistême,” which is the main tenet of all
classical religious traditions.

B. From Diabolic Encoding to Dialogue and Wisdomization
In other words, in our globalized village, everyone is aware of the fact that human being can no longer
live in an isolated island; thus, all should learn how to live, communicate, and interact with each other
in this new global village. Nowadays, compared to the past, humans are more in commercial, political,
martial, religious and cultural relations and interactions. In the aim to expedite these relations,
mutual tolerance and indulgence are direly needed. In the 21. century Muslims live under the non-
Muslim government or administration, and vice versa. This historical necessity leads humans in
constructive relations. 151
This context explains why dialogue and cooperation are salient for the respect of human rights in the
same degree and manner for all humanity. Based on sincerity and good intention of each side,
dialogue is to be initiated in the aim to preserve other’s rights, honor, and dignity. In the search for a
trialogue among Jews, Christians, and Muslims, it seem salient not to bring forth repeatedly the
unfortunate happenings of the past; rather the future perspective may be overemphasized. This kind
of ethos is firstly dependent upon us; namely it is closely bound up with our sincerity in human rights,
ethical precepts, world peace. It is obvious that the world peace cannot be attained just by one or two
nations or groups, rather its is a world-wide initiative through the process of dialogue realizing
mutual understanding, fundamental human rights, and universal moral values. Only through these
means, the most-wanted world peace would, to a great extent, be reached.152
With the constructive help of dialogue, the following malaises can be cured: things threatening life;
terrors, wars, imperialism, poverty, unjust allocation of world resources, genocide, abortion,
euthanasia, suicide, tortures, oppressions, enslaving, exile, adultery, prostitution, human trade, hard
work conditions, etc.
For the sake of brevity, the need for dialogue among members of religions and/or civilizations cannot
be underestimated and overlooked. Through an ethos created by these kinds of dialogical activities,
s/he can “understand” those who are different from her/him. In another word, as Küng clearly
articulates, in the following manner:

151 Abdurrahman Küçük, “Müslüman-Hıristiyan Diyaloguna Genel Bir Bakış”, Asrımızda Müslüman-Hıristiyan
Münasebetleri, Tartışmalı İlmi Toplantılar Dizisi, İSAV, İstanbul 1993, 45-59.
152 Xavier Jakob, “Ahlak, İnsan Hakları ve Diyalog”, Kulturlerarasi Diyalog Sempozyumu, İstanbul Büyük Şehir Belediyesi,
7-8 Mart 1998, İstanbul, 185-191.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

103
1. Only if we seek to understand others’—our neighbors’—beliefs and values,
rites and symbols, can we truly understand people.
2.
Only if  we  seek to understand  others’  faith can we really understand
our own: its strengths and weaknesses, its  constants and variables.
3.
Only if we seek to understand others’ faith can we discover that
common ground which, despite all differences, can become  the basis for a
peaceful  life in this world together.153

C. A Case Approach: Why Wisdomization and Dialogue are “Necessary” in the Post-9/11
Phenomenon
In this part of the study, a case approach will be accentuated and evaluated. In the book, entitled M.
Fethullah Gülen: Bir Portre Denemisi (“A Biographical Assay”), Gülen’s dialogue and latitudinarian
view is evaluated within two categories: (a) latitudinarian ethos both to the Turkish society and to the
whole world; (b) dialogue and wisdimization among members of religions both in Turkiye and the
whole world. 154 By redefining the will to dialogue and latitudinarianism with the aim to reconstruct
“broken crystal”, i.e. disjointed national and cultural bounds in the Turkish society, in particular; the
whole humanity in general, he accentuates this task in the following manner:
The enlightened and happy worlds of the future will be constructed by the
gallants of love flying into passion with affection…(These gallants) spread
love and affection to everybody and everything; from the rising and setting
suns, from glaring and fading stars receive always the message of affection.155
And the extent and caliber of dialogue and wisdomization are determined by him as follows:
Open up your heart as possible as you can; be it like oceans! Stretch up with
faith and love humans; lest nobody ousted from your care and passion.
Applaud the righteous with their good works, be affectionate to the believing
hearts; accost the rejecters with such an easiness and softness, let their rancor
and hate go; and be the Messiah in their breath.156
For him, the cosmos is a “cradle of fraternity” (mahd-i ukhuwwah); hence:
As a believer, one should look at the cosmos as a cradler of fraternity; thus,
s/he should search for a relation bond with beings and s/he must be always
lenient and open to diffusion with the people of faith.157

153 Excerpt from Kurt Rudolph, “The Foundations of the History of Religions and Its Future Task”, in M. Kitagawa (editor),
The History of Religions, 115. See on this W. G. Oxtoby, The Meaning of Other Faiths (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1983).
154 Ali Ünal, M. Fethullah Gülen: Bir Portre Denemesi (İstanbul: Nil Yayınları, 2002), 344.
155 Ünal, 350. Excerpt from M. Fethullah Gülen, Ölçü veya Yoldaki Işıklar 2 (İzmir: Nil Yayınları, 2001; yeni baskı: 208,
192).
156 Ünal, 351.
157 Ünal, 367.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

104
The uptrend of religious values in the last quarter of the previous century set the stage for a new kind
of reconstructions and reconciliations. In another word, religion takes its “revenge” by returning to
history from the front door: In accord with the Modernization claims religion was to be ousted from
the processes of Modernization, public sphere and nation state; yet public sphere is now at the
crossroad of religious, political, and social life and as such it forms civil society in the Muslim world.
158
Thence, at the “destiny-equilibrated” (kaderdenk) point, dialogue and wisdomization process came to
the fore due to two traits: (a) the uptrend of religious values, or the return of “religion” to history, and
thence these values can be called for reconstructing a better and just world order; (b) the soothsayings
of war and terror through the discourses and praxes of a new secular theory, namely “terrorology”; by
extension diabolizing Islam and severely debunking its ability to adapt itself to the values and codes of
the Modern world.159
Due to constant retreat and losses both politically and topographically, such as colonial
encroachments by the West (it was read for centuries as Christians), Herodian and Zeolatian modes of
Modernization processes, and the like, the Muslim world has created defensive collective ethos; thus
everything coming from the West (read also from the Church / Christianity) is dubious, or more aptly
dangerous; hence one should avoid from such incursions. Protective and defensive modes impede the
ability to take risks and to take part of changes and evolutions. 160
According to Gülen, dialogue, mutuality, and wisdomization are necessary in our global village, or
more aptly, our “class without walls”, because:
1.
Politically, economically, martially, and practically, Islamic civilization has for more than two
centuries in the inertial phase; thus by now Islam cannot manifest itself without a problem in
such a conjuncture.
2.
Diabolized and otherized Islamic image cannot be eradicated without a wisdomization ethos; war
and conflictual modes of our world cannot give a space for listening to the otherized person,
religion, or civilization.
3.
Ever-becoming global village through mass-communication and interactions via technological
breakthroughs can no longer tolerate isolations and living at bays; rather it enforces human
beings more and more come into contact with each other;
4.
Wisdomization and living together are tenets of Islamic civilization wrought throughout
centuries; yet the West recently came to the point of “tolerating” Islam with other religious
affiliations.
5.
Humanity came to the point that no religion, or civilization can annihilated others’ religion or
civilization; thus, there is a necessity to live together and side by side.

158 Dale Eickelman, “Islam and the Languages of Modernity,” Daedalus, Winter: 2000.
159 Ünal, 376-7.
160 Ünal, 377.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

105
6.
Most importantly, dialogue and wisdomization processes of today is a reencapsulation of the
Qur’ânic precepts fourteen centuries before.161 Hence,  in the  Islamic epistême, wisdomization
(ta ‘âruf) is not a nascent enterprise; but a perennial functions of all peace-loving persons and
groups.

3. Conclusions and suggestions
Today humanity is at the crossroad of doom and freedom; doom and doomsday fantasies became
extant discourse with their practical manifestations in the oppressed and repressed lands of the
“Third World” on the on hand; freedom from hate, rancor, enmity and inequity, though not as extent
as the former, is also echoed through discourses and praxes on the other. To reach a contended state
of being happy and felicitous, or eudaimonia/ khayr, in the actual realm (and in the Hereafter of the
Abrahamic traditions), is made possible by acting, reacting, and reenacting “rightness” (‘amal salih)
through wisdomization ethos.
In the aim to make human civilization perennial, mutuality and cooperation through wisdomization
and dialogue humanity can form a free and peaceful world, by instilling universal human values built-
in all religions in various degrees in nascent generations (nasl). It seems that wisdomization among
humankind of various religious and civic traditions are the backbone of our existence in the war-torn
world. Without wisdomization, civilization and humanity is destined to perdition and doom.
Interactions and relations among humans shaped and wrought with love, respect, equity, and probity
form accordingly loving, respecting, equity and probity-probing individual and societies (nasl),
material and spiritual outputs (culture/ harth). Any cultural traits whose nature is hegemonic,
othering, degrading, and exclusionary brings about authoritarian and oppressive personalities and
societies. Wisdomization, as in its reciprocal form, is a collateral responsibility. Wisdom of one
civilization whose scope is not expanded  by other set of the values and wisdoms of another
civilization does not value and respect other wisdoms, but only imperializes and encroaches, then
becomes devaluing and degrading “tool kits” at the hands of the oppressing and subjugating subject.
Wisdom of one society or civilization works always with others; thus, in this article it is called
reciprocally, namely wisdomization (ta‘âruf). The processes and actualities of wisdomization are to be
wrought with love, respect, and fraternity. Wisdom-sharing and interaction practices blockade all
hedonistic, utilitarian, pragmatic, and other types of egocentric expressions; thus, it reproduces
always “goodness”, khayr, or ultimate bliss. Briefly, wisdomization and cooperation through dialogue
is to give the proper place to the “pupil of the universe”.
For the sake of conclusion, on the threshold of the “universal Armageddon” planned by those who
devaluing the value of wisdomization and cooperation for the sake of profit and war economy based
on “terrorology”, human being needs a “theology of peace” seeking to establish a communicative-
cooperative (ta‘âruf), and competitive in the path of “goodness” or khayr without demonizing,
othering, demeaning, and “destroying” the “pupil of the universes”. When is humanity going to
resuscitate the valuing epistême again as expressed in the following:
One day Francis crying said to Jesus:

161 Ünal, 374-92.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

106
“I love the sun, I love the stars,
I love Clara and the Sisters
I love human hearts,
I love all beautiful things.
Oh my Lord, I must excuse myself,
For I should love you alone.162

Loving “human hearts” and just “all beautiful things” are “good” but in fact not enough.  Hence,
imbibing the discourse of the Word Civilization encompassing all creation within the sphere of value
as expressed by Yunus Emre:
If you want to efface the rust of the sâwol /inner soul
Discourse that word that is the gist of all words.
“Discourse the Truth,” Çalab (God) ordered every soul
The liar of this world in the Next will embarrass
Anyone who does not look at every creation with equity
Even if saint in appearance, wayward (towards God) in essence. 163
Briefly, in the nascent “globalized village”, especially after the “apocalyptical” event of 9-11 and its
subsequent developments, human being  needs more and more a” theology of peace” modulated on
the perennial values that are  product of universal human heritage and on the mutual love, respect
and probity. Values as the soul of human civilizations are to be reproduced within the core (culture /
the Qur’anic harth) of each civilization and transmitted and thus made perennial by and through the
anthropological and social subjects (nasl) for the  absolute eudaimonia or mutlaq khayr in this world
(and the next world of the Abrahamic quintessence [Urquelle]). Tersely then, as expressed in a French
proverb: “to understand all, is to forgive all”.

162 Song by Bernardino Greco, OFM, at the Institut für ökumenische  Forschung,  Tübingen, June 22, 1985 in Leonard
Swidler, After the Absolute: The Dialogical Future of Religious Reflection (Minneapolis: Fortress Pres, 1990), 19..
163 Yunus Emre, Risâlat al-Nushiyya ve Dîvân, edited by Abdülbâki Gölpınarlı (İstanbul: Sulhi Garan Matbaasi Koll. Şti,
1965), 49, 107.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

107

‘THE LIGHT OF TOLERANCE’— BETWEEN RABBI
ABRAHAM KOOK AND HOJA EFENDI FETHULLAH GÜLEN
EFRAT E. AVIV 164

Abstract
This paper deals with similarities between the ideas of two religious leaders, Hoja Efendi
Fethullah Gülen and Rabbi Abraham HaKohen Kook, with emphasis on their ideas of the state
and tolerance. Abraham Isaac Kook was born in Griva, Latvia in 1865. In 1904, Kook moved to
Ottoman Palestine to assume the rabbinical post in Jaffa. In 1919 he was appointed Rabbi of
Jerusalem, and soon after, as first Chief Rabbi in 1921. His books and personality continue to
influence many even after his death in Jerusalem in 1935. Attempting to synthesize traditional
Judaism with a modern and largely secular ideology Kook should be properly understood as a
pragmatic consensus-builder and present-day Jewish National-religious stream draws on his
ideology. Fethullah Gülen always addressed by his followers as Hoja Efendi (respected teacher)
was born in Erzurum in eastern Turkey in 1941. In 1953 he began his career as a government
preacher and has travelled the length and breadth of Turkey since. His movement seeks
integration with the modern world by reconciling modern and traditional values and hopes to re-
establish the link between religion and society. Both leaders express a unique synthesis of
state/nationalism and religion, military service and religious life. They both seek the integration of
religious people into the modern life and prefer to do it by using tolerance as a way of living.
Interesting to note, that both leaders make the same use of the term ‘light’, for instance; Rabbi
Kook titled his most famous book : ‘Orot HaTorah’ (lights of Torah, Tevrat ışıkları). Both leaders
represent the same ideology within their respective societies: Jewish-Israeli and Muslim-Turkish,
as tolerant religious orthodoxies.

"I love all.
I am unable not to love all creatures,
All the nations.
From the depth of my heart i long for the glory of all,
for the uplifting of all."
(Rabbi Kook, Arfiley Tohar [The Mists of Purity])

164 Now preparing a doctoral dissertation on Fethullah Gülen in the Department of Middle Eastern History at Bar Ilan
University, Israel. She specializes in and is currently teaching a course on Turkish history. Her MA dissertation (in Jewish
history, Bar Ilan University, 2002) was on ‘Community, Culture and Feminism — the Jewish Community of Izmir on the
Eve of “Young Turk Revolution” 1899–1908’. She graduated in Hebrew literature and Jewish history, Bar Ilan University in
1998, and is the holder of several prestigious prizes and scholarships. She has published several articles dealing with
Turkish affairs in the Israeli press, writes poetry and translated Turkish poetry into Hebrew for literary journals in Israel;
she has also published learned articles in her field and the article ‘Izmir’ for the new Judaica encyclopedia.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

108

"Sevgi yaşatan bir İksirdir; İnsan sevgiyle yaşar…Sevgiyle mutlu olur ve sevgiyle çevresini mutlu
eder…" [Love is the elixir of life. Human beings live by virtue of love...thanks to love you are joyful,
and be means of ove you bring joy to your neighbours...
(Fethullah Gülen, Insanın Üzündeki Sevgi [the love inside the people])

1. Introducation
Both Rabbi Avraham Hacohen Kook and Fethullah Gülen Hoca, each an influential and enlightened
leader in his own community, expressed tolerant attitudes unusual for their age. By examining their
lives and writings, we may better understand how inter-religious dialogue may be achieved.

2. A brief summary of their lives
2.1. Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook (1865-1935)
Early life
Rabbi Kook, sometimes called: "The seer of Light", was a rabbi, religious arbiter, Kabbalist and
philosopher. Having immigrated to the Holy Land during "Second Aliyah" (the wave of immigration
before 1914), he developed a philosophical, Kabbalistic position favorable to Zionism and the new
settlement movement. This system of thought, expressed in works compiled from his writings in the
realm of religious law, philosophy, exegesis, ethics, Kabbalah and homiletics ("Aggadah") forms a
significant component in the world outlook of the various elements of the National-Religious
Movement of today.
Born in the village of Griva, Latvia, his first teacher was his learned father. At the end of 13 ("Bar
Mitzva"), he was sent off to study in nearby towns. Married in 1884 to the daughter of Rabbi Elyahu
Te'omim, he spent a year studying at the prestigious Volozhin Yeshiva,165 where he acquired most of
his religious education. Appointed in 1888 as rabbi of the Lithuanian town of Zeimel, he began to
devote himself to Kabbalah. After the early death of his first wife, he married her cousin, and in 1895
was elected rabbi of Boysak, where he began to publish his precepts in the journal "HaPelles".166

The Jaffa Period
When the Jewish community of Jaffa, prompted by Rabbi Joel Moshe Solomon, requested him to
serve as their rabbi, he hastened to fulfill his dream of immigrated to the Land of Israel. Landing at
Jaffa harbor in 1904, he quickly took up his post as rabbi of Jaffa and the new settlements. The period
at Jaffa, the most fruitful for his writings, produced the material for many of his most influential

165 Yeshiva or Yeshivah (plural: yeshivot) is an institution for Torah study and the study of the Talmud by males primarily
within Orthodox Judaism. Could also be translated as Divinity School.
166 Sources for descriptions of the Rabbi's life: Kook, A.Y. HaCohen. (1961) Letters of Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen
Kook (Jerusalem, HaRav Kook Institute). (Heb.)

--- Sayfa 111 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

109
works : Orot HaTorah [Lights of Torah],167 Orot HaTfilah [The Lights of Prayers]168, Orot HaTshuva
[The Lights of Repentance],169 and more. At that time he also promoted the establishment of the
Takhkemoni School which combined religious and secular studies: "to educate man to be honest and
good" "and to prepare him "for the struggle of life". This expression of his view that it is imperative to
progress with the spirit of the age, aroused strong opposition among extreme sectors of the Jerusalem
Rabbinate. Further dissent was created by his relations with the secular leaders of the Labor
Movement, by his support of the growing agricultural settlements, and by his willingness to find
religious, canonical sanction for their continued existence. He also founded a small yeshivah in Jaffa,
where the students spent half a day poring over the holy Writings, but worked at everyday jobs during
the second half.170

The World War 1 Period
In 1914, Rabbi Kook participated in the founding meeting of the World Congress of "Agudat Israel" in
Europe, due to his hope of bringing the leaders of that movement closer to Zionism.171 Stranded there
after only a month by the outbreak of W.W.1, he was forced to remain in Switzerland till 1916 when he
was called to serve as a rabbi in London. There he became deeply involved in public activity in an
effort to aid the settlement of The Land of Israel. Following the publication of Rabbi Kook's manifesto
in the British synagogues, many memoranda were sent from the Jewish congregations to English
parliamentary groups, affirming that the Faith of Israel is linked to Israel's Nationalism and to the
Land of Israel. These were highly influential in the issuing of the Balfour Declaration of 1917. After the
end of the war, and having spent almost three years in London, Rabbi Kook returned to the Land of
Israel in 1919, when he was appointed Rabbi of Jerusalem. In an attempt to provide solutions to
religious problems arising from the transition from Diaspora life to the conditions of life in the Holy
Land, he helped to establish the institution of Chief Rabbinate.172 In 1921, after his appointment as
Chief Ashkenazic Rabbi of the Land of Israel, he continued his public activities and his writing till the
end of his life. He died of cancer at age 70 in 1935, and was buried with great honor in the Holy
City.173 His son and spiritual heir, Rabbi Tzvi Yehudah Kook, continued his work, while Rabbi
Yehudah Maimon founded an academy for Jewish studies and a publication society in Jerusalem that
bear Kook's name.
Though Rabbi Kook is considered a conservative from the standpoint of "Halacha" (legal tradition),
his philosophical outlook is seen as profoundly original as well as being bold and dialectical. It draws
upon his response not only to Jewish writings of all periods, but also to universal thought, in a unique
blend of Bible, Talmud, Hebrew philosophy, and Kabbalah, with more modern concepts absorbed
from the scientific and philosophical world of his day. All these he succeeded in molding into a unified

167  Kook, A.Y. HaCohen. (1900) Lights of Torah (Jerusalem, Jerusalem Publishing).(Heb.)
168  Kook, A.Y. HaCohen. (1979) Lights of Prayer, M.T. Neria (ed.) (Jerusalem, Lavi Publishing). (Heb.)
169 Kook, A.Y. HaCohen. (1935) Light of Repentance (Jerusalem, Jerusalem Publishing). (Heb.)
170  Yaron, Z. (1979) The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook (Jerusalem, The World Zionist Organization). 14. (Heb.)
171 A political Social Ultra Orthodox movement, which was founded in 1912 as a universal religious organization. Back then
staunchly opposed to the new settlements.
172  Gerber, R. (2005) The Enlightenment Revolution- the Spiritual Way of Rabbi Avraham Isaac Haohen Kook (Jerusalem,
Biyalik Institute) 192. (Heb.)
173 Neria M. T. (1986) In the field of Rabbi Kook (Kfar HaRoeh Publishing) 43-44. (Heb.)

--- Sayfa 112 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

110
system and mode of teaching, thus becoming revered as one of the most outstanding figures among
Jewish thinkers of recent generations. Apart from members of the extreme Orthodox Community who
bitterly opposed his modernistic, nationalist views, all those who came into contact with Rabbi Kook
admired him deeply. While the zealously sectarian rabbis respected him for his profound Torah
knowledge, they declared an irreconcilable religious war against him, claiming his progressive Zionist
beliefs to be totally false, so that he suffered deeply from the schism till his last days. As he walked
through the streets of the orthodox quarter of Me'a Shearim [100 Gates] in Jerusalem, he heard the
epithet "Heretic!" hurled at him from behind closed shutters. Of the many books he wrote, he
succeeded in publishing a few himself, but most of them appeared, often in edited versions, only after
his death.

2.2. Fethullah Gülen (b.1938)
Childhood
Fethullah Gülen Hoca was born in 1938,174 in the small village of Koruçuk (with fewer than 80
homes), in the Hasankale sector of the Province of Erzurum, eastern Turkey. His father, a religious
teacher in the local mosque and his mother, a housewife, had six children, of whom Fethullah Hoca
was the second son.175 The early death of one of his brothers during his childhood affected his life
deeply.176
His father's influence was extremely significant. Fethullah Hoca relates that his father's eyes were
always filled with tears, but that he never wasted his time. He wrote that although he grew up in a
small village in material poverty, to the point of actual privation, he was apparently blessed with 'regal
breeding'.177  And it was indeed his father who exposed him to the world of Islam's classical
philosophers.178 During childhood, Fethullah Hoca ran the family errands, helped his mother with
household chores, and even cared or the herds of goats. In his leisure time, he loved to read books or
to memorize verses from the Koran (Hafızlık).179

174  According to the records of the Turkish Population Office, Fethullah Gülen was born April 27, 1941. See Ünal, A. (2004)
M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre Denemesi (İstanbul: Nil Yayınları), 508.(Tur.)
Nonetheless, most books about Gülen as well as his speeches, note the year of his birth as 1938. see for example: Gülen,
F.M. (2000) Prophet Muhammad : Aspects of his life (Virginia :The Fountain), i.(Tur.)
The reason for the discrepancy may be that his father reported his birth to the authorities only 3 years later.
175 Gülen, F.M. (1996) Fasıldan Fasıla 3 (İzmır: Nil A.Ş Yayınları). Cover. (Tur.)
176  One version claims that it was a sister who died:  :www.pearls.org/authors/biography.html, while another version
attests to the death of his brother:  :http://en.fGülen.com/a.page/life/biography/c160.html
 The first version notes that for years Gülen visited his sister's gravesite and wept.
177 Nursi, Ş. (1996) Küçük Dünyam (Hatırlar)- 3. Zaman, 27 Kasım. (Tur.)
178  Sarıtoprak Z. and Sidney G. (2005) Fethulah Gülen and the ‘People of the Book’: A Voice from Turkey for Interfaith
Dialogue.The Muslim World, 95, 3, 331.
179 Nursi, Ş. (1996) Küçük Dünyam (Hatırları)- 5. Zaman, 26 Kasım. (Tur.)

--- Sayfa 113 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

111

His Education
Beginning to pray at the age of four, Fethullah Hoca affirms that since then he never missed a prayer-
service. Since teaching of the Koran was forbidden at that time, his mother, his first Koranic teacher,
used to rise in the middle of the night to teach him and later all the women and girls of the
village.180his first instructor in Arabic was his father, but later he studied in Erzurum under the
grandson of Lutfi, Sadi Efendi.181 In 1949, Fethullah Hoca's family moved to the town of Alvar after a
brief stay in Artuzu,182 at which time the boy was forced to leave primary school after only two and a
half years of study. Though his teacher had recommended entering him into the fourth grade, the
move curtailed his education and Fethullah Hoca completed his studies later, by his own efforts. By
his own admission, he finds it hard to grasp how he succeeded in learning everything by himself,
noting that he was even able to read Ottoman Turkish fluently.
In 1953, Fethullah Hoca began his career as "Government Preacher", the only legal preaching post
available in Turkey at that time. His great rhetorical skills made him a highly gifted orator, raising
him to the first rank of Islamic preachers of Eastern Anatolia in the 1970's.183 in 1959 he moved to
Edirne, the gateway of Turkey to the West.184 On the way, he spent several days in Ankara, during
which time he took the Preaching (Vaızlık) Examination of the Administration of Religions, and was
later informed by his relative Hüseyin that he had passed successfully.185 In Edirne, Fethullah Hoca
spent large sums of money in purchasing books which he considered to be of value, and would give
books and journals as presents to his friends. His generosity is often alluded to by his friends, for it
was known that he was frequently in financial straits. He ate and slept very little, by his own
admission, so that his abstemious life-style once forced him to be hospitalized for a fortnight.186at
Edirne, Fethullah Hoca first received the position of Second Imam in the Mosque of the "Üç Şerefeli
Camii" [Three Illustrious Ones]. Now, for the first time in his life, he received a regular salary of 170
pounds.187

His Military Service
On November 10, 1961, Fethullah Hoca began his military service at Mamak.188 At the same time, he
continued to lecture on religious subjects.189 Having been sent to serve at Iskenderun, he fell ill due to

180 Erdoğan, L.(1995) Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi- Küçük Dünyam (İstanbul: AD Yayıncılık), 25. (Tur.)
181 http://en.fGülen.com/a.page/life/biography/c160.html
182 His move to Artuzu took place after the move to Alvar and before the move to Erzurum.
Ünal A. and Williams, A. (2000) Fethullah Gülen- Advocate of Dialogue (Virginia: The Fountain),14,
www.thefountainmagazine.com
183 www.islamonline.com/cgi-bin/news_service/spot_full_story.asp?service_id=750.
184 Ünal,  M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre Denemesi. 508.
185 Erdoğan, Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi- Küçük Dünyam. 47-48.
186 Ibid. 51
187 Ibid. I49
188 according to another opinon, he started his sevice on the 11th of November: Ünal A. and Williams, A. Fethullah Gülen-
Advocate of Dialogue, 18. www.thefountainmagazine.com
189 http://en.fGülen.com/a.page/life/life.chronology/p1055.html

--- Sayfa 114 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

112
the change of climate, and was granted three months' leave back at Erzurum, which he had left four
years earlier.190 At Iskenderun he had undergone disciplinary punishment which included ten days'
imprisonment in an army jail, due to a sermon which he had preached there.191 Three months later,
Fethullah Hoca returned to his unit, at last completed his army service, and was released in 1963.
Returning to Erzurum, he stayed with his family for a year, and then went back to Edirne.192 During
his military service, one of Fethullah Hoca's superior officers who had a thorough knowledge of
Sufism, urged Fethullah Hoca to read Western classics. As a result, he became familiar not only with
classics of the West, but also with Eastern Islamic writings, both religious and non-religious.193
Consequently, Fethullah Hoca read widely in Rousseau, Balzak, Dostoyevski, Pushkin, Tolstoy and
many others,194 as well as in the great works of the East.

His Civilian Life and the Founding of the Movement
At Erzurum, Gülen continued to give lectures, and for the first time began to visit the "Halk Evi"
[People's Hall], where he presented lectures and seminars to the local people. In the framework of
Gülen's work as a young teacher, we may find elements which testify to his pro-nationalist approach.
In August of 1964, he returned preach at Edirne, where he gave his services voluntarily as teacher of
the Koran and as Imam of the Dar'ül Hadis Mosque. Moving to Izmir in March of 1965, he assumed
his position as official preacher of the Administration of Religions, and also served as teacher in the
Islamic study hall Kestanepazarı Kur'an Derneğı. In addition, he presented volunteer lectures and
seminars.195 İn Izmir, he became very well-known due to his enthralling sermons. Preaching in two or
three additional places beside his regular Friday sermon at the Kestahanepazarı Mosque, he was
extremely active, often working on Saturdays as well.196 During the 1970's, Gülen gave lectures all over
Western Anatolia where they earned him many followers due to his original idea of blending service to
the nation with service to humanity, of combining spirituality with intellectual training, and most
crucial, his belief that true happiness is reached by helping others.197  Throughout the 1970's and
1980's, Gülen continued his activities in Turkey, while the 90's witnessed his emergence into the
public sphere, where the movement which he founded gained increasing recognition. His entrance
into the public sphere was closely connected to the issue of dialogue which he constantly emphasized,
and with activities linked to advancing this topic.

190 the heat in Iskenederun as opposed to the cold in Erzurum. Fethullah Hoca mentioned he had arrived to Iskenderun
with a coat:
Nursi, Ş. (1996) Küçük Dünyam (Hatırları)- 12. Zaman, 6 Aralık.
191 www.kimkimdir.gen.tr/yazdir.php?id=2659.
192 Ünal, A. M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre Denemesi, 508.
193 Ünal A. and Williams, A. Fethullah Gülen- Advocate of Dialogue, 19.
194 http://en.fGülen.com/a.page/life/biography/p760.html
195 Erdoğan, L. Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi- Küçük Dünyam, 98.
196 Ibid., 102.
197 Ünal, A. M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre, 509.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

113
3. Analogies between Rabbi Kook and Fethullah Hoca
3.1. Their Personalities
Beyond the many similarities in the biographies of these two outstanding figures, they both became
charismatic leaders who serve as role- models for thousands of admirers, despite their extreme
modesty. It was related of Rabbi Kook: "his humility, self-effacement and unwillingness to be
showered with honors were well known." When a celebration was held in Haifa in the summer of 1914
to honor him, he requested that the speakers not heap praises upon him, for in Hebrew, the word
"honor" connotes "heaviness", and the greater the honor, the greater the heaviness that accompanies
it. His luminous personality and nobility of character are repeatedly testified to by various people who
came into contact with him. One of his pupils describes their first meeting as follows:
In 1904, not long before the Feast of Pentecost [Shavuoth], I journeyed to Jaffa on my doctor's orders,
to bathe in the sea. On Shavuoth, which fell on a Friday, I prayed at the "Gates of Torah" [Sha'arey
Torah] synagogue. Only 21 years old at that time, I was privileged to hear how the Rabbi was reciting
the Preliminary [Akdamot] prayers, before the congregation with trembling and weeping, so that I
was moved to the depth of my soul. From that moment, I felt deeply bound to the rabbi with ardent
love, and became his pupil and devoted adherent forever.198
Kook was a profound thinker who delved deeply into spiritual questions in the privacy of his study,
but was also a public figure and active leader of superior rhetorical skill, who labored untiringly for
the betterment of society. His gentleness of spirit, forgiving nature, generosity, and desire to
compromise so as to further peace among people were manifest in all he did, as was his constant
emphasis on mankind's spark of Godliness.
Gülen, too, in his personal life, faithfully expresses the values which he teaches. Thus, for example, he
lives a truly ascetic life. Living in the United States, he owns no personal property or possessions,
either there or in Turkey. His dress too is extremely modest and simple, so that he refuses even to
wear a tie.199 Blankets, sheets and books are his only possessions.200 He relates that he never takes
trips to the nearby regions, and that ordinary pleasures, amusements and entertainment are
unnatural to him. He was determined to devote his life to spirituality and religious pursuits only,
spending his days in humble living and even austerity, while never expecting to create a spiritual or
social movement at all. Gülen's outstanding charisma marks him as probably the most charismatic
figure in the annals of modern Turkey. He is surely the most wise and learned among Turkey's
religious leaders, especially because of his comprehensive acquaintance with a uniquely broad range
of erudite sources.201

198 http:// he.vikipedia.org.
199 Bonner, A. (2004) An Islamic Reformation in Turkey. Middle East Policy, 11, 1. 85
200 Akman, N. (1995) Sabah, 23-30 Ocak. http://en.fGülen.com/a.page/life/biography/p760.html.
201  Bilici, M. (2006) The Fethullah Gülen Movement and Its Politics of Representation in Turkey. The Muslim World, 96,
10.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

114
3.2. Nationalism
The nationalistic leanings of these two prominent thinkers were very similar. Gülen himself served in
the army, and called upon everyone else to undertake this duty as well. Rabbi Kook was a passionate
Zionist and fought valiantly for immigration to the Land of Israel. The Rabbi's spiritual path was a
blend of religion and nation, so that his followers, including his son, argued in favor of army service
within a religious framework, for their vision of nationalism was as a fundamental religious
component of the redemption of the Jewish people.202 And indeed in Israel today, there are
institutions for the study of Torah (The Law, Tevrat) that inculcate the combination of religious
teaching with military service, not willing to dispense with either of them. According to Rabbi Kook,
the concept of the State is not the embodiment of the Divine Ideal as claimed by Hegel, but the
Justification for the State is achieved only when its inhabitants live according to the Divine Ideal, with
the will to exercise the Divine Ideal creating he foundation of the Nation's existence. The laws of the
state must lead the national entity into becoming a national-humanistic base for emitting Divine
Light.203 In a similar manner, Gülen too helps to make Islam more "nationalistic". In his view, the
state or "devlet" and the nation, or "millet", do not contradict each other. There is no conflict between
Turkish nationalism and religious identity.204 Gülen's movement strives to build a new social contract
in which Ottoman-Turkish tradition will play a formative role. He brought together diverse groups to
discuss Turkey's problems and to offer solutions to the conflicts between religion and science. These
activities were carried out, for example, under the auspices of the Turkish Journalists and Writers
Foundation [Gazeteciler ve Yazarlar Vakfı].205  Nonetheless, there are significant differences between
the two thinkers, Gülen and Kook, in their ability to express their ideas: while Rabbi Kook's activity
took place just before the founding of the State of Israel, a state characterized as being "Jewish",
permitting and even encouraging the establishment of "National-Religious" schools, Gülen's activity
in Turkey, a state with a markedly secular Constitution, faces the fact that a synthesis between nation
and religion cannot find full expression in the schools or in any educational system as may exist today.
Thus, Rabbi Kook's ideas, despite struggles with the anti-nationalistic ultra orthodox community's
views, fell on attentive ears, since there is a large, highly respected national-religious sector of the
population, in Israel today. Yet the synthesis promoted by the Gülenic Movement is perceived by
Turkish secularists as a threat to the regime, although it in no way presents religion as being
contradictory to the civil authority.

3.3. Education and Educational Synthesis
Both Gülen and Kook were active in education and in establishing schools (or Yeshivot) for enhancing
their religious beliefs and their respective faiths. But this was not their only purpose. As Kook averred,
the ultimate foundation is education. Rabbi Kook's method in advancing the sanctification of all
realms of being and all professions and wisdom is the basis of his concept of the educational value of
secular and scientific studies. In the early 20th century, attempts were made by various groups in

202  On Jewish Nationalism see Katz, J. (1979) Jewish Nationalism :Essays and Studies (Jerusalem: The World Zionist
Organization) 320. (Heb.)
203 Yaron, The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook, 320.
204 Gündem, M.(2005) Milliyet, 27  Ocak.
205 Yavuz, M.H. (1999) Search for a New Contract in Turkey: Fethullah Gülen, the Virtue Party and the Kurds. Sais Review,
19, 1,125.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

115
Eastern Europe to introduce changes into the religious-Jewish educational curriculum by adding
secular to religious studies. In the contrast to other leading rabbis, Rabbi Kook did not completely
oppose this trend, for he believed in the value of educational synthesis, combining the religious with
the secular, while yet always ensuring that religious subjects are of primary importance, and that the
more worldly studies are secondary.206 Kook hoped to create a society in which history, philosophy,
criticism and poetry would not be the exclusive province of those who wish to undermine or destroy
religion. In the yeshivot that he established, he envisioned the spiritual academy of the Israeli people,
while actively founding new Torah institutes in every possible place. In 1924, he headed a delegation
of rabbis to the United States for the purpose of raising funds for Torah seminaries. Received in
America with great esteem, he was even awarded honorary citizenship of New York City. On his return
to the Land of Israel, he also witnessed his founding of the Yeshiva in Jerusalem called "The Central
World Yeshiva" or more briefly "Merkaz HaRav" [the Rabbi's Center]. Its main innovations were the
use of Hebrew as the language of instruction, and the addition of he studies of philosophical thought
and meditation. Its goal was to draw "the best young men from all over the world, those who excel in
talent and mental brilliance…to restore the ancient glory of Israel, to enable them to improve their
knowledge of the Torah of Israel, and to participate in the rebirth of the Land of Israel."207 The rabbi
encouraged the Center's graduates to take an active part in public life and to become rabbis, teachers
and leaders in the public sector in all fields, and indeed his pupils did disperse themselves all over the
country to fulfill these goals.208 Among them were also rabbis who emigrated to the United States to
serve as spiritual leaders of congregations there. The central purpose of education according to Rabbi
Kook is to make man honest and good so as to prepare him for Spiritual Amendment and Perfection.
Ever since Abraham the Patriarch began to fill the world with God's presence, it is believed that the
more Man calls upon the Name of God, the greater will be his goodness and integrity.209
Education is also a crucial element characterizing Gülen and his followers. As an integral part of the
educational system founded by Gülen, student dormitories, secondary schools, seven universities,
cultural and instructional centers as well as summer caps were set up in many places. This
comprehensive educational system comprises over one hundred school in Turkey itself, and above two
hundred beyond Turkey's border.210 Schools inspired by Gülen initiative already began to be built in
the 1970's but the great majority were built starting in 1983.211 the Gülenic educational system
emphasizes such traditional values as respect for elders, politeness, and good behavior, as well as
stressing older pedagogical methods such as memorizing by rote rather than analytical thinking.
These schools support a philosophy based on Turkish nationalism rather than on Islam.212the
prevailing belief in Gülen's movement is that "the world is undergoing a process which causes man's
deterioration, one in which humanity is forfeiting itself  to technology, so that only education can
counteract this rapid decline". According to the basic credo of the movement, one school can prevent

206 Yaron, The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook, 189.
207 http:// he.vikipedia.org.
208 Yaron, The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook, 16.
209 Filber, Y. (1993) The Star of Light: Studies in the Teachings of Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook (Jerusalem, The
Institute for the Study of Rabbi Kook's Teachings) 177. (Heb.)
210 According to Yavuz, the number of schools is above 500. see: Yavuz, M.H. (1999) Search for a New Contract in Turkey,
124.
211 Özdalga, E. (2000) Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gülen's Inspired Piety and Activism. Critique, 17,
84-85.
212 Kristianasen W.(1997) Newe Faces of Islam. Le Monde Diplomatique (English Edition), (July ), 11-12.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

116
hundreds of pupils from descending into a life of crime, and since those who usually end up in prison
are young people, it is doubly important to help them. Education is the prime means for softening
their hearts and for awakening the love of these youthful personalities for nation and country, to
enable them to preserve their individuality and independence.213
In the case of both these great thinkers, the education they promulgate is not an independent system
cutting itself off from state education, but on the contrary, these are systems which both of them
believe blend harmoniously with the governmental course of study. Thus, in Israel's "national-
religious" schools, a religious program of studies is taught in addition to the general one, while in
Gülen's schools, religion is not taught at all. The course of study in those schools is the one dictated by
the state, and the schools themselves are under close supervision by the government. At the same
time, despite their differences, both leaders consider education to be a beneficial force, ameliorating
the individual human being and his personal qualities according to Rabi Kook, and improving man as
part of society according to Gülen.

3.4. Concern for Their Students
Both these outstanding men expressed their love for the younger generation (which is called "Golden
Generation" [Altın Nesil] at the Gülenic Ideology) in practical ways. Rabbi Kook cared for his pupils
as if they were his children, since the yeshiva in Jerusalem became a sort of extended family for them.
he conducted life in the school in a fatherly manner, without formality or distance, often helping the
boys materially, with his wife's aid, so that even the holes in their socks were darned. Fethulah Hoca
relates that while he was in Izmir, working with his pupils at Kestanepazarı, he always checked the
boys' bedrooms, bathrooms and toilets in the evenings, both to see to the condition of his pupils and
to remedy matters that required correction, always trying to protect the pupils. As a result he slept
very little during that period, just two or three hours a night, until he began to suffer seriously from
exhaustion and weakness.214

213 Gülen M. F. (2002) Yitirilmiş Cennete Doğru (Çağ ve Nesil 3) (Izmir: Nil Yayınları), 37-39.(Tur.)
214 Erdoğan, (1995) Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi- Küçük Dünyam, 99-100

--- Sayfa 119 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

117
3.5. Religion and Science - Religion and Philosophy
Both Gülen and Rabbi Kook studied philosophy, were well versed in the works of the major writers,
and forcefully confronted the religious issues they encountered in their studies. In Rabbi Kook's
thinking, the influence of modern philosophy is evident, including many concepts found in the works
of Spinoza. Hegelian influence is especially noticeable.215 In addition, one finds traces of the thought
of Kant, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Henri Bergson, Schelling, Buddhism and also to scientific
discoveries bearing on philosophical issues (Evolution, the age of the universe etc.).216 in some
instances, these concepts seem influential, in others they are treated critically. Thus, for example,
Rabbi Kook found no problem in accepting the theory of Evolution, in marked contrast to many
others, even asserting that it conforms with ancient ideas that appear in the Kabbalah. Rabbi Kook
viewed the amalgamation between the sacred and the profane as what is termed: "the Method of all-
Inclusive Unity", that is, a blend of the two in all spheres and in every important value: in man, in
society and in the world as a whole. From this approach, too, springs his positive attitude towards the
secular segment of the population.217
Gülen was also well acquainted with modern positivistic knowledge, such as literature, history and
philosophy. As an auto-didact, he had even succeeded in attaining an understanding of the natural
sciences- biology, physics and astronomy, as well as being able to read the works of Sartre, Camus and
Marcuse in the original.218 Gülen was also deeply influenced by Kant.219 Gülen saw science and
philosophy as a step promoting man's religious awareness, for in his opinion science is essential for
man's personal development, and without it, he remains hollow, with nothing to transmit to others. If
one is not acquainted at least with philosophy and with the principles of certain sciences such as
physics, chemistry, astronomy, medicine and botany, and if the individual is not involved in
theological studies to the same degree, he will find it impossible to explain anything to others, or to
persuade them of the truth of his beliefs. Thus, every believer bears the real responsibility of reading
widely and learning the ways of God in ordering the world.220  Thus secular studies are essential for
each individual who calls himself a "believer".

215 This fact is especially evident in his article, contained in his work Lights [Orot], "concerning the Course of Ideas in
Israel", which uses the concept of "ideas" in the Hegelian sense to explain Jewish History : Kook, A.Y. (1963) Lights
(Jerusalem: HaRav Kook Insitute). (Heb.)
216 Goldman, E. (1985) Rabbi Kook's relation to European thought, in: B. Ish-Shalom and S. Rosenberg (Eds) A Jubilee of
Lights (Jerusalem: Alinar Library and the Department of Religious Culture and Education in the Diaspors). 118-119.(Heb.)
see also: Gelman, Y. The Aesthetics in the Philosophy of Rabbi Kook, in: B. Ish-Shalom and S. Rosenberg (Eds) A Jubilee of
Lights (Jerusalem: Alinar Library and the Department of Religious Culture and Education in the Diaspors). 159-168.
217 Lifshitz, H. (1966) The Sacred and the Profane in the Teaching of Rabbi Avrahan Yitzchak HaCohen Kook (Jerusalem,
The Zionist Organization). 7.(Heb.)
218  www.pearls.org/authors/biography.html
219 See his book: Gülen, M.F.(1998) Varlığın Metafizik Boyutu (İstanbul: Feza Yayinevi). (Tur.) also here: Can, E. (1998)
Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi İle Ufuk Turu (İstanbul: AD Yayıncılık A.Ş). 109-111.(Tur.)
220 Gülen, M. F. (1996) İnancın Gölgesinde (Izmir: Nil Yayınları). 203-204.(Tur.)

--- Sayfa 120 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

118
3.6. Tolerance and the Attitude towards Atheists
Religious tolerance in the modern age sprang from the weakening of religion. When the idea of
tolerance spread in Europe during the second half of the 17th century, traditional religious faith had
been enfeebled and undermined. Tolerance was motivated by a desire to be liberated from the social
and organizational restrictions of religion. This was a non-religious form of tolerance, which gained
its chief support from opposition to religious piety, or from indifference to it.221 We are thus forced to
ask the following question: can a person who believes that "there is no salvation outside the church"
as St. Augustine asserted, remain indifferent to heretics? This question was intensified within Jewish
society since the establishment of the state of Israel as a "Jewish State" aggravated the tension
between secular and religious elements of the citizenry.
Neither Rabbi Kook nor Gülen derides or scorns the irreligious, but both rather wish to integrate
them and to bring them closer. Though Rabbi Kook felt great anxiety on seeing the increasing
secularization of youth, and their abandonment of religion, he yet loved them and supported them in
many ways, even willingly accepting the opprobrium of "vain love" towards them. even a sinner, in the
rabbi's view, is still a son of God.222All-embracing love is essential for true worship of the Lord, and
whoever harms another even in love, not only spreads dissent among the people, but also injures
religious life. Thus the truly religious man is unable not to love. As one of Rabbi Kook great ethical
works teaches:
Love for all creatures must dwell in the heart and soul, especially love for each individual; and love of
all the people is the desire of the most honorable, and the source of their material and spiritual
uplifting…it is this characteristic which harmonizes the exalted Messianic Spirit with the more earthly
elements of Israel…We must know that the life-point of light and sanctity never departs from the
Godly image instilled into all mankind, and with which every nation and tongue is graced, each
according to its intrinsic worth.223
In similar vein, Gülen maintains that tolerance towards others draws all its origins from religion.
What is expected of us today is the realization that tolerance is a force that grows primarily within
ourselves and later in our surroundings. In order to bring about the rebirth of our nation, we must cut
off the roots of hateful thoughts, and afterwards instill the concept of tolerance. In Turkey, this
viewpoint has already begun to be perceived, but the rate of its growth must be accelerated, so that the
trend may continue and even spread throughout the world. The world of the future must be founded
on tolerance, love and mutual acceptance, instead of hatred grievances, violence and war.224
Furthermore, we will seek in vain to find tolerance, with all its depth and many dimensions, in other
places, for indeed it is to be sought in Islam. Tolerance is also a particularly "Turkish trait", as already
noted by Yunus Emre and Mevlana.225 Gülen believes that the world has already crossed the threshold

221 Toynbee, A. J. (1965). A Study of History (New York: Oxford University Press). 348.
222Yaron, The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook, 333.
223 Kook. A.Y (1971) Thy Father's Instruction (Jerusalem, HaRav Kook Institute). 76.(Heb.)
224 Gülen,  M.F. Fasıldan Fasıla 3, 102-104.
225 Celaleddin Rumi (1207-1273) philosopher and mystic of Islam, poet of Persian origin, who is known in his didactic epics
and poets : Mansnavi-ye Ma'nav. Rumi had affected tremendously the mystic Islamic thought as well as the ideology of
Gülen. He is the father of Mevlevi sect which is known for its Whirling Dervishes. On Rumi see, for example:
Schimmel, A. (1993)The Triumphal Sun: a Study of the Works of Jalaladdin Rumi (Albany: State University of New York
Press).

--- Sayfa 121 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

119
of understanding the truth that there is no way to avoid the dialogue.226 For Gülen, liberalism and
tolerance towards others and inter-religious debate are not merely pleasant ideas to be put into
practice in some future Paradise, but are at the heart of the significance of being a Muslim here and
now. He is convinced that the world is a symphony composed of different faiths, and just as an
orchestra cannot perform if all its members play the same instrument, so too the world is a
harmonious blend of all the varied beliefs. The most potent pillar of tolerance is rooted in love, which
is the strongest force in the life of each human being; the follows compassion whereby the world may
be thought of as a "symphony" of compassion and mercy", leading at last to tolerance. This is the final
pillar for constructing a new mode of existence, one in which we must shut our eyes to the blame of
others but forgive them, so that all together we heal the great majority of our wounds.227 The fact that
Gülen's precepts are not just an abstract model, but have been open to real life experiments and
implementation, encourages the supporters of the movement to discover the many points of similarity
between themselves and others, instead of stressing their differences and peculiarities. This pertains
not only to the divisions between religions, but equally to those within the various secular groups.
Gülen attempts to find common ground  even with Marxists, saying that those who consider religion
to be  "opium of the masses" should not have their opinions dismissed lightly.228 Gülen also has a
group of supporters who hold atheistic views, who endorse some of his tenets at a distance, but do not
play an active part in the movement's regular business.229

3.7. The Element of "Light" as Expressed in Poetry
We may note with more than passing interest that both these great thinkers frequently discussed and
used the concept of "light". Rabbi Kook's works nearly always include the element of light. The titles
of his books affirm this fact repeatedly. In the thought of Gülen light is also a central element, to prove
which we need only mention the "Houses of Light" [Işık Evleri]. In both cases, light is conceived of as
the Supreme Lofty Light which descends from above to the lower realms of worldliness, enabling man
to carry out the Divine Will,230 each according to his own faith or religion.
Both men were also engaged in writing poetry, especially poems dealing with the relations between
man and God.231 Both of them conceive of Light as representing Sublime Truth, infusing every aspect
of daily being, serving as an alternate way to describe the life of perfected righteous behavior. This is
exemplified in Rabbi Kook's poem:
Bring us light,
Bring us Holiness,

Yunus Emre- a poet and mystic of the 13h century.
226 Ünal, A. M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre Denemesi, 362.
227 Kurtz, L. R. (2005) Gülen's Paradox : Combining Commitment and Tolerance. The Muslim World, 95, 3 , 378
228 Gülen, Fasıldan Fasıla 3, 201.
229 Aras B. and Caha Ö. (2003) Fethullah Gülen and his Liberal 'Turkish Islam', in: Barry Rubin (ed), Revolutionaries and
Reformers (Albany: State University of New York Press). 150
230 Kook, Lights of Torah, 6-7.
231  On Rabbi Kook's poetry, see Lifshitz, H. (1975) The Seer of Light (Jerusalem, The Rabbi Kook Institute). The rabbi's
family name, kook, is thought by some to derive from the Yiddish "kooken" maning "to peer deeply", thus reflcting his
unique ability to see beyond surface so as to discern the inner essence of people and events.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

120
Bering us honor,
Bring us justice
Grant us life
Worthy of its name.
In Gülen's poem, we read:
O Army of light, the light of radiant faces
Diffusing deep and warm joy,
Bearing armfuls of tranquility to every place
With endless tears beclouding their eyes"
The Turkish original verse rhymes musically:
Işık ordusu, aydın nâsiyelerinde nûr
Sînelerinde derin ve sımsıcak mutluluk.
Götürürler her tarafa kucak kucak huzûr;
Gözlerinin içinde buğulanır sonsuzluk..

4. Conclusion
Just as Rabbi Kook inspired a large group of National-Religious followers who adhere to his
teachings, so Gülen too drew many loyal acolytes. The unique quality linking the two leaders is that
both regarded nationalism as a complementary force enhancing the religious element, viewing the
nationalist component as an integral part of religious duty, indeed as an actual obligation of the Faith.
Both of them regard tolerance as a religious commandment, believing religion to be the very source of
tolerance rather than the motivation for its absence. Both refuse to leave the material world and its
culture in the hands of the non- religious or, to be dealt with by atheists. Thus they strive, each with
the means available to him and in his own surroundings, to create a synthesis that will enable
religious people to become the very best from all aspects, both spiritual and material, including
science and all realms of culture. Furthermore, both serve as models proving that it is possible to be a
truly devout religious leader, uncompromising in matters of the faith, while at the same time being
highly educated, tolerant, and concerned for the welfare of all those who do not conform to this model
themselves. While others may find this combination paradoxical, Fethullah Gülen Hoca and Rabbi
Avraham Kook prove in their own lives that these seemingly divergent attitudes can be blended in
perfect harmony.

Online sources
http://he.vikipedia.org
http://en.fGülen.com
 www.kimkimdir.gen.tr
www.islamonline.com
www.pearls.org

 www.thefountainmagazine.com

--- Sayfa 123 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

121
A WIDER ROLE FOR THE GÜLEN MOVEMENT CONSISTENT
WITH THE PLACE OF THE QUR’AN AND ISLAM IN THE
EVOLUTION OF RELIGIOUS UNDERSTANDING:
A FUNDAMENTAL THEOLOGICAL REASSESSMENT
IAN FRY 232

Abstract
This paper contends that the ideal of dialogue between people of the Abrahamic faiths is
consistent with Qur’anic teaching and the essential role of Islam in religious evolution. The
Qur’an provides the incentive, and a template, for faith traditions to collaborate to alleviate the
current crisis of conflict. It is also the imperative for a process to reassess foundational
theological concepts that inform the self-understanding of each tradition. The circumstances in
which Fethullah Gϋlen pursued dialogue with other faith communities rather than political
initiatives to protect and selectively benefit Muslim communities are considered in the context of
the relationship between Islam, Judaism and Christianity. Universal history, population growth
and science establish that current religious beliefs and practices are not absolute or final. Each
world faith exists to provide guidelines for humanity to live in harmony and stability. The
Abrahamic faith communities have an additional responsibility: to enable humanity to
understand its relationship with the Divine. Regrettably, conflict between them undermines both
roles. Being bound to their obligations under covenant they might precipitate changes consistent
with Divine intention in spite of pursuing self-interest in exercising total free will, through
negative conduct. If so, circumstances suggest it will be concurrent with Divine Judgment
invoked upon themselves. It is surely better to achieve such changes through reassessment. Islam
came into existence as a challenge to its pre-existing partners and to encourage reassessment of
their self-understanding and practices. Its reforming role has not changed and its leaders should
not be distracted by current disputation. Continuing dialogue is vital — but in parallel with a
global programme of collaborative reassessment. The Gϋlen Movement can become the launch
pad for that programme because of initiatives it has already taken: notably its education and
conference programmes and proposals to establish joint Muslim–Christian universities.

232 Preparing a doctoral dissertation at the Melbourne College of Divinity, having been admitted in recognition of prior
research publications. With a Diploma in Agriculture (Roseworthy), his career was in advisory work and chemical
marketing until he joined the Presbyterian Board of Local Mission, Victoria, as communications officer. On the outbreak of
the Ramadan or Yom Kippur War he proposed a reassessment of theological concepts with Christians, Jews and Muslims
working in collaboration. Denied support, he undertook personal research and turned to journalism. His past international
conference papers have concerned Muslim–Christian relations; intertextuality of the Holy Books; globalization; and
interfaith collaboration in reassessment of theological concepts. His Trouble in the Triangle (Compton Arch: Fitzroy, 2000),
is a critical review of relations between Christianity, Judaism and Islam. Formerly founding secretary of the Jewish–
Christian–Muslim Association of Australia, he is a member of the Interfaith Commission of Council of Churches in Victoria.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

122
1. Introduction: An overview
Units of the Gülen Movement have earned a worthy reputation for openness, ready hospitality, and
readiness to engage in dialogue with people of other faiths on the home grounds of other communities
as well as within their own comfort zone at a time of raging international crisis.  Their policy has
encouraged reciprocal readiness to dialogue, and has achieved success in educational and cultural
programs which was rare only a few years ago. This is consistent with the principles enunciated and
pursued by Fethullah Gülen in his relations with people of other faiths throughout his career, and
with his clear awareness that Islam was called in to existence with the purpose of reform through
dialogue.
In his paper ‘Islam’s Ecumenical Call for Dialogue’ (June 11, 2003) he noted that Islam made the
greatest ecumenical call the world has ever seen in seeking to bring Christian and Jews together as
People of the Book  some fourteen centuries ago. He then confirmed that the urgency of the
ecumenical task is as great now as ever. “Interfaith dialogue is a must today, and the first step in
establishing it is forgetting the past, ignoring polemical arguments, and giving precedence to common
points, which far outnumber polemical ones,” he said.  (‘Dialogue is a Must’, also June 11, 2003)
However, the subject of this conference, peaceful coexistence, is not an adequate aim. Our aim must
be to overcome current circumstances of crisis, to establish and then maintain circumstances of
harmony and stability for whatever may be the term of humanity’s divinely ordained existence. This
requires an understanding of the historical basis of current circumstances of crisis. Therefore,
although it is important that past wounds should be set aside in pursuing dialogue at community
level, history, with all the blemishes of human nature and dastardly conduct that it exposes, must be
considered openly, fully and frankly in moving to another stage: reassessment undertaken by scholars
and religious leaders in order to facilitate the long term aim.
An examination of its historical circumstances shows that the root cause of the current state of crisis is
the development of different community self-understandings based on particular interpretations of
religious belief and teaching. These self-understandings may lead to antagonistic attitudes towards
people of other religious belief, and different patterns of personal and corporate conduct. It is the
patterns of conduct which, in turn, result in predictable patterns of conflict. It would not matter that
people held different religious beliefs if their consequent self-understanding and patterns of conduct
did not lead to conflict.
Two later passages in the same statement on dialogue suggest that Gülen clearly recognizes this
situation:
When those who have adopted Islam as a political ideology, rather than a religion in its
true sense and function, review their self-proclaimed Islamic activities and attitudes,
especially their political ones, they will discover that the driving force is usually
personal or national anger, hostility, and similar motives. If this is the case, we must
accept Islam and adopt an Islamic attitude as the fundamental starting point for
action, rather than the existing oppressive situation…
Our beginning point must have an Islamic basis. Muslims cannot act out of ideological
or political partisanship and then dress it in Islamic garb. Nor can they represent mere
desires as ideas. If we can overcome this tendency, Islam's true image will become

--- Sayfa 125 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

123
known. The present, distorted image of Islam that has resulted from its misuse by both
Muslims and non-Muslims for their own goals scares both Muslims and non-Muslims.
That statement applies equally to Christians and Jews as to Muslims.  Conflict as a consequence of
conduct, self-understanding and belief are intimately linked.  Therefore conflict cannot be eliminated
unless and until relevant aspects of religious belief have been subjected to reassessment and changes
in self-understanding and patterns of conduct have been initiated.
This has been apparent since the early to mid-twentieth century, but it has been widely denied, and
discussion of reassessment that might lead to a new self-understanding has been actively discouraged.
233 [Fry, 2000 (1) P. 579]  234 [Stourton 1998 pp. 37-40]  235 [Ariarajah 1992]  This reflects a fear that to
admit that there may be a reason, or a need, to reassess the faith that one teaches or practices will
imply an admission that one’s own faith-based self-understanding may be (or might have been) a
factor in generating crisis. Even to consider such an admission is a challenge to the self-understanding
of dominant religious faith groups and a threat to the authority of their institutions. The perceived
need to maintain institutional ‘integrity’ and personal authority is given precedence over enhancing
prospects for world peace and stability.  Contradictory responses to the conflict which is a
consequence of such inflexibility may then precipitate a more pressing need to participate in dialogue.
One response — often from people who have no direct involvement in religious affairs and possibly no
faith base in that sense — is based on recognition that a community is tearing itself apart, that this
must stop, and that antagonism between faith-based communities must be overcome through people
talking together and getting to know each other. A second response may be prompted by a sense of
insecurity and fear for the stability of a system of faith that is supposed to provide the framework for a
social and communal culture. This insecurity evokes a hope that through dialogue a compromise may
be reached to deter a process of reassessment or make it unnecessary. A third response may be
prompted b the opposite: a sense of confidence in one’s system of faith and the expectation that if
reassessment does result from dialogue and leads to change, the change will be consistent with divine
intention.

233 In 1928, the International Missionary Council was widely criticized when, following its meeting in Jerusalem, it said that
Christ is the revelation of what God is and what man, through Him, may become, and, referring to other religions in which
Christ is not recognized as Son of God, added that “the Father had nowhere left Himself without witness.”
234 In 1964 the Second Vatican Council had to consider the draft of the Catholic Church’s ‘Declaration on Religious Liberty’,
Dignitatis Humanae. This marked “a seismic shift” in the Church’s thinking.  It challenged the concept of a theocratic state
and accepted limits to the Church’s constitutional authority.  It recognized that “men should act on their own judgment,
enjoying and making use of reasonable freedom, not driven by coercion but a sense of duty”; it placed religious freedom first
among all human rights, noting that “This demand for freedom in human society chiefly regards the quest for the values
proper to the human spirit … the free exercise of religion in society.” The challenge to the Church’s self-understanding was
such that a group of senior Council Members planned a “coup” to prevent it being adopted.  However an equally determined
group of progressive members wrote to Pope John Paul XI that the opposition was “a source of extreme anxiety and very
disquieting,” and seeking his direct intervention. He appointed a special commission with “balanced” membership, and the
declaration was adopted.
235 Suspicion of interfaith dialogue among some Christians surfaced in the open controversy at the WCC’s fifth assembly
(Nairobi 1975). For the first time, five persons of other faiths were invited to a WCC assembly as special guests and took part
in the discussions of the section on “Seeking Community”, where the dialogue issue was debated. Plenary discussion of the
report of this section highlighted the deep disagreement within the church on the issue of dialogue. Fears were expressed
that dialogue would lead to the kind of syncretism … or that it would compromise faith in the uniqueness and finality of the
revelation in Christ, or that it would threaten mission seen as fundamental to the being of the church itself.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

124
This mix of responses and motives means that almost without exception, guidelines for dialogue
programs that have been published steer participants towards getting to know each other personally,
then their cultural and religious practices, and finally an overall framework for their belief.  They steer
people away from theological considerations which actually provide the basis for their self-
understanding and, ultimately, the attitudes and conduct that results in conflict. This is illustrated by
notes 1. and 4. of Guidelines issued by the InterFaith Conference of Metropolitan Washington. 236
The purpose of interfaith dialogue is to increase our understanding of and respect for other religious
systems and institutions, thereby increasing our appreciation of their values. Dialogue should
enhance our sensitivity to the feelings of all professing religious people in their relationship with God.
Good dialogue should, in addition, result in the deepening of the faith of every participant.
There is valid purpose in dialogue regarding an issue which could become desirable or even
mandatory for interfaith action as the result of the dialogue.
There is, however, valid purpose as well in dialogue which takes place for its own sake — for the
elucidation of subjects and for the forthcoming of the persons and feelings of the participants.
Participants in dialogue should represent their faith group views, but may also share their views as
individuals. Thus the rich spectrum of conviction within any faith group can become manifest
[Emphasis added.]
However, the stage of crisis that has been reached requires us to meet for conferences such as this and
makes it quite apparent that our essential aim cannot be achieved through programs of dialogue
alone.  Fundamental theological reassessment is required to enable humanity to develop an
understanding that humanity is one, and an enlightened understanding of the relationship under
covenant between it and the Divine Creator.
This paper examines the concept of covenant, how it has come to be recognized, and the convergence
of covenant-related prophesy, to establish that the Gülen Movement is an appropriate instrument
through which the process of theological reassessment can be stimulated, promoted and supported.
Its starting point is the place of humanity in creation.  But if the Gülen Movement has a significant
role to play, a brief review of the circumstances in which it has taken root is appropriate.
When Fethullah Gülen was born the world was in crisis. 237  Governments and their people were
preoccupied with a conflict between a dictator, Adolf Hitler, leading Germany, and a small group of
other European leaders who were said to be protecting the world from the threat of Hitler’s excesses.
This was in sharp contrast with the adulation with which industrial leaders had greeted Hitler a few
years earlier because of the economic miracle he was credited with overseeing in Germany. Few
people realized that the crisis hinged around the abuse of covenantal obligations that the Christian

236 The InterFaith Conference of Metropolitan Washington.  Guidelines for Interfaith Dialogue.
http://www.religioncommunicators.org/interfaith_IFCguidelines.html  Accessed 3/10/2007
237 At least three dates are given for Fethullah Gülen’s birth (a), but such uncertainty is of no consequence.  The immediate
impact on pre-school children of the crisis of war is greater on those born in war-torn areas and seeing family and friends
killed around them than on those not born in such areas.  My earliest understanding of the macro-crisis environment of the
mid-twentieth century dates from my primary school years towards the end of the war.  (a) [The Gülen Movement website
notes April 27, 1941; the associated Rumi Forum for Interfaith Dialogue website, November 1938; and Gulay 2007, citing
Roy, April 27, 1938.]

--- Sayfa 127 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

125
powers claimed to live under. Even fewer were prepared to talk about it. The key circumstances are
summarised thus.
The European powers had capitalized on the particular interpretation of Divine Covenant adopted by
the Christian Church, its doctrinal theology and its self-understanding, in subjugating and
exploiting peoples throughout the non-European world over a period of four hundred years.
During that period, due to both the dominance of the European powers and the religious self-
understanding of Muslim leaders, the circumstances of the Ottoman Empire declined.
The European powers had systematically abused the same doctrinal theology over a much longer
period to subjugate and oppress the Jewish communities of Europe.
That oppression reached such a level that a group of Jewish leaders established a Zionist movement to
seek a homeland in which to escape oppression in Europe.  They applied their particular
interpretation of the Divine Covenant under which their people believed they lived, and sought to
occupy the region from which their forebears had been expelled almost two thousand years
earlier.
 When competition between the European powers led to the First World War, the dominant colonial
power, Britain, faced the real prospect of defeat.  Its government and the Zionist leaders saw
great mutual benefits from entering into an arrangement that had no formal agreement or
documentation, initially, other than the Balfour Declaration.   What it did involve was further
abuse of religious understanding by both parties.
Among the outcomes from that arrangement were the entry of the United States into the war as an
ally of Britain; the occupation of key oil fields in Iraq by Britain before Germany could do so; the
invasion of Russia by the Allies when Russian Jews who were favoured by the Balfour
Declaration failed to keep the Bolshevik Government in the war as an ally on an eastern  front
and thus prejudiced Britain’s position; a long-drawn-out war with traumatic consequences; the
provision of massive additional funds for Britain — and its survival; the degradation of both
Germany and the Ottoman Empire whose leaders had aligned it with Germany out of fear of a
Russian adventure in support of Britain; and the expectation that the establishment of a Jewish
State would result from the allocation to Britain of a mandate over the territory of Palestine.
The Nazi Party in Germany came to power under the leadership of Adolf Hitler who experienced
messianic visions after being gassed during the closing days of the war; was haunted by the
tragedy of Germany’s loss as a consequence of Jewish intervention through the Balfour
Declaration.   He made good use of nine months in prison to begin dictating his policy document,
Mein Kampf, in which he made his intentions perfectly clear.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

126
“I believe that I am acting in accordance with the will of the Almighty Creator: by
defending myself against the Jew, I am fighting for the work of the Lord.”  [Watt, 1969]
238
While Mustafa Kemal set about restoring the pride, prestige, security and economy of a reconstructed
Republic of Turkey through military success and the abolition of the Ottoman Sultanate,  the
Great Powers of Continental Europe, preoccupied with reconstruction and economic recovery,
tried to persuade themselves that Hitler and his religious ideas were of little consequence, and
Britain struggled to maintain control of Palestine – torn apart by conflict between Jewish
immigrant settlers and Arabs of both Muslim and Christian heritage who saw their homeland
being progressively alienated – because without it the loss of its eastern empire was almost
certain.  Turkey’s reconstruction was accompanied by the severing of the role and influence of
Islam from state structures, a range of Kemalist social, educational  and administration reforms,
the Europeanization of culture and language, the substitution of civil for religious codes, and the
elimination of ethnic differentiation.
That reconstruction was complete on November 10th, 1938, when Turkey mourned its founder’s last
breath; Europe woke to a new phase of Hitler’s Jewish Question, and Fethullah Gülen may have been
taking his first breath.
A few months earlier, at a conference at Evian, the Western powers had refused to agree to a program
of Jewish resettlement to relieve Hitler of his “Jewish problem”.  The Jesuit journal La Civilta
Cattolica immediately aggravated the situation by publishing a long study saying that the
“supremacy” of Jews had become particularly “disastrous for the religious, moral, and social life
of the Hungarian people” and it was therefore not a question of proposing a theory of
“segregation”, but of “approving its concrete application in a country represented as being ‘the
most solid and indestructible fortress of Christianity’”. [Fry 2000 (1) p. 791]   Hitler responded,
telling the British Government that “if there is no satisfactory solution in the near future, I will
simply have to solve (the Sudeten question) by force.” [Toland 1977 pp. 637-638 ; Churchill 1948
pp.242-243]  Britain obliged by forcing Czechoslovakia to accept the Munich Agreement and
surrender Sudetenland to Hitler, [Bullock 1993, p. 633], and on November 9, 1938, Hitler
confirmed his message to the Jews and the world with the devastation of ‘Crystal Night’ and the
accelerated repatriation of Jews to Czechoslovakia and Poland.
Britain rapidly lost control of the crisis in Palestine and its grip on its empire was threatened; Hitler
increased the pressure for Jewish resettlement but no country would oblige; he threatened to
invade Poland and, under intense pressure from the World Zionist Organization and the Jewish

238  These selected quotations from Hitler’s Mein Kampf are successively from pages 103, 109, 278, 512 and 60. Having
come under anti-Semitic influence from many quarters, and being steeped in the anti-Semitism that was part of the
Church’s history and culture, Hitler maintained that the Protestant Churches failed to rescue Germany from “its most
mortal enemy, since its attitude towards Jews just happens to be more or less dogmatically established”; that the Christian
Social Party failed because its anti-Semitism was based on “religious ideas instead of racial knowledge”; that Christ “took to
the whip to drive from the temple of the Lord this adversary of all humanity … [and] in return … was nailed to the cross”;
that both Christian denominations [he meant Catholic and Protestant] looked on indifferently at systematic bastardization
of the nation by the Jewish black parasites, making it every man’s “sacred duty, each in his own denomination, [to make]
people stop just talking superficially of God’s will, and actually fulfil God’s will, and not let God’s word be desecrated”; and
“hence today I believe that I am acting in accordance with the will of the Almighty Creator: by defending myself against the
Jew, I am fighting for the work of the Lord.”  [Watt, 1969]

--- Sayfa 129 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

127
Agency for Palestine, Britain gave Poland a guarantee of intervention.239 [Fry 2000 (2) pp. 960-
970]  When Hitler’s bombs began to fall on Poland, Britain and Germany were at war.  Hitler had
the upper hand and pressed for negotiations to solve his Jewish resettlement problem. No one
budged.  Hitler overwhelmed Holland, Belgium and France, and expected Britain to negotiate.  It
didn’t.  Churchill, determined to regroup and continue the war, mounted the Dunkirk evacuation.
Seeing his hopes trashed, Hitler issued instructions for “The Final Solution”.
Four years and a Holocaust later, the war ended. Reconstruction began again. The Jewish community
took full advantage of the intense Western Christian guilt complexes brought on by the fate of the
Jews, and resettlement was agreed to with Palestine as the Jewish homeland.  Another three
years later, the British Government knew it faced imperial and economic collapse if it enforced
the plan against the interests of the Arab people. But the United States had glimpsed the same
vision of enormous benefits from assuming the role of sponsor and protector of the proposed
Jewish State that had inspired the Balfour declaration thirty years earlier.  It anticipated an
enormous boost to its political and capital strength, and ready made access to exploit the
geography and the resources of the Middle East by using Palestine as a foothold with the support
of its Jewish constituency. The administration believed that such a partnership would
complement the establishment of the Bretton Woods Organizations and the Marshall Plan which
were planned to enable it to secure control of the international economic system, future
resources and markets, and domination of world affairs with a minimal need for armed forces.
[Wala 1993; Pollard 1985]
Fethullah Gülen was in the last phase of his elementary schooling when the Partition of Palestine took
effect on May 15, 1948 with the Declaration of the State of Israel, and, in the wake of
unprecedented political corruption and manipulation of voting in the United Nations, 32,500
troops from five neighbouring Arab nations crossed the border to confront 30,000 troops of the
Jewish Hagana in the Arab-Israeli War.  [Fry 2000 (2) pp. 1474-1483] The first of seven major
wars directly related to the establishment of the State of Israel in less than sixty years had
erupted.
But that was the lesser of two concurrent events.  It was only the outward indication of the other.  The
principal event was the conjunction of prophetic outpourings from its two partner faiths which the
Church had long maintained could never happen:  the Qur’anic Night Journey and Maimonides’
prediction of circumstances in which people of Israel would return to their ancestral home.
This takes us to our real starting point.

2. History and Systematic Religion
The solar system has existed for about 4.5 billion years, and universe for about 14 billion years. The
current state of knowledge indicates that human habitation may be possible for about 5 billion years.
(Wright, 2005)
Although evolution of the progenitors of humanity occurred over a period of four to six million years,
humanity, as we understand ourselves, has been on earth for somewhat less than 200,000 years.

239 See letter, Weizmann to Chamberlain, The Times, London, Wednesday, September 6, 1939, p. 8.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

128
Significant genetic variation dated ca. 35,000 BCE indicates continuing evolution. (Lahn 2005)  The
first evidence of systematic religion 240 is dated about ten thousand years ago: a couple of thousand
years after the close of the most recent cyclical ice age, The population of the world at that time was
about four million. (McEvedy 1978)  It took ten thousand years to increase to about 375 million at the
time of the European Christian push for colonies. That push was triggered by the occupation of
Constantinople by Muslim forces and coincided with the beginning of the exponential growth phase.
The tripling of the population to one billion, about 1825, then took just 15 generations. But, baring
catastrophes, the nine-fold increase from 1825 to the projected peak of nine billion about 2070 will
have taken a mere ten generations: 250 years.
From our vantage point two thirds of the way up the cliff face of the world population curve, chart 1, it
is apparent that the development of systematic religion through an evolutionary process has been a
prelude to life on the imminent human population plateau.
That development preceded the fantastic search for knowledge of how existing matter, both biological
and inert, came in to existence, functions and interacts, and the consequent technological
development that has provided the capacity to enable humanity to secure its future as it progresses
along the plateau — at least in a physical sense.
We are at a critical stage of humanity’s existence. The need for a framework of beliefs and guidelines
that will sustain humanity in terms of human relationships, moral conduct and responsibility in
matters affecting the human environment for whatever might be the Divine Authority’s intent, is
absolute.
Humanity, potentially, has a lot of living to do. It is our grandchildren who, only sixty years from now,
must guide and manage — or at least respond to — humanity’s circumstances and conduct at the peak.
three traditions which claim divine revelation, rather than rational reasoning, as the basis of their
faith each take Adam as a starting point, make mention of Noah, then take up their story with
Abraham. The implication is that Abraham took a leap out of a religious vacuum and that Judaism
then developed under divine guidance, more or less in isolatiorents of religious activity. Sharman and
totems had given way to priestly polytheistic systems with semi-divine kings to the north, east and
south (some claiming full divinity), with an overlay of Indo-Aryan Vedic sacramental philosophy of

240 The term ‘systematic religion’ as used in this paper is not restricted to religion subsequent to the introduction of written
texts or the development, imposition and systematic study of authoritative doctrinal and dogmatic statements. Neither is it
restricted to systems that involve ritual or priestly figures, although available evidence indicates that from the earliest era of
identified systematic religions, c. 8,000-7,000 BCE, persons claiming or recognized as having healing or divining capacities
(sharmans) generally assumed communal religious leadership to some extent. The term is used to refer to any system of
enquiry or belief organized on a communal basis and seeking to understand the meaning of human existence and to
establish or regulate laws and ethics for communal living, or to identify and honour a power or authority that initiates or
sustains life and is greater than the group or its members and which exercises influence in their lives and their affairs.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

129
life in the eastern region, (Ling 1968 p. 3; Flood 1996), but there were also a series of codes of
conduct. 241

3. The Concept of Divine Covenant: Stage 1 – Evolution of an Idea
At an early stage in that process of exposure, Abraham perceived and responded to a divine command
to leave his ancestral home, to migrate to a land that he would be shown, settle, and found a new
nation. Somewhat later, at Moreh, he experienced a vision. Neither was a covenant involving three
essential attributes: a divine promise, an obligation linked to it, and a penal clause, either explicit or
implied, in the event that the obligation was not honoured.  There was a command associated with a
promise, but no penal clause and only the implication that the promise might not be fulfilled if the
command was not acted upon.
The covenant followed only after Abraham obeyed the first command and survived a range of testing
experiences. When it was imposed in a vision after he had finally settled at Hebron he was
traumatized, but he did not spontaneously understand that his life’s work was to be the basis of a
process that should enable humanity to live in harmony and stability for an indefinite period after it
reaches its plateau. An understanding of covenant began to evolve when the basic covenant, having
been revealed, was invoked and reinforced in many stages involving interaction between people of a
number of faiths.
Each of those faiths has received insights and inspirations relating to one or another aspect of
covenant at some time. The concept of covenant — and in particular the notion that all humanity is
interdependent and has responsibilities to share and obligations to honour — is not the sole province
of the Abrahamic faiths. The key phases that have influenced the understanding of the concept to date
are summarized in a series of clusters arranged according to the era in which relevant ideas were first
expressed. Each phase is placed in historical context by an ID number in a panel below the dateline on
chart 1, and the interaction between the faiths can be traced along diverging and intersecting time
lines in chart 2.
Abraham was traumatized when Yahweh told him his descendants would be exiled, enslaved and
oppressed for four hundred years; that they would return with many possessions and that judgment
would also be passed on the nation that enslaved them because its wickedness had not ended.
Yahweh then made the specific commitment that: “To your descendants I give this land, from the
wadi of Egypt to the Great River, the river Euphrates.”

241 Over several thousand years Ur was swept by waves of Semitic Accadians and Amorites; Aryan Hurrians from Iran
invaded the region during the 18th century BCE; and for about seven hundred years an Asian Sumerian people had provided
the basis of the population.  Abraham’s ancestry is therefore speculation, (Armstrong 1993 p. 11) , but the religious
environment was very complex, and at Ebla, a centre of scholarship, religion and commerce between Haran and Canaan, at
least twelve gods were worshipped, and creation was seen as the act of a deity.   (Matthiae 1981, Gordon 1987, Pettinato
1981) Contact with a wide range of belief systems was clearly a vital aspect of Abraham’s formative experience as he
migrated from place to place successively.  Exposure to belief in divine intervention and punishment, certainly: but a sense
of covenant, no. [Armstrong 1993 p. 11, suggests that the migration occurred between the twentieth and nineteenth
centuries rather than the eighteenth, and that Abraham may have been a wandering chieftain.]

--- Sayfa 132 ---
Second Intifada
  Yom Kippur War
Vatican II
WCC, State of Israel
     Zionism, Darwin, Marx
    Barth, Hitler
Balfour Declaration
    Dreyfus, Herzl, WZO
    September 11, 2001
Jerusalem
Destroyed
again. Jewish
dispersion
Pentecost
Christology
church
structure
300-year Crusades
Ż
1) Adoption of totems
2) Shamanism.
3) Adoption of deities,
sacrificial practices
under priestly direction
4) organized settlement,
kingdoms.
5).Vedas
Parallel developments:
Kingdoms of Israel &
Judah Hebrew prophecy
Asian & Greek philosophy
Messianic expectations
Buddha , Confucius
Zoroaster
Moses
Exodus, Law
Covenant
Chart 1
The Human Population Explosion
             Systematic Religion: Evolution, Covenant & Crisis
Domination: Use & Abuse of Resource
World Population in Billions

 Time Scale: 2000 BCE – 3000 CE

The North: Countries with European Christian or Jewish heritage which constitute the Western World. The South: All other countries, essentially Asia, Africa & Latin America; previously called the economic Third World.
Population data: (1) McEvedy, Colin & Richard Jones 1978. Atlas of World Population History  Harmondswoth. Penguin   (2) UN DESA. 2007 World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision. Data, projections, trend lines.
Resource usage and projections have been compiled from published trade data and industry projections for production and demand for basic foodstuffs, fibres and non-renewable resources.        Ian Fry  MCD/NL  Oct 2007
Abrahamic
tradition:
Yahwism
Jerusalem
Destroyed:
Jews exiled
Jesus
of
Nazareth
The Prophet
Muhammad
Islam
Nicaea
Maimonides
      Fall of Constantinople
      European Colonial Era
      Reformation
            Invasion of Iraq
   Today*  6.7 billion
Peak
2050i 9.2  : 2070, 9.4 :   2100, 8.9
Situation today *
   North             South
Ratio of
foodstuffs,
fibres, non-
renewable
resources
consumed
Ratio of
populations
     Projection for the Situation at 2050i
       based on data in circulation at the time
       sof the invasion of Iraq, March 2003
 North               South
Ratio of
foodstuffs,
fibres, fuels &
non-renewable
resources
consumed
Ratio of
populations
4
    7
6
   5
4
1
1
1
?
Divine Covenant
Successive stages in the evolving
understanding of the nature and
consequences of Divine Covenant are
discussed as clusters of ideas in
section 3 of this paper.
The clusters are placed in the era in
which the ideas were first expressed
or committed to writing for the Holy
Books.  This sequence is not the
same as the era in which the events
referred to occurred or are said to
have occurred. The clusters and the
era in which the ideas were
expressed are identified by numbers
in the panel beneath the date line.
1,2,3,4, 5,  6,7,  8
          9,10
11
        12
         13     ?

--- Sayfa 133 ---
Evolution of Systematic Religion and the Concept of Covenant                                                    Upper time scale: years     Lower time scale: hundreds of years
↓40000 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. ↓3000 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. ↓2000 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. ↓1000 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 0 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. ↓1000 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. ↓2000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pittsburgh Platform
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mendelssohn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Copernicus              Darwin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rominus Pontifex                   Marx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pantheon dedicated to Mary                              Huss & Wycliffe           Voltaire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sancta Maria ad Martyres                                Aquinas  Inquisitions █                        Columbus P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Crusades █                                         Bultmann
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Schism                       Calvin                    Balthasar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Charlemagne                                      Luther                 Tillich       Kung
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Roman conquest              Abraha at Mecca                                                                                      Rahner Barth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Alexander’s conquest                      Genseric & Odoacer                       Cluny                                                         Herzl   Balfour Dec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pelagius                                                                            Mott     Evian Conf.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Constantine                            MAIMONIDES                         Napoleon            Hitler

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARISTOTLE                                                            The Covenants                                                            Shoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PLATO                                                                        interpreted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SOCRATES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PYTHAGORAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUNNI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sth. W. Europe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Egypt      England
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Egypt                     Greece  Nth.Africa MUHAMMAD                ISLAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Arabia                     Turkey Italy Arabia  The Covenants
                                                        Sumarian                           Amorite                                                     ○ = Significant Jewish resettlement …     ○       and exile       ○      ○   ○  ○        recognized
    Accadian                                                                                                                                                                                                       Assyria ○Babylon                                                                                         SHI’A
                                                                                                                                                               ● ISHMAEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nostra Aetate
              ●                                        ●       .                                        An era of communal evolution, rapid changes in patterns of domination; imperial turmoil throughout Asia Minor .                 CATHOLIC                         Vatican II
                 ADAM*                                                         NOAH*                                      ABRAHAM                                                                  Growth by proselytising & syncretism   Nicaea                                                                             Colonial expansion
 Sharman                                                                                    Aryan                           [c. 2000-1800]                                                    CONFUCIUS                                                                                        Fragmentation                                         REFORM
         Totems                                                                                     Hurrian                                        ● ISAAC                                           BUDDHA
                Priests                                                                                                                                         Hindu Rg Veda                  ZOROASTER’S  influence                        Expansion    by Coercion    and     Conquest                                                         WCC
                               Vedic Tradition                                                                                                                                          Persian conquest                                                                                                                                        ORTHODOX
                                                                                        Ziggurats                                                                                Babylonian conquest          Judaism grows by annexation
                                                                        Eblaite creation hymns                                                                        Assyrian conquest                                             Samaria
                                                                       Sumerian Ur-Nammu Code                                                 Akhenaton                                                                               Galilee                        CHRISTIANITY                                                                                                REFORM
                                                                                  Accadian Bilalama Code                                                     Early Aramaean influence                                          Idumea              New Covenant
                                                                                Naram-Sin: divine kingship                                                                                                                                        Negev              proclaimed                               ○ Khazar Khanate, by adoption                                CONSERV
                                                                                         Amorite Hammurabi Code                                   1st Temple                             2nd Temple                             Pentecost                         ○Central Europe, Russia, by expulsion. Zionism            WZO
                                                                                                                                                                    JUDAISM             Monarchy                                                                                          Dispersion RABBINIC JUDAISM                                                                ORTH’OX
                                                                                                                                                                   ●    ●               ●●●                                                                                 ●      Mass Jewish expulsions
                                                                                                                                                               JACOB MOSES Judges Samuel        Two kings                 Cyrus Proc.    JESUS                         Hijra             Ibn Sina    Rumi                Aggresive oppression
                                                                                                                                                                 (Israel)                              Saul         DAVID                    Universal Covenant               Arius         Shi’at Ali                                                                               Ataturk
                                                                                                                                                                                          Abrahamic Cov.          Partial exile       composed                         Athanasius             Muslim Conquests   █                                                      Gülen
                                                                                                                                                                                               documented        SOLOMON  Hasmonean Revolt                     Augustine               Genghis Khan’s conquests           Shah Wali Allah      Nursi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Amos                            Jubilees          Paul         Nestorius       Sufism                       al-Ghazalli    Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Isaiah                         Maccabees                                                    Dhual-Nun                                Sikhism               Baha’i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jeremiah                                    Philo                                            Muhasibi Hujwiri Gilani     Guru Nanak             The Bab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Habakkuk                                 Josephus                                                       Kabbalah                                         Baha’u’llah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Haggai                          ben Zakkai                                                                              Abulafia                        Gandhi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jonah           Ezra   bar Kochkbar                                                                               Zohar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zecharia   Babylonian Talmud
   *By Biblical tradition                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Malachi
40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
.Ian Fry-MCD/NL Oct 2007.
Isaac’s
12 grandsons
by Jacob (Israel)
settle in Canaan and
 the Negeb – but many
move southwest to Goshen
and eventual bondage in  Egypt

Ishmael’s
sons establish
12 Arab nations;
settle from the River
Paran east towards
Babylonia in association
with descendants of all of
Abraham’s children
The
Exodus.
The Israelites,
held in bondage,
are led out of Egypt
by Moses to Sinai where
they receive the Law and
Covenant
Asian & African influence
European influence
Abraham’s Mesopotamian
Heritage
Sumerian, Accadian, Amorite, Aryan & Hurrian.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Cereal harvesting, dry stone wall construction from 9000 BCE; symbolic script,
toolmaking, painted pottery from 7000 BCE; irrigated farming, copper & iron
smelting, clay tablets, ideographs & pictographs from 4000 BCE;
Cruciform writing c. 2250
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Traditions:
Shamanism; Hierarchies of deities & priests; Great Floods & associated myths;
 Ziggurats to approach the gods.
Codes:
Aryan Vedic; Sumerian Ur-Nammu & Lipit-Ishtar; Akkadian  Bilalama;
Amorite Hammurabi
 Settlement
    from c. 9000 BCE
  Chart 2
Floods

--- Sayfa 134 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

132
Abraham’s problem was that ten tribes occupied the territory straddling the Jordan, including the
Syrian Desert — the stronghold of the Amorites — whose wickedness, according to the statement
attributed to Yahweh, had not ended. Trouble was to be expected if Abraham tried to settle those
areas. Furthermore, he had not been given specific rules, guidelines or codes of conduct on which he
and his descendants would be judged, nor a schedule of punishments, nor any pattern of worship
practices or liturgies. The Abrahamic Covenant was based on human conscience, intelligence and
capacity to determine right from wrong. That was to be adequate to ensure that the party under
covenant acted appropriately.
It was clearly implied that judgment would be exercised and punishments imposed on the same basis
to Abraham’s household and successors and on those occupying the Promised Land at that time. The
word “also” in the expression: “I will pass judgment also on the nation that enslaves them,” would
have been superfluous if equality of judgment and punishment was not intended. Exile and
enslavement were to be imposed as punishment for breaches of the Covenant which, again by
implication, included abuse and oppression of the neighbours of Abraham’s descendants.
The Hebrews were not being treated in isolation. Judgment of their actions would be based on their
adherence or non-adherence to the Covenant, while Yahweh would continue to exercise the same
authority and judge other communities on the same basis: their wickedness — meaning abuse or
oppression of their neighbours — but not on the basis of their worship. 242  The exclusive application
of the worship provisions of God’s relationship with humanity applied at that stage specifically to
Abraham’s successors. Nothing suggested that other forms of worship or the recognition of other gods
should be suppressed. Abraham’s household and descendants were simply obliged to honour Yahweh
and no god other than Yahweh.
Similarly, the covenant did not qualify or contradict in any way the direct relationship between
Yahweh and all humanity. Yahweh’s love, mercy and justice was universal.
But Yahweh’s commitment to Abraham was the trigger for a chain of traumatic events of far-reaching
consequences. It prompted Abraham’s wife to propose that he should father a child through her slave
girl so that Yahweh’s promise could be fulfilled; coercion of the slave girl to become a surrogate
mother; a consequent family feud and expulsion of the slave-girl; Yahweh’s intervention, the return of
the slave-girl, and the birth of Abraham’s first son, Ishmael.
The subsequent birth of a second son, to Sarah, exacerbated the jealousy and precipitated Abraham’s
decision, taken reluctantly, to banish Ishmael and his mother after receiving God’s assurance that
although the family was divided and the responsibility to pursue the Covenant would pass to one son,
both sons would lead great nations.
From that point the Hebrew text follows only Isaac and his descendants. Ishmael is written out of
Biblical history. He is referred to only when other family members cross his path. However there is
sufficient information available 243 to establish that the branch of Abraham’s family that Sarah and
Isaac rejected, settled to the south and the east, from the eastern edge of Egypt through Central
Arabia towards Babylon, and became a significant influence in the development of the Arab nation.

242 A selection of relevant references: Genesis 12:17-20; 15:14; 18:20-21; 19:13-14, 24-25.
243 Genesis 25:5-6,18 (J), and the Book of Jubilees which forms part of the Jewish Pseudepigrapha.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

133
All of Abraham’s descendants were subject to the foundational Covenant with its components of
divine promise, obligations and penalty clause. 244  Key points are summarised, thus:
Responsibility for honouring the covenant passed through two generations of Abraham’s descendants
with little to distinguish them and lengthy periods of apostasy before family affairs again triggered
dramatic developments. A group of Abraham’s great-grandsons on Isaac’s side sold one, a sibling,
Joseph, into slavery through a group of great-grandsons on Ishmael’s side;  Joseph saved his criminal
brothers from famine by arranging their settlement in Egypt. A later descendant on Isaac’s line,
Moses, married into the apostate line of another of Abraham’s children, Midian (one of six born to a
third woman), then, later, received help from his father-in-law, (a Midianite priest), to organize the
people of Israel after their escape from oppression in Egypt. Israel received a comprehensive code of
laws and practices from Yahweh through Moses but immediately fell into apostasy also.

244 The region which Abraham apparently allocated to Ishmael and Ketura’s sons included the district of Paran, where
Ishmael’s half-brother Midian settled, and also extended into central Arabia.   Isaac’s descendents passed through Paran on
their way to and from Egypt.  Moses married a daughter of a Midianite priest, Jethro, and received help from him in
establishing a legal system for the Israelites after the Exodus.   Within the region were areas that were already settled by the
families of Lot’s sons/grandsons who had been conceived in drunken incest against Lot’s will, the Ammonites and the
Moabites.  Lot’s household had ceased to be a part of Abraham’s wider household after he and Abraham parted company
following their return from Egypt.   They were not included in the covenantal circumcision event, they were subsequently
barred from the assembly of Yahweh for misconduct and reverting to pagan practices, and their core community was
slaughtered by the Israelites under Moses.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

134
Yahweh sternly rebuked Israel, but ratified and then renewed the Covenant through the leadership of
Moses, but not by succession through his line.
The core of the Midianites, having rejected the most basic tenet of the Abrahamic Covenant and
adopted idolatry, led the Israelites to again do likewise and to fall into immorality.
Moses was immediately instructed to extract full vengeance for the sons of Israel and the ensuing
slaughter was carried out in Yahweh’s name.
The events foreshadowed by Yahweh at Hebron had come to pass. The penal clause of the Abrahamic
Covenant had been invoked successively, through Israel’s bondage as a consequence of Jacob’s
failure to adhere to it, and when the Midianites felt the full force of Yahweh’s judgment under
covenant. Equality of divine judgement had been demonstrated through the fate of the
Egyptians, and the Israelites had been enabled to return to the Promised Land.
The Israelites then fought battle after vicious battle to occupy portions of the Promised Land but, in
due course, out of frustration for having to do so, they decided that a loose community
structure with dependence on periodic divine guidance through judges and without direct
leadership controls did not provide security. They wanted a king. They got one, and then
began documenting their history.
The immediate stimulus was the establishment of the monarchy: a crucial event in the evolution of its
nationhood and self-understanding.  It was expected to ease conflict with the peoples whose
territories they were yet to occupy with a guarantee of protection under a divine covenant, and
to usher in an era of privilege under Yahweh’s protection.
The events from Horeb through the Exodus to Sinai and to the establishment of the monarchy were
therefore documented first.  Once the process was underway, the amount of detail recorded
increased. Then the need to record the nation’s pre-history became more apparent but, with
only oral history to rely on they had to leave huge gaps and reliability was uncertain.  They had
largely lost touch with their pre-Egypt heritage and information for the period of several
hundred years prior to Sinai was very sparse.
On this basis the sequence of clusters begins with the call to Moses, the Exodus, the delivery of the
Mosaic Covenant at Sinai, and Yahweh’s prompt threat to destroy the apostates and to narrow the
base of the covenant community to a remnant led by Moses. 245

245 Some authorities maintain that the J and E strands were all written more or less concurrently, in the tenth century
rather than in the tenth and eighth respectively, and that they should be classified by place of composition, either Judah as
an undivided kingdom or Israel. For this reason, and the logical sequence of their content, some passages from the E strand
are included with passages from the J strand in the first cluster.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

135
4. The Concept of Divine Covenant: Stage 1 – Evolution of an Idea
Cluster 1: 10th - 8th 1 cent. BCE 246
The first cluster, written in the tenth century, relates to the period immediately after the Kingdom of
Israel had been established. It records that Israel’s leaders recognized that, as a community, they had
been rescued from oppression by divine intervention under a special relationship imposed by Yahweh,
that they accepted specific obligations under the Mosaic Covenant of Sinai; undertook to bow to no
other god than Yahweh, and acknowledged that serious consequences might result from apostasy and
failure to honour obligations under covenant.
Cluster 2: 10th cent. 247
The writers acknowledged Yahweh’s absolute authority in commands imposed on Abraham in a
divine covenant during an earlier period; that his successors were to bow to no other God and to
accept ongoing responsibility to maintain the specific Abrahamic Covenant; and that Abraham’s
successors divided into two streams, through Isaac and Ishmael.
Cluster 3: 10th cent. and later 248Straining to recall the origins and pre-history of their community,
they acknowledged the divisions within Abraham’s family, the succession through Isaac and then
Jacob, Jacob’s failure, and the community’s bondage and rescue. They tried to glimpse their pre-
history, and recognized creation as an act of God.
Cluster 4: 8th cent. 249
By the eighth century the competing kingdoms of Judah and Israel faced increased external influence
from pagan and polytheistic kingdoms including the Assyrian Empire.   Israel’s King Ahab introduced
the worship of Baal; Judah became a vassal kingdom, a hotbed of idolatry, and apostasy was
widespread.
The primary stage of Israel’s prophetic era began at this point with the inspired work of Hosea, Amos,
Isaiah and others who recognized that Yahweh’s authority is universal; judgment and corrective
punishment is imposed on both individuals and communities or nations; and the agency through
which punishment is administered may be no less corrupt or unworthy than the party being punished.
Cluster 5: 7th,early 6th cent 250
The dramatic prophetic period continued. Elijah and Jeremiah each understood that Yahweh’s
relationships are both personal and communal; that Israel would be subjugated for its apostasy, but
that a remnant would survive so that it would rise again to pursue its continuing role in Yahweh’s
plan.  Jeremiah also anticipated that a messianic figure, ‘a righteous branch springing from David’,
would secure Jerusalem in peace – provided the Covenant was honoured.

246 Exodus 3:6 E, 7-8 J, 16-20 J; 32:9-11, 14 J; Numbers 14:19-25 J
247 Genesis 12:1-7  J; 13:14-16  J; 15:1-4 J & E?; 15:13-16 E?, 18 J; 16:9-10 source ?, 16:11-12  J
248 Genesis 26:3-6 J; 26:24-25 J; 28:13-17 J; 32:27-29 J; 2:5-4:26  J;, J portions of chapters 6,7,8 & 9; 8:21 J
249 Genesis 21:12-13 E; 22:2 E; 22:16-18 Source ?; 28:20-22 E; 46:3-5 E; Hosea 2:7,9-10,13-23; 14:1-8; Amos 3:1-2;  8:4-
7,14; Isaiah 6:1-3; 1:2-4, 9, 24-28; 6:13; 11:1-6, 9-11
250 1 Kings 18:17-18 D; Jeremiah 23:4-6; 30:4-11; 31:31; 33:14-26; 2 Samuel 7:11b,16 source ?; 2 7:12-15 D

--- Sayfa 138 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

136
Editors backdated this understanding to relate it to the oracle of Nathan, David’s reign and Solomon’s
succession.
Cluster 5: 6th cent. 251
Rampant idolatry in Assyria triggered the ministry of the prophet Zoroaster, but the circulation of the
RgVeda, completed ca.900, was also a factor. It was basically socially constructive but Zoroaster
denounced its polytheism and some aspects of its teachings. [Zaehner 1977] Zoroaster’s stringent
monotheism influenced both Cyrus of Persia and Second Isaiah in exile.  They both concluded that
Israel’s God and Persia’s God were one. But Second Isaiah also realized that God has a covenant with
all humanity and that Israel is to exemplify the nature of that relationship.  Editors backdated that
realization also, inserting it in Genesis and Exodus as if it had been a fundamental belief from the
earliest days of Abraham and his predecessors.
Cluster 7: Post exile 6th/5th cent. 252
Jonah, also inspired by the experience of the Exile, realized that God’s love and compassion is for all
who repent, not only those who were obligated under the Abrahamic or Mosaic Covenants.
Editors acted again, inserting an array of critical passages into Genesis and Exodus which had been
compiled from three to four centuries earlier. The insertions included the expanded creation story;
the Universal Covenant through Noah; a greatly expanded statement of the Abrahamic Covenant,
including that circumcision was to be a sign of the Covenant; a redefinition of the land promised in
perpetuity to Israel, reducing it to the land of Canaan and, in so doing, tacitly acknowledging that
Ishmael’s descendants had been blessed  and were occupying the balance of the territory under
covenant, while Israel’s covenant was to relate to Isaac.
But they also inserted passages relating to circumstances after Abraham’s death.  They noted that:
after Jacob/Israel had destroyed the idols, Yahweh confirmed that benefits to flow to his descendants
were because of Abraham’s obedience; Yahweh’s name was not disclosed until Moses received
additional commands in Egypt;  future protection had been made conditional on absolute obedience
to Yahweh prior to Sinai; Israel’s role as a kingdom of priests with stronger conditionality of covenant
was imposed at Sinai,  and that there would be continuity of punishment for breaches  of the
Covenant, They also inserted the 18th century Amorite Hammurabi Code into Book of Covenant
without acknowledging in any way that it was only known to the Israelites because of the Exile.
Those additions represent the major flowering of Israel’s understanding of Divine Covenant and it
happened because of its interaction with diverse peoples who were also struggling to understand their
relationship with God. However the editors should not be criticised for doing so. They were concerned
to lift the self-understanding and commitment of Israel. They were not to anticipate the confusion
that their action would later cause.
Cluster 8: Post Exile to 2nd cent. BCE 253

251 Second Isaiah 42:5-8; 43:8-12; 44:24, 28; 45:13
252 Jonah 3:4-10; 4:1;10-11; Genesis 1:1-2:4 P;  8:15-17  P; 9:1-17 P; 17:4-8 P; 17:19-21 P; 28:3-4 P;  35:11-13 P; Exodus 6:4-9
P; 15:26  D; 19:3-6  D; 19:5-6 D; 20:5-6 source ?;  20:23 to 23:33  D ?; chapters 25-31; 35-40 P
253 Malachi 1:11-14; 2:17-3: 5; Jubilees 6:1-38

--- Sayfa 139 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

137
Then there was a dramatic change of direction. Malachi asserted that the failure of Israel’s priestly
system had brought the era of prophecy to an end, pending the arrival of a Messenger to restore the
relationship between Israel and God.  And in a stunning work that was relegated to the Jewish
Pseudepigrapha, the writer of Jubilees asserted that the Universal Covenant with all humanity, only
recently inserted with the story of Noah, was the basic covenant. The Mosaic covenant, he insisted,
was a continuation or renewal of the Universal Covenant. [Van Ruiten 2003 p.190; Barnstone 2005.
p.223].
Cluster 9: 1st cent.BCE 254
Those new understandings were extended by other writers whose works are also excluded from the
canon.
The Qumran Community believed that Israel was condemned by misconduct during the Hasmonean
expansion [Barnstone 2005. p.223]; that it would be the faithful remnant that provided a vehicle for
the renewal of the Covenant of Sinai; and that the rigid discipline in conduct and acceptance of
communal and personal covenants that it imposed on those who wished to join it was a requirement
for renewal. [Evans 2003 p.59]
Philo regarded covenant as a matter of God’s gift of grace, law and justice being reflected without
restriction in those who might have responsibility for human affairs.  It was not a matter of a contract
imposed or negotiated between God and a person or community, and it was not essential to express or
conceptualize religious belief or personal obligations. [Grabbe 2003 p. 257,266].
Cluster 10: 1st - 4th cent. CE  255
According to the authors of the Synoptic Gospels, Jesus taught that the Mosaic Covenant obliged
Israel to contribute to the life of humanity, but that the substance of law — good relations with
neighbours — determined every person’s relationship with God, and that he believed himself to be the
fulfilment of Malachi’s expectations.
However Jesus’ disciples and later adherents gradually departed from that teaching.
Paul, writing ca.55-59 CE before any of the Gospels were in circulation, implied that Israelites who
rejected Jesus forfeited a covenantal relationship with God to those “of the promise” and that
descendants of Abraham who were not through Isaac had never been part of the covenant.  The writer
of Hebrews,  ca.60-96, taught that the Christian “presence” is superior; the Mosaic Covenant was
abrogated and Christ had “obtained” a more excellent one; that the ‘old’ covenant was at fault, not the
people subject to it; Jesus’ promises are “better”, and Christ is a mediator between humanity and God.
Ephesians, ca. 90-95, rejected the later prophets’ teaching about God’s personal covenantal
relationship with all humanity, and stated that gentiles were “without God” until Jesus provided
“access in one Spirit to the Father.”  The writer of John’s Gospel, ca.90-110, insisted on a one-track
salvation: Jesus was the way, the truth and the life; no one comes to the Father but by him.

254 Qumran Manual of Discipline, Section 1; Damascus Document; Philo, Mut. 51, 52; Somm. 2

255 Matthew 5:13-16; 5:17-20; 6:7-15; 11:2-6; 25:31-34; 26:63-64; Luke 13:34-35 ; 9:34-36; 22:14-20; Mark 16:14-16; Acts
3:25-26; Romans 9:3-8; Hebrews 8:5-9, 13; 9:11-14, 13:20; Ephesians 2:11-22; John, various chapters.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

138
Then, as the church took a grip on the future of imperial affairs, it adopted the Athanasian Creed,
ca.381-428, and rejected all other notions of covenant. Whosoever will be saved must hold the
Catholick Faith whole and undefiled or, without doubt, he shall perish everlastingly.  That was not a
matter of enhancing faith by clarifying teaching; it was a case of rejecting a basis for faith and
abrogating the teaching of Jesus.
Cluster 11: 6th cent. 256
The consequences of that creedal statement, and the conduct that followed, triggered the ministry of
the Prophet Muhammad and the dictation of the Qur’an.
The framework of the Qur’an is that the scriptures of all three communities comprise ‘The Book’, and,
concerning covenant, its essential elements correspond with the teaching of the Hebrew prophets and
Jesus of Nazareth.
They can be encapsulated thus: the Abrahamic, Mosaic, Christian and Universal Covenants are all
valid, but no covenant relates to David.
The paramount Qur’anic consideration in covenant is submission to the will of God in one’s conduct
and in honouring all moral obligations; recognition that divine judgment is the prerogative of God
alone;  anticipation of  judgment for transgressions  on that basis and the need to monitor one’s own
conduct and not to assume automatic salvation after acknowledging one’s sins. Repentance is a
matter of the heart, not the mouth, and one must not look for benefits through personal or material
intervention or intercession.
Paradise is for all who live according to God’s will, not only ‘People of the Book’, and Sinai did not
abrogate the Abrahamic Covenant which continues to bind all descendants through Ishmael to
Muhammad as the ‘Seal of the Prophets’. Sinai was an extension of the Abrahamic Covenant that
binds only those descended through Isaac. Both Jews and Christians have breeched covenants that
they acknowledge and are subject to judgment accordingly.  Believers who accept as valid any of the
divine covenants are bound by the same covenantal concepts of obedience to the Law, and there is no
need for separate confirming covenants.
The universal covenant embraces all humanity with obligations that relate to all living creatures: not
only humanity.
Quite specifically, the Qur’an maintains that Jews are still part of the Divine Plans and rigidly subject
to covenant as the people chosen for a particular role. The prophecy of “The Night Journey”
anticipated that if they again transgressed against their neighbours they would again suffer Divine
retribution. It was not a prophecy that they would transgress, because they, like everyone else, have
the facility of absolute free will.  But it was a very definite statement that in the event of a further
communal transgression they would be subject to exemplary consequences.

256 The Qur’an:  Sura 2:62, 83-96; 3:64-80, 98-109, 113-120, 144-148, 183-188, 199; 4:46-48, 152-159; 5:1-5, 7-43; 7:188;
17:1-10;  18:110; 20:116-128; 21:78-81; 27:91-93; 29:14-22; 33:7-20, 38-40; 37:100-138;  48:28-29; 52:1-28.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

139
Cluster 12: 12th cent. 257
The preeminent 12th century Spanish Jewish scholar, Moses Maimonides, accepted the validity of
Muhammad’s ministry but rejected Qur’anic belief that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah.  In spite of
scathing criticism of the great “stumbling block” of Christian theology he saw a role for each of
Judaism, Islam and Christianity in bringing humanity to understand its relationship with God.
Disagreeing with the Qur’an, and thus playing into the hand of the Church, Maimonides wrote that
David’s succession was under covenant and that a Messianic King would arise from his line.  He
foreshadowed the return of the dispersed of Israel to the Promised Land under the Covenant of Sinai
and predicted that their return would be associated with a war between powers of great evil: Gog and
Magog. His ultimate prediction, corresponding with Malachi’s belief that prophetic capacity would, in
due course, return to Israel, was that the return would be a prelude to an era free of famine and war;
that Israel would dwell securely with its prophetic capacity restored; that “the occupation of the entire
world will be solely to know God,” and that “the world will be filled with the knowledge of God as the
sea fills the ocean bed.” But the Church disagreed.  The Messianic Era was here and now, it said,
under its delegated management.
Cluster 13: an opportunity lost, and the 19th-20th cent.
Two hundred and fifty years later, Muslim forces occupied Constantinople and the Church’s situation
changed significantly.  It did not wish people who held power under its patronage to trade with, or
reach political accommodation with, the powers of Islam.  It used various mechanisms, including its
versions of covenants to coerce the principalities and powers into a massive crusade to regain ground
and suppress Islam. It did not succeed.  It further undermined relations between the communities of
faith, inhibited any moves towards reconciliation, triggered a competitive push for territories and
initiated the European Colonial Era.  This was to be managed on the basis of the Athanasian Creed
and contrary to every other understanding of covenant.
The pivotal document was the bull Romanus Pontifex, issued in favour of Portugal by Pope Nicholas V
in January, 1455, little more than a year after the Ottoman occupation of Constantinople in May,
1453.    Portugal was to enjoy absolute power over people and lands that might be discovered in the
New World.  258
But the first of a series of critical documents, the bull Dum Diversas had already authorized,
promoted and legitimized slavery in any areas where Islam was present.  It was issued a year prior to
the occupation of Constantinople, in May 1452.
“We … [grant to King Alfonso the faculty]…  to invade, search out, capture, vanquish, and subdue all
Saracens and pagans whatsoever, and other enemies of Christ wheresoever placed, and the kingdoms,

257 The Mishneh Torah, volume 14, The Laws of Kings and Their Wars, chapters 11, 12.

258 Romanus Pontifex reflects a particular interpretation of the New Covenant: that the temporal head of the Church
exercised authority delegated by God; and that the teachings of the Prophets and Jesus which were guidelines for
relationships between people and personal conduct towards one’s neighbours could be ignored without regard for Divine
Judgment.  It grossly exceeded the parameters of the Athanasian Creed.   While the creed demanded absolute acceptance of
the Catholick Faith it did not presume to hand the responsibility for judgment and punishment to the Church.  It
anticipated the return of Jesus, that he would judge the living and the dead upon his return, and that in the meantime either
judgment would be left in abeyance or saving grace would be exercised by God.

--- Sayfa 142 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

140
dukedoms, principalities, dominions … held and possessed by them and to reduce their persons to
perpetual slavery, and … to convert them to his [and his successors] use and profit…” 259
The church hierarchy had totally rejected the concept of Universal Covenant and the guidelines for
conduct towards one’s neighbours. The understanding of covenantal responsibility which had been
developed through interaction between people of a wide range of experiences, and which had been
edited progressively into the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian New Testament, should have
prompted them to reflect on what the future might hold. They ignored the teaching that judgment
may be imposed and extend through future generations as a consequence of communal wrongdoing:
they sought to choose which aspects of covenant they would respond to.
In 1869, against the backdrop of the European Colonial Era and turmoil in Europe, the Philadelphia
Conference of Reform Rabbis adopted a platform that said the purpose of the ending of  the second
Jewish commonwealth had been to realize the priestly mission entrusted to Israel to lead the nations
to know and to worship God, and the Messianic aim is  the union of all men as children of God
confessing unity of God and a call to moral sanctification: not a restored Jewish state under David’s
descendants. [Meyer 1988 p. 256]
But later, responding directly to the impact of Christian-Jewish relations in Europe, Theodore Herzl
wrote in ‘The Jewish State’ that the Jewish question is no more a social than a religious one; that Jews
shall not be left in peace and that the only solution was to make it a political world-question to be
settled by civilized nations. [Herzl 1896 p. 2]
Again, the Church did not agree.  Civilita Cattolica published a statement that to reconstitute Israel is
against the prediction of Christ Himself and Jews must remain dispersed to render witness to Christ
by their existence. [Minerbi 1990 p. 96]
But in line with Britain’s aspirations not to be defeated in The Great War, Arthur James Balfour wrote
in 1917 that: “His Majesty’s Government (favours) the establishment in Palestine of a national home
for the Jewish people and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object.”
[Isaacs 1995 p. 202]
Then two Christian leaders who had both been affected by that war responded in quite different ways.
Karl Barth wrote first, (Romans, 1922) that Israel and the Jews have not been cast off.  They have
been “veritably entrusted with the oracles of God … the Risen Lord is no founder of a new religion …
(and God) overcometh the unrighteousness of the existing order…” [Barth 1968 p. 396]
Then, as already noted, Adolf Hitler followed with his infamous statement in Mein Kampf: “I am
acting in accord with the will of the Almighty Creator: by defending myself against the Jew, I am
fighting for the work of the Lord …” [Watt 1969 p.60]

5. The reality of Shared Covenant: a requirement for dialogue and reassessment
During the past five generations the conjunction of prophecy generated within two of the three
primary Abrahamic faiths has involved the conduct of all three, and, with the declaration of the State

259 Various translations and histories of the document are available. Some indicate that it was issued to both Spain and
Portugal.  This extract: www.romancatholicism.org accessed August 20, 2007.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

141
of Israel and its consequences, every aspect of Divine Covenant that has been illustrated progressively
though four thousand years of Biblical and Qur’anic history and human interaction is being illustrated
again.
This interaction confirms the reality of divine covenant.  In doing so it also confirms that each of the
Abrahamic faiths owe their origin to inspiration and revelation, and that they are each legitimate
instruments of God’s will with a continuing role tightly obligated within covenant.
Several circumstances have therefore been demonstrated.
The Divine Covenants under which each of the Abrahamic Faiths came into being are firmly in place,
but in circumstances that none of them welcome or, generally, appreciate.
The people Israel are the primary instrument through which humanity will be enabled to understand
and respond to its relationship with God; the prophetic understanding that a remnant would
remain to re-establish its communal function after any or each successive breech of covenant and
punishment has been confirmed; and in current circumstances the role of the reinvigorated
remnant is to be a catalyst to precipitate change to the benefit of humanity at large and consistent
with Divine Will.   Israel is a very reluctant catalyst.   Its people find it very difficult to
acknowledge that they are the focal point in conflict from which the dominant and privileged
Christian Western World – which they see as their protector and with which they are intimately
enmeshed – will emerge with its position of relative privilege and authority reversed.
The Christian Church’s role is to be a vehicle to proclaim the Good News of the love of God for all
humanity on the basis of the teaching of the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth, through whom the
Gospel was delivered as an extension of the Hebrew experience and as a pattern for relationships
and conduct to enable humanity to live in harmony and stability.  Through the misinterpretation
of its role, the misconduct of its hierarchy and gross exploitation by commercial and political
powers acting on its self-understanding, it has basically failed in its mission, and in the eyes of
the world-at-large it faces an uphill struggle to establish its credibility and fulfil its role.
The role of the Prophet Muhammad and the establishment of Islam as the third Abrahamic faith,
generated through the line of Abraham’s first born son, Ishmael, was to confirm those who had
gone before, to correct errors of understanding, and to lead and stimulate reform in both
religious belief and personal and communal or corporate conduct.  The pursuance of reform in
obedience to Divine command remains the basis of its Divine Covenant which it must pursue
while restraining those elements within its ranks who – responding to the need to offset the
exploitation and degradation of a significant proportion of the world’s people – have taken
precipitate action to accelerate the pace of change.
The conduct that brought about confirmation of these roles relates directly to the prophecy revealed
in the critical Qur’anic passage, The Night Journey, and to Maimonides’ prediction of the
circumstances of the return of the people Israel to The Promised Land.
For most of its history from the seventh century CE the Jewish community was in no position to
transgress — as a community — against its neighbours. It was scattered, fragmented and constantly
oppressed by the Church and its associated powers — the amorphous Christian gel.  That situation
changed, quite quickly, with the preparation of Herzl’s plan for a homeland for Jews in Palestine and
the establishment of the World Zionist Organization to implement it.  Measures taken to implement
the plan constituted the transgression. [Aarons & Loftus 1994; Lilienthal 1953, 1978; Tessler 1994; Fry

--- Sayfa 144 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

142
2000(2)]  Adolf Hitler then fulfilled the role of the Scourge foreshadowed by the Qur’anic passage. A
remnant remained to return to the Promised Land, to restore Israel as a cohesive community and to
provide a focal point for the efforts and aspirations of those remaining scattered in the Diaspora, and
to pursue Israel’s prophetic role under Covenant.
But, while the transgression was entirely a matter of absolute freewill, it was prompted by, and was a
consequence of, the abuse of authority and breech of Covenant by the Christian community, its
leaders and powers associated with it during the long and painful experience of its institutional
growth and the European Colonial Era. Hitler and his Alliance constituted one of the ‘persons’ of
Maimonides’ Gog and Magog. The remaining powers of the Christian Western World — the Allies —
constituted the other.
In fact current world crises need not have erupted around the establishment of the State of Israel if a
different approach had been taken to resettlement. It was predicated on the assuagement of the guilt
complexes of the Western Christian powers and the churches for their role in bringing about the
Shoah, and the assumed desirability of repatriating all people who considered themselves as Jewish to
the region in which the religion of their forebears originated.  It was then precipitated and brought
into effect by the corruption and blackmail exercised by those pushing for a decision by the United
Nations to partition the Mandated Territory of Palestine. [Aarons & Loftus 1994 pp. 168-171; Fry
2000 (2) pp. 1481-83, 1955-56]  These situations and actions compounded breeches of covenant by
both the Jewish and Christian communities.
If a reassessment of the theology of covenant which determines communal self-understanding and
conduct had been undertaken prior to, or immediately after World War Two, and if the economic and
political powers had responded appropriately, events could have unfolded in a radically different way.
A paradigm shift is now necessary to avoid further rapid deterioration and consequences which may
go far beyond inhibiting the development of harmony and stability in humanity’s affairs on the
plateau.
The Muslim community of Dãr al-islãm need not have become involved in a crisis which was
essentially a matter of Christian-Jewish relations. Its relations with the Jewish community had been
quite sound. However it did become involved because its people shared the territory being partitioned
to establish the State of Israel; they were among those most deeply affected by the European Colonial
Era; and they see their moral, social and cultural norms being undermined by Western (thus
Christian) influence. Furthermore, as a result of a key phase of the conflicts centred on Palestine and
the City of Jerusalem, the Muslim World Community now enjoys financial, political and cultural
influence as great as at any time in its history, even allowing for the peak of power enjoyed by the
Ottoman Empire. [Fry 2000(2) 1785-1820]
The key phase was the partial oil embargo that was imposed against the USA and Holland in
retaliation for the resupply of arms to Israel by the United States which enabled Israel to continue the
Ramadan or Yom Kippur War and end direct hostilities without having to negotiate a settlement of
the concerns of the Palestinian people. The embargo enabled the source countries to dramatically

--- Sayfa 145 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

143
raise the price for their crude oil.260  With a massive new flow of ‘petro-dollars’ the source countries,
many of which were Muslim, were able to fund aid and development programs in underprivileged
countries for which those countries had been begging, as well as their own development. Hospitals,
schools, mosques, universities and joint investments flowed freely. The prestige and influence of the
benefactors rose accordingly. So did interest in Islam.

6. The Way Ahead, and a Wider Role for the Gülen Movement?
Each community under covenant has a potentially critical role in securing humanity’s future.  If they
act in concert, the course towards harmony and stability can be relatively smooth.  If they do not:
ruggedness and trauma can be anticipated, but the outcome in either case must be the same. A
dramatic shift in influence and privilege from the Western world to the balance of the world;
realignment of priorities in resource allocation; a dramatic lift in the circumstances of countries that
are currently in a state of degradation and depression,  and an equally dramatic shift in patterns of
personal, communal and corporate conduct in the Western world will inevitably take effect under the
Universal Covenant.
A particular obligation of each of the Abrahamic faiths is to enable humanity to better understand its
relationship with the Divine. If the resolution of the current world crisis is seen to be to the benefit of
humanity-at-large, then it follows that if that resolution is seen to be at the initiative of the Abrahamic
faiths, or as a consequence of interaction between them, it may lead to global recognition of a
relationship between humanity and the Divine. However, there is little doubt that if current
leadership fails to act on this opportunity it may, in the immediate future, be responsible for leaving
people of other faiths, or none at all, with the belief that this God business is all a figment of
Abrahamic imagination. The outcome depends on the people involved. None are bound like robots or
puppets.  They all enjoy authority and the opportunity to act totally on free will. The only thing that
binds them is their obligation under divine covenant.
There appear to be four alternative pathways to stability and harmony — or five if the leadership
groups of all three faiths act in concert.
Israel and its supporters, for whom the security of Israel is paramount, take two concurrent steps:  1)
to negotiate an end to the Palestinian crisis directly with the Palestinian people, and 2) to initiate the
redirection of global governance and resources by using their influence directly on the political
economies of the West and by collaborating with the Non-Western powers. This would remove the
Palestinian Question from the international conflict equation, dramatically change Israel’s relations
with those people who see it as a tool perpetuating Western domination and oppression, and make the
US military umbrella totally redundant.  There could be no clearer demonstration of Israel’s existence
under covenant.

260 The countries from which the Western world was, at that time, sourcing the bulk of its petroleum requirements had been
struggling to obtain anything like a realistic return for their commodities.  The Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) had been established but its members efforts to achieve a fare share of revenue or effective participation
in production were constantly thwarted by oppressive collusion by the cartel of oil ‘majors’ and their governments.   That
situation changed dramatically when a group of Arab countries – allies of Palestine but not all members of OPEC or directly
involved in the war – imposed the partial embargo and raised prices.   The West screamed “cartel”, but it was crying “wolf”.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

144
The Christian Churches initiate a reassessment of fundamental theology in collaboration with leaders
and authorities of its partner Abrahamic faiths who then, together, use their influence on the political
and economic powers of the West to ensure the redirection of global governance, authority and
resources.  Muslim scholars and leaders take the same path: initiate a reassessment of fundamental
theology in collaboration with leaders and authorities of its partner Abrahamic faiths who then,
together, use their influence on the political and economic powers of the West to ensure the same
redirection of global governance, authority and resources.
A breakdown in international relations results from the crises in the Middle East; the redistribution of
resources and authority follows, accompanied by the redrawing of international systems of
governance, authority, financial management and capital investment.  But the process is
different.  It involves collaboration between all interested parties in the Non-Western world,
excludes the Western world, and results from the non-Western powers coalescing (as they are
tending to already) around complications flowing from the Israel-Palestine imbroglio.
The first option requires a dramatic change in dominant attitudes in both the United States and
Israel, and there is no evidence that change is imminent. People of influence in Israel’s affairs do not
believe that the Christian Churches will ever change their fundamental theology and self-
understanding, or influence the conduct of their adherents sufficiently to ensure security for Israel
and safety for Jews in the Diaspora.
The second is hardly achievable because of the Vatican’s absolute resistance to a process of theological
reassessment or renewal; the inability of the World Council of Churches (in spite of strong activity in
interfaith dialogue) to act as a vehicle for rapid change because of the arrangements under which it is
constituted and operates, and the determination among the Western Powers to maintain their
position of privilege with near-complete disregard for any guidance from the churches.
Given the strained relations between Western governments and the Muslim world at large; the fact
that the Islamic Conference is concerned only with relations between states; and because Islam does
not have a centralized body of authority that can readily take initiatives in matters of religion except,
perhaps, the Saudi Arabia-based World Muslim League (Rabita), this leaves the fourth option – a
total breakdown in international relations – as the most likely.
However it is clearly preferable that such dynamic change, with consequences that can not readily be
identified and quantified in advance of the event, should take place with the steadying influence of
one, if not all, of the communities of faith which are bound under divine covenant. In this regard the
Gülen Movement is in a potentially critical position. 261  Although there are Muslim organizations in

261 People of religions that do not have a perception of a divine being, or divine intervention, may well understand a simple
schematic scenario with the Abrahamic faiths identified by their initials, J, C and M, and with their responses to divine
covenant, and the consequences of failure to honour their respective obligations, summarized thus –

--- Sayfa 147 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

145
many countries that have been established to secure or negotiate in support of their communities, and
to offset Islamophoebia through dialogue with other faiths, there are none with the philosophical
approach, experience, competence and influence of the umbrella Gülen Movement. The initiatives
that Fethullah Gülen and his colleagues have already taken suggest that they may be able to initiate an
appropriate process for reassessment, bringing together scholars and leaders of each faith to work
together on a continuing program.
The scheme of cooperation ought not be limited to like-minded organizations within, or involving,
only Islam, Christianity and Judaism, whether with, or without, the formal involvement of the
institutions of those partner faiths. It ought welcome participation from scholars other than those of
the revealed religions. There are certainly many potential partners for the process. To list them in this
paper is not appropriate, but an outline of the rise of organizations set up to facilitate interfaith
dialogue or to serve minority faith communities is appropriate.
Chart 3 indicates when and in what relative numbers such organizations have been established.  The
earliest ones were single faith support groups or, as in the case of the Muslim-Christian Association in
1918, reactions against the Balfour Declaration and the activities of the Zionist communities.  No
organizations that were established prior to World War Two for the purposes of dialogue, cooperation
or the protection of minorities involved direct membership of institutions of the Abrahamic faiths.
They were founded by concerned individuals who, in most cases, had strong institutional links, but
membership was individual.
In the years following World War Two the emphasis was heavily on Christian-Jewish reconciliation,
except in the United States where there was a proliferation of single interest and multiple interest
religious and civil rights groups.  Since the establishment of the State of Israel and the rise of
interfaith tension and conflict there has been a corresponding rise in initiatives following each related
war. The Iranian crisis, the decision of the United States to provide Israel with direct military aid, and
Israel’s confrontation with Syria in 1963 prompted a sharp rise in the organization of Muslim groups
in the US, then a dramatic overall increase in activity followed the Six Day, Ramadan and  first Gulf
Wars. (The phenomenon of the establishment of a rash of single interest and multiple interest
religious and civil rights groups in the United States occurred again following the Ramadan War, but
with a disproportionate emphasis on the defence of particular Christian-group interests.)
During the 1960’s and 1970’s some Christian churches and institutions took a direct interest in
interfaith organizations and activities, and Christian theological training institutions began to add the
study of non-Christian religions to their curriculum, but they also closed ranks and placed greater
emphasis on teaching the concepts which their partner faiths disagreed about.  Of special significance

The inadequate response to its task by J led to C being brought into being.    The misconduct of C led to M beingcalled.   C’s
continuing misconduct induced the transgression of J which triggered the application of prophecy from M (the Night
Journey).  C then provided all three parties involved in the prophecies:  two powers of evil for the prophecy from J (Gog and
Magog), and the Scourge, Hitler, for M (the Night Journey).  Through conflict with M, J is now the catalyst in precipitating
conflict between C and M in circumstances that bring covenantal retribution upon C and benefit for the whole of humanity
long term.   However the scenario is not yet played out.  The geographic and physical circumstances of both J and M are
such that it is virtually certain that if they do not act to help resolve the situation, the consequences of a continuation of
current policies will be catastrophe for both of them as well as bringing degradation upon C.   The features which are central
to their beliefs and self-understanding – the State of Israel and Jerusalem, and the heartland of Dãr al-islãm, Mecca – lie at
critical points in the Middle East zone of conflict.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
|  1870/79
|  1880/89
| 1890/99
|  1900/09
|  1910/19
|  1920/29
|  1930/39
|  1940/49
|  1950/59
|  1960/69
| 1970/79
| 1980’89
| 1990/99
| 2000/07| 08
Chart 3

     8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ☼

                        7

   6

 5

         4

                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                      ⌂
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                     +

                                                               □                                               *

                                                            

																																																													
											
↑         ↑    ↑       ↑   ↑                               ↑  ↑↑       ↑  ↑      ↑            ↑  ↑↑   ↑               ↑    ↑          ↑       ↑  ↑      ↑  ↑   ↑          ↑      ↑                ↑                          ↑              ↑↑                 ↑                       ↑           ↑↑  ↑   ↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
            ↓                        ↓                                ↓                                          ↓               ↓                                  ↓  ↓                  ↓      ↓                ↓                   ↓        ↓           ↓
 |
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
| 2000/07|08_____
▲▲▲  ▲     ▲▲    ▲                       ▲▲▲    ▲▲▲▲              ▲  ▲▲    ▲▲  ▲       ▲      ▲▲▲_▲▲▲▲…▲▲    ▲              ▲             ▲▲      ▲    ▲▲               ▲                ▲  ▲                     ▲▲▲
Papal infallibility German C’cordat  □Dreyfus case Pont.Bib. Com
1st World War
Versailles

Dunkirk
H bomb race
Apartheid SA
US  ME oil plan 5.‘Peace/Galilee’ 6.1st Gulf War 7.2nd Intifada

Kulturkampf
Russia May Law  Der Judenstaat  Protocols/Zion
*Balfour Dec
+Palestine M’date Hitler in office Barbarossa
Coup in Egypt
Org of AF. Unity 4.Ramadan War  Lebanon  C/w  Kosovo              ☼ ‘9/11’

French 3rd Rep.  Lovers of Zion      !st Zionist Cong Muslim League  Hitler’s vision
Mein Kampf
#Reich C’nc’dat  ⌂Sov/Pol Acc    Crisis in Iran
Cuban Missiles Oil embargo
 Intifada               Dissolution of    War on Terror
Russo-Turkish War

Oath/Modernism
Lateran Treaty
Boycott
Final Solution      2.Suez Crisis
Vatican II
Iranian Rev
 Birth of Hamas    Soviet Union
Afghanistan

                            ‘Transfer’ agreed Asia/Pacific plan  Colonial
PLO
Afghasnistan/Sov  Iran/Iraq War                                  8.2nd Gulf War

BiraBidzhan
Pearl Harbour/
   watershed
3.Six Day War
                                                         London

Mit Br’nder Sorge Chelmo …

Suez blocked                                                                                           Lebanon – again…

Evian Conf.
German defeat
OAPEC                                                                                                    Division of Palestine

Munich
Arab League

OIC                                                                                                          Israel>Syria

‘Crystal Night’
Hiroshima                                                                                                                                                            Iran ?

Eastern Pact
Japanese defeat

Polish guarantee Palestine Partition

2nd World War 1.Arab/Israeli War

Renascent Judaism

World C. of Churches

                                                         NATO                                                                                                                                                              Ian Fry, MCD/NL Oct 2007
?
Small arrows indicate circumstances that have
aggravated ↑ or reduced ↓ the level of
         Anti-Semitism,
         Islamophobia
         Attacks against Christians
         Other anti-religious activity
Contradictory influences apply from region to region and
culture to culture
The trend line indicates military and political activity/intervention
New Interfaith initiatives correspond closely with the trend line
Events are grouped in decadal periods
Critical events are shown in bold and identified by arrows:
THE MIDDLE EAST
… the temperature of crisis and instability in world affairs
	









	




		










	




--- Sayfa 149 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

147
were the establishment of the Vatican’s Secretariat for Non-Christians, and the World Council of
Churches’ Unit for Dialogue with Living Faiths and Ideologies.
The consequences of the Ramadan War, the oil embargo, the Gulf War and the associated implosion
of the Soviet Union then encouraged universities to become more directly involved, organizing
conferences and research programs. The biggest increase in Muslim organizational activity in the
USA, and the broadening of educational curricula followed the Kosovo Crisis. That pattern continued
through the 1990’s, and several universities established centres for interfaith studies and dialogue, or
inter-civilization studies: the University of Malaya possibly being the first.
However, since September 11, 2001, the dark mood of foreboding and the realization that the world
does indeed face a crisis linked to both religious self-understanding and its abuse, has boosted the
level of interfaith activity in all fields.  The resource-use blocks in chart 1 indicate the critical nature of
the point we are at in human history.  The dominant assumptions in the Western world concerning its
relationship with the Non-Western world are illustrated by the projections for future resource
consumption which are based on data current at the time of the ‘shock and awe’ invasion of Iraq. They
indicate that the assumed relationship is totally unsustainable on two grounds. First: the impact on
the environment if the projected consumption levels in the West were to be ‘achieved’, regardless of
any efforts by the Non-Western world to achieve comparable consumption levels. Second: the
inevitability of retaliatory conflict when human relationships are abused by such disproportionate
resource consumption. No amount of interfaith dialogue could possibly placate the mass of people if
that pattern were to become the reality.
Also, since September 11, 2001, additional universities have established centres for dialogue studies
(including LaTrobe and the Australian Catholic University). Privately constituted and funded centres
(such as the Weeramantry International Centre for Peace Education and Research, Colombo) and the
World Futures Council have also been established, and the flow of new initiatives is being maintained
at a frenetic pace. [For a selected chronology of the establishment of significant organizations and
institutions illustrating the pattern of developments see endnote262.]

262 The institutions and organizations named here have been selected and listed to illustrate the changing emphasis in
international concern and initiatives relating to the interfaith relations and the crisis in the Middle East.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

148
The significance of the contribution that Fethullah Gülen and his colleagues in the Movement have
already made is best appreciated by relating it to the circumstances in which he became involved.
By the time Gülen abandoned elementary education and began reading religion with his father and
Haci Sitki Effendi, efforts had been stirred in Turkey to reverse some of the Kemalist Reforms and to
bring its domestic codes into line with the liberties and rights subscribed to by adopting the Charter of
the United Nations in which the country was entitled to a seat – having broken its neutrality in the
closing stages of the war against Germany to benefit from post war association with the victorious
Western powers. 263  As a result, some degree of religious freedom had already been restored, religious
instruction was allowed upon request at state schools, a faculty of divinity had been established at the
Ankara University, and the Sufi Brotherhoods were being revived.
It was then that Gülen became interested in the works of Said Nursi who was said to be the inventor of
Interfaith dialogue because of his correspondence with the Pope and the Orthodox Patriarch in an
effort to bring Muslims and Christians together in opposition to Communism.  By the time his mentor
died in 1960 and Gülen began giving lectures himself, the Middle East had reached another Arab-
Israeli war involving the Great Powers — the Suez Crisis.  He travelled twice for the Haj, in 1968 and
again in January 1973. His experience of Saudi Arabia and the Eastern Mediterranean on the second
pilgrimage would have still been prominent in his memory when the Ramadan War broke out nine
months later, but at that time his principal concern appears to have been religious recovery and
domestic reform at home, and his preaching focus remained firm: love, right behaviour before God,
the requirements of the Qur’an, tolerance, human rights, justice, community cohesion, democratic
participation, and the need for the religion of Islam to be given its rightful place as an influence in the
life and education of the community.
However, after the Ramadan War his foreign contacts and interest in foreign affairs appear to have
increased steadily, and when he returned from Mecca and Medina to Turkey by the land route
following his third Haj in August 1986 he was clearly immersed in the international crisis.  The

 1843, B’nai B’rith; 1893, Parliament of the World’s Religions; 1897, World Zionist Organization; 1900, International
Association for Religious Freedom; 1901, Jewish National Fund; 1906, American Jewish Committee; All India Muslim
League; 1913, Anti-Defamation League; 1918, Muslim-Christian Association; 1928, Muslim Brotherhood; 1936, World
Congress of Faiths; 1944, National Jewish Community Relations Advisory Council (USA); Jewish Council for Public Affairs
(USA); 1945, Arab League; 1947, International Council of Christians and Jews; 1950, American Israel Public Affairs
Committee; 1956, Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations; 1961, Christian Legal Society (USA);
1963, Muslim World League (Rabita); Muslim Students Association (USA & Canada); Islamic Society of North
America; 1964, Vatican Secretariat for Non-Christians; 1968, Jewish Defence League; 1969, Organization of
the Islamic Conference;  1970, World Conference of Religions for Peace; 1971, Dialogue Unit of the WCC;
1973, North American Islamic Trust; 1974, Conference of Jews Christians and Muslims;  1976, Jerusalem
Center for Public Affairs; 1984, Islamic Relief (UK); 1985, Muslim Youth of North America; 1989, Holy Land Foundation;
1990, American Muslim Council; 1992, Muslim American Society; International Movement for a Just World;  1993,
International Interfaith Centre; Association of Muslim Lawyer5s;  1994, Journalists and Writers Foundation; Council on
American-Islamic Relations (CAIR);  1995, Minorities of Europe; 1996, Children of Abraham Institute; Society for
Scriptural Reasoning; Three faiths Forum;  1997, Muslim Council of Britain; Islamic Human Rights Commission; 1998,
Oslo Coalition on Freedom of Religion or Belief; Forum 18; World Faiths Development Dialogue;  1999, Rumi Forum;
2000, United Religions Initiative; 2002, Interreligious Engagement Project ; World Council of Religious Leaders;  2003,
Jewish-Christian-Muslim Association of Australia; Australian National Dialogue of Christians, Muslims and Jews; 2004,
World Futures Council; 2006, Mosque and Imams National Advisory Board (UK); 2007, Family Action Organization (USA).
263 Turkey’s neutrality had been assured by concurrent treaties of mutual assistance with both Britain and France, a
nonaggression treaty with Germany, and its capacity to maintain passage through the Black Sea to the Soviet Union.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

149
Iranian Revolution was history; Israel’s destruction of the PLO and Beirut were fresh memories;
Jordan was about to assume responsibility for the West Bank; and Osama bin Laden, with aid from
the USA, was helping the Afghans humiliate the Soviet Union which was preparing to withdraw.
Gülen’s preaching was taking on a new emphasis.
He was aware that the Catholic Church’s attitude had changed, that it was looking further afield and
encouraging Christians to have dialogue with people of other faiths. He noted that the church “is
turning towards other religions that preserve the concept and meaning of God as One,
Transcendental, Creator, Ruler of Fate and Wise.” He was soon prepared to say that “Interfaith
dialogue seeks to realise religion’s basic oneness and unity, and the universality of belief.  Religion
embraces all beliefs and races in brotherhood, and exalts love, respect, tolerance, forgiveness, mercy,
human rights, peace, brotherhood, and freedom via its Prophets.” [02.05.2002]
He was well aware of opposition from certain quarters, notably the Kharijites, Karmatis and
Anarchists, but he put his commitment into practice in seeking meetings with the Greek Patriarch
Bartholomeos in April 1996, Pope John Paul II in February 1998, and Chief Rabbi David Aseo as
recently as July 2006.
Gülen’s writings on the relationship between civilization and modernization establish that has an
acute awareness of the processes of evolution in all human development, material progress, the flow
of history and philosophical and religious thought, and, in particular, the relationship between the
three Abrahamic traditions.264
That awareness was the basis on which he could say, after the traumatic events of September 11 and
the subsequent ‘shock and awe’ invasion of Iraq:
The goal of dialogue among world religions is not simply to destroy scientific
materialism and the destructive materialistic worldview; rather, the very nature of
religion demands this dialogue. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and even Hinduism
and other world religions accept the same source for themselves, and, including
Buddhism, pursue the same goal. As a Muslim, I accept all Prophets and Books sent to
different peoples throughout history, and regard belief in them as an essential
principle of being Muslim. A Muslim is a true follower of Abraham, Moses, David,
Jesus, and all other Prophets. Not believing in one Prophet or Book means that one is
not a Muslim. Thus we acknowledge the oneness and basic unity of religion, which is a
symphony of God's blessings and mercy, and the universality of belief in religion. So,
religion is a system of belief embracing all races and all beliefs, a road bringing
everyone together in brotherhood. [11.06.2003]
Tragically, the reaction of the United States Government and certain of its allies was damning of Islam
and its people in a bid to politically and socially isolate them and reduce their influence in

264 “We have a Prophetic Tradition almost unanimously recorded in the Hadith literature that Jesus will return when the
end of the world is near. We do not know whether he will actually reappear physically, but what we understand is that near
the end of time, values like love, peace, brotherhood, forgiveness, altruism, mercy, and spiritual purification will have
precedence, as they did during Jesus' ministry. In addition, because Jesus was sent to the Jews and because all Hebrew
Prophets exalted these values, it will be necessary to establish a dialogue with the Jews as well as a closer relationship and
co-operation among Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.”  [Fethullah Gülen. 11.06.2003]

--- Sayfa 152 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

150
international forums. However that policy has backfired. The reverse has happened. Muslim minority
communities — after a period of reluctance and trauma – returned to organizing and, with the
cooperation and support of many communities of non-Muslims and institutions of other faiths, have
become better coordinated and organized in their worship, education and welfare programs.
Extensive dialogue and community consultation programs have been organized with churches,
synagogues, universities and local government. With better exposure and ease of recognition they
have achieved greater acceptance and enjoy more open participation and influence in their wider
communities than had previously been possible.  Certain governments and political parties have
found it necessary to modify their wedging practices to avoid a community backlash.
It is unfortunate that Gülen’s proposal for the establishment of a three-faiths university, symbolically
to be placed in the region from which Abraham migrated, was not adopted.  However the
collaborative establishment of Chairs in Islamic Studies at universities, such as that at the Australian
Catholic University, indicates that some authorities may be prepared to go to the next step.
However the need for the leaders of faiths to go further and to begin a process of systematic
reassessment of how we came to our point of crisis, the influence that their theological teaching has
had, and how to move forward is so critical that efforts to achieve collaborative educational and
research programs cannot be allowed to lapse. The Gülen Movement, under its leader’s inspiration,
has shown that it is able to manage such an effort — if it has the will.  It should be encouraged by the
Four Levels of Interreligious Dialogue identified by M. Thomas Thangaraj. [Thangarai 1999]
1.
The dialogue of life….
2. The dialogue of action….
3. The dialogue of theological exchange, where specialists seek to deepen their
understanding of their respective religious heritages, and to appreciate each
other's spiritual values.
4. The dialogue of religious experience…
Given that the major faiths each now acknowledge the validity of their partner faiths, logic requires
that they also acknowledge the validity of their holy scriptures. It follows that at the level of scholarly
theological exchange it is time to shift from dialogue to reassessment.   Therefore conditions requiring
that the faithful should try “to learn by sincere and patient dialogue what treasures a bountiful God
has distributed among the nations of the earth” while at the same time letting them “try to illuminate
these treasures with the light of the Gospel, to set them free, and bring them under the dominion of
God their Savior” should be discarded. 265  However some communities are still being told to regard
dialogue in that light. 266

265 Vatican Secretariat fro Non-Christians (May 10, 1984) The attitude of the Church toward Followers of other Religions:
Reflections and Orientations on Dialogue and Mission.
266 “According to the guidelines, interfaith dialogue does not entail Christians watering down their faith. Nor should it be
blind to the light of truth in other religions. … it does great harm to interfaith dialogue for a Catholic to slip into a belief that
all religions are basically the same.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

151
The two positions are contradictory. Therefore to establish a program of collaborative reassessment of
fundamental theological concepts is no mean task, but the Gülen Movement should be encouraged by
the assessment that “the earliest form of dialogue between Islam and Christianity can be said to have
taken place in the Qur’an, where the Christian doctrine is referred to in explicit terms.” (Alatas 2006
p.125) Many debates occurred face to face and in correspondence during the three centuries following
the establishment of Islam.267  But more significant than the debates and polemics were later
developments including cultural borrowing of Christians from Muslims, largely revolving around the
Muslim universities of the past, that influenced matters in the Medieval West. The records indicate
that three themes of interreligious dialogue began to emerge in the 13th century during the period of
the rise of the western university: (1) the multicultural origins of modern civilization; (2)
intercivilizational encounters of mutual learning; and (3) the point of view of the other. (Alatas 2006
p126)
Logic suggests that the process of reassessment should be steered by an International Standing Body
of eminent persons involved in the life of each major faith, including scholars at the highest level of
universities from each faith. It will need to be well resourced, with funds available to administer a
network of research programs that would involve universities and related institutions of research in a
number of countries, and that would not necessarily be campus-dependent. It is envisaged that the
research programs would involve groups of doctoral or post-doctoral candidates working in teams of
three (probably one Muslim, one Christian and one Jew) under the supervision of teams constituted
the same way. There would be no need for them to be domiciled at the same institution.The world is
driven by instant communications. The results of their work would be published and made readily
available for consideration by the teaching institutions and peak leadership bodies of each faith, and
for general publication.
The program would probably require two parallel bodies: one to administer the program and ensure a
flow of funds, and another to determine all academic matters. These would include priorities for
research; oversight of the selection and appointment of panels of research scholars, supervisors and
examiners; and policies for the awarding of degrees and publication policies to be adopted in the
event that the scholars in a research team were not unanimous in their conclusions (requiring the
admission of a minority submission on certain matters).
It can be anticipated that the resulting publications, books, papers or occasional pieces would be used
extensively in dialogue programs and by educational institutions. However, if any changes were
envisaged to the teaching, doctrines, creeds, liturgy, systems of discipline, structure and authority

“Catholics should not fudge “the basic Catholic belief that the Church (the Body of Christ) is necessary for salvation” …
“Jesus is for all times ‘the way, the truth and the life.’ (Jn 14:6) Jesus alive in His Church is necessary for the salvation of
every human being.” At the same time … “[The] universal salvific will of God propels us to seek out the evidence of God’s
presence in all men and women of good will and offer every encouragement and mutual search for fullness of all Truth.”
“… three challenges [can be identified] in further development in the “graced journey” of interfaith dialogue. Many
Catholics fail to see why we should engage in interfaith dialogue. The ongoing development of interfaith relations “is an
important way to peace in families, neighbourhoods and communities – local, national and international.” [Kairos Catholic
Journal Vol. 18, Issue 17.  www.southern-cross.org.au  accessed 3/10/2007]
267 Alatas shows that within the first three centuries of Islam several works refuting Christian doctrine had appeared, and
an index of books written in Arabic lists the works of several authors who dealt with Christian theological doctrines.  Alatas
notes that the discussion on Christianity was not always one-sided. There were often exchanges between Muslim and
Christian scholars; among the first Christians to “enter into polemics” with Muslims was St. John of Damascus, and there
was debate between Nestorian Patriarch Timothy I and Caliph al-Mahdī.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

152
systems or organizational relationships of any institution of faith, these would be matters for
consideration and decision solely by that institution.
The initiative of reassessment of matters around which the Abrahamic faiths have divided is long
overdue. It is a matter of great urgency if the opportunity for a Messianic Era of peace stability and
harmony as envisaged by each of the Abrahamic faiths is not to be missed and if, as Maimonides
anticipated “the world will be filled with the knowledge of God as the sea fills the ocean bed” following
the return of people Israel to their ancestral homeland.  But it can only be achieved if scholars and
institutional leaders from each faith are involved in intimate collaboration.
A logical starting point may be the convening of a meeting of thirty or forty eminent persons for an in-
depth working session of a few days to consider alternative approaches to establishing an
international standing body, what resources will be required, how to obtain them, and what
administrative and coordinating procedures and facilities must be put in place.   This is a challenge,
an opportunity and an obligation under covenant that I trust the Gülen Movement is prepared to
accept.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

153

SACRED SCRIPTURES AND INTERFAITH DIALOGUE
TERRY MATHIS 268

Abstract
M. Fethullah Gülen encourages Muslims to be tolerant and accepting of people in other religions
and to enter in to interfaith dialogue with them.  He succeeds in doing this because the Qur’an
sets the ground for this interfaith stance.  Christians and Jews are often not aware that their
Scriptures also promote interfaith dialogue. The paper shows that Jewish and Christian
Scriptures, somewhat in keeping with the Qur’an, allow for interfaith relationships that are
respectful and peaceful.  To this end, the paper briefly examines some of the Old Testament and
New Testament passages that promote interfaith dialogue.  In the OT, the story of the Prophet
Jonah is first examined to set the stage for an interfaith understanding of the story of Abraham
and Melchizedek, the life of Ruth, her great grandson, King David, and finally, the Jewish
restoration after the dispersion in Babylon and Persia.  In addition to these OT themes, which
Christians take as their own, the paper gathers similar interfaith themes in the NT.  Christ is seen
to encourage interfaith dialogue, as does James, the early Church leader.  The paper finds that
the Apostle Paul (the author of most of the NT) develops the implications of an interfaith
theology in his letter to the Romans.  The paper will conclude with some consideration of why the
adherents of Christian and Jewish traditions seldom take their Scriptures to advocate interfaith
dialogue and how the work of Mr. Gülen suggests a way forward to create more such
understanding and dialogue.

The Sacred Scriptures of Islam, Judaism, and Christianity each allow for interfaith dialogue.  We will
consider some of the ways in which the Scriptures of these religions provide for such dialogue, and the
work of M. Fethullah Gülen will illuminate the issues. He has for many years promoted interfaith
dialogue between Muslims and adherents of other religions.  We will find that he has provided keen
practical insight that may encourage others outside of Islam to engage in interfaith dialogue.
Mr. Gülen’s use of various passages of the Qur’an will inform the Muslim position. Jewish and
Christian positions will be informed by my own use of the respective texts, and in any of these cases, I
am aware that my use of the various texts may be offensive to some readers.  Although I hope not to

268 He is the Campus Minister at the University of California in Riverside, where he directs the University Religious
Conference, which promotes interfaith activity on campus.  He received his PhD in philosophy from Claremont Graduate
University.  Faculty positions have included Associate Professor at Rosemead School of Psychology in California and at
Northern Arizona University at Lake Havasu. Current interests:  the metaphysical and psychological conditions that allow
for interfaith dialogue, and the history and rise of secularism.  Relevant publications:  Against John Hick: An Examination
of His Philosophy of Religion (Lanham: University Press of America, 1985) and Review of Christians and Religious
Pluralism by Alan Race (TSF Bulletin, Vol. 7, No. 5, June 1984). He has been to Antarctica three times with the United
Stated Antarctic Research Program and accordingly has a keen interest in the relationship between science and religion.
Ordained with the Church of the Brethren, his pastoral expertise includes counseling and university outreach.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

154
be offensive, various approaches or uses of Sacred Scripture are often personal, and different from
mine. While it is my intention to revere the way in which other people use Scripture, there are at least
two groups who may nevertheless find my approach inappropriate and even disrespectful to their own
standard use of the texts. Conservative Christians will tend to reject my assumption that revelation
occurs outside of the Bible.  The other group is secular. This group will find my use of texts naive in
light of their materialist worldview.
Mr. Gülen addresses both of these groups. One of the hallmarks of the thought of Fethullah Gülen is
his vision for a relationship of tolerance and dialogue between Muslims and people of other faiths, but
he also sees the influence of materialism as a threat to the possibility of interfaith dialogue.269 In a
pivotal essay entitled “The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue,” Mr. Gülen laments that the influence of
religion in contemporary social life is often shunted by the western materialist world view.
Materialism keeps people from reconciling the material and spiritual realms, which reconciliation is
crucial. We must first be at peace with God if we are to have personal integrity and thus experience
peace and justice in the world.  From a viable relationship with God come reconciliation between the
material and the spiritual, and thus the realization of the desired contemporary social life in which
society can flourish.270  In contrast, to the detriment of society, when experience of God is called into
question by the assumptions of secular scientific materialism, the social conditions that flow from
living in the presence of the divine are interrupted.  People become less able to engage in dialogue of
any kind, including interfaith or intercultural dialogue.  In response to the influence of the secular
scientific world view of the West, an optimist, Mr. Gülen all the more calls for Muslim dialogue with
others.  Intrinsic to the nature of true religion is positive influence.  The faith of the Muslim in
dialogue with Christians and Jews and others will provide a corrective influence to a destructive
materialistic world view.

269 Modern secular materialism includes metaphysical and epistemological assumptions that impact the use of language to
talk about God, and these various linguistic restrictions may tend to cause the different world religions to become
competitive.  The way the materialist notion of “truth” and “certainty” are construed, it is difficult if not impossible to talk
meaningfully about God, and more important for interfaith dialogue, given this notion of truth, the secular model often
requires that only one religion be representative of the truth.  The materialist account of language often does not allow the
possibility of the truth of conflicting statements from different religions.  Accordingly, a conceptual framework for dealing
with religion has grown up in the universities of the West to cope with the metaphysical assumptions of materialism and its
account of the use of language.  At one extreme there is thought to be exclusivism, while at the other extreme is pluralism,
inclusivism perhaps in the middle.  Most religions are thought to include a core of exclusivist stance, most fundamentalists
maintaining that their religion is the only true religion, and thus they are generally completely under the influence of
modern epistemological assumptions of Western culture, although they are typically without awareness of this influence.
Inclusivists, perhaps the least affected by modern secular assumptions, often suppose that God can somehow accommodate
the various different religions.  Although inclusivists may suppose that God can accommodate most religions, one’s own
religion is usually thought to be the best.  Pluralism is generally the dominant position in most religion departments in
Western universities.  Pluralism tends to mesh with the assumptions of materialism thus elevating the factual capacity of
scientific language while still allowing religion to have significant meaning but of a different value than that of science.  In
pluralism, typically, the various different religions are all equally interesting and valuable (we should promote world peace)
but religious language is often thought not to be factually reflective of material reality.  Some recent thinkers are attempting
to create different models for understanding religion in the West.  See, for example, Knitter, P (2002) Theologies of
Theologies (New York, Orbis Books).  Knitter’s attempt to create new labels for the issues seems to weight in favor of
pluralist assumptions, and he seems to conflate a number of the issues.  For a critique of secular assumptions with respect
to theology see Diamond, M “The Challenge of Contemporary Empiricism” in Diamond, M (1975) The Logic of God /
Theology and Verification (Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill Company).  We shall not be concerned with these issues except to
note that Mr. Gülen is attempting to cut through the detrimental effects of materialism.
270 Gülen, F (2006) Essays – Perspectives – Opinions (New Jersey, The Light, Inc.), 34.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

155
The role of the sacred text is central to Muslim faith. Mr. Gülen’s views thus naturally have there
origin in the Qur’an, which refers to the various persons of faith in the different world religions as
“People of the Book.” Jews and Christians, when persons of faith, are People of the Book.  Muslims
have some advantage over other People of the Book with respect to interfaith dialogue because Islam
is open to dialogue. As an example of this openness, along with the Prophet Mohammed, Mr. Gülen,
as a Muslim, says of himself and other Muslims, “… I accept all Prophets and Books sent to different
peoples throughout history, and regard belief in them as an essential principle of being Muslim.  A
Muslim is a true follower of Abraham, Moses, David, Jesus, and all other Prophets.”271 The advantage
the Muslim has for engaging in interfaith dialogue, Mr. Gülen continues, is thus that they “…
acknowledge the oneness and basic unity of religion, which is a symphony of God’s blessing and
mercy, …embracing all races and beliefs, a road bringing everyone together in brotherhood.”272  Like
Christians, moreover, Muslims believe that Jesus will return when the end of the world is near,
though perhaps not physically, but as the underlying conditions of a Godly society.  Near the end of
world history, from society will emerge values such as peace, love, forgiveness, and mercy.  As these
values are also central in the Hebrew Prophets, there will be cause for cooperation between Islam,
Judaism, and Christianity.273  Muslims have already engaged in this activity with Jews, who were
welcomed into the Ottoman Empire when expelled from Spain.
Despite these various factors that predispose Islam to interfaith dialogue, Islam is not well understood
and this misunderstanding contributes to difficulties.
Christendom’s historical portrayal of Islam … has weakened Muslim’s courage with respect
to interfaith dialog.  For centuries, Christians were told that Islam was a crude and distorted
version of Judaism and Christianity, and so the Prophet was considered an imposter, a
common or ingenious trickster, the Antichrist, or even an idol worshipped by Muslims.
Even recent books have presented him as someone with strange ideas who believed he had
to succeed at any cost, and who resorted to any means to achieve success.274
In the extreme, misunderstanding of Islam has often erupted into violence. When wrongly understood
as a political system, rather than a religion, Islam is sometimes seen as an ideology promoting social
instability and conflict that must be eliminated.  So misunderstood, Islam has been under siege, more
Muslims killed in the last century than throughout history.  Accordingly, when non-Muslims call for
dialogue, Muslims may meet this call with suspicion.
Again the optimist, Mr. Gülen insists that Muslims engage in dialogue for the reasons that religious
leaders such as Massignon, Pope Paul VI, and Pope John Paul II have recognized.  Muslim faith in
God is not a political ideology aimed at self interest, but a life changing spiritual experience that
results in compassionate and cooperative representatives of universal peace.275 The fountainhead of
this virtuous disposition of true Muslims is the teaching of the Prophet Mohammad, who through the
revelation of the Qur’an lays essential ground work for interfaith dialogue.

271 Ibid.
272 Ibid., 34-35
273 Ibid.
274 Ibid., 37-38
275 Ibid.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

156
In referring to people of faith outside of Islam as the “People of the Book,” the Qur’an issues one of the
greatest calls to interfaith dialogue that can be found.
“O People of the Book! Come to common terms as between us and you: that we worship
none but God; that we associate no partners with Him; that we take not, from among
ourselves lords and patrons other than God.”  If then they turn back, say you: “Bear witness
that we are Muslims (surrendered to God’s Will).” (3:64)
If this call to dialogue is rejected, Muslims are to continue on their path and allow the other person to
continue on their path as well.  But those who respond to the call find their path opens to salvation
that is available for all who respond to this call.  A person experiences salvation, roughly, in the event
God graciously allows this person to enjoy both this life and the next.276 The dialogue following this
openness that leads to salvation should avoid argumentative unproductive debate and rather revolve
around caring relationships. The Qur’an states;
God forbids you not, with regard to those who fight you not for (your) Faith nor drive you
out of your homes, from dealing kindly and justly with them: for God loves those who are
just. (60:8)
Further describing the degree to which God may provide a measure of salvation through revelatory
interaction with non-Muslims, the Qur’an states of itself:

This is the Book; wherein there is no doubt; a guidance to the pious ones. (2:2)
The pious ones later described as those
Who believe in the Unseen, are steadfast in prayer, and spend out of what We have provided
for them; and who believe in what is sent to you and what was sent before you, and (in their
hearts) have the reassurance of the Hereafter. (2:3-4)
The Qur’an here proclaims the beneficial providence of God at work in the lives of some non-Muslims.
We thus find that Mr. Gülen’s vision for interfaith dialogue has influenced many people, in part,
because of the way in which his views naturally have there origin in the Qur’an. The admonition
toward dialogue that Mr. Gülen promotes flows naturally from the Qur’an, and the authority of the
Holy Book provides him with authority. He directs Muslims to engage with others because the
Prophet Mohammad first conveyed this message in what was revealed to him.
We will find that this divine message of encouragement toward universal tolerance and acceptance of
others (the call to interfaith dialogue), is less explicit in other religions, but we will limit our
discussion to a Christian and Jewish understanding of interfaith dialogue as found in the Bible. We
begin with the Old Testament, which is not only a fundamental source of Jewish outlook on interfaith
dialogue, but also foundational for many Christians. As will also be the case later on when we look at
the New Testament, it is beyond the scope of this paper to utilize contemporary critical studies of the
OT, which studies are extremely valuable when on occasion they can be used in such a way that they
do not rule out the implications of the Sacred texts this paper attempts to gather.

276 For the purpose of this paper, I shall assume that this brief understanding of salvation will suffice for each of the
religions represented here. Buddhism and other religions are obviously of a different elk.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

157
A most interesting interfaith OT story is that of the Prophet Jonah.  Some time in the eighth century
BCE, God told Jonah that he must carry a message of God’s forgiveness to the people of Nineveh, the
capital of Assyria, an enemy of Israel. Nineveh seems to have been representative of Assyria.  Jonah’s
task was to instruct the Assyrians to repent from their destructive ways or God would destroy them.
God’s forgiveness was thus conditional, and there was surely a chance they might not meet these
conditions.
Jonah was understandably reluctant to obey God. Assyrian warfare was vicious. After victory in
battles with Israel, Assyrians sometimes deported Jewish prisoners to languish and die in exile in
Assyrian territories.  To these hated adversaries Jonah was asked to bring a message of salvation.
His initial response was to flee from the task.  He boarded a ship headed for Tarshish (probably
southwest Spain) traveling in the opposite direction of Nineveh. But God caused a storm that
threatened the ship.  At Jonah’s own request, the mariners threw him overboard.  The sea
immediately calmed and God then “… appointed a great fish to swallow Jonah.” (1:17)  After three
days and nights in the stomach of the fish, the fish vomited Jonah onto dry land, and God asked
Jonah a second time to go to Nineveh. This time Jonah obeyed. After hearing God’s message the
Assyrians repented. They asked God to help them turn from their wicked ways (3:8), and then God
relented from the calamity that would have been brought upon Assyria.  God’s mercy toward
Assyrians made Jonah so angry he wanted to die, and “he prayed to the Lord and said, ‘Please Lord,
was this not what I said [would happen] when I was still in my own country? Therefore, in order to
forestall this I fled to Tarshish, for I know that you are a gracious and compassionate God, slow to
anger and abundant in loving-kindness’…” (4:2).
God then tries to show Jonah that saving the Assyrians was the right thing to do. God causes a plant to
grow up to shade Jonah, and then the plant dies, illustrating that as the plant is worthwhile to Jonah,
God finds the Assyrians worth saving. The interfaith contrast is such that despite Jonah’s Judaism,
including his special knowledge of God as a Prophet of God, he also needs to repent. He needs to be
saved from his destructive ways as much as the Assyrians do.
The story of Jonah suggest that non-Jewish religion is not the immediate issue for God, or at least that
the Assyrian view of God was not the issue, but rather the problem was the destructive violent way in
which the Assyrians were living. The Assyrians were not asked to become Jews to experience God’s
favor. They were asked to look to God to change there way of living life. They did so and were saved.
Something like interfaith dialogue occurs on a practical scale, orchestrated by God. The Assyrians are
confronted by a weak (perhaps despised) person about God’s concerns.  Jonah and the readers of his
text are in turn confronted by God about their attitude toward the Assyrians, their powerful enemy.
The Assyrians are not required to become Jews, and the Jews are asked to accept and even care for
the enemy, the Assyrian non-Jew or anti-Jew.  There is a kind of dialogue between two different
religious groups, and the result is a more peaceful co-existence, or at least the potential for a more
comfortable co-existence between Jews and Assyrians.
These interfaith implications of the Book of Jonah were not new to the Jews. Abraham, the great
patriarch of various religions, including Islam, Judaism and Christianity, is the main character of
most of the book of Genesis and a central figure in the Qur’an and the New Testament. Abraham,
through his wives Hagar and Sarah, was called to make great nations.  He is an iconic example of
God’s covenant purpose for humankind. But well after God’s covenant relationship with Abraham had
been established (Gen 13:14-18), he meets with a mysterious character, “… Melchizedek king of Salem

--- Sayfa 160 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

158
…priest of God Most High (Gen 14:18).  Melchizedek blessed Abraham who paid tithes to
Melchizedek. Abraham on his covenant pilgrimage is helped and strengthened on his way by someone
outside of God’s newly formed covenant with Abraham. Both figures benefit from each other and
respect the divine connection each has, even though different kinds of relationships with God are
evident.  Abraham believed God and was accordingly called to be the father of many nations;
Melchizedek was the king of Salem and a priest.  Both individuals were God’s people and though
different, one could bless the other, and the other paid worshipful respect with a tithe in response.
Another non-Jewish minister to Jews is Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses. While Jethro was not a
Hebrew, as a Midianite and perhaps a descendent of Ishmael (Gen 37:28), Jethro helped design an
effective structure for Moses’ governance of the Hebrew people, and though not a Hebrew, led Aaron
(often thought to be the father of the Jewish priesthood) and the other elders in worship before God
(Ex 18:12-24).
Another interfaith life changing interaction comes from the life of Ruth in the Book of Ruth.  This
brief OT history tells of Elimelech and his wife Naomi who sojourned in the land of Moab while there
was a famine in their home town of Bethlehem in Judah.  Ruth was one of two Moabite women who
met and married Naomi’s two sons while they were in Moab.  Elimelech and Naomi’s two sons died,
and Ruth followed Naomi back to Judah when the famine had passed. This Moabite woman
aggressively secures food for herself and Ruth and succeeds in acquiring Naomi’s relative, Boaz, as her
husband and the women’s redeemer.  Ruth has a son, Obed, the father of Jesse, the Father of David.
Naomi, as a surrogate mother, has the joy of helping raise Obed.
While Naomi adheres to Jewish tradition, she does not appear to require Ruth to do the same.  Also,
when Naomi’s other daughter-in-law, Orpah, had started on the journey back to Judah with Naomi,
Orpah decides to return to Moab. Naomi says to Ruth at this juncture, “…your sister-in-law has gone
back to her people and her gods, return after your sister-in-law.” (1:15)  Ruth, as we have noted,
decides to stay with Naomi, but Naomi is not possessive of Orpah and Ruth, concerned to keep them
with her so that they might become Jews. Naomi is comfortable with the non-Jewish Moabite religion
of her daughter-in-laws. While Ruth eventually embraces Naomi’s religion there is no requirement
that she do so.
Some years later, this comfort level seems to also exist in her great grand child, David. Before he was
king, when hiding from King Saul who wanted to kill him, David often goes to Moab.  After David and
his band of follows leave their hiding place in the cave of Adullam, “… David went from there to
Mizpah of Moab; and he said to the king of Moab, “Please let my Father and Mother come and stay
with you until I know what God will do with me.” (1 Sam 22:3)
David, the author of many of the Psalms, a person of unique spiritual insight, does not presume to
inform the Moabite king about the nature of God, but assumes that the king can track with his
frustrating experience of exile brought on by the attempts of king Saul to murder David.
Even as the king of Moab helped David and his family and seemed open to David’s sense of
providence, some time later, one of the kings of Persia, Cyrus, seems to have had a similar outlook of
acceptance for people in other religions, though this was not true of his predecessors.
To secure the lands they conquered, the Persian kings deported populations in mass resettlements to
places where control of these people would be easier. When Persia conquered Babylon, some of the
Jews already in captivity in Babylon were moved to Persia. When Cyrus eventually became king of

--- Sayfa 161 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

159
Persia, many Jews were not only allowed to return to their homeland, Cyrus sometimes financed their
trip and gave them back their religious artifacts and places of worship. Cyrus, unlike many of his
predecessors, seems to have believed that God wanted the restoration of the religions of conquered
people. Cyrus thus helped with the restoration of the Hebrew religion. In recognition, the Prophet
Isaiah says of this restoration that it was the work of God. “It is I who say of Cyrus, he is My shepherd.
And he will perform all My desire. And he declares of Jerusalem, she will be built, and of the temple,
your foundation will be laid.” (Is 44:28)
The Hebrew Prophet Isaiah thus extols the pleasure of God for Cyrus’ interfaith activity. As one of
many of Cyrus’ restoration projects, many Jews did return to Jerusalem from captivity in Persia and
the Temple was rebuilt, and Isaiah says that God enabled Cyrus to carry on this restoration, which
clearly reflects some kind of ancient interfaith initiative on a massive scale.
These OT examples supporting interfaith activity should be as significant for Christians as for Jews.
For many Christians, the meaning of the relationship of the Old Testament and New Testament is
literally a relationship between Old Covenant and New Covenant. Christians often think that the
books of the New Testament depict a New Covenant or agreement with God that is at least a more
complete account of God’s grace and mercy than the Old Covenant found in the OT. If so, the previous
OT examples of interfaith activity in the OT should provide a bias toward an understanding of
interfaith material in the NT, or even more than mere bias. Some people find the grace and goodness
of God in the OT just as profound and wonderful as that which is found in the Qur’an and the NT. A
further complication is that, unlike the Qur’an, not everyone agrees about what should be included in
the NT and the OT.   Many Christians, such as Roman Catholics and Greek Orthodox, include
deuterocanonical and apocrypha books into the cannon of Scripture. In any event, the scope of this
paper must be limited by the assumption that the OT is usually taken to be foundational for the NT,
and with this assumption in hand, we turn now to focus on NT Scripture.
Were we to ask Christians the question, “What should be the relationship between Christianity and
other religions?” the answer appears differently at different times in the history of Christianity.
Something similar also occurs in Islam and Judaism, although we shall only consider Christianity in
this regard.
The Christian movement in the first century was often taken by Jews to be heretical perversion of
Judaism. The man eventually known as the Apostle Paul, for example, first known as a conservative
Jew named Saul, tried to destroy the early Christian movement. In his zeal to preserve Judaism, Saul
sometimes authorized the killing of innocent people, as we learn from the story of Stephen in Acts
chapter eight. The people of the early Christian movement, on the other hand, often took themselves
to be open to other religions, God being the Father of all viable religion. The early movement often
worshiped in Synagogues with Jews, though they were first called Christians through their
involvement with gentiles outside the Jewish tradition in Antioch (Acts 11:26). Centuries later, after
Christianity had become institutionalized, the tables were turned. As an institution, Christianity has
often taken a hostile stance toward any other religion that might question or even merely differ from
the standards of orthodoxy that happen to be in place at a given time, these standards generally
reflecting the history of philosophy.
The early church, due to the able influence of Augustine, incorporated Plato. Latter Thomistic
tradition created a larger paradigm in which Neo-Platonism was integrated with Aristotle, in no small
part because the crusades brought Moslem theology with its link to Aristotle back to Europe. The likes

--- Sayfa 162 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

160
of Galileo, Descartes, Locke and Hume later set the stage for a secular materialist world view. Kant
and the philosophical theology of thinkers Kant influenced, such as Friedrich Schleiermacher and
John Hick, lead us into the modern era and the current post modern developments.  Given these
philosophical theological trends that shape the outlook of any given historical Christian institution or
movement, Christians have generally exhibited a brittle defensive reaction to religions that have not
held a corresponding acceptance of these trends.
Utilizing a focus similar to that of Mr. Gülen, who looks to the Qur’an, we will for the moment leave
aside the history of Christianity, and in what follows we will briefly consider the position of the early
Christian movement as found in the New Testament. We will again do this in a non-critical way, that
is, we will not utilize extra-biblical textual criticism, which is nearly always a part of the study of the
gospels. We begin with the gospels.
The story of the Christ Child in the Gospel of Matthew (2:1-12) often leaves people puzzled about the
identity of the wise men from the East who came to Jerusalem looking for the king of the Jews. Were
they priests, philosophers, or perhaps astrologers? They followed a star to the baby Jesus, and when
they found him they fell down and worshipped him and presented him with precious gifts. Though
they are not Jews, they are sensitive to God and seem to have had revelation from God that was so
significant that they left their homes in the East, traveled a considerable distance, engaged in an act of
worship, and gave costly gifts.  Since these wise men were not identified as Jews, their activities would
not have been possible unless God’s favor and revelation extends outside the religious context of the
Jews of the first century.
Another NT account will help shape our thinking.  There was an incident in the life of Christ that we
find in both Mark and Luke. One of the disciples saw someone casting out demons in Christ’s name,
though this person was not a part of the band of disciples, so the disciples tried to stop him and came
to Christ for help. Christ responds, “Do not hinder him, … For he who is not against us is for us.” (Mk
9:39-40, Lk 9:49)  Is Christ simply telling them to be tolerant?  Or is Christ assuming that God is at
work in the lives of people who are not involved in Christ’s ministry?  It seems that there are people
who are appropriately religious though outside the group of disciples, and Christ is at least asking his
followers to have an attitude toward others that could easily lead to interfaith dialogue.
Much more to the point in a different passage, consider the words of Christ as the “Good Shepherd” in
the Gospel of John, chapter ten.  We find a metaphor. There are sheep and there is a shepherd. The
disciples are obviously the sheep, and Jesus represents himself as the “good Shepherd,” who will
protect and care for the sheep even to the point of laying down his life for them.  He says,
I am the good shepherd; and I know my own, and my own know me, even as the Father
knows me and I know my Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep.  And I have other
sheep which are not of this fold; I must bring them also, and they shall hear my voice; and
they shall become one flock with one shepherd.  (Jn 10:14-16)
Who are the “other sheep” who are not apparently among the immediate band of Christ’s disciples?
These “other sheep” shall hear his voice, shall become one flock, and shall have one shepherd. The
assumptions that often prevent Christians from seeing Muslims and Jews, respectively, as such flocks
with their own shepherds have largely been the cultural and philosophical trends mentioned above.
But aside from these trends, why not understand that the various world religions are the flocks in
question, Islam being one in particular, with the shepherd of Islam being Mohammad and the faithful
imams following the Prophet

--- Sayfa 163 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

161
In keeping with Christ’s indication that the other sheep would hear his voice and would have one
shepherd, might we suppose that the Prophet Mohammad somehow mysteriously, from Christ’s
perspective, stands in the place of Christ?
Many Christians would be troubled by the suggestion that we might see Christ in Mohammad, but
that this may be possible is suggested by the way in which the Apostle Paul sometimes viewed Christ.
In writing his first letter to the Corinthians, many of them gentiles, he interestingly refers to the Jews
wandering in the wilderness, immigrating from Egypt to Canaan, as the fathers of the Corinthians,
saying, more importantly for the point here, that when they drank from the rock at Horeb, that rock
was Christ. (I Cor. 10:4)  The OT story tells us that the Israelites were thirsty and complained bitterly
to Moses, who then struck a rock with his staff, and water came out of the rock. (Ex 17:6) The source
of this satisfying refreshment, says Paul, was Christ. The rock was Christ.  But if that rock was Christ,
similarly, Mohammad might be seen by some as a form of Christ.
Christians might recoil that Christ and Mohammad are entirely different.  The problem for many
Christians is that they elevate the status of Christ to deity and hold everyone else to the status of mere
humans, who are accordingly not thought to have the capacity for divine activity of Christ except
through the use of spiritual gifts, a kind of supernatural ability to do God’s work (Rom. 12; Eph. 4; 1
Cor. 12-14) and through prayer.  To the contrary, a statement suggesting the possibility of greater
human capacity is found in Paul’s letter to the Colossians.  Paul says, “Now I rejoice in my sufferings
for your sake, and in my flesh I do my share on behalf of his body (which is the church) in filling up
that which is lacking in Christ’s afflictions.” (Col. 1:24)  Paul seems to be saying that Christ’s suffering
is not sufficient for the needs of the church, so that Paul must also contribute his sufferings.  If so,
why not assume that Mohammad’s contributions also have measure in God’s economy as did Paul’s
and Christ’s contributions.
Another NT example that suggests a commonality between Christianity and other religions comes
from James, often thought to be the brother of Christ.  As a good Jew and a leader of the early
Christian movement, in his NT epistle James encourages relationship with God in a way that is typical
of many other religions.  He says that if we cleanse ourselves and draw near to God, God will draw
near to us (4:8-10). In writing this, James does not create a religion superior to other religions, but
rather, after identifying himself as “a bond-servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ,” (1:1) he does
not then tie true religion to Christ, but says that “… pure and undefiled religion in the sight of our God
and Father … [is] to visit orphans and widows in their distress, and to keep oneself unstained from the
world.”(1:27)  In this early Christian account of religion, James appears to intend to define religion
across the boundaries of the various world religions.  As the leader of the early Christian movement,
he is known for reconciling different groups within the early church (Acts 15:13). Similarly, in keeping
with his calling as the shepherd of the early church, his account of religion, selects the core elements
that many religions have in common that have to do with a quality of life that seeks the well-being of
others. Keeping oneself from the destructive processes of the world, the truly religious person has the
resources to care for those who are in need, some who are even weak and helpless, such as widows
and orphans.   James’ enduring account of religion seems to be altogether compatible with Islam and
Judaism, and given the likelihood that James has given us the religion of Christ, it is significant that
the religions of Mohammad and Moses are compatible with James’ account.
Might we even say that, to some degree in light of the Epistle of James, the religion of Mohammad is
the religion of Christ, and thus, that from an interfaith perspective, Mohammad reflects the spirit of

--- Sayfa 164 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

162
Christ, even as Muslims may feel that Christ reflects the spirit of Mohammad.  James has allowed for
this kind of reciprocal exchange.
Many Christians can easily see Abraham and Moses and David as God’s people.  So can some
Muslims, who also revere Christ. But Christians and Jews do not readily reciprocate with Muslims.
Christians and Jews can often not see Mohammad as a prophet. But this short sightedness is out of
keeping with the Apostle Paul’s account of a prophet.
A prophet, says Paul, is one who speaks to people “…for edification and exhortation and consolation.”
(1 Cor.14:3, 25)  In Paul’s view, the prophet engenders qualities of life that help people overcome grief
and anger with success.  The prophet is supposed to give insight that leads to Godliness. Although
Paul is addressing a Christian audience, there is reason to think he saw a larger context that would, on
his own account of the prophetic, include Mohammad as a prophet.
Consider Paul’s Epistle to the Romans for its interfaith implications. This letter is a bit more general
and comprehensive than most of his correspondence and it develops an inter-religious understanding
of God’s dealings with humankind. Although known as a Jew, Paul identifies himself as the apostle to
the gentiles in the first chapter, thus qualifying himself to deal with non-Jewish religion through his
appointment by God to do so (Rm 1:5).  In chapters two through four there is a basic contrast between
Jews and people of non-Jewish religion (gentiles), and it is here that Paul implies that God’s hope for
all people is that they be in a personal relationship with God, despite whether they are Jews or
gentiles. God’s relationship with a person preferably develops in response to a person’s faith. Though
Paul did not have Muslims specifically in mind, had he lived later in history, he no doubt would have
seen practicing Muslims as people of faith, people who may transcend the category of Jew or gentile
(Rm 3:28-30). Then turning to the transforming effect of faith, more or less, in chapters five through
eight Paul explores why transformation may or may not occur. An outgrowth of the earlier discussion,
chapters nine through eleven wrestle with questions about the relationship between an all-powerful
God and responsible free agents. The remainder of the letter, chapters twelve through sixteen, deal
mainly with the way in which faith affects a community of people of faith. Paul considers the
relationship between the well-being of an individual and the well-being of the group in which this
person may live, a group that includes vast differences (Rm 15:7-13), and he concludes with personal
notes and greetings to individuals mainly in Rome. While the terminology of the letter addresses and
presupposes a Hellenistic world, a mix of Jewish, Greek, and Roman culture and philosophy, its
monotheistic overtone is nevertheless compatible with that of the Qur’an.
This letter to people living in Rome was meant to convey what Paul had hoped to say in person (Rm
1:9-15). Given that he was unable to visit Rome (as least prior to the writing of this letter), Paul felt
compelled to write to these people to give them his account of God’s way of dealing with people.
Presumable this letter contains Paul’s basic message to all the groups he encountered and attempted
to influence, and if so, its significance is heightened.
Touching on some of the points that are obviously related to interfaith dialogue, we find in Romans
chapter two that gentiles, who do not have the benefit of the Jewish law, can nevertheless find favor
with God, even if they are not circumcised Rm (2:14-16). The practice of circumcision is used to
illustrate that faith in God runs deeper than the act of circumcision (Rm 2:28-29). A gentile, who has
faith in God, though not circumcised, may thus experience God’s favor. Paul argues, for example, that
Abraham experienced God’s favor prior to circumcision, and then when later circumcised, this
circumcision is merely a sign of the faith that he had while uncircumcised.  So it is faith in the grace

--- Sayfa 165 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

163
and mercy of God that ultimately makes the person acceptable to God, and as Abraham exemplifies
this life of faith, Abraham is an archetype or spiritual father of all who have faith. The kind of religion
in which the faith is expressed is not at issue for Paul (Rm 4:9-16).  If faith in such instances is like
Islamic submission, we again find parallels between Islam and the early Christian movement.
But perhaps most significant for the discussion of interfaith implications in Paul’s letter to Rome is
found in what has become chapter four (the original manuscript had no chapters or verse numbers).
Here Paul uses two individuals to illustrate salvation by faith.  Paul obviously has the work of God in
Christ in view.  He has just explained the role of Christ’s death, burial and resurrection in God’s plan
for salvation in chapter three.  Who should he use as examples of people who found favor with God
through Christ?  Did Paul develop an illustration through the life of Peter, the well known disciple and
early church leader, or James, who was possibly the brother of Christ, or John, the disciple Christ
seemed to love more than the others (Jn 13:23)?  We find that the two people Paul used to illustrate a
relationship with God were Abraham and David.  Despite the various examples available, Paul hails
these two non-Christian individuals as examples of Christian faith (Rm 3:21-4:25).  For our purpose
we should emphasize that neither of these persons knew Christ personally, nor did they know the
culture and theology that are usually required for orthodox Christianity.  More succinctly, while Paul
had developed the role of Christ in God’s salvation in chapter three, to illustrate this, that is, to
exemplify the person of faith who has been saved through Christ, Paul did not use Christians, but
rather two well known Jews, David and Abraham.  Abraham is importantly seen as having faith before
he was circumcised, because this precondition of faith further shows that it is by faith (or submission
to God), and not merely by following a religious tradition, that God’s eternal favor is received.
Knowledge of Christ is not necessary.  The obvious intent of Paul’s argument is to show that God deals
with people from all religions (gentiles as well as Jews) under the same conditions.277 Accordingly, we
must surmise that all people who are in fact God’s children are faithful and submissive to God as were
Abraham and David.  By implication, as Paul intended, we should suppose that such people can be
found in a Mosque, a Synagogue, a Temple, a Monastery, or in ordinary everyday circumstances
located in Asia, Berlin, South Africa, Antarctica, or Detroit. Christians may come to see that
Mohammad is like Christ, and some Christians may see that Mohammad was a Prophet through
whom God’s word was revealed as the Qur’an.
One controversial NT passage should be mentioned because it is used to argue that Christianity is
exclusively God’s only one true religion.  In the Gospel of John Jesus says, “I am the way, and the
truth, and the life; no one come to the Father, but through me.” (Jn 14:6)  This passage is used to
argue that only explicit knowledge of Christ can result in salvation.  For example, contemporary
conservative Christians usually maintain that for a person to experience salvation, this person must
realize (must somehow explicitly know) that Jesus provides substitutionary atonement for their sins,
although the language describing atonement may vary.  It is often held that the person must pray a
prayer to bring Christ into this person’s life. But consider a different interpretation of this text.
Another standard alternative interpretation of this verse (though seldom known or accepted by
conservative Christians) is that “through Christ” means to live in a way that is the same as the way

277 For a scholarly commentary that supports my reading of Romans see Ziegler, J (1989) Paul’s Letter to Rome (London,
JLM Press).

--- Sayfa 166 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

164
Christ lived.278 A closer examination of the larger context of the Gospel of John does suggest (perhaps
in addition to mysterious metaphysical conditions somehow only realized through Christ) that the
meaning of this text in John has to do with living the kind of life that Christ lived. The background of
the verse includes the disciple’s realization that Christ will soon die.  They are disappointed, fearful
and concerned. They had believed that he would overthrow Roman rule and restore world control to
the Jews. As they understand his insistence that he must die, and his reassurance that despite his
death, they will one day be with him again in heaven, Thomas (doubting Thomas) confesses, in
essence, that he does not know how to get to heaven. Christ responds, “I am the way, the truth, and
the life; no one come to the Father, but through me.  If you had known me, you would have known my
Father also; from now on you know Him and have seen Him.” (Jn 14:6-7) The issue for Thomas is
whether or not he knows the Father, who is God. Implied in Christ’s response to Thomas, if Thomas
really knew Jesus, he also knew God. So while salvation, as some Christians understand salvation, is
only through Christ, this passage in John does not actually require a person to endorse a certain kind
of twentieth century theology. We have found this to be the case in the examples of salvation used by
Paul in the Epistle to the Romans.  David and Abraham did not know Jesus, even though Paul
indicates that they were saved through Christ.
What is entailed in knowing another person is beyond the scope of this paper, but the simple message
may be that to know a person like Jesus is to know God. Perhaps David came to know God through his
grandmother Ruth, if she was still alive when David was a boy. Ruth may have provided mothering for
David even as Naomi was a surrogate mother for Obed.  In knowing his Moabite grandmother, David
would have come to know God. Likewise, people who knew David knew God, people who knew
Abraham knew God, and people who knew Moses knew God. So why should Christians and Jews and
others not take the matter a step further and say that people who knew Mohammad knew God, and
that people continue to get to know Mohammad through the Qur’an. And thus through the Qur’an,
people continue to grow in their knowledge and relationship with God.
In conclusion, the broad strokes used to pull together the various religious traditions represented
herein indicate that the Sacred Scriptures of Islam, Judaism, and Christianity each encourage
intercultural tolerance and acceptance. While the Qur’an gives implicit instruction for Muslims to
interact with the followers of other religions peacefully under most conditions (Mr Gülen embodying
this instruction), the Scriptures of other religions are not so explicitly instructive, though we have
found that Jewish and Christian Scriptures can be read to support and advocate interfaith dialogue.
The stories of the lives of Jonah, Ruth, Abraham, and David are telling.  Similarly, Christian Scripture
on the whole includes an understanding of deity that embraces all of humankind, and as Christianity
depends upon the OT, we see this embrace of humanity occurring through the religion indigenous to
the region in which a person lives.  Whether a person is an Assyrian, Moabite, Roman, or Jew, in each
case the implications if not the directives (somewhat tacitly) toward interfaith dialogue are for the
larger purpose of promoting peace and well-being among all peoples of the world.
This interfaith outlook in Scripture is often not apparent when, as the insight of Mr Gülen would have
it, religion is used for self proclaimed personal ends apart from God, especially political ends.279
When religion is used to inflict torment and suffering and to gain political control, the Scriptures in

278 For an exhaustive account of the various views of atonement, especially the one I have sketched here see Moberly, R. C.
(1904) Atonement and Personality (London, John Murray).
279 Gülen, Essays, 37.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

165
this case are not being used in accord with their purpose as divine revelation. The influence of
materialism may provide impetus for such abuse of Scripture in that unbelief and skepticism in the
lives of religious leaders may distort their use of Scripture, so that they perhaps foster indifference or
scorn for people outside their own cultural norms.
Cutting through the effects of materialism in the life of faith, Mr Gülen finds that the powerful effect
of a loving relationship with a person of faith provides a cure. He therefore encourages Muslims to
reach out in friendship to non-Muslims so as to counter the effects of the secular world. The cure for
the ill is love.  He finds that religion
…commands love, compassion, tolerance, and forgiving….  Love is the most essential
element in every being, a most radiant light, a great power that can resist and overcome
every force.  It elevates every soul that absorbs it, and prepares it for the journey to eternity.
Those who make contact with eternity through love work to implant in all other souls what
they receive from eternity.  They dedicate their lives to this sacred duty, and endure any
hardship for its sake.  Just as they say “love” with their last breaths, they also breath “love”
while being raised on the day of Judgment.280
According to the Gospel of John, Jesus, like Mr Gülen, similarly encouraged people to love one
another despite their differences and problems. An instance of this is found in John’s account of the
Last Supper.281 Prior to the meal, Jesus got up from the table and took a towel and a basin of water
and washed his disciple’s feet (13:1-30). According to John, this feet washing was an act of love (13:1),
which was in part to show the disciples (and all disciples to follow) how they should lovingly treat one
another (13:14). Jesus enacted a metaphor to depict a deep caring relationship that would sooth and
overcome the affects of brokenness and pathology in the lives of people of faith (it seems that even
saints have dirty feet from time to time).282
A bit later, when the meal begins, Jesus again reaches out in love to Judas, by seating Judas at the
place of honor at the head of the table where they could talk to each other.  When they were finally
seated, Jesus confronted Judas (13:26), but rather than entering into dialogue with Jesus about his
dissatisfaction with Jesus’ views, such as, we can imagine,  the theology of the story of the Good
Samaritan (Lk 10:30-37), or their various excursions into non-Jewish Samaritan territory to help non-

280 Ibid., 48-49
281 Many scholars do not think this passage is an account of the Last Supper because the first verse (13:1) specifies it was
before the Passover Feast, and moreover, John’s account is different than the other gospel accounts.  However, these
scholars seem to fail to see the entire context.  The text says “…before the Passover Feast, Jesus knew that his time had
come…”  referring back to Jesus’ awareness, when the Greeks wanted to talk to him sometime earlier (12:20), that the time
of his death had come (12:23).  The passage seems simply to be saying that this occasion in John’s gospel is the Passover
Feast, but before the feast began, Jesus already knew he was about to die.
282 The meaning of Jesus’ metaphor is somewhat obvious when he says of Judas, after having washed Judas’ feet, “…not all
of you are clean...,” (Jn 13:10) for Judas must have been clean.  Judas was the disciple who was perhaps the most respectful
of Jewish tradition.  He would have bathed before the Passover meal, yet wearing sandals, his feet would have become
soiled by walking through the city streets to the place of the Passover meal.  When under normal circumstances the servant
at the door would have washed his feet, he would have become clean all over again (in accord with ritual requirements).
Only in this instance, Jesus took the place of the servant and in an act of love, washed Judas’ feet, but then strangely said
that Judas was not clean. (Jn 13:10-11)  John reiterates that this condition of Judas (not being clean) is an indication of the
betrayal that is about to take place (Jn 13:10).

--- Sayfa 168 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

166
Jewish people (Mt 15:21-28), or caring for tax collectors (Lk 19:1-10) and women of the night (Lk
7:36-39), Judas mounted a passive aggressive attack and managed in short order to kill Jesus.
It appears that Jesus was committed to something like intercultural dialogue which Judas rejected.
Judas may have been some sort of Jewish exclusivist who could not tolerate the openness to people
that Jesus expected.  Jesus was apparently aware of Judas’ rejection and hence gave Judas the place of
honor at the table (an act of love no less than feet washing) no doubt so that Judas and Jesus could
iron things out.
While few Christians emulate Jesus by loving their enemies, it appears that Mr Gülen is willing to
place himself in this risky position. He has taken the place of Christ, not as a Christian, but as a
Muslim, offering peaceful dialogue to Christians and Jews and people of all religions. Mr Gülen’s
insistence that love is the essential element that will solve the problems related to interfaith dialogue
places him squarely in the non-violent peaceful tradition of the Jew named Jesus that Christians
claim to follow. Christians and Jews and people of the various world religions would do well to
emulate Mr. Gülen.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

167

Gülen between East and West

PART
3

--- Sayfa 170 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

168

--- Sayfa 171 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

169
OPENING THE ROAD TO DIALOGUE: AN AMALGAMATION
OF GÜLEN’S AND SPINOZA’S IDEAS ON TOLERANCE AND
DIALOGUE APPLIED TO THE SITUATION OF MUSLIMS IN
THE NETHERLANDS
KATE KIRK 283 AND GURKAN CELIK 284

Abstract
This paper is a demonstration of how perspectives from different times, locations, and
worldviews can still find deep resonance and yield points supporting the necessity for dialogue
and tolerance. By amalgamating two perspectives on these issues — one rooted in Islam, the
other in secular early-Enlightenment — the authors show that although different they can
together point to the same goal. The need for and the relationship between tolerance and
dialogue are expressed in the writings of both Fethullah Gülen (1941–), an internationally-
renowned scholar of Islam and a prominent teacher of peace and practitioner of dialogue, and
Benedictus (Baruch) de Spinoza (1632–1677), the son of Portuguese Jew who sought refuge in
Amsterdam during the seventeenth century and became the leader of a ‘radical’ philosophic
current which divorced philosophy from theology. The merging of these two men’s ideas
demonstrates in itself that a dialogue between ‘civilizations’ is possible and thus defies those who
believe that Islam and the Judeo-Christian/secular West are destined to clash. Furthermore,
their philosophies can inform public debates, policy development and community-building
strategies in western European countries, like the Netherlands, with their growing Muslim
populations. Islamophobic and anti-Muslim discourses have had a profound impact on recent
developments in integration and naturalization policies in the Netherlands. All across western
Europe the doctrine of multiculturalism and the welfare state shaped post-War immigrant
related policies, but these policies have since been re-examined due to social problems among
first and second generation immigrants and the emergence of what is considered to be
‘theologically’ inspired terrorism. In the Netherlands politicians, policy-makers and citizens
struggle to deal with these discourses and especially the perceived tensions between the Dutch
secular state and society and the increasing number of Muslim citizens. Thus the amalgamation
of Gülen’s Islamic and Spinoza’s secular perspectives on tolerance and dialogue have the
potential to contribute to the ‘peaceful coexistence’ of secular and Islamic residents.

283 Kate Kirk: Currently writing a doctoral dissertation, at Queens University, Belfast, on Dutch integration policies and
their implications on citizenship practices. (A graduate in social science, University College Utrecht; MA in political science,
Leiden University.) Ms Kirk is also doing research on social problems in a deprived neighbourhood in Amsterdam for the
Wiardi Beckman Foundation (WBS), the Dutch Labour Party think tank. She has recently published ‘Enlightened
Embodiment: the Submissive Islamic Female Body in the Contemporary Dutch Enlightenment Project’ in The International
Journal of Diversity in Organizations, Communities and Nations.
284 Gurkan Celik: Currently preparing a doctoral dissertation on Gülen's views on peace and the human condition from the
perspectives of education, dialogue and theological anthropology at Radboud University, Nijmegen. (MA in policy and
organization studies at Tilburg University in the Netherlands.) He has written articles for learned journals, and is (co-
)author of several publications, including ‘Gülen’s Approach to Dialogue and Peace’ in The International Journal of
Diversity in Organizations, Communities and Nations (2007); ‘Fethullah Gülen as a Servant Leader’ in International
Journal of Servant-Leadership (2007); Voorlopers in de Vrede [Forerunners for Peace] (2005); Hizmetkar Liderlik [Servant
Leadership] (2003).

--- Sayfa 172 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

170
The ways to explain things to people without making them hostile and frightened should be sought.
For this reason, at whatever cost, the road to dialogue with people must be kept open. (Gülen
2004a:140).

1. Introduction
Throughout its history the Netherlands has been known as one of the most tolerant countries in
Europe. Repressed groups, such a Portuguese Jews and French Huguenots, came to the Netherlands
during the 16th Century because there they were able to practice their religion without persecution.
Similarly philosophers like Descartes came to the Netherlands because he could enjoy greater
freedom of speech than in his native France. Dutch tolerance took on it most indurate institutional
form during the era of pillarization when Catholics, Protestants, socialists, and liberals lived
harmoniously ‘apart-together’ (Vermeij, 2006:19). Currently, homosexuals come the Netherlands to
enjoy the freedom to express their sexuality openly and even marry if they wish to.285 Similarly, post-
colonial and labour immigrants who arrived in the Netherlands during the 1960’s and 70’s and the
subsequent generation of alloctonen (those born in a foreign country or with parents born in a foreign
country) where also treated with ‘tolerance’ under multicultural policies. However, during the last
several years the Dutch tradition of tolerance seems to many to have encountered Popper’s “paradox
of tolerance”. Popper argued that tolerance of the intolerant is ultimately self-defeating because it
eventually leads to the abolition of tolerance by the intolerant (Popper 1966 as cited in Rosenfeld
2003:11).
The interethnic and inter-religious climate in the Netherlands has undergone dramatic changes over
the passed several years. During the 1990’s criticism of multiculturalism and its ‘tolerance’ of Muslim
immigrant, primarily of Moroccan and Turkish origin, began to surface: exclusionist opinions and
social distance towards ethnic minorities have increased (Dagevos, Gijsberts & van Praag, 2003). Both
the structural and political-cultural integration of these groups was said to have failed. We will argue
that this failure is due not to excessive ‘tolerance’ but to indifference masked by a ‘tolerant’ façade.
Furthermore, current claims to the Dutch tradition of ‘tolerance’ have become part of a nationalistic
identity building project that has shaped current integration policies. As both a form of indifference
and nationalism ‘tolerance’ losses its power to build a plural liberal democratic society because it
closes the “road to dialogue” (Gülen 2004a:140). Thus, we will contend that it is not the ‘paradox of
tolerance’ that has strained relations between Muslims and non-Muslims in the Netherlands but the
misuse and misunderstanding of the principle.
Dutch politics and society is renowned for its political culture of dialogue: in the “polder model” all
parties have to be heard before a decision can be made. However, Dutch dialogues between non-
Muslim and Muslim citizens on the role of religion in society and on integration will be empty and
counterproductive without a re-conceptualisation of what it means to be tolerant in a plural society
and how a meaningful dialogue should be conducted. By using the ideas of Fethullah Gülen [1941]286—
an internationally-renowned scholar of Islam and a prominent teacher of peace and practitioner of

285 Dutch tolerance has also lead to the integration of liberal attitudes and polities towards prostitutions, and the use of soft
drugs suggest that the Dutch still take an open and accepting stand towards behaviours that may be condemned as deviant
by others.
286 Gülen was born in Erzurum, eastern Turkey and has lived in Pennsylvania USA since 1998.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

171
dialogue—in comparison with those of Benedictus (Baruch) de Spinoza [1632-1677]—the son of
Portuguese Jew who sought refuge in Amsterdam during the 17th century and became the leader of a
‘radical’ philosophical current which divorced philosophy from theology—we will attempt to make
such a re-conceptualisation. The purpose of this amalgamation of philosophic perspectives on
tolerance and dialogue is two fold. First, Gülen and Spinoza, respectively, argue that dialogue and
tolerance complement each other and together make liberal democratic peaceful coexistence possible.
Second, the merging of these two men’s ideas, emerging from very different perspectives—the former
religious and the later secular, demonstrates in itself that a dialogue between ‘civilizations’ is possible
and thus defies those who believe that Islam and the judo-Christian/secular west are predestined to
clash.
The paper will begin with an outline of the historical developments of Dutch integration policies in
order to provide the background information needed to understand the position and participation of
Muslims in the Netherlands. Thereafter we will discuss the Dutch discourse on Islam and Muslims.
We will then outline Spinoza’s and Gülen’s thoughts on discourse and tolerance and conclude by
discussing how they can be applied to the Dutch situation.

2. Becoming Dutch: Muslim Citizens and Dutch Integration Policies
The Netherlands has had a long history of contact with the Muslim world thanks to its trading
activities. In fact the Ottoman Turks gave the Dutch their first tulips, the famous national flower, in
the 1500s (Ireland 2004). However, little of this commercial or cultural contact occurred on Dutch
soil until after the Second World War. The Netherlands was, and remains, a very hesitant immigrant
land. Nevertheless, at present approximately 11 percent of the Dutch population is foreign born, and,
if the second generation is included, that percentage increases to 20 (Entzinger 2007:2).
Approximately one million of the 16 million people living in the Netherlands are considered to be
Muslims (van der Laan 2007 ) the majority of whom are of Turkish or Moroccan origin. 287 The most
‘visible minorities are Turks, Surinamese and Moroccans.288 The Surinamese immigrants arrived
during the 1970s, as a result of increasing apprehension over the country’s independence from the
Netherlands. Their Dutch passports and knowledge of the Dutch language greatly facilitated their
integration. Conversely, the Turkish and Moroccan communities—the legacy of ‘guest worker’ policies
of the late 1960’s and 1970’s that were followed by generous programs of settlement and family
reunification—have come to be seen as problematic due to a lack of integration (Entzinger 2007:2).
Before the 1980s the national government had not devised any clearly articulated policies towards
immigrants. Prior to that period it was believed that most of the post-war immigrants would
eventually leave the country (van Houtum et al. 2005:626). There was a powerful conviction that the
Netherlands should not be an immigration country: immigrant residence was to be temporary
because the Netherlands regarded itself to be overpopulated (Entzinger 1975). However after acts of

287 Other Islamic groups in the Netherlands include Hindustani Surinamese, Indonesians, Pakistanis, Tunisians and
Moluccans (Shadid and van Koningsveld 1996) as well as newer immigrants/asylum seekers such as Iranians and Iraqis.
288 ‘Visible minorities’ is a Canadian term used to indicate ethnic communities that stand out as a result of their size
(Entzinger 2006:2).

--- Sayfa 174 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

172
violence committed by young Molukan immigrants the Netherlands began to recognize and accept the
presence of immigrant communities.289
After the parliament published the Minderhedennota (the Minority Memorandum) in 1983 the ‘guest
workers’ and post-colonial migrants became known as ‘ethnic minorities’ (van Houtum et al.
2005:626). The policy that followed reflected the belief that if the newly discovered ‘ethnic minorities’
were allowed to “retain their own culture and manage their own affairs they would be better placed to
emancipate in Dutch society” (van Houtum et al. 2005:626). The institutional and political structure
for these new policies had already been constructed.
Dutch Multiculturalism was the descendent of earlier forms of political accommodation that had
served the country well in the past. The Netherlands was remarkably politically stable during the 20th
century, despite the constant threat posed by the division of society into four separate ‘pillars’:
Catholic, Protestant, liberal, and socialist (Andeweg & Irwin 2005:19). Arend Lijphart explained this
extraordinary stability with his concept of ‘consociational democracy’. This theory seeks to
demonstrate how stable and effective democracy is possible despite social heterogeneity when there is
elite cooperation (Lijphart 1975). In the pillarised Netherlands there was a decentralization of policy
making to the ‘corporate’ minorities, whose institutions were subsidised by the central government.
Although the pillars collapsed under the pressure of social mobility and secularisation during the
1960s, “subsidised autonomy” was granted to new immigrant groups and formed the backbone of
Dutch multiculturalism. The ‘Ethnic Minorities Policy’ focused on ethnic minorities as collectives: it
promoted
socio-economic
participation,
combated
discrimination,
and
supported
group
emancipation of minority groups through coordination with ethnic elites. These policies had an
especially profound impact on the experience of Turkish and Moroccan ‘guest-workers’ and their
families (Entzinger 2007:3). These Islamic immigrants were allowed to establish separate facilities
based on their community and religious identity. For example subsidies were allocated for ‘mother
language’ teaching programs for immigrant children, and welfare benefits were granted to their non-
Dutch speaking parents (Entzinger 2007:3).290
During the 1990’s high unemployment and under-development among first and second generation
allochtonen opened the flood gates to progressive claims that multiculturalism promoted racial
stereotypes and ethnic marginalisation (Steenbergen 2006: 267). Furthermore, criminality and
Islamic fundamentalism provoked more conservative critiques—echoing Samuel Huntington (2004,
1998)—against the “tribalisation” of the Netherlands and the assaults on Western democratic ideals
by foreigners, particularly Muslims (Philipse 2005; Bolkestein 1997). The political debate over the
compatibility between Islam and democratic liberalism, which would mark much of the later political

289 After Indonesian independence was granted in 1949 approximately 300,000 colonizers and colonized fled to the
Netherlands, of whom approximately 13,000 were former soldiers from the island of Ambon (Molukans) (Köbben 1979:
147). Both the Molukans and the government considered their residence to be temporary because they had been promised
independence by the Dutch. After being housed in a former Nazi concentration camp, and having been considered
‘temporary’ for more than 25 years, unrest led to several terrorist attacks by young Molukans. Finally a kidnapping and two
train hijackings sparked the political and social debates that eventually led to the WWR report on the status of Minorities.
(Köbben 1979).
290 It is interesting to note that although well meaning these policies often led to mistaken understandings of ethnic group
composition. For instance all Moroccans were supposed to have Arabic as their mother language and thus the children of
Berber speaking immigrants were also provided with Arabic classes.

--- Sayfa 175 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

173
debate over integration, was started in 1991 by former liberal party (VVD) leader Frits Bolkestein
(Maas 1997). Bolkestein claimed that Islam was a threat to liberal freedom and democracy
After the 1994 elections, the newly elected ‘purple’ coalition, composed of the three main non-
religious parties, replaced ‘minority policies’ with ‘integration policies’; shifting the focus from
respecting cultural difference to promoting the immigrant’s social and economic participation
(Entzinger 2007:5; Ministerie van BiZa 1994).The approach taken by the ‘integration policy’ was a
more citizenship-oriented (or republican) approach than the group-oriented policies of the 1980s.
Nevertheless, the 1997 parliamentary report on the multicultural society still stressed the importance
of strong group-identity as a means to facilitate self-confident societal participation (Gemeente
Utrecht 2004:17).291 Thus, the integration of individuals was also combined with the idea of distinct
group identity.
The Inburgering of new immigrants became the spearhead of Dutch integration policies (Fermin
1999:96). In colloquial Dutch the word integratie (integration) is used interchangeably with the word
inburgering—normally translated as naturalising. However, the root of the term, burger (citizen)
suggests it can literally be translated as “to become a citizen”. This concept arose in 1989 when the
WRR advised that basic civic and language education be made a requirement for immigrants. In 1994
the government began to express interest in developing an inburgering policy, the purpose of which
would be to facilitate the independent functioning of immigrants in Dutch society. Finally, in 1996,
non-European Union immigrants, with a right to welfare benefits, were obliged to participate in a 12-
month integration course, consisting of 600 hours of Dutch language instruction, civic education and
preparation for the labour market (Joppke 2007:13). Then, in 1998, through the enactment of the Wet
inburgering nieuwkomers (WIN) (Newcomer Integration Law), non-EU immigrants without a
temporary reason for residence (such as students), were required to inburgeren regardless of welfare
rights (Fermin 1999: 96). Furthermore, the relics of multiculturalism, such as ‘mother tongue’
teaching, were removed from the school curriculum (Entzinger 2007:5).
During the 2002 parliamentary elections campaign, Pim Fortuyn, a flamboyant homosexual sociology
professor, challenged the political elite with his populist claims that there was no more room in the
Netherlands for foreigners. Furthermore, in his book, Against the Islamicisation of Our Culture, he
warned that Dutch society was under attack by authoritarian Muslims who, if given the opportunity,
would destroy the Dutch tradition of tolerance, and rob homosexuals and women of their rights
(Fortuyn 2001). Although assassinated shortly before the elections by a Dutch animal rights activist,
his party (LPF, List Pim Fortuyn) was included in the ruling coalition. However, the party’s inability
to function as part of the government led to the collapse of the coalition, and after new elections were
called the LPF lost most of its votes (Andeweg & Irwin 2005: 16). In the end it was Fortuyn’s critique
of the prevalent political correctness towards immigrants—especially Islamic immigrants—that had
the most impact on Dutch political culture.
One of Fortuyn’s most enthusiastic supporters, who dubbed him the ‘divine baldy’ in light of his
shaved head, was Theo van Gogh. Van Gogh, a film maker, columnist and television personality, was
known for his outrageous and politically incorrect antics. When he was approached by Ayaan Hirsi
Ali—a liberal party parliamentarian of Somalian decent—to direct a film she had written called

291 In this same report the government wrote that the effort of the entire society, both foreign and native-Dutch was needed
for the integration of minorities.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

174
Submission Part I, he agreed.292 In the film the story of the abuse suffered by Islamic women at the
hands of male relatives was told by a woman dressed in a transparent ‘burka’: her naked body was
tattooed with Qur’an texts. The film alienated and enraged many Muslims and as revenge a young
Dutch Islamic fundamentalist, Mohammed Bouyeri, killed van Gogh. Bouyeri left a note on the body
threatening Hirsi Ali.
The lives and deaths of Pim Fortuyn and Theo van Gogh, the media spectacle that was Hirsi Ali, along
with international events like September 11th and the Madrid bombings, set the stage for the
formulation of ‘Integration Policy New Style’. Furthermore, a 2004 parliamentary investigation into
the state of integration in the Netherlands, known as the Blok Commission, concluded that
integration in the Netherlands had failed, especially in regard to education (Tijdelijke Commissie
Onderzoek Integratiebelied; Commissie Blok, 2004). Steered by the former heavy-handed Minister of
Integration, Rita Verdonk, the Netherlands enacted increasingly restrictive migration and more
rigorous integration policies, including the requirement of ‘civic integration’ or inburgering classes
for religious leaders like Imams.293

3. Anti-Muslimism in the Netherlands
Dutch Islamophobia is marked by what Halliday (1995) calls ‘anti-Muslimism’ because it
encompassed racist, xenophobic and, stereotypical element : it is part of a larger anti-immigrant
sentiment (as cited in Koningsveld 2002:175). ‘Muslim’ is an ethnic political identity, that along with
socio-economic deprivation and spatial segregation, is used to draw clear lines between Dutch and
Islamic culture, the native Dutch and Muslims. This kind of differentiation does not allow for
engagement and cooperation but instead fear and feeling of moral superiority born of ignorance.
Initially the aforementioned legacy of pillarization, provide for a conception of ethnic minorities that
was based on social, economic, cultural and religious characteristics: the end goal was a cohesive yet
pluralistic society made up of ethnically distinct yet settled groups (Ireland 2004:122). Muslim
movements were just part of the mix: the problematic history of Catholic emancipation and the
eventual acquiesce of humanist beliefs and Jewish practices helped to clear the way for Islam (Ireland
2004:122). Although the so called ‘silver cord’ between the Dutch state and churches was cut in 1983
local governments still had the authority to disperse subsidies for social and cultural work, including
those performed by mosque associations (Ireland 2004:122). Thus, although most of the Dutch where
leaving their pillars the state helped to construct a new Muslim one: they introduced subsidies for
prayers rooms and eventually mosques, sanctioned and regulated the ritual slaughtering of animals,
initiated the Islamic Broadcasting Foundation, and made imams legally equal to other spiritual
leaders (Shadid & Van Koningveld 1996). It was believed that Muslim organizations could help to

292 Hirsi Ali made it her political mission to emancipate women from Islam. She herself came to the Netherlands as a
refugee after escaping an arranged marriage. In 2006 a controversy over her citizenship arose after the Minister of
Integration -a fellow liberal party member- made an issue of lies Hirsi Ali had told on her original asylum request. In the
end she was allowed to keep her citizenship but she voluntarily resigned from the parliament and moved to the United
States.
293 In Dec 2006 integration was removed from Verdonk’s portfolio after a struggle between the cabinet and the parliament
over the pardoning of 2600 asylum seekers who asked for asylum longer than five years before and who had asylum
applications turned down under the previous cabinet and in the justice system. In Feb. 2007 she stood down as minister
when the new cabinet was installed and is now a member of parliament (Valk 2006:3).

--- Sayfa 177 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

175
implement the minority policies and emancipate their members. However, efforts to create a unified
Dutch Islam failed and the organizations remained nationality-based and most Mosques had an
ethnic affiliation (Ireland 2004:123). Thus references to “the Islam” or “Muslims” are miss-leading
generalizations, for there are many different interpretations of the Qur’an and differences in religious
cultural practices.
This focus on political-cultural integration based on ethnic identities and the lack of structural-
integration in the labour market, housing, schools and vocational training polices eventually blew up
in the faces of Dutch policy makers. As Christopher Cadwel writes: “The Dutch talked themselves into
believing that valuelessness was a perennial feature of their society. So they could build a Muslim
pillar and then let it collapse into post-modern individualism, following the same historic route that
Protestantism and Catholicism had taken, as if that route were the product of an iron historical law”
(Cadwell 2004 as cited in Carle 2006). The economic stagnation and restructuring of the late 1980s
hit immigrant groups very hard—in 1987 unemployment rates had soared to 42 percent among
Moroccans, 44 percent among Turks and 27 percept among Surinamese, compared to just 13 percent
among the native population (Pennix & Groenendijk as cited in Ireland 2004:123). Drop out rates
among alloctonous students were very high and many of the first generation immigrants who had
lived in the Netherlands for decades did not speak any Dutch (Engbersen, Hemerijck & Bakker 1994
as cited in Ireland 2004: 123 ).
In January of 2000 Paul Scheffer, a historian and prominent Dutch Labour Party (PVdA) member,
wrote an article that appeared in the NRC Handelsblad, a Dutch daily newspaper, entitled “The
Multicultural Drama”. Herein Scheffer argued that an “ethnic underclass” consisted of people who do
not feel attached to Dutch culture and society and who are unwilling and unable to integrate, had been
formed as the result of cultural relativism. From his view point the illiberal idea of Muslims could
undermine the social cohesion and the functioning of liberal democracy (Scheffer 2000). The solution
he suggested was a ‘civilization offensive’ which would force immigrants to adhere to the principles on
which the Dutch state had been created and that they should have a comprehensive knowledge of
Dutch history and culture. Tolerance, he claimed, “can only survive within clear limits: without shared
norms and values about the rule of law, we cannot productively have differences of opinion” (Scheffer
2000). The success of Scheffers critique of the indifference of Dutch multicultural ‘tolerance’ was that
it sparked the expression of classical nationalist sentiments such as the defences of Dutch language
and culture and the need for a shared understanding of history. Thus criticism from the left that “the
very idea of a multicultural society was too conservative because it denies the fact that migration
changes people” (Scheffer 2000) started to ricochet across the political spectrum.
These anti-multiculturalism sentiments were most clearly articulated by the rightist populists like Pim
Fortuyn and later Geert Wilders and Liberal Party (VVD) members like form leader Frit Bolkestein,
parliamentarian Ayaan Hirsi Ali and the former minister of Integration, Rita Verdonk. What all these
politicians have in common is the idea that Islam is fundamentally incompatible with democracy and
that Western values are superior. The status of homosexuality and the position of women in society
have become markers of the difference between ‘Dutch values’ and Islam.
Fortuyn in particular expressed the importance of protecting the rights of homosexuals from Muslim,
although he openly bragged about sleeping with many Moroccan men (Burma 2006). During a recent
political controversy sparked after Prime minister Balkenende told a group of students at the Islamic
Indonesian State University that he had voted again gay marriage as a parliamentarian Boris van der
Ham (D66) stated “as prime minister representing all the Dutch he must explain that gay marriage is

--- Sayfa 178 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

176
based on deeply rooted norms and values” (Krietiek op uitspraken Balkenende over homohuwelijk
2007). However, what van der Ham and Fortuyn before him have failed to explicate is that the right to
gay marriage is not a fundamental Dutch value but the result of a democratic decision that many,
including native Dutch Christians like Balkenende opposed.
The supposed suppression and abuse of Islamic women has been repeatedly used as an example of the
threat of Muslims to Dutch society and the ‘backwardness’ of Islam. Islamic women and their own
definitions of themselves are often excluded from this discourse, based on presumption and not on
dialogue. Ayaan Hirsi Ali—who has mistakenly been called the heiress of Spinoza294—made it her
mission to free women from the edicts of Islam that had decreed her own circumcision, and an
arranged marriage from which she had fled.295 Through the language of the European Enlightenment,
and with the justification of her own Islamic African past, she has declared war on Islam from inside
liberal Dutch political circles. However it is not skin colour or background that matter here but the
nature of the arguments. Hirsi Ali’s position clearly comes from an elite, secular, western perspective.
Feminist scholar Halleh Ghorashi captures the anomaly of Hirsi Ali’s politics in her assessment that:
“Hirsi Ali is sincere but also dogmatic, she is brave but also one-sided, she is black but thinks white”
(Ghorashi 2005:2). Although her intentions are good, by allying herself with an ideology that
objectifies the Islamic woman as part of a postcolonial nationalistic discourse instead of engaging in
dialogue , she has failed in her emancipatory mission.
Just as in France and the UK, woman clad in hijab in the Netherlands have become walking symbols
of an Islamic threat. In December of 2005 Geert Wilders, the leader of the populist anti-immigrant
‘Party for Freedom’, proposed a motion to ban the Burka, a garment worn by orthodox Muslim
woman with only a screened opening around the eyes. In regard to the motion Wilders stated:
The Burka is unfriendly to women and actually medieval. It is an insult to
everyone who believes in equal rights to have completely unrecognizable women
on the streets. Thus, in the Netherlands there is no place for a burka. The motion
also gives support to moderate Muslims in the Netherlands. The burka ban
contributes to integration in the Netherlands. Furthermore, in light of security
issues it is unacceptable that people are unrecognizable. It is for this reason that
the burka was earlier forbidden in certain Belgian cities.296,297
Although such a ban was found to be unconstitutional on the grounds of religious freedom, the
motion may still be passed in light of security issues surrounding unidentifiable people. Wilders was
given wide support by the Christian Democrats (CDA), the Liberal Party (VVD) and the party founded
by the late Pim Fortuyn (LPF). The parliamentary fuss over the issue puzzled many because only
about 100 women, out of a population 16 million, actually wear the burka. However, within the
context of Dutch anti-Muslimism it is entirely understandable because the burka is a glaring example
of the Islamic other violating perceived pillars of the Dutch state.

294 Buurma 2006; 24. This was a statement made by Jonathan Israel quoted by Yoram Stein in Trouw, May 6, 2005.
295 Hirsi Ali has resigned from her parliamentary position and moved to America due to a controversy surrounding her
citizenship and security issues.
296 Groep Wilders. 20 Dec. 2005. “Burka verboden in Nederland – Kamer stemt voor motie van Wilders.
http://www.geertwilders.nl/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=364&Itemid=71 (8 Oct 2006).
297 This is the author’s own translation from Dutch to English.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

177
During an interview in July 2007 the minister of Housing, Neighbourhoods and Integration, Ella
Vogelaar, made the prediction that in several decades the Dutch would have a ‘Jewish-Christian-
Islamic tradition’. Furthermore she stated that she “would like to help Muslims to feel at home. Islam
and Muslim must be able to root themselves here, specifically because Muslims are also citizens of
this country” (Laan 2007). These statements were immediately meet with disapproval by the leaders
of the PVV, VVD and members of one of the government coalition parties the Christen Union (CU).
Wilders was quotes as saying: “I fell off my chair when I read it [the interview with Vogelaar] ….the
Islam is opposed to very important norms and values in our culture. We must not just throw these
away”(“Nederland krijgt joods-christeljke-islamitische traditie” 19 juli 2007). VVD leader Mark Rutte
echoed Wilders saying: “the Netherlands doesn’t have an Islamic tradition. Of course not, we have to
be clear over that. People who come to our country have to except our core values like the equality
between men and women and the democratic state” (ibid 19 July 2007). CU parliamentarian Ed
Anker stated that the ministers remarks misrepresented “fundamental differences between two
religions” and expressed worries that the ministers opinions on the compatibility between different
religious cultures would find its way into the cabinets integration policy (ibid 19 July 2007).
Vogelaar stressed that in her role as minister she would like to put an end to the negative image and
fear of Islam precisely because they are Dutch citizens and in the country stay (van der Laan 2007).
Not only does she have fight against the fear that Muslims will override so called ‘deeply rooted Dutch
norms and values’ but also the fear of terrorism and anarchism. Around the world the difference
between Islam in general and jijhadism is often confused and Muslim has become a synonym with
terror. Jihad is an element of Islam which is primarily defined as the inner struggle of a believer
against all that stands between the believer and God.298 For the last decade or so terms like Muslim
terrorists, Islamic violence, jihadists, Muslim suicide bombers rank among the most frequently used
jargon in the press and TV broadcasts. Regardless of how one defines global Islamic revival,
theological and political debate makes its presence felt on a global scale. Contrarily, Fethullah Gülen
(2004:261; Caban 2005) argues: ‘there is no such thing as a Muslim terrorist; a terrorist cannot be
Muslim; a Muslim cannot be a terrorist.” He declares that from the point of view of Islamic criteria
nobody can justify or permit suicide attacks.
According to Robert Carle approximately 80 percent of the Dutch population believes that the state
has been too tolerant towards Muslims who do not respect the right of homosexuals and women and
are willing to use violence to further their assault against the democratic state (Carle 2006:68). Until
recently, students of Dutch interethnic attitudes have agreed that a strong norm against blatant
racism prevailed among native Dutch, but that more subtle forms of racism were equally prevalent in
the Netherlands as in other countries (Essed 1991; Pettigrew & Meertens 1996). However, it is
important to note that this ‘tolerance’ first lead to indifferent to the economic and social problems in
an Islamic pillar tucked away in crumbling inner-city and then to a tit-for-tat tolerance: “we are only
tolerant if you are then tolerant” based on nationalistic cries for the protection of Dutch ‘core’ norms
and values. True tolerance and the dialogue it can promote are needed because there are a million

298 Jihad occurs on two fronts. the internal and the external. The internal struggle (the greater jihad) is the effort to attain
one’s essence; the external struggle (the lesser jihad) is the process of enabling someone else to attain his or her essence.
The first is conducted on the spiritual frond, and is based on overcoming obstacles between oneself and one’s essence, and
the soul’s reaching knowledge, eventually divine knowledge, divine love, and spiritual bliss. The second is, however,
material and based on removing obstacles between people and faith so that people can choose freely between belief and
disbelief. (see Gülen, 1998a,b).

--- Sayfa 180 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

178
Muslims in the Netherlands, there are mosques and even halal meat in the supermarkets: Muslims
are nested in the Netherlands and are there to stay.

4. Dialogue and Tolerance: Spinoza and Gülen
Islamaphobia and anti-Muslimism in the Netherlands are often buttressed on the national claims to a
tradition that is not Judaeo-Christian but Enlightened. What Jonathan Israel calls the “radical” or
early enlightenment, which began in the Netherlands during its ‘golden’ 17th century (Isreal 2001), is
often referenced by the likes of Hirsi Ali and Bolkestein. This nostalgia is reminiscence is what Vamik
Volkan calls a ‘chosen glory’: a historical story of greatness woven into nationalist narratives and used
to rally people around an imagined collective identity (Volkan 1994). What made the radical
enlightenment so radical, a movement in which Spinoza played a key role, is that it was the first time
that philosophy was divorced from theology (Isreal 2001). Isreal claims that Spinoza was the first to
see all the key elements that made up the modern, progressive values that mark the secular Dutch
society today (Hartmans 2007:24). Spinoza’s philosophy, instead of being the brawn behind
nationalist anti-Muslimism, can be used to advocate religious tolerance from a secular position.
In his writings and speeches, Gülen highlights the tension between Islamophobia and the reality of
Muslims in the West that needs to be addressed in order to make sustainable peaceful coexistence
possible. Gülen’s ‘alliance of civilizations’—as apposed to the ‘clash of civilizations’—offers a
perspective from which this peaceful coexistence is possible. Gülen’s perspective shows that through
dialogue groups can come to see that they share common virtues and ideas not simply incompatible
differences (Ünal & Williams 2000; Carroll 2007). Gülen, a contemporary theologian, clearly comes
from an Islamic perspective: the Qur’an, the Sunnah, ijtihad (independent reasoning, see Yilmaz
2003), and Islamic piety are his reference points, just as reason was the basis of Spinoza’s philosophy.
He like Spinoza tries to conceptualize modern peaceful coexistence by conjoining tolerance and
dialogue.
Spinoza, a vehement critic of religious superstition called for religious tolerance in the name of reason
and Gülen, a devote Muslim, calls for tolerance in the name of God. This is not to say that either
Spinoza or Gülen is a relativist, however both do believe that differences are inevitable in society and
we must thus learn ways of living together in harmony. Gülen states, “tolerance does not mean being
influenced by others and joining them; it means accepting others as they are and knowing how to get
along with them (Gülen 2004a:157). Spinoza insisted that a philosophy of reason was necessary to
unmask the evils produced by theology, but if it was believed that a philosophy could do way with
faith and religion, it would ultimately become yet another dangerous dogma (Rosenfeld 2003:34).
Thus, adherents to both a philosophy of reason and to Islam do not have to let their own belief falter
by tolerating others and accepting that there are other ‘conceptions of the good’.
For Spinoza virtue can be created by acting in accordance with reason and for Gülen virtue comes
from acting in accordance with a love of God however both men come to the conclusion that it is both
a public and a private virtue to be tolerance: tolerance is necessary for dialogue, which in turn leads to
a understand that can facilitate peaceful coexistence. It is noteworthy to mention that both Spinoza
and Gülen reject the Cartesian divide between faith and reason, both find that faith and true religion
can be part of the realm of reason.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

179
These men, coming for very different time periods, assert that a plurality of ideas of ‘the good’ exist
and thus must be dealt with. Gülen states: “at a time when the world has become like a big village and
at a point when our society is on the verge of great change and transformation, if we are talking about
dialogue with other nations…[then] tolerance is a matter that needs to be rewarded and for this
reason it must permeate the whole society”(Gülen 2004a:57). Spinoza lived in a diverse and thus
fragile Dutch republic when democracy was trying to establish a firm footing amidst vehement
religious and political conflict (Rosenfeld 2003:3). Both thinkers oppose government efforts to stamp
out what is considered “false belief”. Spinoza insisted that the state is tyrannical if it attempts to force
a person to abandon his or her beliefs (Rosenfeld 2003:42). Similarly, Gülen (2004b:34) observes
that “in countries programmed for corruption, intolerance and mercilessness, such things as freedom
of thought, polite criticism and exchange of ideas according to norms of equity and fair-minded
debate, it would be meaningless to speak of products of logic and inspiration.”
Spinoza held that democracy was the best form of government because he believed that the rule of the
majority would lead to political decisions based on reason (Rosenfeld 2003:65).299 Correspondingly,
Gülen considers democracy to be a necessary requirement for the continuation of Islamic thought and
belief. According to Gülen, human rights, freedom of thought and the rule of law provide the ideal
circumstance in which Islam is best understood and can flourished. That is why, Gülen states, that
Islam is better practiced and appreciated in Europe and United States than it is in some Muslim
countries. Likewise, Gülen argues that Islam necessitates support for human rights and freedom
(Saritoprak & Ünal 2005:447-456). In terms of democracy vis-à-vis Islam, Gülen claims that Islam
does not propose a specific form of governance but that it sets some certain underlying fundamental
principles that should be adhered to, such as justice, tolerance, equality, freedom from oppression and
persecution; freedom from despotism, freedom of worship (Yilmaz 2003:208-237). Thus, according
to him, there is no such thing as an “Islamic state” or “Islamic regime”. Every form of governance can
be “Islamic” if the aforementioned principles are followed. Hence, according to Gülen Western states
that protect and promote human rights, democracy, equality and justice are more ‘Islamic’ than some
so-called “Islamic states” that do not uphold such principles and values. Therefore, Islam leaves the
choice of governance to the people which will inevitably be dictated and affected by the prevailing
circumstances of the time. Gülen calls the determination of this choice a “social contract” between the
people and the governors. He does not see a contradiction between ‘Islamic administration’ and
democracy (Yilmaz 2005:396) and strongly states that a democratic state ruled by law depends on the
idea of a social contract.
As Islam holds individuals and societies responsible for their own fate, people
must be responsible for governing themselves. The Qur’an addresses society with
such phrases as: “O people!” and “O believers!” The duties entrusted to modern
democratic systems are those that Islam refers to society and classifies, in order of
importance, as “absolutely necessary, relatively necessary, and commendable to
carry out.” People cooperate with one another in sharing these duties and
establishing the essential foundations necessary to perform them. The
government is composed of all of these foundations. Thus, Islam recommends a
government based on a social contract. People elect the administrators, and

299 Spinoza envisaged elite democracy instead of mass democracy, which as the democratic election of Aldolf Hitler shows
can lead an end to reason and tolerance.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

180
establish a council to debate common issues. Also, the society as a whole
participates in auditing the administration. (Gülen 2001:135-136).
Tolerance as both a public and private virtue opens the door to dialogue. Spinoza’s thoughts on
tolerance can best be understood from a dialectical approach (Rosenfeld 2003:14). Thus, his ideas on
tolerance are based a dialogue of sorts for he used a method of reasoning and to reach a conclusion by
considering theories and ideas together with ones that contradict them: thus in his quest for reason he
considered religious doctrines that he considered superstitious. Dialogue is part and parcel of
democracy, which Spinoza found to be the best form of government because it promoted reason.
Gülen is very explicit over the inter-relationship between dialogue and tolerance (de Bolt 2005:38-
52). Spinoza conceptualized tolerance as a combination of self-constraint with greater openness
towards others, under these conditions dialogue is then possible. Gülen defines dialogue as “two or
more people coming together to talk and meet on certain subjects and by means of this, to draw closer
together to one another (Gülen 2004a:171). For both men consent is not the ultimate goal of dialogue
but instead a means to deal with the contradictory view-points in pluralistic society. Both believe that
the discourse is a logical process that can lead to a reasonable outcome because there is a commonly
shared core of identity that permeates through difference, and that is reason. Gülen believes—as
aforementioned—that “tolerance does not mean being influenced by others or joining them; it means
accepting others as they are and knowing how to get along with them” (Gülen 2004b:52).
Celik and Valkenberg (2007) explain that Gülen proposes dialogue as a method used in building and
establishing a culture of peace among co-religionists, people of different ethnic, racial and cultural
backgrounds. He sees dialogue as a framework of mutual acceptance and respect of each other’s
identity. They describe this as the first stage of Gülen’s dialogue concept: accepting the others in their
own position. The second stage involves respecting the position of the other(s), and the third stage is
the concept of sharing values in the context of the other(s). Gülen conviction’s is that humanity
ultimately will be led to peace and unity by recognizing and accepting social, cultural, and religious
diversity, an exchange of mutual values and union in collaboration. Gülen sees diversity and pluralism
as a natural fact. He wants those differences to be admitted and to be explicitly professed. Accepting
everyone as they are, which is broader and deeper than tolerance, is his normal practice (Ünal &
Williams 2000:256-8).
The Prophet (Mohammed) says that all people are as equal as the teeth of a comb.
Islam does not discriminate based on race, colour, age, nationality, or physical
traits. The Prophet declared “You are all from Adam, and Adam is from earth. O
servants of God, be brothers (and sisters)”. Gülen, 2001a:134). Those who close
the road of tolerance are beasts who have lost their humanity. . . forgiveness and
tolerance will heal most of our wounds, but only if this divine instrument is in the
hands of those who understand its language. Otherwise, the incorrect treatment
we have used until now will create many complications and continue to confuse us
(Gülen 2000:4-5).
Gülen (2000:4-5) believes that “interfaith dialogue is a must today, and that the first step in
establishing it is forgetting the past, ignoring polemical arguments, and giving precedence to common
points, which far outnumber polemical ones.” In his opinion, a believer does not hesitate to
communicate with any kind of thought and system. Islam does not reject interaction with diverse
cultures and change as long as what is to be appropriated does not contradict with the main pillars of
Islam.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

181
…different beliefs, races, customs and traditions will continue to cohabit in this
village. Each individual is like a unique realm unto themselves; therefore the
desire for all humanity to be similar to one another is nothing more than wishing
for the impossible. For this reason, the peace of this (global) village lies in
respecting all these differences, considering these differences to be part of our
nature and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences. Otherwise, it is
unavoidable that the world will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes, fights,
and the bloodiest of wars, thus preparing the way for its own end (Gülen
2004:249-250). If one were to seek the true face of Islam in its own sources,
history, and true representatives, then one would discover that it contains no
harshness, cruelty, or fanaticism. It is a religion of forgiveness, pardon, and
tolerance as such saints and princes of love and tolerance as Rumi, Yunus Emre,
Ahmed Yesevi, Bediüzzaman and many others have so beautifully expressed.
(Gülen 2004b:58-59).
Gülen envisions a twenty-first century in which human beings shall witness the birth of a spiritual
dynamic that will revitalise long-dormant moral values; an age of tolerance, understanding, and
international cooperation that will ultimately lead, through inter-cultural dialog and a sharing of
values, to greater understanding and peace. Gülen believes the road to justice for all is dependent on
the provision of an adequate and appropriate universal education. Only then, will there be sufficient
understanding and tolerance to secure respect for the rights of others.

5. Conclusions and Discussion
Initial Dutch ‘tolerance’ of Muslims was not true tolerance because instead of leading the way to
dialogue is lead to the division of society through pillarization and current claims to ‘tolerance’ by
rightist politicians close off the way to dialogue pinning one extreme inflexible ‘core’ of beliefs against
another. The fear of losing Dutch traditions to Muslims is based on a fear and a lack of insight into
historical and democratic processes: homosexual and women’s rights were created as a result of a
socio-economic changes and dialogue. Gülen’s interpretation of the Qur’an shows that Islam does not
require its followers destroy beliefs they don’t agree with but instead to tolerate and engage in
dialogue with those who have seemingly contradictory values. Similarly, Spinoza insists that the state
should not try to force people to desert their beliefs. Thus Scheffers ‘civilization defensive’ is not
conducive to true democracy and lasting peace.
A re-evaluation of the Dutch tolerance is necessary! Before he was killed Theo van Gogh said to
Mohammed Bouyeri, “can we discuss this” (Spruyt 2007) but no discussion was possible because
Bouyeri was not tolerance of van Gogh’s ideas and van Gogh himself had also not been tolerant of
Muslims. The situation is a microcosm for what has been happening in Dutch society as a whole.
Those afraid of losing their ideals fail to tolerate positions they see as threatening and thus do not
engage in dialogue. The problem with this fear is that it breeds intolerance in a society that is and will
inevitably remain diverse: Gülen writes “people with different ideals and thoughts are either going to
seek ways of getting along by means of reconciliation or they will constantly fight with one another.
There have always people who thought differently to one another and there always will be” (Gülen
2004b:52). In the post-9/11 world of real and perceived ‘clashes’, the millions participating in the

--- Sayfa 184 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

182
Gülen movement continue to provide people with both spiritual and practical guidance towards peace
and tolerance of others.
This paper is a demonstration of how perspectives from different times, locations, and worldviews can
still find deep resonance and yield points on which to engage in dialogue and tolerance. By
amalgamating the perspectives on tolerance and dialogue, one Islamic, the other enlightenment
secular, it shows that although different they can together arrive at one truth. This is only possible
when political and social positions are developed in dialectic, and not a fundamentalist, context.
Respecting others, listening to others in dialogue, and considering their perspectives when drawing
conclusions can lead to peaceful coexistence between Muslims and non-Muslim in the Netherlands.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

183
FETHULLAH GÜLEN: FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF
RUMI
THOMAS MICHEL 300

Abstract
The writings of Jalal al-Din Rumi, the thirteenth-century mystical poet and founder of the
Mevlevi Sufi confraternity, have influenced the thinking and behaviour of many Muslims down to
our own times. One of the modern Muslims who have appropriated Rumi’s attitudes and
integrated them into their own understanding of Islamic faith and practice is the Turkish scholar
and religious leader, Muhammad Fethullah Gülen.  The correspondence of Mevlana to Gülen is
that of kindred spirits who, across the centuries, share an interpretation of the Qur’anic message
as well as a commitment to communicate that message effectively to people of their respective
ages.  In his sermons and written works, Gülen frequently cites Rumi’s behavior and attitudes to
illustrate his message; in the book Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Gülen
cites Rumi over 15 times to exemplify his themes of civilizational dialogue.  In his work on the
Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism, Gülen cites Mevlana more often than any other saint or
spiritual writer as he seeks to initiate the seeker into the mysteries of God’s love.  What does
Mevlana mean for Fethullah Gülen?  Where does he see the affinity between his own
understanding of Islam and that expounded and exemplified by Rumi?  What are the lessons that
can be learned from Rumi?  Why does Gülen consider Rumi a worthy exemplar for the modern
Muslim? The answers to these questions can be found in four areas. Firstly, for Gülen, Rumi is
one of the great figures of tolerance and dialogue in Islamic history; modern Muslims can learn
from Rumi’s ‘compass openness’. Secondly, Rumi is a model of holiness, one of the great saints
produced by Islam. Thirdly, Mevlana’s longing for God makes him an instructive example for all
those who thirst for a relationship of greater intimacy with God. Finally, Rumi is the teacher of
the many virtues need by conscientious Muslims at all times.

1. The need for a modern spirituality
Among the medieval mystical poets, the one who speaks most clearly and directly to the modern
world is Jalaluddin Rumi, known simply in the Muslim world as “Mevlana,” Our Master. The depth of
his spiritual experience, his original and arresting poetic images, his obvious sincerity and
openheartedness, and his ability to transcend cultures, time periods, and religions, all go together to
make Mevlana one of the most accessible and influential of Muslim thinkers who speak to us from the
past.
The number of internet webpages devoted to translations of Rumi’s poetry into European languages is
evidence of the extent to which Mevlana is known and loved in the West, but in the Muslim world, the

300 Currently Secretary for Inter-religious Dialogue for the Society of Jesus and Ecumenical Secretary for the Federation of
Asian Bishops’ Conferences. Professor Michel was director of the Islamic Office of the Vatican’s Council for Inter-religious
Dialogue for 13 years. He belongs to the Indonesian Province of the Jesuits. He regularly conducts seminars on Christian–
Muslim relations in Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia. He has written much on the thought of Said Nursi and M.
Fethullah Gülen.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

184
influence of Mevlana on modern thinkers and scholars, as upon the ordinary Muslim worshiper, must
not be underestimated. While those who can read and appreciate his poetry in the original Persian
may be relatively few, Mevlana’s works are known through poetry recitations, classical performances
of their musical settings, and through the many translations of his poetry into Turkish, Arabic, Urdu
and other Muslim languages.  I have seen verses of Rumi decorating dishes, wood panels, horse carts
and their modern equivalent, minibuses. The dervishes of the Mevlevi tariqa communicate, through
their solemn whirling prayer, a non-verbal way message of Rumi’s experience of tolerance, peace, and
deep absorption in the Divine.
One of the modern Muslims who have appropriated Rumi’s attitudes and integrated them into their
own understanding of Islamic faith and practice is the Turkish scholar and religious leader,
Muhammad Fethullah Gülen. The correspondence of Mevlana to Gülen is that of kindred spirits who,
across the centuries, share an interpretation of the Qur’anic message as well as a commitment to
communicate that message effectively to people of their respective ages. In his sermons and written
works, Gülen frequently cites Rumi’s behavior and attitudes to illustrate his message; in the book
Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Gülen cites Rumi over 15 times to exemplify his
themes of civilizational dialogue.  In his work on the Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism, Gülen
cites Mevlana more often than any other saint or spiritual writer as he seeks to initiate the seeker into
the mysteries of God’s love.
What does Mevlana mean for Fethullah Gülen? Where does he see the affinity between his own
understanding of Islam and that expounded and exemplified by Rumi?  What are the lessons that can
be learned from Rumi?  Why does Gülen consider Rumi a worthy exemplar for the modern Muslim? I
believe that the answers to these questions can be found in four areas.

2. 1. Rumi as the model of tolerance and dialogue
In discussing Said Nursi’s proposal to undertake dialogue and cooperation with true Christians, Gülen
states that in this Nursi is acting in a similar manner to Rumi who described himself as a compass,
with one foot fixed firmly in the center while the other turns in a broad arc to complete a full circle.
The foot planted resolutely in the center which never changes position is the faith conviction by which
one is united to God as the unmoving heart and center of one’s existence, while the other foot moves
in a “broad circle that embraces all believers.”301
Gülen endorses Nursi’s view that the days of the use of force are over; today’s methods of persuasion
are those of dialogue, scientific argumentation and rational debate. The “jihad of the word” focuses on
rationally convincing others of the truth of one’s position, not on imposing one’s views by force. For
Gülen, this mode of discussion is the only manner of confrontation which fits properly the nature of
Islam:
The truth is that there is no harshness or bigotry in Islam.  It is a religion made up entirely
of forgiveness and tolerance.  Such pillars of love and tolerance like Rumi, Yunus Emre302,

301.M. Fethullah Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Light: Somerset, N.J., 2004, p. 199.
302.The poet Yunus Emre, 1238-1320, was one of the first mystical poets to compose his works in the spoken Turkish of the
time.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

185
Ahmed Yesevi303, Bediüzzaman [Said Nursi]304 and similar figures have expressed this
aspect of Islam most beautifully and they have gone down in history as examples of this
affection and tolerance.305

2.2. Rumi as one of the great saints produced by Islam.
If Gülen understands Islam to be a religion consisting entirely of forgiveness and tolerance, he looks
back in Islamic history at those figures who best embodied these values. Foremost among them is
Mevlana, whom Gülen calls one of “the people of love.”306 About such, he has this to say: “Being the
embodiments of sincerity, Divine love, and purity of intention, the Sufi masters have become the
motivating factor and the source of power behind the Islamic conquests and the Islamization of
conquered lands and peoples.”307
For Gülen, Rumi represents the “true face of Islam,” what the Islamic revelation and tradition is
actually about.Gülen elaborates his point as follows:If one were to seek the true face of Islam in its
own sources, history, and true representatives, then one would discover that it contains no harshness,
cruelty, or fanaticism. It is a religion of forgiveness, pardon, and tolerance as such saints and princes
of love and tolerance as Rumi, Yunus Emre, Ahmed Yesevi, Bediüzzaman and many others have so
beautifully expressed.308
Gülen notes that not every aspect of religion is of equal weight; there are some aspects which are
essential and fundamental, while other aspects are occasional and peripheral. For Gülen, the essence
of Islam, what the religion is really about, are values like peace, love, forgiveness and tolerance.
Rumi’s preeminence in the Islamic tradition derives from his eloquent espousal of the primacy of love,
God’s love for the believer, and the believer’s love for God. A similar emphasis is found in Gülen’s
thought:
I can and do say that peace, love, forgiveness and tolerance are fundamental to Islam; other
things are accidental.  Yet, it is necessary to give priority to basic Muslim issues according to
their degree of importance.  For example, if God gives importance to love, if He has
informed us that He loves those who love Him, and if He has given to the person He loves
most the name “Habibullah,” i.e., one who loves God and is loved by Him, then we have to
take this as a fundamental principle.  Rules like jihad against hypocrites and unbelievers are
secondary matters that are necessitated by circumstances.309

303.Ahmad Yesevi (Yasawi), from modern-day Kazakhstan, was the first Sufi poet to write his mystical works in Turkish.
He founded a Sufi confraternity, the Yasawiyya, which has been widely diffused throughout the Turkic world.
304.Said Nursi, 1878-1960, a prominent scholar and author of the Risale-i Nur, a 6600-page commentary on the Qur’an
which has influenced millions of modern Muslims.  Fethullah Gülen came to know Nursi’s writings at the age of twenty.  He
describes Nursi as follows: “An Islamic scholar of the highest standing with deep spirituality, a wide knowledge of modern
science and the contemporary world.  He believed that humanity could be saved from its crises and could achieve true
progress and happiness only by knowing its true nature and by recognizing and submitting to God.”
305.Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, p. 179.
306.Ibid. p. 93.
307.M. Fethullah Gülen, Prophet Muhammad: The Infinite Light, Izmir: Kaynak, 1998, 2: 154.
308.Toward a Global Civilization, pp. 58-59.
309.Toward a Global Civilization, pp. 71-72.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

186
According to Gülen, men like Rumi and Yunus Emre have made an important cultural contribution to
the Turkish people and have left their mark on Islam as understood and practiced in Turkey. The
great honor and affection shown to mystical poets and saints by Turkish Muslims is evidence of the
esteem in which such holy men are held and an indication of the attitudes and values according to
which Islam is meant to be lived. As Gülen puts it, the message of Islam for which modern people are
thirsting is its teaching of peace, tolerance and love; the mission of Muslims today is thus to invite
people to discover this message by the way that Muslims themselves live their beliefs.
Even though there are naturally exceptions, the interpretations of Islam held by Turkish
scholars are tolerant.  If we can spread the understanding of Islam held by the pillars of
affection like Rumi and Yunus Emre throughout the world, and if we can get their message
of love, dialogue and tolerance to those people who are thirsting for this message, then
people from all over the world will come running into the arms of this love, peace, and
tolerance that we represent.310
In Gülen’s thinking, Rumi, Yunus Emre, and those like them represent the mainstream of Islamic
thought and practice down through the centuries. There is no denying that some Muslims have at
times espoused violence and coercion, but Gülen invites his followers to look to “the lovers — the
people of love,” as Rumi calls them, to discover and follow the example of those who have come to a
understand Islam as a message of love. He cites Rumi’s famous invitation:
“Come, come and join us, as we are the people of love devoted to God!
Come, come through the door of love and join us and sit with us.
Come, let us speak one to another through our hearts.
Let us speak secretly, without ears and eyes.
Let us laugh together without lips or sound, let us laugh like the roses.
Since we are all the same, let us call each other from our hearts,
We won’t use our lips or tongue.”311
In quoting these lines of Rumi, notes that according to the logical principles of Greek thought or
Western philosophy, such words are nonsense. How can people converse without ears and eyes? How
can they share laughter without expression or sound? How can they call to one another without lips or
tongue?  However, Rumi insists that “the people of love” can do just that, and Gülen is suggesting that
this ancient skill of lovers’ is one that needs to be rediscovered by modern people. “As we are all limbs
of the same body,” he affirms, “we should cease this duality that violates our very union.  We should
clear the way to unite people; this is one of the greatest ways in which God grants people success in
this world, and how He transforms this world into a Paradise.”312

310.Ibid., p. 181.
311.M. Fethullah Gülen, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism, Fairfax, Va.: The Fountain, 1999, p. 6.
312.Ibid. p. 7.

--- Sayfa 189 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

187
2.3. Rumi as the saint who longed to be united to God.
For Gülen, Mevlana is someone who was able to express the fundamental pain and sorrow of human
life in this world. For Rumi, that pain is rooted in the separation of the soul from its deepest desire,
that is, for unity with the Divine Beloved.  This yearning of the soul for its true home forms the
opening verses of Rumi=s masterwork, the Mathnawi:  “Listen to the reed and the tale it tells, how it
sings of separation…”
To Rumi, the notes of the flute are like the sound of human groans, and readers of the Mathnawi are
invited to imagine the reed flute being cut and plucked from its roots in the reed bed. Its sad sounds
represent the longing of the reed flute to return to its origins where it feels it belongs. The application
of this image to the human condition is not hard to conceive for, like the flute, the human soul has
been snatched from its true home in the presence of God; it is presently wandering lost and far from
home and is forever longing to return to the source from which it had sprung. Gülen likens the
melancholy human yearning for God to the mournful sounds of the flute, as in the opening verses of
the Mathnawi, or to the distant squeaking of a water wheel, as in the imagery of Yunus Emre.
Zeal and yearning can be divided into two categories.  The first is the yearning produced by
separation from the Beloved after meeting with and gazing upon Him in the past eternity.
The sighs that Rumi’s flute uttered and the creaking, painful sounds heard by Yunus Emre
from the revolving water-wheel express such a separation.  These sighs will continue until
the final union or meeting with Him.313
Such sorrow and feelings of separation are felt only by those who know God directly.  Someone who
has been blessed by being allowed to experience oneness with the Divine Lover will be like a “spiritual
drunkard,” living from then on with a longing to be fully united to the Beloved. Gülen notes that only
one who has reached this rank of sanctity can properly describe the profundity of his thoughts and
feelings. He cites Rumi’s verses in the Mathnawi to illustrate his point: “Those illusions are traps for
saints, whereas in reality they are the reflections of those with radiant faces in the garden of God.”314
Gülen’s point, beautifully expressed by Rumi, is that the longing to be united with God produces a
sorrow and world-weariness which to those who did not know better would appear as unhappiness
and despair. Those who have not been initiated into the mysteries of Divine love must necessarily
judge by appearances rather than the deeper reality. However, for those who have arrived at the truth,
like Mevlana, they see that such superficial sadness masks the radiant faces of those who have come
into the “garden of God,” that is, God’s loving presence.
Gülen makes the point elsewhere that the longing and sorrow expressed by Rumi truly embody the
human condition, the state of distance and lack of fulfilment in which we all live.  Absence, it is true,
makes the heart grow fonder, but the deepest desire of our hearts cannot be achieved here on earth.
Whether or not we are aware of it, we are all longing to be in that loving union with God which is true
peace and our heart’s true home.  Until that is achieved, no one can be satisfied with transient and
ephemeral substitutes.  As Gülen states:
Our tongues speak sometimes of love and sometimes of weariness; though love
and weariness cause pain to others, in them we always hear, like Rumi, the poem

313.M. Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism, p. 157.
314.Key Concepts, p. 15.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

188
of longing for the realm that we have left to come here.  Love and weariness to us
are like a plea from the tongue of the soul, stemming from a sorrowful desire for
eternity.315
The other side of the coin consists of those fleeting moments of joy by which God blesses the one who
is seeking to be united with Him. Gülen notes: “Since our beliefs and feelings take us to the magical
worlds of beyond, we almost always feel sadness and joy intertwined; we hear the sounds of crying
and laughing as different notes of the same melody.”  Rumi refers to these experiential states of soul
(hal/ihwal) as the “wedding night,” depicting the state of grace when those on the spiritual path find
themselves rushing headlong to embrace the Beloved.
“They try to find satisfaction for the desire of reunion in their soul. They keep running toward Him,
sometimes flying, sometimes limping on the ground, unified with everyone and everything.”316 Gülen
points out that the same image of the wedding night, the fulfillment of love, is used by Mevlana to
indicate death, when the seeker, freed from the shackles of mortality and earthly bonds, transcends all
obstacles separating the soul from a loving union with the Divine Beloved.
Sorrow which arises from separation from the Beloved and which gives give rise to a longing to return
to God is the source of greater love and happiness in one’s life. The pain of separation from God must
not be rejected or denied, but rather accepted as expressive of the human state and a strong
motivation for a fuller absorption in the Divine. Rumi puts it as follows:
“I’ve broken through to longing now,
filled with a grief I have felt before, but never like this.
The center leads to love . . .
Hold on to your particular pain. That too can take you to God.”
One must not think that Rumi, in his day, and Gülen, in modern times, are proposing a life-
denying spirituality in which a person turns one=s back on the exigencies of reality and
practical living in this world.  Gülen quotes Mevlana to say:
One wise and sensible prefers the bottom of the well,
For the soul finds delight in privacy (to be with God).
The darkness of the well is preferable to the darkness people cause...
One must seclude oneself from others, not from the Beloved.317
In his commentary on these verses, Gülen explains that the purpose of seclusion is to purify the heart
of all love which is not for God so that one might live united with the Beloved in the midst of daily
activities. This is a restatement of what is affirmed in the compass image, portraying the true lover as
one whose union with God frees him to embrace humanity wholeheartedly. As Gülen explains:

315.Toward a Global Civilization, p. 155.
316.Ibid., p. 97.
317.Key Concepts, p. 18-19.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

189
Those who always feel themselves in the presence of God do not need to seclude
themselves from people. Such people, in the words of Rumi, are like those who
keep one foot in the sphere of Divine commandments and turn the other, like a
compass needle, throughout the world. They experience ascension and descent at
every moment. This is the seclusion recognized and preferred by the Prophets and
saints.318

2.4. Rumi as teacher of virtue.
Gülen also sees Mevlana as one who teaches and exemplifies the virtues needed to progress on the
path toward a union of love and will with God. He enlists Rumi’s advice at the very beginning of the
spiritual path and cites Mevlana’s words on the need for repentance. If one does not feel remorse and
disgust for errors committed and if one is not apprehensive of falling back into one’s old ways of
living, in short, if one has not made a serious act of repentance, one’s persistence in following the
spiritual path will be shallow and unstable.  Gülen sites Rumi as follows on the need for a deep
commitment to repent :
I have repented and turned to God so sincerely
that I will not break [the vow of repentance] until my soul leaves my body.
In fact, who other than an ass steps toward perdition
after having suffered so much trouble [on account of his sins]?319
A second virtue essential for progress in spiritual life is that of sincerity. It is so easy to fool oneself
and even easier to deceive others that if one is not sincere, one may find oneself performing religious
duties to be seen by others. As Rumi puts it:
You should be sincere in all your deeds,
So that the Majestic Lord may accept them.
Sincerity is the wing of the bird of the acts of obedience.
Without a wing, how can you fly to the abode of prosperity?320
Gülen elaborates on this by adding two hadiths from the Prophet in which he states: “Be sincere in
your religion; a little work (with sincerity) is enough for you,” and “Be sincere in your deeds, for God
only accepts what is done with sincerity.”
A third virtue stressed by Rumi is humility. Rumi does not present himself as a great saint or someone
who has achieved a deep spiritual level, but sees himself rather as a simple servant of God. He
reiterates his servant status to emphasize his standing before God:
I have become a servant, become a servant, become a servant;

318.Ibid., p. 19.
319.Ibid. p. 3.
320.Ibid. pp. 61-62.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

190
I have bowed and doubled myself up with serving You.
Servants or slaves rejoice when they become emancipated;
Whereas I rejoice when I become a servant of You.321
Gülen is aware, as was Rumi before him, that spiritual pride, or boasting about one’s religious
experiences, is an all-too-common failing among those involved in religious practices, a fault which
leads to an arrogant service of oneself rather than of God. Gülen quotes Rumi regarding this danger to
the effect: If the king’s courtier behaves in an affected manner to attract the king’s attention, you must
not attempt to do so, for you do not have the document (to justify your doing so). O one who cannot
be freed from the restrictions of this transient life, how can you know what (the stations of)
annihilation, drunkenness, and expansion mean? 322
In commenting on these words of Rumi, Gülen affirms that “It is impossible for those imprisoned in
the body to be aware of spirituality. We should ask those souls who have burned and been ‘roasted’
many times in the fire of the love of God about the pains of a heart that has been cleft open, and their
expansion and contraction.” Expansion (bast) and contraction (qabd) of the soul are states taught by
Sufi masters and experienced by practitioners on the path to holiness. It is not only Muslim mystics
like Rumi who have spoken and written about these states of soul. There is much in common, for
example, between the Sufis explanation of qabd and John of the Cross’ description of the Dark Night
of the Soul.
One could go on at length to multiply instances of how Fethullah Gülen employs the teaching of Jalal
al-Din Rumi to teach the practical virtues needed for a rich spirituality. In his work, Key Concepts in
the Practice of Sufism, Gülen refers to Rumi more often than to any other spiritual author. He cites
the advice of Mevlana to illustrate his teaching on poverty (“Poverty is the essence and all else is
form; poverty is a remedy and all else the disease,” p. 171); on the need for austerity and periods of
retreat (“In the early days of his initiation, Rumi underwent many forty-day periods of austerity in
seclusion; however, when he found a true, perfect master, he left seclusion for the company of
people,” p. 17); and the value of temporary seclusion (“One must seclude oneself from others, not
from the Beloved; fur is worn in winter, not in spring,” p. 18).
Similarly, Gülen enlists the authority of Rumi to underline the importance of self-supervision (“Rumi
regards self-supervision as a protecting screen from evil emotions, thoughts, passions, and acts, and
considers it the safest way to be attentive to Divine rights,” p. 58); truthfulness (“The truthfulness of a
lover affects even the lifeless; why then should it be found strange that it affects man’s heart?” p. 86),
and reliance on God (p. 70). Rumi offers the criteria for judging the value of work (p. 126) and for
appreciating a proper attitude toward worldly possessions (p. 43).
What is the world? It is heedlessness of God’
Not clothes, nor silver coin, nor children, nor women.
If you have worldly possessions in the name of God,
Then the Messenger said: How fine is the property a righteous man has!

321.Ibid., p. 55.
322.Ibid., p. 116.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

191
The water in a ship causes it to sink,
But the water under it causes it to float.323
Gülen uses Rumi’s parable of the grain of wheat to illustrate the nature of patience. “In order to be
sustenance for man…a grain of wheat must be buried in the bosom of the earth, germinate under it,
and grow to emerge into the air.  It must come into the air after a fierce struggle with the earth, and
then be sown and threshed and ground in a mill. After that, it must be kneaded, baked in an oven,
and, finally, chewed by teeth, sent into the stomach and digested” (p. 103). To a Christian, this parable
calls to mind the words of Jesus in John’s Gospel, “Truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls
into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit” (John 12:24). In Rumi’s
poetry the image of the grain buried in the earth is a symbol of the patient unfolding of natural
processes, while in Jesus’ words, the grain of wheat symbolizes “dying to oneself” in order to rise to
service of others.
It is clear from Gülen’s writings that he has spent much time perusing the poetry of Rumi and has
reflected deeply on his spiritual insights.  It is not an exaggeration to say that Gülen is a modern
Muslim thinker and activist whose life work of promoting an Islamic appreciation of love, tolerance,
and universal peace is in fact a renewed interpretation for our times of the central insights of
Mevlana. Gülen sees himself, not as an innovator, but as a Muslim scholar firmly within the Islamic
tradition represented by the “lovers” like Jalal al-Din Rumi, Yunus Emre, Ahmad Yasawi, and Said
Nursi.
In many of his writings, Gülen composes paeans to love as the central motivating force of his life. For
example, he states:
We have been brought up in an atmosphere in which the victories of love are in our eyes and
the sound of the drums of love resounds in our hearts.  Our hearts beat with excitement
when we see the flag of love waving.  We have become so intertwined with love that our lives
become purely dependent on love, and we dedicate our souls to it.  When we live, we live
with love, and when we die, we die with love. In every breath, we feel it with our whole
existence; it is our warmth in the cold, and our oasis in the heat.324
One can give the last word to Our Master Rumi himself to show the attraction of Rumi´s thought for
modern Muslim thinkers like Fethullah Gülen. Rumi’s words unknowingly reveal why his poetry
continues to be perused and reflected upon by Gülen and his disciples: “Stay in the company of lovers.
Those kinds of people, they each have something to show you.”

323.Ibid., p. 43.
324. Toward a Global Civilization, p. 4.

--- Sayfa 194 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

192

--- Sayfa 195 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

193
M. F. GÜLEN: A BRIDGE BETWEEN ISLAM AND THE WEST
RICHARD PENASKOVIC 325

Abstract
Ever since 9/11 the Western world has been griped with anxious fear as to what some Muslims
might do next. Hardly any journalist in the Western world speaks about moderate or liberal
Islam, although plenty of Muslims globally fall into that category. This paper deals with the
thought of M. Fethullah Gülen, a moderate Muslim. It argues that Gülen may be a bridge toward
better understanding between Islam and the West because of his views on peace, tolerance, and
interfaith dialogue and because of his optimistic view of the future relations between the two
aforementioned blocs. I base my argument on five theses:
Thesis 1: We live in a global world: Gülen argues that we live in a global world, one
tremendously different from the past. Today what happens in one part of the world is known
throughout the world almost instantaneously because of the Internet and the cell phone.
Technology has caused our world to shrink.
Thesis 2: Islam and the West have become estranged: The estrangement between Islam and the
West began with the Crusades followed by the Mongol invasion of the Muslim world, notes Mr.
Gülen.  Western civilization has been based on the physical sciences and has unfortunately
succumbed to materialism, its Achilles heel.
Thesis 3: Dialogue, particularly interfaith dialogue, is the key: Gülen sees dialogue as a give and
take between two or more parties involving respect, honesty, and compassionate love. In
dialogue one must retain self-integrity while encountering the other as a true other, who is
neither falsely similar, nor too alien from me. For interfaith dialogue to succeed one must forget
past hurts, ignore polemics, and concentrate on the commonalities between the dialogue
partners.
Thesis 4: Love conquers all:  Gülen speaks eloquently of love as the greatest power, the most
radiant light, and the chain that binds humans one to another.
Thesis 5: The future looks hopeful:  Gülen does not see a clash of civilizations between Islam and
the West. By focusing on dialogue, tolerance, peace, and love the future of the relationship
between Islam and the West looks rather rosy.

325 Professor of Religious Studies and Immediate Past Chair of the University Senate and University Faculty at Auburn
University in Alabama, USA. (BA in philosophy, the equivalent of an MA in theology from the University of Wuerzburg,
Germany, and a doctorate in theology from Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich. He is the author of over 100
publications  and has appeared on radio and TV in the US. His latest book, Critical Thinking and the Academic Study of
Religion, is distributed by Duke University Press. His many articles and book reviews have appeared in such journals as The
Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Augustinian Studies, Theological Studies, The Journal of Ecumenical
Studies, Louvain Studies (Belgium), and The Heythrop Journal (London). His current research interests are Muslim–
Christian dialogue, spirituality, and ecclesiology.

--- Sayfa 196 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

194
1. Introduction
Ever since 9/11 the entire Western world has been griped with anxious fear as to what some Muslims
might do next. Hardly any journalist in the Western world speaks about moderate or liberal Islam,
although plenty of Muslims around the globe fall into that category. My proposed paper deals with the
thought of M. Fethullah Gülen, a moderate Muslim. I argue that Gülen may be a bridge toward better
understanding between Islam and the West because of his views on peace, tolerance, and interfaith
dialogue and because of his optimistic view of the future relations between the two aforementioned
blocs. I base my argument on five theses, which can be distilled by looking carefully at his copious
writings.

2.1. Thesis 1: We Live In a Global World
Mr. Gülen argues that we live in a global world, one tremendously different from the past.  Today
what happens in one part of the world is known throughout the world almost instantaneously because
of the Internet and the cell phone. Technology has caused our world to shrink (Ameli, 2004, p. 324).
Those who think that any radical changes in a particular nation will be determined by that nation
alone are in for a rude awakening. We exist in a totally interdependent world, a global village (Stiglitz,
2002, p. 9; Kellner, 2007, p. 54). The events of 9/11 show that the world has become one place. The
attacks on the United States shook the world on a global scale. For example, within two hours of the
terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center towers, almost eighty percent of Sweden knew about it. In
fact, both national radio and T.V. in Sweden changed their programming in order to cover the story
(Larsson, 2005, p. 34).
Gülen notes that today’s world has a plethora of problems that can only be solved by many nations
working together in unison. Some examples of these problems are: global warming, the regulation of
outer space, over-fishing of the seas and oceans, water pollution and dealing with international terror,
to name but a few (See Gülen, 2000a, p. 240).Gülen manages to put his finger on a twenty-first
century phenomenon that intellectuals and others see as increasingly important, viz., globalization.
Like the word, spirituality, globalization is an ill-defined concept, an umbrella term. Globalization
means different things in various cultures and geographical regions.
The West often views globalization in economic terms, namely, as the free and untrammeled
movement of capital, goods, labor, and services across borders. In other words, globalization refers to
the integration of technologies, nations, and markets to an unprecedented degree. However,
globalization has taken on a different meaning in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region.
There globalization is perceived in mainly ideological terms and hence attacked as a new brand of
imperialism, although some like King ‘Abdullah of Jordan view globalization in positive terms. In the
MENA region many people see globalization as a threat to their cultural, economic, or political
independence. This is the case despite the fact that the MENA region, in toto, remains one of the least
globalized areas in the world (Looney, 2007, p. 342).
Gülen thinks of globalization in more than economic and ideological terms. For him globalization is a
more encompassing term. It refers to connectivity and interdependence in all areas of life, cultural,
ecological, economic, political, religious, social, and technological. Gülen would be comfortable in
saying that globalization is the process by which the experience of everyday living is becoming
standardized around the world.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

195
How precisely has the world become a global village according to Mr. Gülen? Gülen attributes
globalization to advances in communication, science, and technology (Gülen, 2004b, p.230). He
points out that thanks to advances in technology, more specifically electronic technology, both the
acquisition and exchange of information is gradually growing. The Internet would be a good example
of globalization. Through the Internet people all over the world can be linked together. At the same
time, though, those without computer access are left in the dark and ignored. Sometimes entire
regions are cut off, for example, in parts of South America where the Amazon River flows in areas
inaccessible to roads.
Gülen came upon the notion of globalization by reflecting on the nature of the universe. For him the
universe is clearly and unmistakably an inseparable whole. Every being on every level is interrelated
to every other being. Quantum physics points toward this unity or unbroken wholeness of the
universe, including human beings (Gülen, 2000b, p. 4). Since there exists an interdependence of all
beings in the universe, whatever causes a flower to exist must be responsible for a tree, notes Mr.
Gülen. And whatever causes a tree to exist must be responsible for the forest. Such interrelatedness
and interconnectedness means that all beings in the universe help each other.
Gülen finds the order, organization, and harmony in the world completely fascinating. He does not
believe that this order and harmony derive from matter or come about randomly through chance.
Rather, in his view everything that happens in the universe takes place according to certain laws. The
most trifling event cannot occur without putting into the equation one who has an absolutely perfect
knowledge of the universe and who possesses absolute power. That one is God the Creator. Gülen
argues that God reveals himself in the book of nature which, addressed to humanity as a whole, makes
known its Author (Gülen, 2000b, p.13).

2.2. Thesis 2: Islam and the West Have Become Estranged From One Another
In speaking about Islam and the West several important distinctions must be made. First, one must
distinguish between Islam as a religion and Islamism as a political ideology. This distinction is
implicit in Gülen’s writings, for example, in his essay, “True Muslims Cannot Be Terrorists.” (Gülen,
2002b, pp. 95-98). As a religion Islam insists very strongly on peace, love, and tolerance. For Gülen
love binds existence. Gülen notes that Muhammad, a man of affection, was given the title,
‘Habibullah,’ which comes from the word, habib, meaning ‘he who loves God and is loved by God.’
Gülen narrates several stories (hadith) from the Prophet Muhammad that make the point there is no
room for hatred in Islam or in the multicolored world of its ambassador, Muhammad, the Prophet,
may his name be blessed. For Gülen the entire Qur’an has tolerance and forgiveness as its foundation
(Gülen, 2002b, p. 99).
Islamism, though draped in religious imagery and presented in apocalyptic language, has more in
common with secular ideologies of terror than it does with the Islamic religion. For example, just as
the Irish Republican Army cannot in any way be equated with Roman Catholicism, so Islamism as an
ideology cannot be thought of in the same breath as the Islamic religion (Desai, 2007, pp. 59-87.).
One of Gülen’s favorite aphorisms goes like this: “In true Islam, terror does not exist.” In the Islamic
religion no one can be a suicide bomber, not even in time of war. The Islamic religion forbids such
barbarism. To kill another person according to the Islamic religion is tantamount to qufr or atheism.
A true Muslim cannot say, “I will kill someone and then go to heaven.” How can someone receive the

--- Sayfa 198 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

196
approval of God by taking a precious human life? In the Islamic religion this is a sheer impossibility
(Gülen, 2004b, p.185).
Second, when Gülen speaks of Islam is he thinking of customary Islam characterized by the
combination of regional practices and those shared by most Muslims around the globe who desire to
surrender themselves to the will of Allah as revealed in the Qur’an or of revivalist Islam? Note,
though, that this customary tradition is not a unitary one, since each region of the Islamic world has
made its own version of customary practices. For example, the customary tradition in Morocco
includes reverence for saintly figures that some Muslims argue have no basis in the Qur’an. Does
Gülen have in mind revivalist Islam, the most common alternative to customary Islam? The revivalist
tradition, also known as fundamentalism or Wahhabism, argues against local deviations and
practices. Instead, it stands for a renewed stress on Arabic as the language of revelation, the
illegitimacy of local political institutions, (since they usurp the sovereignty of Allah), the revival of
practices from the early period of Islam, and, lastly, the authority of the revivalists like Muhammad
ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab as the sole qualified interpreters of Islam. I would argue that Gülen speaks of
Islam in the former sense, viz., that of customary Islam (Kurzman, 1998, p. 6.).
I would also observe that Gülen thinks that Islam has become a way of life or a culture for some
Muslims who do not adhere to Islam as a faith. These Muslims have restructured Islam in accordance
with their own thoughts. Gülen sums up his feelings on this matter by asserting that an Islamic world
does not exist. What does this imply? Gülen means that some Muslims live Islam as it suits their own
purposes so that a Muslim culture is dominant rather than an Islamic one (Gülen, 2004b, p. 186).
If the term, Islam, can be problematical, so does the term, the West, have its ambiguities. First, the
term, the West, can be understood geographically. As such it refers to those countries in which most
of the inhabitants are Christian and where pluralistic political systems and free market economies
thrive. Historically, this would include Canada and the United States, Europe west of the former East
Germany, plus Australia and New Zealand, along with South Africa and possibly Israel since the
majority of Israelis are Jewish and not Christian.
Today, however, one could argue that past geographical boundaries defining the West no longer hold
and are porous. In the post cold-war era the West incorporates Russia, the urbanized, moneyed-elites
in Latin America, and an advanced capitalist, democratic Japan as well as Taiwan, and the power-
brokers in the oil-rich Gulf States like Dubai ( Abramsky, 2007, p. B8).
Second, the term, the West, can be understood culturally either as part of the world that shares a
Judaeo-Christian heritage or as synonymous with secular humanism and the mind-set of the
Enlightenment. The question, then, boils down to this, namely, does the West refer to a state of mind
or to a particular plot of land? There exists no doubt where Gülen comes down on this question. Gülen
understands the West mainly in cultural and religious terms. For him Western civilization has been
based on the hard sciences, such as physics and mathematics. In his estimation a gigantic conflict has
arisen in the West between the hard sciences and religion, a conflict that need not exist. Gülen sees
the West as succumbing to materialism and secularization. On this matter Gülen aligns himself with
other Muslim thinkers who feel this way, e.g., Sayyid Qutb (Ayoub, 2007, p.49).
The East, on the contrary, has emphasized moral, religious, and spiritual values, while at the same
time, giving short shrift to the hard sciences and technology. Gülen notes that the estrangement
between Islam and the West began with the Crusades followed by the Mongol invasion of the Muslim
world (Gülen, 2002b, p. 27). The Crusades were crucial in setting a pattern for the long history of

--- Sayfa 199 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

197
mistrust and conflict between Islam and the West (Lewis, 2004, p. 47). Although Jesus in the gospels
taught love of neighbor, the Crusaders apparently never learned the meaning of love of neighbor.
The Crusades have made Muslims wary of entering into dialogue with Christians but many other
factors also play a role. For example, Gülen points out that in the twentieth century far more Muslims
have been killed by Christians than all Christians were killed by Muslims throughout the march of
history (Gülen, 2002b, p. 33). Attacks by Europeans collapsed the Ottoman Empire, while
Christendom’s portrayal of Islam as a crude, distorted version of Judaism and Christianity upsets
many Muslims to this very day. In hopes of building a better future, Gülen insists on interfaith
dialogue as the key to overcoming the historical conflict between Islam and the West. Gülen says, in
effect, “Let the healing begin.” We now turn to this extremely important matter of dialogue.

2.3. Thesis 3: Dialogue is the Key
Despite the tension and struggles between Muslims and Christians for almost fourteen centuries,
Gülen calls interfaith dialogue a necessity. Throughout his writings Gülen insists that for interfaith
dialogue to succeed, we must forget the past, ignore polemics, and focus on the points both religions
have in common (Gülen, 2002b, p. 34). He notes that all revealed religions are based on peace,
security, and world harmony. Like Jesus’ call to “turn the other cheek,” Gülen exhorts us to return
good for evil and overlook discourteous treatment (Gülen, 2000a, p.192).
Should Muslims engage in dialogue with Jews and Christians? Based on his reading of the Qur’an
Gülen answers with a resounding “yes.” At the beginning of the Qur’an in 2:2-4 people are called to
accept the former prophets of both the Hebrew Scriptures and the New Testament and their books.
Gülen interprets this passage as sending an important message in terms of establishing dialogue with
Jews and Christians. In 29:46 of the Qur’an we are enjoined not to dispute with People of the Book
except with means better than mere disputation. The Qur’an thus gives us a method of how dialogue
should be conducted with Jews and Christians. Based on his reading of the Qur’an Gülen believes that
tolerance should be extended not only to Jews and Christians but to all people (Gülen, 2000a, p.260).
I would also point out that Gülen argues that there are as many theoretical reasons for Muslims and
Jews to draw together in dialogue as there are for Jews and Christians to engage in dialogue. There
has been no discrimination on the part of Muslims toward Jews, no denial of their basic human
rights, and no Shoah or Holocaust. Gülen observes that Jews were welcomed in times of trouble. For
example, the Ottoman State embraced Jews after they were expelled from Spain (Gülen, 2002b, p.
33).
Gülen always speaks of dialogue in connection with toleration, forgiveness, love, and opening one’s
heart to everyone. He makes an important distinction between matters that are fundamental to Islam
and those that are accidental. Dialogue, toleration, love, forgiveness, and opening one’s heart to all are
basic to Islam (Gülen, 2004b, p.71). In the dialogue with others Gülen states that the dialogue
partners should look at what they have in common, rather than focusing on the differences. He
remarks that issues that can separate us should be avoided altogether.
Gülen calls dialogue and toleration the two roses of the emerald hills. What exactly does Gülen mean
by dialogue? Gülen understands dialogue as the encounter between two or more individuals in order
to discuss specific issues. What does dialogue bring about? Dialogue helps form strong bonds between
the dialogue partners. Gülen calls dialogue an activity that has the human person as its axis. In

--- Sayfa 200 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

198
dialogue the discussants share their thoughts and their feelings. Knowledge alone does not suffice. In
dialogue we open our minds and hearts to others in a compassionate and loving way. Dialogue is not
something we achieve on our own. Only with the help of God can we concentrate on matters of
dialogue and toleration, says Gülen. (Gülen, 2004b, p.55).
What is the goal or purpose of dialogue? Is it to drive one’s dialogue partner in the ground using tools
of superior logic and insight? Not at all, retorts Mr. Gülen. Dialogue exists so that the truth emerges
from the dialogue more clearly. One enters into dialogue neither to best one’s dialogue partner nor to
satisfy one’s ego. Rather, the goal is to let the truth emerge out of the conversation. In dialogue with
others, particularly in interfaith dialogue, one must not neglect such important items as mutual
understanding, dedication to justice, and, above all, respect for one’s dialogue partner (Gülen, 2000a,
p.259).
How did Gülen come to intimately link tolerance with dialogue? Gülen took his cues on the
importance of toleration and dialogue from the Qur’an and the sunna of the Prophet. In the Qur’an
25:63 we read that the servants of God are humble and when the ignorant address them they say,
“Peace.” In other words, the servants of Mercy do not return evil with evil. Instead, they take tolerance
and dialogue as their basic principles in dealing with those who are rudely ignorant. Other verses in
the Qur’an such as 25:72 and 28:55 make a similar point, namely, that when the special servants of
Allah encounter ugly words or behavior, they overlook such things and pass by in a dignified way
(Gülen, 2000a, p.257).
Gülen remarks that the life of Prophet Muhammad was an orbit of forgiveness, toleration, and
patience. Take the case of the Prophet’s dealings with Abu Sufyan who persecuted Muhammad
throughout his life. Although Abu Sufyan had doubts about Islam during the conquest of Mecca,
Muhammad said that those who take refuge in the home of Abu Safyan are as safe as those who take
refuge in the Ka’ba. What an incredible passage because it mentions the home of Abu Safyan in the
same breath as the sacred Ka’ba, in terms of safety and security. In commenting on this passage Gülen
notes that such tolerance was more valuable to Abu Safyan than giving him tons of gold (Gülen,
2000a, p. 257).
In short, Mr. Gülen sees dialogue as a give and take between two or more parties involving respect,
honesty, and compassionate love. In dialogue one must retain self-integrity while encountering the
other as a true other, who is neither falsely similar, nor too alien from me. Not only is interfaith
dialogue critical to peace in today’s world. There must also be a dialogue of cultures, viz., a dialogue
between Islam and the West.

2.4. Thesis 4: Love Conquers All
Gülen speaks of love in conjunction with compassion, forgiveness, and tolerance. For him these are
the pillars of dialogue and basic human values. Love has the ability to overcome every force, elevate
every soul that absorbs it, and it also prepares the soul for the journey to eternity. Love is, then, our
human way of making contact with eternity. Mr. Gülen speaks eloquently of love as the greatest
power, the most radiant light, and the chain that binds humans one to another.  On the individual
level love is the sultan that reigns on the throne of the human heart. On the social level there is
nothing more lasting or more real than love in any nation or society. For Gülen it is axiomatic that
love should be as vast as the oceans. Love calls us to take every soul to our bosom.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

199
Those who have the greatest share in this love are the greatest heroes on earth. Such heroes live on
even after death. These lofty souls light a new torch of love in their hearts on a daily basis. In turn,
they are loved by others. What makes these heroes of love so special? They transcend the generality of
others by their ability to uproot from their hearts any personal feelings of animosity toward others
(Gülen, 2000a, p.253).
How should we deal with those who put us down? Gülen counsels us to take the approach of Yunus
the poet: not striking those who hit us, not replying in kind to those who curse us, and not holding any
secret grudges against those who abuse us. This goes against the grain on the natural level. That is
why Gülen sees God, the Truly Beloved One, as the fountainhead of this type of love (Mahabba)
(Gülen, 2004a, p.149).
Genuine love of God means to stand in God’s presence, wholly set on the Beloved, and mindful that
complete union with God will only occur in the afterlife. A persons’ love for God varies in accordance
with the degree of one’s obedience to the Beloved. To come closer to God in true love, one must fight
to overcome one’s faults and deficiencies, says Gülen. Those individuals on the highest stage of love
are illumined with the light of God’s being and are in touch with the spiritual world. These favored
souls recognize that they are an inspiration to those with whom they come into contact. Gülen would
say that one’s true identity and personality come from one’s inner spirit. The more humans are filled
with the love of God, the more that they can say with the prophet Abraham that “I love not things that
set” (Gülen, 2000b, p.107).
Imagine what the world would look like if more people possessed true, spiritual love. What a
difference this would make if leaders of nations possessed such a deep, dynamic, and transforming
love. If they did, they could solve an entire mountain of problems and there would be no clash of
civilizations. This is Gülen’s message to today’s broken, fractured world of egoism, individualism, and
greed.

2.5. Thesis 5: The Future Looks Hopeful
In light of the preceding section on love, it is not surprising that Gülen has an upbeat, hope-filled view
of the future. Most assuredly, Gülen does not subscribe to the clash of civilizations thesis advanced by
Sam Huntington. By focusing on such qualities as dialogue, peace, and love Gülen has high hope that
Islam and the West can resolve their differences amicably through dialogue. By focusing on dialogue,
tolerance, peace, and love, the future of the relationship between Islam and the West looks rather
rosy.
Gülen’s belief in the resurrection and last judgment helps him look at life in a qualitatively different
way than the secular humanist and others who believe that life ends with the grave. For Gülen life on
earth prepares us for an eternal life with God in heaven. Gülen views this present life as a test for the
human race. We are to brace ourselves, so to speak, for the future by caring for others and by putting
on such qualities as love, gentleness, and inner peace. Those who live their lives on the plane of
eternity can forgive others their trespasses and overlook their shortcomings. In short, Gülen remains
convinced that human life on earth is absurd and meaningless without a strong belief in the
resurrection of the dead (Gülen, 2000b, p. iii).
Gülen argues that if we look at life through the windows of God, then it follows that hope is the
dynamic of action that does not falter. Hope may be regarded as the life-giving nourishment of those

--- Sayfa 202 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

200
souls who live for others, rather than looking out for number one. Gülen calls hope a source of energy
which never diminishes for souls that are other-centered.  Finally, Gülen’s reflections on hope are
epitomized in these poetic words, “I am keeping my hope alive for the world and humanity, fresh as
evergreen leaves and I keep on looking upon tomorrow with a smile.” (Gülen, 2004b, p. 234).

3. Concluding Observations
I conclude my essay with these four observations written in the spirit of Mr. Gülen:
1.
Unfortunately, many Western observers today see the Islamic world as a threat, similar to the
way the Soviet Union was considered a threat to the West during the Cold War. Actually, the
Islamic world does not really threaten the West economically, militarily, or politically (Robb,
2007, p. 7). Many Western nations control the most precious asset of the Muslim world, viz., oil,
and desire to recover the money they have paid for it, either through the creation of safe markets
or by selling military hardware. (Nasr, 2007, p. 374). Far from being a threat to the Western way
of life, the Muslim world is only a threat to Western interests in the Muslim world itself. For
example, tapes of the Qur’an are not about to replace rap music in Western culture. On the other
hand, Gülen might say that the secularization and materialism of the West, the so-called Coca
Cola culture, is a threat to the Islamic emphasis on spiritual and moral values.
2.
It is abundantly clear from this essay that Gülen’s moderate views on the Islamic faith may be an
effective antidote to the Islamophobia now sweeping the world as chronicled in the Western
media where Muslims are depicted stereotypically (Pratt, 2005, p. 175). By this I mean that all
Muslims are judged to be evil by the very fact that they are Muslims. Hence Islam is perceived in
the West as a pernicious and dangerous religion, rather than one of peace, love, and tolerance
(Larsson, 2005, p. 37). If Western journalists and intellectuals would read the writings of M.
Fethullah Gülen carefully, they would understand the true meaning of Islam as a religion of
peace, love, and forgiveness.
3.
A close reading of Gülen’s writings would teach the Western world a critical lesson, namely,
tolerance. Unfortunately, the West sees its own development in history as the only true path for
other cultures and civilizations to follow. The Muslim world, on the other hand, questions many
assumptions held by the West: humanly devised laws over against the divine law, secular
humanism or the denial of any transcendent dimension to human existence, as opposed to the
Islamic faith, and the supremacy of human rights over divine rights. From Gülen the West can
learn to be tolerant vis-à-vis a Muslim world that wishes to develop according to its own Islamic
principles and dynamic (Nasr, 2007, p. 374). The Western world can make an infinitely small
start by trying to understand the world from an Islamic perspective (Shahrur, 2007, p. 353).
Muslims world-wide are outraged by the loss of Muslim lands, particularly in Palestine, on the
basis of exclusive historical claims that deny the claims of Muslims to these lands. Also, many
Muslims do not feel the leaders of Western governments care seriously about the greater welfare
of the Muslim community or ummah. The Western powers care for the greater welfare of
Muslims only if doing so coincides with the economic, political, and military interests of the
West. For example, look at the attitude of the West in regard to democracy in the Muslim world.
The West countenances free elections only to the extent that the winners align themselves with
Western interests. How does this make most Muslims feel?

--- Sayfa 203 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

201
4.
Gülen has also something to say to the Muslim world. Muslims must not write off the West as
completely secular and materialistic. The vast majority of people in the United States, for
example, attends church regularly and is deeply religious. Moreover, there are striking
similarities between Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. All three are Abrahamic religions which
take their origin from the deserts of the Middle East. All three religions believe in monotheism
and regard God as transcendent, ineffable, and completely above the world as its creator and
sustainer. Not only do we urgently need interfaith dialogue but a dialogue between Islam and the
West. Gülen would opine that our very existence may well depend on its success.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

202

--- Sayfa 205 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

203
BEYOND EAST AND WEST: FETHULLAH GÜLEN AND
‘BORDER’ THINKING
KLAS GRINELL 326

Abstract
East is East and West is West. We have heard it many times; Kipling said they shall never meet
Huntington that they shall clash. ‘Bordering’ (or barrier-building) is a fundamental practice of
modernity, creating dichotomies and trenches between us and them. Gülen’s message of dialogue
is shown to depart from this practice. It developed with the help of both Eastern and Western
arguments. Through the concept of ‘border thinking’ I argue for the special bi-polar vision Gülen
holds thanks to his Turkish experience of modernist Kemalism and deep-rooted Islamic tradition.
Gülen holds that today we are all living in borderlands, a global border village where no one can
live a life sheltered in one tradition only. We therefore need to engage in dialogue. For dialogue to
be possible there must be difference as well as belief in our ability to understand each other
despite difference. ‘Bordering’ modernity has seen only difference and dichotomies. The meaning
of the concept of civilization is explored to differentiate between the barrier-building
Huntingtonian concept and Gülen’s affirmation that we are all fundamentally of the same make,
that we sing different harmonies on the same song; describe different parts of the same elephant.
The paper argues for the importance of Sufism to Gülen’s position on civilizational understanding.
The concepts of borderland and ‘border thinking’ are taken from Walter Mignolo, a leftist post-
colonial critic of modernity. His aim is to be open to thinking other than modernity. I explore the
affinities between Mignolo and Gülen without trying to make them fit each other’s projects. I
argue for the need for not only interfaith dialogue, but dialogue between these different strands of
critiques of the border building modernity.

1. Introduction
East is East and West is West. We have heard it many times. Kipling said they shall never meet,
Huntington that they will always clash.327 They both say that there is a distinct border between them.
They are both mistaken.

326 Assistant Professor in the History of Ideas, Goteborg University; Associate Lecturer at the Centre for Middle Eastern
Studies, Goteborg University, and Country Coordinator for Turkey at Amnesty International Sweden. Klas Grinell has
published in Swedish on the following subjects: Images of the other in Swedish tourism abroad; the place of Islam in
Hegel’s philosophy of history; Ziauddin Sardar, social constructivism and the Islamization of science; al-Suhrawardi and the
place of Islamic philosophy in the history of Western philosophy; Orientalism, post-colonial theory and world systems
analysis; the idea of Europe will be fulfilled by Muslim Turkey; Justice beyond the reach of reason: some agreements in the
writings of Said Nursi and Jacques Derrida.
327 Kipling’s phrase is the refrain of the poem “The ballad of East and West” to be found for example in Stedman, Edmund
Clarence, A Victorian anthology 1837-1895: selections illustrating the editor's critical review of British poetry in the reign of
Victoria. Houghton & Mifflin, Boston, 1895, p. 1129. Huntington presented his theory in Huntington, Samuel P., ”The clash
of civilizations?” Foreign Affairs, nr 3, 1993.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

204
But Kipling and Huntington are not alone in imagining an uncrossable border between East and
West. They are merely two all-too ordinary representatives of Western modernity, and bordering is a
fundamental practice of modernity. In this paper I will discuss Fethullah Gülen as a critic of
modernity that departs from these bordering practices and offers an alternative of civilisational
dialogue.
These opening paragraphs are scattered with opaque and difficult entities — East, West, modernity,
civilisation. Everything said in such big generalising terms is bound to be rather superficial, but
distinctions will be made along the way.

2. Modernity as Border Building
I will begin with a sketch of a kind ideal type of modernity that fits the intention of this paper. As said,
the practice of creating borders is a fundamental aspect of modernity. The border can be seen as a
political and epistemological invention of European modernity, politically established with the peace
of Westphalia in 1648 and spread around the world with imperial colonialism, epistemologically
maybe most influentially articulated by René Descartes in the same time.328 In different areas
dichotomies and trenches were created between us and them – this state and that state, mind and
body, civilised and barbarian, either-or…
One aspect of this was developed in Cartesian theory of science where an object could only have one
essence, a cause only one effect. The burning of coal, for example, created heat and energy. That was
the essential outcome. Other effects could only be interpreted as side effects, pollution was thus not
essential. But in the long term we might see that pollution will kill everyone that the coal could warm
and produce energy for. From that perspective the energy effect can be seen as only a temporal gain
from a deeply destructive process. This very simplified example serves to show that matters are more
complicated than the border building, either-or thinking modernists could see. The over-confident
belief in science dominant in positivistic modernity is something Gülen has often criticised under the
name of materialism. “Enlightenment movements beginning in the eighteenth century saw human
beings as mind only. Following that, positivist and materialist movements saw them as material and
corporeal entities only.”329
If we take modernity to be what the staunchest modernists wanted it to be, as I have done so far, we
run the risk of simplifying life lived in the modern society. Modernisation did not make the world
modern in the way the modernist expected. But in my use modernity is the ideology and practice of
the modernists, the borderland is a place where its shortcomings and abuses become visible. Another
way of stating that modernist modernity never has been hegemonic can be found in the sociological

328 On the Westphalian order see the International Studies Review: Special issue – Continuity and Change in the
Westphalian Order, vol 2, no 2, 2000. On Descartes as the father of modern dichotomous epistemology, born in
concert with the formation of the nation-states, see Mignolo, Walter D., Local histories/global designs: coloniality,
subaltern knowledges, and border thinking, Princeton studies in culture/power/history, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1999, pp. 60.
329 Gülen, M. Fethullah, “Education from Cradle to Grave”, in Essays – Perspectives – Opinions, the Light, New Jersey,
2004, p. 79.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

205
concept of multiple modernities, there have always been many different ways of being modern.330
From a sociological perspective I find that concept fruitful, but from a more philosophical perspective
modernity is useful as a marker for the ideology and practice of Western expansionism.

3. Gülen as a Border Transgressor
But Gülen is not merely a critic of them on the other side of the civilisational border. His critique is
directed to both sides.
The East’s and West’s civilizations existed separated from each other. This separation, which should
not have occurred, was based on the former’s retiring from intellect and science, while the latter
retired from spirituality, metaphysics, and eternal and invariable values. As a result, the last centuries
of this millennium have witnessed disasters that are hard to believe.331
The border set up between East and West is a false one, he says. To say that science is Western and
spirituality Eastern is just a symptom of the bordering mentality. The separation should not have
occurred, Gülen says. It was an invention. As all inventions it had a purpose connected to its time and
place of invention. I would argue that one important purpose with the invention was to prove the
West’s superiority. Its time has run out and there is no room for it today.
Borders are set up to define the places that are safe and unsafe, to distinguish us from them. A border
is a dividing line, a narrow strip along a steep edge. A borderland is a vague and undetermined place
created by the emotional residue of an unnatural boundary. It is a constant state of transition. The
prohibited and forbidden are its inhabitants.332
The above words are taken from Chicana feminist Gloria Anzaldúa. She is claiming the borderland as
a place to have a full identity, not accepting all those that say that purity and belonging to only one
side is essential for a qualitative identity. In her writings the borderland becomes a place for a new
understanding of traditions, heritage and identity. She is from the indigenous Mexican mestizo
population of south Texas that came under US rule after the wars between the United States and
Mexico in the middle of the nineteenth century. Her borderland is Anglo-Spanish-Aztecan. Her story
is tied to her very special biography. But her example can be inspiring in the analysis of many other
places.

4. Turkey as a Borderland
Turkey is often called a bridge between East and West, a place where they meet and intermingle.
Tourist guides are full of that kind of wordings. We could, to sound more academic, instead call it a
borderland. A borderland where East and West are wrapped in layer upon layer that makes it
impossible to say what is what: Hittite, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Seljuk, Ottoman, Turkish, Central
Asian, Kurdish, Muslim, Sunni, Alevi, Balkan, Middle Eastern, Mediterranean, European, and many

330 On multiple modernities in relation to Turkey and Islam, see Göle, Nilüfer, “Snapshots of Islamic modernities” i,
Daedalus, vol 129, nr 1, 2000.
331 Gülen, M. Fethullah, “At the threshold of the new millennium”, in Essays – Perspectives – Opinions, p. 28.
332 Anzaldúa, Gloria, Borderlands/La Frontera: The new Mestiza, 2nd ed., Aunt Lute Books, San Francisco, 1999, p. 25.

--- Sayfa 208 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

206
other layers. If Turkey is a borderland, Fethullah Gülen can be called a person who has developed and
preached a border gnosis that takes us beyond the confrontational understanding of East and West. (I
will return to the concept of border gnosis later.)
But Turkey is not the only borderland, maybe just a more obvious one. At least in a metaphorical way
today we are all living in borderlands, a global border village where no one can live a life sheltered in
one tradition only. If we could only escape from the comfortable self absorption of fixated identities,
and instead live in the multilayered present we might see that bordering is a modernistic and even
unnatural practice. Many on each side of the imagined East-West divide, be it a Sayyid Qutb or a
Hindutva man, or a Donald Rumsfeld or a staunch Kemalist, will of course cling frenzily to the fixed
identities guarded by the border and its barbed wire. They want to stay safe and only have to mingle
with those who are one of us.
Fethullah Gülen, on the other hand, has devoted much of his time and made many efforts to mingle
with them, and it could be said that he has seen the borderland as a place to meet them and dialogue
with them. Since the borderland is an undetermined place it is a place where something new can come
to be. The bright future of the new millennium that Gülen speaks so often about is for him not a
return to something pure and forlorn within the established borders, it is something new and
transgressive. “Giving up their centuries-old clashes, these two worlds should come together for a
happier, more peaceful world.”333 For Gülen religion will be the foundation for a new and happier
world, the revelation sets parameters for it. So even if Gülen is an advocate of dialogue and a
spokesman for everyone’s place in a global civilisation of love and tolerance, he still has a firm
normative ground for his message. Religion, in a very inclusive understanding, is the answer, and
atheism is unacceptable.334
Religion reconciles opposites that seem to be mutually exclusive: religion-science, this world-the next
world, nature-Divine Books, the material-the spiritual, and spirit-body. Religion can erect a defence
against the destruction caused by scientific materialism, put science in its proper place, and end long-
standing conflicts among nations and peoples. [---] The goal of dialogue among world religions is not
simply to destroy scientific materialism and the destructive materialistic worldview; rather, the very
nature of religion demands this dialogue. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and even Hinduism and
other world religions accept the same source for themselves, and, including Buddhism, pursue the
same goal.335

5. Gülen on the Western Side of the Border
As said, Gülen has special experiences that make him able to be transgressive and inclusive. His
Turkish experience of modernistic westernistic Kemalism and a deep rooted and familial Islamic
tradition gives him a double vision. As he says himself: “We have one side in common with Europe
and one side in common with the Muslim world.”336 He uses that double belonging to argue for his
cause from both sides. He is as firm in his critique of the lack of intellect and science in the Islamic

333 Gülen, Fethullah,. Advocate of dialogue, The Fountain, Fairfax, 2000, p. 58.
334 Gülen, Fethullah,. Advocate of dialogue, pp. 241.
335 Gülen, Fethullah,. Advocate of dialogue, p. 241-242..
336 Gülen, Advocate of dialogue, p. 189.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

207
tradition as of the materialistic denial of the spiritual in the Western tradition. He shows that there is
a Western counterpoint to the materialistic strand and tries to argue for a different and truer Western
canon in contact with Platonist and Christian thinking. In this non-materialistic canon he places
thinkers like Plato, Descartes, Pascal, Leibniz, Kant, Hegel, Bergson and Heisenberg. With this
broadened Western tradition he can argue against the materialist imitators of the West, who, he says,
are always more radical in their borrowed modernist attitudes.337 The Westerners in the East are thus
trying to imitate a fake image of the West.
But what role do European thinkers play in Gülen’s message? It is difficult to see that they have any
part in shaping his arguments. Here and there in his writings he invokes their names to strengthen his
point against those who believe that science must equal materialism and atheism. “The worldly
allusions derive their specific meaning through their existence within the sacred universe of God and
the Ultimate Truth that stands at its centre.”, one could say.338 The quote is taken from an analysis of
Martin Luther King’s rethoric. To me, Gülen’s and King’s use of the Western canon are very similar.
As Fredrik Sunnemark argues in his analysis of King’s rhetoric it is hard to find any detailed content
in the references made to the authorities of the modern canon. They are no building blocks for the
argument. It might seem as if King’s use of literary references simply fills the function of
ornamentation. But that is a too simplified understanding, Sunnemark says. The allusions are a
method of legitimising the civil rights movement’s claim to righteousness. But it is not a philosophical
method; it is a preacher’s method. The allusions are significant and important, but they are part of a
rhetorical establishing of a theological argument formed without their participation. Therefore a
rather superficial understanding of these sources can make do, for both preacher and listener.339 The
same can be said of Gülen and his style of argumentation.

6. Gülen’s Theory of Science
But not all of Gülen’s use of the Western tradition is rhetorical. Science is one of the most important
subjects in Gülen’s message. Science is something that during the last couple of hundred years have
been developed in the West. To get rid of its compartmentalised and materialistic conceptions of
reality, Gülen says, it needs to be conducted within the spiritual and moral frame of Islam. “There is
no reason to fear science. The danger does not lie with science and the founding of the new world it
will usher in, but rather with ignorance and irresponsible scientists and others who exploit it for their
own selfish interests.”340
His discussions of science are very much in tune with contemporary strands in the theory of science
field gathered under the name of Science and technology studies (STS).341 But here the relationship is
rather opposite to the one with the classical philosophers. Here Gülen does not mention any names. It

337 Gülen, A civilization of love and tolerance, pp. 148.
338 Sunnemark, Fredrik, An inescapable network of mutuality: Discursivity and ideology in the rhetoric of Martin Luther
King, Jr., Acta universitatis Gothoburgensis, 2001, p. 215.
339 Ibid. pp. 198-261.
340 Gülen, The Essentials of the Islamic faith, p. 233.
341 STS works from the understanding that social, political, and cultural values affect science and technology innovation,
and that they in turn affect society. It is richly presented in Jasanoff, Sheila, (ed.), Handbook of science and technology
studies: published in cooperation with the Society for Social Studies of Science, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 1995.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

208
is thus difficult to know whether his arguments stem from readings of this field, or if he has come to
similar conclusions from a different angle. He very strongly emphasises that “none of the findings of
scientific research are ever absolute.”342 To support this claim he refers to the majority of scientists,
without giving any references. Also without mentioning names he distance himself from those who try
to see simple correspondences between today’s scientific results and verses in the Qu’ran. “The great
volume of articles and books produced in this vein in recent times will be open to ridicule in the
future.”343 Gülen’s reluctance to name people like Maurice Bucaille or Harun Yahya as those who fit
his description of an improper stance is probably due to his wish not to create divisions in Islam.344
The wisdom of the Qu’ran does not need any external support, Gülen stresses. His position on the
relation between Islam and science is similar to the British Muslim writer Ziauddin Sardar’s. But a big
difference is that Sardar makes many references to the contemporary debate among theorists of
science in the STS-tradition such as Thomas Kuhn, Jeremy Ravetz and Donna Haraway.345
What we must, and do, reject is that the truth of Qu’ran and hadith should be made to depend on
verification and confirmation by scientific data which are, as explained above, incomplete,
disconnected from the meaning and purpose of life as a whole, and vulnerable to change as the
borders of human ignorance change.346
Gülen criticise Darwinism for being too certain of the truth of its claims. His argument that the theory
of evolution is just a theory that leaves many things unexplained is a rather standard one from
religious critics.347 But Gülen does not approve of the theory of intelligent design, it is a debate in the
wrong arena, trying to beat the opponent in his own field with scientific arguments rather than trying
to transgress the dichotomy and see the explanations as incommensurable.348
7. Border Gnoseology
Gülen can be seen as a border thinker, as a producer of border gnosis: but what does that mean?
Argentinean philologist Walter Mignolo has theorised about the border and developed the concepts of
border thinking and border gnoseology. It might seem as pure post modern jargon, but according to
Mignolo it is often necessary to change the terms in order to change the content of a discussion. I will
argue that there are certain affinities between Mignolo’s and Gülen’s critical ambitions. Or maybe

342 Gülen, M. Fethullah, Questions and answers about Islam, vol 2, The Light, New Jersey, 2005, p. 105.
343 Ibid.
344 “I have no time or intention to show enmity to others. The Qu’ran teaches us: ‘You must be busy with yourselves; don’t
allow others’ following different ways to keep you busy.” In Gülen, Advocate of dialogue, p. 67.
345 See mainly Sardar, Ziauddin, Explorations in Islamic science, Islamic futures and policy studies, Mansell, London, 1989,
and Ziauddin Sardar, Introducing science, Icon Books, Cambridge, 2002. A good exposition of different Muslim
conceptions of science is Stenberg, Leif, The Islamization of science: four Muslim positions developing an Islamic
modernity, Lund studies in history of religions, 6, Almqvist & Wiksell International, Stockholm, 1996.
346 Gülen, M. Fethullah, Questions and answers about Islam, vol 2, The Light, New Jersey, 2005, p. 107.
347 See for example, taken rather randomly, Denton, Michael, Evolution: a theory in crisis, Burnett, London, 1985.
348 Thomas Kuhn saw theories as incommensurable if there is no common theoretical language that can be used to compare
them, and since there is no place outside the paradigms, different paradigms will from their own perspectives judge the
others’ theory as flawed. There is no absolute way to decide which theory is better. Gülen’s argument is in line with Kuhn’,
but as I have said, since there is no references, I cannot know if Gülen is influenced by Kuhnian perspectives. See Thomas S.
Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970, chapter 10..

--- Sayfa 211 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

209
more to the point – that Gülen is a representative of the break with modern/colonial epistemology
that Mignolo is trying to encourage and develop.
Mignolo develops the concept of gnosis as an alternative to episteme. They are both Greek words for
knowledge. But in the modern international academic language gnosis has been connected with
Gnosticism and the search for knowledge about God.349 The rational knowledge revered by
modernity’s big philosophers such as Descartes, Kant and Husserl is episteme, which is connected
with empiricism and rationalism. But Mignolo argues that that division was made not only in the
interest of philosophy and science, it also excluded a lot of local, non-Western knowledge that was
articulated in different, maybe non-textual, ways and therefore were not recognised as epistemic
knowledge by modernity.350 A lot of important local knowledge was thus lost forever, but some it is
still possible to reactivate.
As stated in the opening quote from Gülen, episteme was reserved for the West and gnosis for the
East. That was of course a simplification, but a simplification that in time became productive in the
sense that the two sides of the dichotomy came to reproduce themselves in line with it. Gnosis was
non-Western and therefore not wanted in the West. Episteme was Western and therefore not
understandable or useful to the East. And so the prejudice and empty phrase that East is East and
West is West was born. It implied that we should stick to our respective fields of expertise and learn to
live with the fact that we cannot understand each other. For the hardliners it meant that the others
should be conquered and ruled over, or even that they had no right to live.
It is very important to note that the reverence for episteme and despise for gnosis grew hand in hand
with the colonial expansion. Among the radical propagators of epistemic fundamentalism was those
Gülen criticise as scientific materialists and Bediüzzaman Said Nursi called students of philosophy
and positivists.351 Mignolo rather calls them propagators of colonial knowledge, to emphasise that this

349 In explaining the concept of ma’rifa (turk. marifet) the English translators Ali Ünal uses the term gnosis as a synonym
for the Turkish word marifet. “A traveler who is completely closed to all else save God, who has resisted all corporeal
desires and impulses in order to be carried by the tides of peace, has reached the stage of ma’rifa. One who travels around
this point is called a traveler to ma’rifa; one who has reached it is called an ‘arif (a Gnostic, or one who has spiritual
knowledge of God). The differences found in commentaries on ma’rifa are based on the temperaments and schools of
thought or levels of the Gnostics.” In Gülen, M. Fethullah, Key Concepts in the practice of Sufism: Emerald hills of the
heart, vol 1, revised edition, The Light, New Jersey, 2004, p. 147. Compared to the corresponding section in Turkish: ”Hak
yolcusunun bütün bütün ağyâra kapandığı, tamamıyla nefsanîliğe karşı gerilime geçtiği ve kendini huzurun gel-gitlerine
saldığı işte bu nokta, mârifet noktasıdır. Bu nokta etrafında dönüp durana ’irfan yolcusu’, başı bu noktaya ulaşana da ’ârif’
denir. Mârifet mevzuunda söylenen sözlerin farklılığı, istidat ve meşrep ayrılıklarından kaynaklandığı gibi, seviye farklılığıyla
da alâkalı olabilir.” In Gülen, M. Fethullah, Kalbin zümrüt tepelerin, Nil Yayinlari, 2001, ”Marifet”. This opens the very
interesting question of translation, and transmission of knowledge. Here the translator has inserted a rather Christian
concept to explain to readers in English what the Arabic ma’rifa is. In Gülen’s exposition of the Turkish marifet there is no
such connection, instead we find a reference to ibn Hanbal, al-Ghazzali and al-Daylami that is omitted in the translation. It
is not a question for this paper, but if Gülen is to be seen as an important scholar, as stated in all introductions to his
books, there is a need for more scholarly translations into English. Now it seems as if accessibility is chosen before
accuracy. It is often not so easy to find the original version corresponding to texts by Gülen published in English, and
therefore it is hard to tell if the message might be somewhat altered in the translation process. I would very much welcome
a study on this subject by someone equipped with the language skills needed.
350 Mignolo, pp. 10.
351 The references for this could be numerous, see for example Gülen, M. Fethullah, The Essentials of the Islamic faith, The
Light, New Jersey, 2005, pp. 228, and Said Nursi, Bediüzzaman, The Words: On the nature and purposes of Man, Life and
all things, From the Risale-i Nur Collection 1, Istanbul, Sözler Publications, 2004,, 30th Word, 561-69.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

210
knowledge was used to gain control over nature and other peoples, by suppressing other ways of
knowing. To escape from this version of colonial modernity Mignolo want to resurrect the concept of
gnosis with a meaning covering both episteme and doxa and use it so that Western philosophy no
longer will be allowed to judge over other forms of knowledge.352 Instead different ways of knowing
can suit different times and different places, and there is no need for a totalising system of all
knowledges where they are put in boxes and hierarchies.
Border thinking, or border gnosis, is thinking and knowledge produced from the borders of colonial
modernity, knowledge that recognises the colonising aspects of what has been seen as true knowledge
in mainstream modernity, and uses local resources to confront and alter that knowledge in order to
know the particularities of life lived in that setting better.
The first criterion for a border thinker is that (s)he cannot be an unproblematic part of the centre, nor
entangled only in a local tradition. Fethullah Gülen fits very well into Mignolo’s description, even if
Gülen comes from a very different background and position than the authors Mignolo deals with.
Mignolo’s insistence on different ways of knowing puts universalism into question. If there is no
universally valid knowledge, can there be any universal values? If border thinking is opposed to
universalism then Gülen can hardly be a border thinker. His message is definitely universalistic. Also
in this analysis do we have to release ourselves from an over dichotomous understanding a choice
between absolute universalism and absolute particularism. There might be universal values, but every
attempt to express them will be tied to the time and place where the attempt takes place, it will be
coloured by what Mignolo calls its loci of enunciation. German sociologist Ulrish Beck has coined the
concept contextualised universalism to describe a similar position.353 The emancipatory power of
border thinking lies in the double vision it upholds, the border thinker is more prone to see this
situatedness of every expression. Thinking made in the borderland might still spring from universal
values, but it will be aware of the impossibility to speak for everyone. Therefore the border thinker,
like Gülen, will need to dialogue with others to see, and show respect towards, other localised
understandings of the universal values.

8. Border Dialogue
A dialogue must start with difference (or we will have monologue) and a belief in the possibility that
we can understand each other. We must break with the empty phrase that East is East and West is
West. First and foremost we are human beings of the same make. In Western epistemology there has
been a dominant tradition to separate the understanding of non-Westerners to special fields such as
anthropology. In anthropological philosophy, a branch of philosophy discussing the possibilities of
understanding other peoples, it has been common to state that it is something different to understand
a person or a custom from another tradition. For example: It might be hard for me as a Swedish
historian of ideas to try to relive the thoughts of Aristotle, but to try to understand an African sage is

352 Mignolo, pp. 10.
353 Beck, Ulrich, Risk society: Towards a new modernity, Sage, London, 1992.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

211
utterly impossible since we do not share the same we, which Aristotle and I are assumed to do.354
Such a view makes true dialogue impossible and therefore meaningless. That is the stance of those
protecting borders.
There are of course representatives of a similar position from Eastern countries. But I am not the
most fitted to give examples.355 To them Gülen says: “Islam is the religion of the whole universe. That
is, the entire universe obeys the laws laid down by God, so everything in the universe is ‘Muslim’ and
obeys God by submitting to His laws.”356 His message goes out to all humanity. We are all of the same
make and therefore we can understand each other. The differences are only on the surface; essentially
we are all the same.
Another requisite for dialogue is that we do not think that a person or a tradition can only speak for
themselves. Walter Mignolo might be called a post colonial critic. One of the main aims of post
colonial critique is to show that the urge to gain knowledge of the non-Westerners has often been used
to conquer, rule and diminish them.357 It is easy to jump to the conclusion that any attempt to seek
knowledge about another person or culture is a way of suppressing them. The next logical step is to
say that no Western orientalist or islamologist can understand Islam, that only a Muslim has the right
to talk about Islam. But the just moral imperative that everyone should have the right to speak for
themselves does not imply that everyone can only speak for themselves. This would lead to a position
holding that we cannot represent someone else’s rights  and thus take away the possibility for
engagement for others and for humanitarian solidarity. Those who are too oppressed to be heard
cannot gain any rights if that view is put into practice. It would leads to an egoistic and cynical world.
But Gülen is no advocate of that kind of misguided respect for the other. As we have seen he takes the
right to argue from both sides of the border, a must in a real dialogue.

354 Clack, Brian R., Wittgenstein, Frazer and Religion, Macmillan press, London, 1999, pp. 76. I take my understanding of
this from Motturi, Aleksander, Filosofi vid mörkrets hjärta: Wittgenstein, Frazer och vildarna, Glänta produktion, Göteborg,
2003, pp. 235. A way to make it possible for me to understand Gülen within these axioms would be to argue that Aristotle is
as Muslim as he is Western European. For example in Gülen’s discussion of proofs for God’s existence we can see the strong
Aristotelian legacy in Islam. We have the same philosophical ancestors and thus we can understand each other. But that
would only serve to argue for a more exclusive Abrahamitic dialogue. See Gülen, M. Fethullah, Questions and answers about
faith, vol 1, The Fountain, Fairfax, 2000, pp 1.
355 Gülen criticise the lack of universality with the neo-salafiyah, Gülen, Advocate of dialogue, p. 54.
356 Gülen, M. Fethullah, ”A comparative approach to Islam and Democracy” in Essays – Perspectives – Opinions, the Light,
New Jersey, 2004, p. 18, as well as in Toward a global civilization of love and tolerance, the Light, New Jersey, 2004, p. 223.
357 For an introduction to post colonial thinking see, Gandhi, Leela Postcolonial theory: a critical introduction, Edinburgh,
Edinburgh University Press, 1998.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

212
9. Civilisations?
But what are these ‘sides of the border’. What are East and West? What is a civilisation? Both Gülen
and Samuel Huntington speak of civilisations. If we shall not assume they are comrades in arms it is
important to see the differences in their understanding of what the term civilisation denotes.
The word civilisation (turk. medeniyet) has more than one meaning. According to the English
dictionaries the main meanings are 1. the state of being civilised, 2. culture 3. cultural entity. In
Turkish medeniyet covers roughly the same meaning of being civilised and as Redhouse puts it: “the
sum of those qualities that give a society its particular character”. In both languages it is connected
with the root civic or medeni, used in concepts like civil law, or medeni hukuk.
A major problem with talk about civilisation is that the different meanings often are intermingled and
the descriptive use of civilisation for different cultural entities in the world often becomes linked to an
understanding of a hierarchy according to those entities different level of civilisation. The scale for
that levelling is of course always the Western civilisation’s most chauvinistic self image of itself as
being guided only by liberty, equality, reason and democracy. Only in the West is there Culture. Only
in the West is there true civilisation.
One of the major proponents for the importance of civilisations in understanding the present state of
the world is infamous Samuel Huntington. In the context of my discussion it is not so important
whether one accepts his argument for the inevitable clash of civilisations or not. It is more important
to scrutinise his definition of civilisations. In my view he would be just as mistaken even if his thesis
was “the peaceful co-existence of civilisations”. That is because he is committed to the East-West
dichotomy, to the barbed wired border. Every civilisation has its own unique core values and we can
not understand each other, he says. It is the same stance as the one shown in anthropological
philosophy. Even if Huntington wasn’t militaristic, his definition of civilisation can never lead to
understanding or real dialogue. The most positive option within that conception of civilisations is
some kind of exoticising interest in those whom we can never understand. As we can see this is far
from Gülen’s stance. His concept of civilisation cannot be the same as Huntington’s. But what is the
content of his concept? Unfortunately is not easy to find out since he uses civilisation in a rather
broad and undistinguished way.358 Gülen’s concept of global civilisation seems to refer to the state of
being civilised, but also that the world will come together in one civilisation, one culture and cultural
entity. This is possible because we already are essentially one.
Can this ideal be called border thinking? If the borderland becomes global then there are no borders
anymore. Let us return to the difference between Huntington and Gülen. Huntington argues that the
West is the only civilised civilisation. I would interpret Gülen’s global civilisation as something that
can only be realised in the borderland. It is realised by the golden generation, and their special power
comes from the fact that they are brought up in a borderland. Of course this takes the notion of
borderland from its localised setting in south USA and transforms it into the broader concept-
metaphor of a global border village hinted at earlier in this paper. Everyone can share the experience
of living in borderlands, and in that respect everyone is part of the same global entity. But the

358 Again we encounter the problem of translation. Is it only the Turkish term medeniyet that is translated as civilisation?
Medeniyet is derived from the Arabic medeniyyet and even if the meaning given in the dictionaries are rather similar, the
Arabic origin unavoidably has different connotations than the very Enlightenment made concept of civilisation as opposed
to barbarism. Again I can only point to an important topic to study.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

213
understanding of that entity is always coloured by a specific local experience. Even if this is a possible
interpretation it would hardly be endorsed by either Mignolo or Anzaldua, they would most probably
find it to Utopian.
On of the important aspects of Turkish Islam highlighted by Gülen is the importance of love and
tolerance.359 That is the Sufi strand. Like mystics in all religions the Sufis seeks the experience of
oneness and are less akin to border building and sectarianism. Since we are parts of the same whole
we belong to the same creation. Civilisations in the meaning of cultural entities are just different ways
of expressing life in this creation. Every civilisation has developed some knowledge and
understanding, but often failed to see that it was only a partial understanding. But from the mystic
perspective they are not dichotomous but complementary. We can sing different harmonies in the
same song; describe different parts of the same elephant; I we break all the cups, the water will be
one. There are countless images to express this belief that the ultimate truth is Unity. “Sufism is the
way of being God’s “friend”, Gülen says and makes Sufism a very natural part of Islamic life.360 There
is no tension between the exoteric and the esoteric aspects of Islam or religion as such in Gülen’s
writings.

10. Something Bordering to a Conclusion
Mignolo is a Latin American leftist and he mainly reads and uses other thinkers with a leftist
approach. Gülen is a preacher more connected to the political right, if anything, and building his
message from Islamic sources.361 But they are both deeply committed to furthering dialogue and
respect between different traditions of knowledge. The fact that they come from perspectives often
seen as opposing each other, as maybe the main opponents, is interesting and might shed light on
their respective views on dialogue. Are there hidden borders? Can there be dialogue between these
perspectives?
I think that the mystical can be a meeting place and a starting point. From a post modern point of
view mysticism can be seen as a rational humility towards the complexity of the world. There are
things we cannot know, that others might have come closer to by other means than epistemic
knowledge. From a religious point of view mysticism opens for a curiosity of how others have
experienced and explained the ungraspable mystery. In this paper I have tried to explore the concept
of border thinking to better understand Fethullah Gülen and reach that meeting place beyond East
and West.

359 Gülen, Advocate of dialogue, p. 53 and 196.
360 Gülen, Advocate of dialogue, p. 359.
361 On Gülen’s ties with right wing politics, see Özdalga, Elisabeth, “Worldly asceticism in Islamic casting: Fethullah
Gülen’s inspired piety and activism”, Critique, vol. 17, 2003.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

214

--- Sayfa 217 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

215

Framing Paths to Citizenship:
Gülen in Redefining Integration

PART
4

--- Sayfa 218 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

216

--- Sayfa 219 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

217
IDENTİTY AS A MAJOR FACTOR IN INTEGRATION TO THE
WESTERN SOCIETY
NAZILA ISGANDAROV 362

Abstract
Many different changes have occurred within Muslim communities all over the world over the
last decade. Some Muslim communities have managed to become front-runners in the shift
towards democratization and in encouraging Muslim regimes and states to make a transition to
liberal democracy and a market economy. Liberal Muslims and others who watch these changes
have acknowledged the contributions of those communities. In this regard, the Gülen movement
has a particularly positive image. However, how this movement has been helping Muslims in the
West to integrate into their societies has not been analysed. This paper investigates the identity
crisis among Muslims in the West as a part of the identity crisis in Western society generally, and
asks how the views of Fethullah Gülen, a prominent spiritual and religious leader of moderate
Muslims, help Muslims to deal with this crisis. Does he think it is necessary to feel ‘Westernized’
in order to be integrated into Western society? If so, how controversial is being ‘Westernized’ for
Muslims living in Western society? Does becoming ‘Western’ go against Muslim belief and
attitude? If so, how avoid stigmatization and negative labelling from both sides — the
‘Westernized Muslims’ on the one side and those who reject being ‘Westernized’ on the other?
The following two hypotheses guide the discussion: first, that the identity issues among Muslims
have increased since 9/11 and have marginalized them in the West; and second, the Gülen
movement challenges traditional notions of identity and encourages Muslims to accelerate the
process of integration into Western society.

1. Introduction: Importance of the Problem
The impact of globalization on the movement of people made a tremendous impact on identity of
peoples in the West. According to the estimation of the World Bank, at the beginning of the 21st
century, about 2.5 percent of world’s population, or roughly 130 million people, lived outside their
countries of birth, and that this number is rising at a rate of approximately 2% per year (World Bank.
2000:38). The migrants, especially from the Muslim world who migrated to the West deepened the
identity crisis of the West, which has already been challenged in terms of identity.
Identity is a target of various disciplines such as sociology, political science, international relations,
anthropology, etc. It is involved in human relations and consists of its most important features and

362 Nazila Isgandarov: Graduate in history from Baku State University; MA in European and Russian Studies, Carleton
University and a DMin student in Wilfrid Laurier University. She is a Spiritual and Religious Care Coordinator in Toronto,
endorsed by the Ontario Multifaith Council, and a member of the Union of Azerbaijani Journalists. Her recent work
includes: ‘Islamic Spiritual Care in a Health Care Setting’, a chapter in A. Meier, T. O'Connor and P. VanKatwyk  (eds.),
Spirituality and Health: Multidisciplinary Explorations, (Waterloo, ON: WLU Press, 2005); The Search for Security in the
South Caucasus: NATO’s Role in the Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan Pipeline (Carleton University, Ottawa Institute of European and
Russian Studies, Sept., 2006); ‘Silence in Muslim Language Prayer’, paper presented at CAPPE Annual Conference, Niagara
Falls, 9 February 9, 2007.

--- Sayfa 220 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

218
forms the conditional nature of social, political and economic relations (Guerrina, 2003, p.136). It
also is a set of feelings that defines belonging both in individual and political sense and could be
divided into three categories, which are social identity, cultural identity, and political identity. Social
identity refers to an individual’s relationship with social structure. Cultural identity relates to history
and heritage, and political identity refers to the relationship between citizens of a state and/or nation
(Guerrina, 2003, p.137). In this meaning, nation building is people’s active search for their identity
through their particular culture, history, language, and identity. For Max Weber, the nation is a
cultural community on a solidarity form and the state is a political institution and an organisational
form (Weber, [1922] 1978). But there are two types of nation, one is a civic nation and the other is
ethnic one. The civic nation is a territorially based community of common descent, based on
“historical territory, legal-political community, legal-political equality of the members, and common
civic culture and ideology…” whereas the latter is based on descent where the nation is “seen as a
fictive ‘super-family’, and it boasts pedigrees and genealogies to back up its claims…” (Smith, 1991, p.
12). .
National identity, according to Smith, is based on those traits that are common to both of these
versions, namely “(1) historic territory, or homeland; (2) common myths and historical memories; (3)
a common, mass public culture; (4) common legal rights and duties for all members; [and] (5) a
common economy with territorial mobility for members” (Smith, 1991, p. 14). This type of
identification has been challenged with recent developments in the world, especially by globalisation,
which increases interconnectedness, weaken institutional mechanisms and organisations that have
hitherto sustained national identities. It also is somewhat different from the Islamic view of nation
and nationalism. First of all, emergence of nationalism is a result of different historical events in the
West and the Muslim World. In Europe, secularization of the Reformation gave birth to nationalism
by underestimating the sense of Christian nation and rising the “national selfishness” and the
“individual selfishness” (Hassan Al-Banna, p. 26), but in the Muslim world it is a result of  the
destruction of the Islamic ummah, or the last Caliphate, the Ottoman Empire, by the Europeans and
the emergence of a new economic structure and relations.
Like in the West, nationalism was a new phenomenon of ‘imagined’ identity in the Muslim world. In
history, identity was religious in its content and was perceived in the light of religion. For instance,
the West was identified mainly Catholic during the premodern era, but was divided into Catholic,
Protestant, and emerging secular identities during the early modern era (the sixteenth, seventeenth,
and early eighteenth centuries). In the late eighteenth and the nineteenth century, this identity was
transformed into a new division between liberal, socialist, and nationalist identities. In the modern
era (the twentieth century), the West was challenged with its democratic, communist, and
fascist/national socialist identities.
In the Muslim world, a lot of changes have also occurred in regard to new definition of identity. The
equivalent of ‘nation’ in the Qur’an is ummah, which applied to religious communities mainly.
However, it also is human societies united not only in religious beliefs and behaviour but also in
social, economic, and political framework. Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn Khaldun, the medieval Muslim
philosophers used this conception to describe communities based on “mere” ties of blood or language,
and are designated with the term ‘asabiyya (cited in Hourani, pp. 20-25). However, “modern”
ideologies, among them the conceptions of nationality and nationalism challenged this vision of the
ummah well in the eighteenth century. For instance, Jamal al-Din al-Afghani tried to re-define the
term by incorporating the politically and socially useful aspects of European civilization into the
Islamic ummah without sacrificing the essential religious, moral, and cultural identity of the latter.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

219
He wrote “the centre of attention is no longer Islam as a religion, it is rather Islam as a civilization.
The norm of human action is no longer the service of God; it is the creation of a human civilization
flourishing in all its parts” (quoted in Hurani, p. 114). Al-Afgani’s views on new definition of ummah
was spread very quickly because many Muslims in Ottoman Empire had already experienced the new
sense of identity. The destruction of Ottoman Empire accelerated this process and Islamic culture and
religion, Arab culture and language, local cultures and traditions – had been utilized for the purposes
of creating new identities. In general, the identity was defined in four trends such as: territorial
nationalism, integral nationalism, ethnic (Arab, Turkish, etc.) nationalism and Islamic nationalism.
The supporters of the first trend sought to build a new community on the basis of civic notions of
nationhood. Second, integral nationalism espoused ethnic criteria of “nationality”. The ethnic
nationalism stressed on ethnic identities. Finally, Islamic nationalism sought to reconcile ethnic
identity with the cosmopolitan Islamic teachings on the nature of the trans-national Muslim ummah
(Israel Gershoni and James Jankowski, pp. 81-93).
For Gülen, combination of Islamic and Turkish (ethnic) nationalism is more relevant. Based on liberal
interpretations of the Qur’an, the civic nation is more appealing to Gülen when he sees the Turkish
nation based on not racism but on common culture, history of all Anatolian people and supports
democratic and pluralistic society (Güleng, p.140). According to Gülen, history, territory and culture
play an important role in definition of nation. For instance, Gülen interprets the collapse of the
Ottoman Empire as a negative impact on culturally authentic modernization of Turkish, Arabic and
other nationalities (H. Yavuz, 2003b, 274). However, Gülen argues that this identity should not take
on an identity of confrontation and conflict, but rather one of co-operation and coexistence.
Therefore, Gülen’s goal is to raise Muslim consciousness and to get involved in modernity, democracy
and a free-market economy, so as to get Muslims to enter into those global processes and to turn
Turkey into a regional power: “What has been going on in modern Turkey is the reconstruction of the
Islamic tradition in terms of modern idioms to create a new Turkey that can become an exemplar of
political, economic, and cultural success for Muslims around the world” (H. Yavuz, 2003b, p. 238).
Thus, the modern interpretations of identity, nation and nationalism in the West and the Muslim
world coincide. The identity question is not anymore defined by territory, ethnos, language, culture
and history, e.g. territory has been excluded from this definition and ethnos is not based on racism.
Now there is a common trend in the West and the Muslim world which stresses on co-existence and
cooperation and tries to reconcile ethnic identity with civic notion of nationhood. Under this impact,
the Muslims like other communities in the West try how to maintain both national identity and
preserve cultural particularity.

2. Literature Review
The literature review shows that there are three main approaches on the identity question in the West.
The first approach perceives the West as a cultural civilization and supports the Western identity363
formation on the bases of cultural and historical values. The second approach suggests that the
Western identity should be political which must be based on political and social values of West.
Michael Bruter, Lars-Erik Cederman and Jon Erick Fossum are the best representatives of this stream
(L. Cederman, 2001; J.E. Fossum,November 12, 2005). The third approach perceives the Western

363 The Western identity refers to the identity in EU particularly in this research..

--- Sayfa 222 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

220
identity between cultural and political identities. For them, the Western states are political unities,
but their nations use their cultural values to understand and interpret the political values of their
states. Furio Cerutti’s “A Political Identity of the Europeans” is one of best representatives of this
approach.
All these approaches are characterized in two main groups: constructivist and traditional or
deconstructivist. The latter is an idea, which is based on Western Christianity and sees the problem of
integration and adaptation from the context of the clash between the civilizations. (B. Lewis, S.
Huntington, etc.) However, the constructivists support the idea that it is mistake to see culture
entirely in terms of conflict and cultural differences should not be exaggerated in terms of integration
and adaptation (Delanty, 1995, p.17).  The works of Gülen can also be included in this stream.
Some scholars and politicians argue that the Western identity is based on only Western Christianity
(e.g. S. P. Huntington, B. Lewis). For instance, S. P.  Huntington sees Islam and Muslim identity as a
deconstructive factor in the West when he writes that problem for the West is Islam, a different
civilization whose people is convinced of the superiority of their culture, and is obsessed with the
inferiority of their power (Huntington 1997, p. 217). This decontructivist approach to the problem was
challenged by the constructivists who argue that the Western identity went through different identity
formations. The constructivists concentrate purely on politics in identity formation and do not agree
with the notion that identity at the European level can only be based on national level. For them, the
role of national identity at the EU level is thin and the existence of culturally imposed trade-offs is not
important. (M. Bruter, 2005). They argue that the Western identity was transformed into a new
division between liberal, socialist, and nationalist identities. Today, in our post-modern era Europe is
once again defined by liberalism that is characterized with the hyper-individualism dividing the
society into different small groups. Therefore, “it is mistake to see culture entirely in terms of
conflict…” and “cultural differences should not be exaggerated” (Delanty, 1995, p.17). Instead,
Western identity should be based on the core European values, which are solidarity and a concern
with social justice, and the principal identity of people in the Western civilization, is defined by an
ensemble of liberal ideas: (1) liberal democracy; (2) the free market; (3) the open society; and (4) an
individualist culture, but the religious identity of Western society should not be underestimated, too.
Bo Petersson and Anders Hellstrom suggests that the legitimacy of the present Western order has to
be enhanced among its peoples through nurturing of common identities within the EU which can
make it most lasting and solid unit (B. Petersson and A. Hellstrom, 2003, p. 236).
Gülen’s view on this subject also relates to the constructivist approach to the problem. Since Gülen
strives for political, economic, and cultural success of Muslims in the world, their identity struggle in
the West is not alien to him and he offers some solutions to the identity crisis in the West. According
to Gülen, modern Western identity was once based on the trinity of Greek thought, Roman law and
Christianity and Eastern identity is based on faith and morality (Gülen, 2004f, p.148), and the
Western identity should be enhanced with Eastern faith and morality (Gülen, 2005c. p. 56).
Thus, the identity concept is moving from the traditional view to the constructivist approach because
the decontructivists rarely acknowledge the mutability of other collective identities and are inclined to
see other nationalities and religious groups as obstacles to self-realization. However, migration and
then globalization brought a general acceptance of the idea of multicultural identity and inter-
community dialogue.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

221
3. Research Questions and Hypotheses
To grapple with this issue, I took a constructivist approach, which attempted to arrive at what is
considered true by eliminating differences and by synthesizing common grounds or potential
similarities in the West. I looked at different concepts from a collective perspective, followed by a
similar examination at the personal level focusing on what I regard as being the major characteristics
of the Muslims as individuals and as a people in the West in the shade of thoughts of Gülen.
From the follows the hypotheses guiding this research are: first, the identity crisis issues among
Muslims have increased since the 9/11 and have marginalized them in the West. Second, Gülen
movement challenged the traditional notions of identity, which is based on territory, ethnos, culture
and history, in the Muslim community and encouraged them to accelerate the process of integration
to the Western society. Testing of these hypotheses is based on the comparison of actual cases, the
identity problem of Muslims in the West as an independent variable, and Gülen movement as a
dependent variable.

4. Identity Crisis in the West
The Western society needs some kind of identity to exist and the Western national identity is one
form of collective identities. This national identity, however, is not just any collective identification,
but is broader than all other social and individual identifications, embodies, coordinates, and grades
all social and individual identifications. In this meaning, the foundation of a nation in the West is
based on and legitimized by the ideology of an absolute, unique national identity which functions as a
mechanism for the formation and control of the community of "us" in juxtaposition to the community
of "them" (Panagiotopoulou, 1997, p. 349).
Identity in the West is not a natural state of being and is a process of inclusion and exclusion.
Individuals are not born with an instinctive identification with a particular group, and in this
meaning, the identity construction is an artificial process, but this process is based on a shared culture
and heritage (Guerrina, 2003, p. 138). Therefore, the Muslims also go through the process of
inclusion and exclusion. In this regard, their identity has a fluid nature because of the involvement of
social relations, political and economical circumstances.
Since the nations are active in the social, political, and economic discourse of the West, the Muslim
identity as a part of general identity in the West are moving away from the ethno-cultural identity
towards a state-central identity. It became possible especially under the impact of formation of the
global identity, which eliminates language, territorial, custom, religious barriers and leads to the
globalization of culture. Such identity is cosmopolitan in nature because it is not supported by a
common past, common historical origins, historical memory, or a sense of continuity
(Panagiotopoulou, 1997, p. 350).
The Western identity is a kind of global identity, which desires to build not a West of institutions but a
West of individuals guided by the non-identity of the national (Delanty, 1995, p. 5). However, many
still support traditional aspect of identity which emphasizes on alienation from others and definition
of “Us” and “Others” which is at the heart of the identity construction process in some Western
countries (Delanty, 1995, p. 5). For instance, Huntington also defines civilization as a "cultural entity
... the highest cultural grouping … defined by both common objective elements, such as language,
history, religion, customs, institutions, and by the subjective self-identification of people … A

--- Sayfa 224 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

222
civilization may include several nation states or only one" (Huntington 1993, p. 24). But Gülen’s
suggestion about the global character of Western civilization and identity is more appealing. Gülen
suggests that if Western civilization is based only on science and technology, it will be paralyzed. If it
claims to be the civilization of future, it should combine science and Eastern faith and morality in
order to establish true civilization (Gülen, 2005c. p.56).
Today’s identity formation in the West is about two things: (1) the growth of a new system, which
upholds national identities, while at the same time symbolizing and encompassing those common
Western ideas and experiences that have developed during the history; and (2) the existence of
Western structures which makes it easier for different groups and communities to express their
different identities within the dominant culture (B. Petersson and An. Hellstrom, 238). In this regard,
the West represents a system in which both the fundamental and more cultural and ideological
aspects of Western identity are reflected. It is a framework in which national identity is fundamental,
yet where different identities are also important. The main categories of the culture are national and
cultural identities. If the Western identity is based on one sole national culture, then it is exclusive
and restrictive, because in national cultural point of view, the Western identity is controversial and
not clear because the West is consisted of many diverse nationalities and groups, on the one hand,
and there is discontinuity of historical culture than continuity and difference than sameness on the
other. The West is still culturally thin and there is no common Western language and common
Western memory that can bind many diverse peoples, and for many there are only the memories of
divisions. Culture is not stable and changes according to the surrounding environment. These are
common features of the nation-states in many Western states in the process of becoming a state-
nation. However, culture still plays an important role and associated with the geographical and
political space. Therefore, legitimacy of the present Western identity has to be enhanced among its
peoples through nurturing of common identities, which can make it most lasting and solid.  In this
process symbols, like flags, anthems play great role but with considering the historical experiences
(Petersson and Hellstrom, 2003, p.238). In this regard, Gülen suggests that the existence of distinct
and unique cultures should first be ‘distilled’ before being absorbed into the indigenous culture
because otherwise, cultural and civilizational crises can occur, but communities should also be
allowed to produce a distinctive culture in order not to become a ‘barren tree’ (Gülen, 2005c. p.55).
Thus, the cultural foundations of the West are not in a pre-political cultural identity and relating
Western identity to the Christian heritage does not offer much substance. The cultural dimension of
the West is the mixture and recombination of current exiting identities through the interface of the
encounter of the global with the local.
In this meaning, the top-down creation of a global identity in the West as a process of transformation
of national identities for the purpose of strengthening of the West as a cultural reference is important.
Therefore, the Western cultural identity is hybrid, mixed and evolving. It also includes the Muslim
identity and culture but with a condition of fully integration of “others” into the national culture of the
states in which they are citizens.
Many Muslims have accepted the core Western values, which are based on solidarity and a concern
with social justice and do not feel a conflict in terms of cultural identity in the West, if it is seen in
positive terms and cultural differences are not exaggerated. The Muslim scholars have also been
encouraging Muslims in the West in this process. For instance, al-Qaradawi says, “[We urge] Muslims
to integrate into the societies within which they live without conceding their faith” (quoted in “Scholar
with a streetwise touch defies expectations and stereotypes” by Owen Bowcott and Faisal al Yafai, July
9, 2004, The Guardian).

--- Sayfa 225 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

223
Like al-Qaradawi, Gülen preaches that Muslims should to be able to have a new, flexible Muslim
identity, which can be changed under the market economics and neo-liberal economic policies within
the current tendencies of modernity. For him, being a Muslim in the modern world, especially in the
Western world means to support and consolidate modern institutions of democracy, the rule of law, a
free-market economy, and so forth. Muslims should not isolate themselves from the world but
interact and to create a shared understanding, a shared experience and a shared code of ethics (Yavuz,
July 21, 2004a).
Thus, the identity in the West is complex with many layers which means individuals have multiple
identities. The Western institutions recognize the multiple bases of identity that are found in any
group and individual and take into account variation in levels of commitment to the identities which
people are tied into. Therefore, the complexity of Western identity is reflected in the complexity of the
society itself. This kind of identity does not depend on one factor. Today the West is multicultural and
many communities, including Muslims claim their own location within this boundary of values of
solidarity and social justice. There should not be tension between the national, religious, and Western
feelings. And indeed, the Muslims attempt to fully integrate into the national culture of the Western
society by bringing the Eastern faith and morality to the science and technology based Western
civilization.

5. Identity Crisis among Muslims in the West
Religion is among many factors, which affect the level of democracy and formation of the Western
identity, but the democratic community begins with the acceptance of fundamental values, including
the religious values and identity. Therefore, the religious identity should not be underestimated.
However, there is no easy answer to the question of what constitutes the religious identity of a person
or human group. The demographic diversity of Muslims themselves in the West - theologically,
economically, and culturally - also makes it harder to answer to identity question. For instance, what
are the characteristics of Muslim? How is Muslim identity shaped into a shared image in the West?
Some suggest that there is such a thing as only a Muslim, but some argue that there is no such a
person today because Muslims have been assimilated into the local cultures and languages of the
majority societies in which they now live in the West. However, the term ‘Muslim’ indicates an
identity-something the person defines who he/she is. This sense of self is expressed by membership in
a group, or affiliation in something like culture or religion.
The major categories of Muslims in the West are the devout and secular, immigrant and Western-
born Muslims. But for all of them, the sources of their identity are the Qur’an and the narrations of
the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) based on the basic tenets of Islam, which are belief in one God and
Prophet Muhammad as the final messenger of God, charity, fasting, prayers and the hajj pilgrimage
for those who can afford it. The different urf and adats (cultures) are also the sources of their identity.
Linguistically, the word Islam means ‘peace, salvation, and submission.’ This should first be
“established in our inner worlds, so that we are at peace with God and natural environment, and then
throughout the world and then universe” (Gülen, 2005a. p. 209). In regard to the integration with the
world, Islam preaches that Adam represents the creation of all races. The origin of human being is the
same regardless their color, peoples do not display different physical characteristics. Islam makes the
idea of a common ancestor likely and advocates the idea of one creation, not two (one for Gentiles, the
second for the creation of Adam.) According to Gülen,

--- Sayfa 226 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

224
“human beings, unlike other creatures who tread the path nature have free will. We bear the gift of
freedom and obligation to harmonize our life with nature. This harmony is also the path of our
exaltation and progress, the path upon which God created human nature” (Gülen, 2005a, pp. 201-
203).
Gülen suggests that to harmonize our lives depends on how much we realize our personal integrity
and remember that we are social beings (Gülen, 2005a, p. 202). A good Muslim is the one who is
powerful both physically and spiritually, and also has scientific and technical competence (Gülen,
2005a, p. 194). A good Muslim is also the one regards whatever pleases and displeases others as a
measure while interacting with others (Gülen, 2005c. p.59). In this meaning, Islamic identity
theologies promote unity not segregation as a divine command and condemn any kind of racism and
discrimination.
Although, the immigration is very difficult undertaking (Gülen, 2005a, p. 263), the teachings of Islam
make the adaptation of Muslims to the Western society easy. However, the laws in the Western states
also help Muslims to become legal citizens and residents of these states. For instance, the older
generation of Muslims became citizens of the West through naturalization process, which is granted
to those individuals who have met some years of residence requirements, then wait a further period of
time for the processing of the application and be able to communicate in state language. It
demonstrates that many Western states do not limit their citizenship to ethnic population nor
discriminate individuals on an ethnic basis. They have established a relatively liberal naturalization
procedure, but the only concern lies with the preservation of the state culture and language. The
commonality of naturalization process is the same in many Western states which includes:
1.
Permanent residence permit for some period of time to the date on which an application for
citizenship is submitted;
2.
Knowledge of the state language in accordance with the requirements;
3.
Knowledge of the state’s history, geography, and laws.
4.
Loyalty to the state;
5.
Oath in applying for citizenship, etc (Chinn and Truex, 1996, pp. 134-135).
The younger generation became citizens of the West because traditional idea of citizenship in many
Western states which is based on the Jus Sanguinis model that bases citizenship on blood decent, was
replaced with the Jus Soli method that allocates citizenship to all those who were born on the
territory, regardless of the citizenship of their parents (Chinn and Truex, 1996, pp. 134-135).
Although, the older generation became the citizens of the Western states, still have cultural or social
ties with their countries of birth. Many of them see their religious identity in ethnic or religious
culture alone, and are pessimistic that their culture will be weakened over time. For instance, Dr
Muzammil H. Siddiqi suggests that there is a decline in strict adherence to specific Islamic values
among the younger generations. However, I suggest that Muslims in West are combining their faith,
ethnic background, and the folkways of their adopted land in many different ways. I also witnessed
that later generations of Muslims who were born here often embrace their faith with more enthusiasm
than their parents, who may have distanced from their religious identity due to many reasons.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

225
Against the notion that the younger generation is assimilated in the dominant culture, I would suggest
that Muslim identity in the West displays itself in three layers:  social, cultural and political. The social
identity of Muslims refers Muslim’s individual relationship with social structure. The cultural identity
of Muslims relates to Islamic history and heritage. Since Muslim identity in the West is very much
politicized, I will here emphasize on political identity of Muslims.
The political identity of Muslims refers to the relationship between citizens of a state and/or nation.
However, the view of alienation process in the identity process, which sees “Us” as a homogenous
mass and denies the multiple identities in “Us” and the “Other”, has received a great deal of attention
since the securitization of migration in the EU since 9/11. In conservative politics Muslims were
perceived as a threat, which have provoked confusions between Muslim legal immigrants and asylum-
seekers. In general, the Muslim identity has been associated through the figure of ‘the foreigner’
within security discourse, Islamic fundamentalism and the threat of terrorism. Moreover, cultural and
historical values are strongly embedded in the politicians’ behavior in the EU (Douglas Alexander,
Speech at the Centre for European Policy Studies, October 15, 2005). The laws passed in some
European countries make it harder for Muslims and others to practice their religion. A poll by USA
Today/Gallup reported that 39 percent of respondents favored requiring Muslims, including U.S.
citizens, to carry special identification. Many politicians support the idea of racial profiling in the US
(Speeches of Rep. Peter King, chairman of the Homeland Security Committee; U.S. Rep. Mark Kirk
(R-Ill.) and John Faso, a New York Republican running for governor).
This tendency in political life of the West resulted in categorization of Muslims as liberals or
moderates and radicals. Radicals as rogue Islamists are defined Muslims who are willing to do
anything except to destroy America and its power, but the liberal Muslims concentrate on liberal
values such as religious tolerance, freedoms of conscience and speech, civil liberties, social justice,
public welfare, and educational development (Muqtedar Khan, 2003, p. 418). Some suggest that
fundamentalist movements in the West are a direct response to globalization pressures exerted by
Western cultural and economic values and the movement “tends to draw people who feel cut off from
what they see as a traditionally Islamic lifestyle, including converts to Islam in European countries,
such as Britain, France and Germany. At the same time, fundamentalists find themselves unable to fit
in to the respective societies in which they are living. The fundamentalists have recast religion outside
of cultural contexts” (Roy, 2003).
The Liberal Muslims or moderate Muslims are mostly among the Muslim intellectuals who have
achieved a negotiated peace with modernity as an existential condition of our time and advocate
democracy, religious tolerance, interfaith relations, peaceful co-existence and education (Muqtedar
Khan, 2003, p. 419). For them, the religion is not a subjective faith or a cultural tradition, but it is
what the Qur’an promotes religion as a distinctive path to the divine (The Qur’an, 23:53 and 30:32).

6. Gülen’s Approach to Eliminate the Identity Crisis among Muslims
Gülen’s views are deeply rooted in favoring Islam as a religion and Anatolian people as a nation,
which act in framework of tolerance and pluralism. In this regard, Gülen is a moderate Muslim and
criticizes the religious bigotry in the form of religious extremism and favors modernism, nationalism,
tolerance, and democracy without sacrificing religious precepts. He opposes politicized Islam imposed
by the radical Muslims emphasizing the view that no individual or group has a monopoly on
interpreting Islam manipulating the emotions of Muslims. However, he also is critical to the current

--- Sayfa 228 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

226
foreign and internal policy trends in the world, including the West. He highly criticizes the prejudiced
view of Islam particularly among the political elites who have lack of knowledge about Islam and the
trends in the Muslim communities. Gülen also criticizes a state-controlled secularist fear of religion
and sees the secular fanaticism a blind persistence, which is against the tolerance as the acceptance of
differences as a result of dialogue to promote cooperation (Gülen, 2004f. p.240). However, like the
other moderate Muslims, Gülen is against the view of radicals to see the backwardness of the Muslim
world as a Western production but sees this backwardness as a result of the internal dynamics. For
Gülen, backwardness of the Muslim world was a result in pressure for centuries from both within and
outside and under restrictions put on feelings, thoughts, culture, and education of Muslims, it was
impossible for a person to remain with human faculties, let alone realize a renewal and development.
The backwardness of the Muslim countries is due to the continuation of feudal and tribal systems and
lack of education, and values like democracy, human rights, spread of education across society,
economic prosperity, equality in production, the institutionalization of consumption and income in a
way that prevents class formation, the supremacy of law and justice have never been fully realized in
Islamic societies (Gülen, 2004f. p.240).
Gülen is also very critical of the regimes because of harsh restrictions or fanaticism. He supports the
idea of republicanism, which is in accordance with the idea of “consultation” in Islamic sources. Like
the idea of “consultation”, republicanism promotes peace tolerance and dialogue and does not mean
being anti-religious. This view seeks integration with the modern world by reconciling modern and
traditional values (Aras and Caha, December 2000, p. 10, Kuru 2003). In this regard, Gülen writes
that the current religious situation in both Iran and Saudi Arabia is not what the Islamic states
promoted in history because religion has never been a tool of manipulation and repression but instead
religion was and should always be a private matter, and its requirements should not be imposed on
anyone (Gülen, 1995b, p. 223). Gülen highly criticizes the fundamentalist approach to the problems
and preaches:  “Muslim cannot act out of ideological or political partisanship” (Gülen, 2000g. p.5).
However, the excluding Muslims in the Western society is also harmful, too, because a nation fails to
establish relationships as strong as the family members cannot be considered a nation (Gülen, 2005c.
p.92).
Thus, many Muslims see religion as a source of morality and ethics but do not want religion to
become a tool of politics, because if something then goes wrong in politics, people will blame religion.
In this regard, Gülen wants religion to remain above politics when he says: “religion is the
relationship between people and their Creator. The feeling of religion lives in the heart’s depths and
on the inner world’s emerald hills. If you turn it into a display of forms, you’ll kill it. Politicizing
religion will harm religion before it harms a government’s life” (Unal and Williams, 2000, p. 36).
Although, young generations and converts have been facing social, economic, cultural and political
problems in the process of adaptation and finding their places in the society and the search for
identity became fierce in the dominant traditional culture surrounding them, many young Muslims in
the West are able to shape their identity and integrate with the modern world by reconciling modern
and traditional values. It is possible when people do not neglect their children and abandon them to a
foreign culture risk losing their identity, as Gülen suggests. If a young Muslim knows from where he
came from and the destination of his life, together with his responsibilities will take on the
responsibility of bringing justice and happiness to the society and will be able to think freely and
respect freedom of thought since freedom is a significant dimension of man's free will and a key to the
mysteries of human identity, otherwise, distancing from Islam leads to degeneration and loss of peace
(Gülen, 2004f. p.245).

--- Sayfa 229 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

227
These teachings of Gülen helped many members of young Muslim generation to accept Western
civilization as a suitable foundation for material life while considering Islamic civilization suitable for
spiritual life. (Aras and Caha, December 2000, p. 11) This strong foundation of Muslim identity will
bring some relief to the identity crisis in the West among Muslims and integrate them to the society
easily, and also brings relief to the Western society which still goes through the process of identity
formation. Moreover, Muslims should not feel discouraged because this trend was even stronger
during the World War II when thousands of innocent Japanese-Americans were interned in camps
after Pearl Harbor because their loyalty to the U.S. and Canada was doubted.

7. Conclusion
The identity in the West is complex and has many layers, and individuals have multiple identities. The
complexity of West is reflected in the complexity of the society itself. The migration to the West
brought another complexity to the society and challenged the old notion of identity which was once
based on Western Christianity (e.g. S. Huntington, B. Lewis). The diversification of the Western
society promoted the idea to see cultures in unity and not exaggerate cultural. However, this problem
is not completely solved in the West, especially in the EU which suffers identity lack. Muslims found
themselves in amid of this process which contributed to the identity crisis among Muslims.
The religious identity of Muslims should not be considered as a problem in the West because today
Muslims are the second largest religious group in many Western countries. However, many Muslims,
especially the young generations and converts have been facing social, economic, cultural and political
problems in the process of adaptation and finding their places in the society. The inner struggle of
many of them is to find out where their identities truly lie: on secularized Western identity or faith-
based Eastern identity. This search for identity became fierce in the dominant traditional culture
surrounding them. Although, Muslims suffer the lack of agreement between themselves when it
comes to the interpretation of Islam and considered the less integrated group to the society, and have
been facing social, economic, cultural and political problems in the process of adaptation and finding
their places in the society, the teachings of progressive Muslim scholars help many young Muslims in
the West to shape their identity and integrate with the modern world by reconciling modern and
traditional values (Gülen, al-Qaradawi, etc.). They encourage Muslims in the West to enjoy these core
Western values and hold on their religious identity. For instance, Gülen invites them to integrate to
the Western society fully by obeying the local laws (Yilmaz 2003, Yilmaz 2005) and by supporting the
liberal democracy, market-economy without sacrificing their Islamic belief and morality. He invites
Muslims to accept Western civilization as a suitable foundation for material life while considering
Islamic civilization suitable for spiritual life. However, he also acknowledges the political obstacles
before Muslims, therefore, invites the political elite in the West to support the attempt of Muslims to
eliminate differences and synthesize common grounds or potential similarities and allow Muslims to
claim their own place in the identity construction of the West as equal citizens.
Thus, Gülen’s views are very progressive and can be used as a model to eliminate the identity crisis
among Muslims in the West. His ideas of identity mean that identity is not merely given and the
personal and collective identity should be recognized within the certain parameters. We are all as
human beings shaped by social and historical context, therefore, a dynamic relationship with others,
acknowledging responsibilities, and dialogue is the last step to reach to progressive and peaceful
society.

--- Sayfa 230 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

228

--- Sayfa 231 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

229
MOTIVATING MINORITY INTEGRATION IN WESTERN
CONTEXT:  THE GÜLEN MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED
KINGDOM
FATIH TEDIK 364

Abstract
This paper endeavours to analyse the potential contributions of the Gülen Movement to the
integration process of Turkish community in the UK in the medium-run and the whole Muslim
community in the long-run and the feasibility of this process with references to the existing
restrictions in the composition of aforementioned communities. The Gülen movement has an
interesting potential in the UK since 7/7 and its aftermath have urged the state to co-opt a
suitable Muslimhood in the UK’s multicultural context. This does not mean that the government
and policymakers would invent or evolve a new religion but, indeed, it denotes that the existing
system should cooperate with an existing Muslim establishment, movement or approach in order
to endorse integration process for a peaceful coexistence. Many Muslim organisations and
movements exist as the possible candidates particularly with their improving dialogue activities
in the post 7/7 atmosphere. However, I suggest that, in this context, the Gülen movement offers a
new partnership with the surrounding society with its characteristics, such as built-in dialogue
notion, un-denominational schools and new understanding of the West and Western. Yet, this
mostly positive outlook contains undeniable shortcomings that constraint the movement’s
capacity at this new home, e.g. severe sectarian and ethnic cleavages, disadvantageous status of
Turkish community and the movement’s financial constraints. To articulate this probable
function of the Movement, the paper first gives a succinct summary of the theoretical incentives
of the Gülen movement for integration. Then it depicts the social conditions in which the Turkish
community live followed by the Gülen movement’s history in the United Kingdom. Thirdly, the
paper endeavour to analyse the Movement’s integration philosophy, its impacts on Turkish
community in the Western Europe and the problems that the Movement and Turkish community
experience. Finally, possible collaboration options for the UK government and the Gülen
movement to improve the integration of Turkish community in the medium-run and the greater
Muslim community in the long-run are discussed.

1. Introduction: Theoretical Incentives of the Gülen Movement for Integration
Initially –and perhaps the most importantly– Gülen’s redefinition of West, Western civilisation and
Western context in religious terms is an attempt to replace the conventional dichotomy of dar al-
Islam (abode of Islam) and dar al-harb (abode of war). He does not only attempts to alter the
Muslims’ assessment of West as a natural enemy and their land as the natural places of destruction;

364 Preparing a doctoral dissertation at the University of Birmingham on ‘Stimulating the Potential: the Role of Religious
Movements in the Integration Process of the Turkish Community in Holland and the United Kingdom'. (BA in political
science and public administration, Bilkent University; MA in public administration, Ankara University; MSc in politics,
SOAS, University of London.) Research interests: Turkish religious movements, integration, the Turkish diaspora in
western Europe, the Gülen Movement and the Muslim community in the UK.

--- Sayfa 232 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

230
he also seeks to substitute the classifications, which give temporal reconciliation, with an
unconditional idea of concord. For instance, besides the dar al-Islam and dar al-harb dichotomy,
Islamic jurisprudence has utilised different concepts –such as ikrah (duress), darura (necessity), and
maslaha (public welfare)– and produce some concepts –such as dar al-ahd (country of treaty,
covenant), dar al-aman (country of security), dar as-sulh (country of peace), and dar al-darura
(country of necessity) which  denotes that “Muslims can live according to their religion in non-Muslim
lands perhaps with difficulty but peacefully.”365 Quite the reverse, Gülen’s term of dar el-hizmet
(abode of service) requires Muslims to ad infinitum perform peaceful manners in their societies to
demonstrate Islam’s ‘true façade’.
The term charges new duty to the believer to portray good example in their everyday lives (temsil)
without any reservation. It stresses not only necessity but also the obligation of a Muslim to obey legal
settings of the new country, not only receiving benefits of the political setting (e.g. pensions, but also
perform civic duties (e.g. tax), recognition of other’s rights and being fair. Gülen stresses that:
“wherever a Muslim is, even outside a Muslim polity; he or she has to obey the lex loci,
to respect others’ rights and to be just, In Gülen’s understanding, umma is more of a
transnational socio-cultural entity, not a politico-legal one. He hopes that this socio-
cultural entity will be instrumental in bringing general universal peace.”366
Thus, by these words, he nullifies the conventional evaluation of the western context, even those
giving a conditional status of peace but which are prone-to-change according to conditions. And quite
strikingly, he also changes the magnitude of the aforementioned peaceful manner in terms of Islamic
theology. Though in the classical dichotomies, the terms do not belong to the essence of the faith;
Gülen repositioned the peaceful method and obedience to the host country to the centre of a Muslim’s
personal and religious life and requires him/her to re-designate the complete way of life similar to the
commands of the religion. Hence, for his integration becomes intrinsic or integral part of the religion.
Secondly, and parallel to the first set of logic, values of Western civilisation such as democracy and
modernity, and re-evaluation of the West’s development occupy a one of the focal points in his logic.
He does not observe the West and its civilisation from ‘our eternal enemy’ perspective, and thus,
denies the rejection of its values just because ‘they are Western’. He sees Western dominance as the
result of their obedience to the Divine laws valid in the nature by pursuing scientific knowledge and by
developing well-structured methodology. Gülen emphasizes his concern for the basic, tenets of Islam,
but he also professes the backwardness of today's Islamic interpretation and livelihood vis-à-vis the
requirements of the era. To him, that’s why West dominates the Muslim World, while latter fails to
understand and perform Islam properly, and disregards the scientific investigation as done by the
former.367 He promotes this notion with his understanding of takwah which mostly understood as the
preservation from sins. He sees takwah as a systematic rapprochement to the creation, fulfillment all
the requirements of this world (e.g. from science to economics) which concomitant with having a
pious and otherworldly character. It seems that this is not a mere justification of modernity and a
pursuit of a ‘middle way’ between being Muslim and being modern; because he accepts Islam itself as

365 Yilmaz, I, Ijtihad and Tajdid by Conduct: The Gülen Movement, in M. Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito, eds., Turkish
Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement, Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, p. 234
366 Yilmaz, I, Ijtihad and Tajdid by Conduct: The Gülen Movement, in M. Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito, eds., Turkish
Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement, Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, p. 234
367 Gülen, MF, Essentials of the Islamic, The Light, New Jersey, 2005, p. 251

--- Sayfa 233 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

231
the middle way. In this regard, Gülen is searching for an interpretation of Islam that is compatible
with and at the same time critical of modernity and tradition. In other words, it is not an effort for
grafting Islam with modernity and obtaining a hybrid identity. “What he does is reveal a dynamic
interpretation of Islam that is both compatible with and critical of modernity and Muslim
tradition.”368
Thirdly, with his re-reading of dialogue in which dialogue is the natural result of the practice of
Islamic ethics falls apart from most of the Islamic scholars. For him, Islam does not reject interaction
with diverse cultures and on condition that it does not challenge with the essence of Islam. For all
other conditions, dialogue is not a superfluous endeavour, but an imperative which is inherent to the
faith. For him “love, respect, tolerance, forgiveness, mercy, human rights, peace, brotherhood, and
freedom are all values exalted by religion… [and are the parts of] the messages brought by Moses,
Jesus, and Muhammad, upon them be peace, as well as in the messages of Buddha and even
Zarathustra, Lao-Tzu, Confucius, and the Hindu prophets.”369 On the contrary, opposition to the
diversity or attempts to take measures against the emergence of diverse ideas are, indeed, against
God’s creation and historical fact.

2. Turks in the United Kingdom
The terms Turks in the United Kingdom or Turkish Community in Britain, at least in this article, refer
to the ethnically, politically and religiously fragmented community that comprises three main groups:
Cypriot Turks, mainland Turks and Kurdish refugees. Most of the members of this Turkish speaking
community have settled mainly in London, particularly the boroughs of Lewisham, Lambeth,
Southwark, Croydon in the south, Haringey, Enfield, Islington and Hackney in the north, and in other
major cities such as Manchester, Birmingham and Leicester.
Today, it’s quite common to feel Turkish presence in some parts of these places. For instance, in
Harringay of London Borough of Haringey or Kingsland Road (which situated between Dalston and
Stoke Newington) of London Borough of Hackney, a large amount of Turkish coffee and kebab shops,
restaurants, markets, social clubs and other Turkish businesses with their Turkish names, Turkish
outlook and Turkish style of merchandising serve their surrounding society. As one of the kebab shop
clerks in Harringay states that probably the number of kebab shops on Harringay or Kingland Road is
more than anywhere in Turkey.
This picture, of course, started emerging after a series of political and social events in mainland
Turkey and Cyprus. These events such as wars, coup d’état of 1980, economic conditions and social
trends have encouraged, if not obliged, to immigrate for safer and better places to live. As a result,
since the first wave of Turkish Cypriots fled their increasingly unstable and divided island to seek
refuge in the UK in between the first half of 50s and the end of 60s, the number of Turkish people has
steadily increased over time.370 Particularly, with a tide of immigrants in the 80s that seek to build
more economically and politically foreseeable future for themselves and their household and with

368 Kuru, Ahmet T. Fethullah Gülen’s Search for a Middle Way Between Modernity and Muslim Tradition, in M. Hakan
Yavuz and John L. Esposito, eds., Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement, Syracuse: Syracuse University
Press, 2003, p. 130
369 Ünal, Ali and Alphonse Williams, Fethullah Gülen: Advocate of Dialogue, Fairfax: The Fountain, 2000, p.43
370 http://www.gazetem.net/bellekyazi.asp?yaziid=67

--- Sayfa 234 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

232
another great wave in the 90s mainly consists of people with Kurdish origin who left their homelands
due to Gulf War, this Turkish population has been calculated as nearly a quarter-million immigrants.
Even for some representatives of the respective communities, this number could have soared to
300.000 or even 350.000. Although most of related literature insists that small proportion of
mainland Turkish minority and vast majority of Kurds have resided the UK as safe haven where is far
from political turbulence of their hometowns, as consequence of my interviews, I believe that almost
all of the former group and the vast majority of the latter came to the UK due to economical reasons.
By economical reasons, I mean the availability of more prosperous life in the UK than in Turkey.
Now, third generation is in education and preparing to enter the life but In terms of integration,
although each new generation performs better than previous one the picture is not so bright. After the
formal immigration era started the first generation were hardly educated population who had rural
background of Eastern and Central Anatolia. When they experienced a shock following residence in
the Western countries, with the instinct of protection they began gathering in the Turkish ghettos.371
They had no intention to stay permanently, thus, they didn’t feel the necessity to integrate into the
society. This pattern of ‘ethnic enclaves’ has continued and even increased each year. In fact, the
Turkish-speaking community is probably one of the most self-sufficient communities in London with
half a dozen local community-based newspapers, together with Turkish television channels and
countless digital radio channels. Community members can provide any service within the community
ranging from mortgages to a quit-smoking helpline and from driving instructions to massage
parlours. As BBC correspondent reported it could be christened “Little Turkey”.
At the beginning, religion had not any role in the Turkish community. Especially before the 1980s,
parallel to the Turkish politics, the greater part of Turkish associations could be categorised according
to their position on the continuum of the extreme poles of Turkish society. Turkish political
competition, both official and underground, became reflected among the Turks in Diaspora. But
transition from temporary migration to permanent settlement, family reunification and Turkish
political developments increased the significance of religion in the Turkish community.372
However, religion of Turkish community is neither strong enough to mobilise people nor monolithic
entity.  Turkish community divided into many parts due to sectarian and ethnic disparities. In terms
of sectarian variations, Turkish population is mostly Sunni with 88% and Alevis with 11%, which have
no large exchanges between them. No Alevis live in Sunni-dominated areas and as was shown earlier,
the distinctions are repeated in the composition of the unions. The Alevis and the laicists are unlikely
candidates for Islamic movements.
Turks are mostly cultural Muslims who adjust their religious practices towards ‘folk Islam’. This
Islamic way if life is a mixture of “popular religiosity, national customs, Islamic rules of conduct,
mysticism, folk knowledge, folklore and magic with Islamic elements”.373 Especially members of the
first generation define themselves as Muslims but this is not because of their firm adherence to an
Islamic faith but they merge the notion of nationality and the Islam. In other words, they are Muslims
because Islam was taken granted with ‘Turkishness’ and it is far from their central identities. For
example, as Joseph Rowntree Foundation research suggests that less than 5 per cent chose religion as

371 http://www.gazetem.net/bellekyazi.asp?yaziid=68
372 http://www.flwi.ugent.be/cie/umanco
373 Thomä-Venske, Hans (1988) The Religious Life of Muslims in Berlin, in T. Gerholm and Yngve George Lithman, eds.,
London and New York: Mansell, p. 78

--- Sayfa 235 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

233
their only identity. Sixty-eight per cent did not subscribe to a religious identity at all. This low use of a
Muslim identity is completely distinct from the findings of the Fourth Survey, in which, for instance,
an overwhelming majority of Pakistanis and Bangladeshis said their religion was an important feature
of their self-description and the way they lived their lives (Modood et al, 1997). While for some
respondents being Turk implies being Muslim at the same time, this Muslimness is again a cultural
identity rather than a religious one.374
On the other hand, the members of Turkish community do not feel British either. As figures in the
same research illustrates that only 3 out of 250 Turkish respondents identified themselves as British
only. Not having British as a self-identity does not mean that the young people chose only Turkish as
an identity. Indeed, nearly 60 per cent of the young people chose multiple identities for themselves. In
fact, only 22 per cent of the males and 15 per cent of the females chose only Turkish as a self-
description.375 While this is partly because of many Kurdish people’s alienation from a Turkish
identity, it is still the case that the majority of the young people picked more than one identity. In
other words, in ethno-national sense, the chief split occurs mainly among people with Turkish and
Kurdish origins.376 Three different historical and social backgrounds of these three migrants groups
inevitably have affected relations between the communities and generated a heterogeneous
community in Britain. Nowadays, the tension between Turkish State vs. PKK and Turkish State vs.
Kurdish Administration in Northern Iraq highlighted the ethnic division between Turks and Kurds in
Britain. For instance, during the pro-PKK demonstration on 28th October 2007 the Metropolitan
Police did show great effort to prevent a bloody encounter between the two sides.377
For social indices, today, the Turkish community suffers from very serious deficiencies which not only
obstruct a healthy integration but also threaten Turkish community itself. Lack of formal and
vocational education, critical deficiencies in communication in native language, social isolation,
animosity and anxiety towards the societal environment, and involvement to crime378 have reached
very critical level already. Again findings from the same research indicate that many of the 16–23 year
olds who filled in our questionnaire did not have many qualifications. This outcome is also likely to be
shaped by their socioeconomic background and, in the case of some, their recent arrival under
difficult circumstances in Britain. Nearly half of the males and 37 per cent of the females in our survey
did not have a single good GCSE result. In terms of the 2002 GCSE results, only 13 per cent of 99
Kurdish candidates achieved five or more C and above grades (the standard measure of good
educational achievement). For Turkish Cypriots, it was 14 per cent of 36 and, for Turkish students, 21
per cent of 94. The average for Haringey is 35 per cent (Haringey Local Education Authority website,
http://www.haringey.gov.uk/education/). If we add the whole Turkish community, this figure
becomes much more severe: 40% of Turks and 60% of Kurds in Britain have no formal educations379.
In terms of unemployment and home ownership the Turkish-speaking families are worse off than the
Haringey average. Free School Meal (FSM) entitlement for pupils in English schools is an indicator

374 The complete report entitled “Young Turks and Kurds: A Set of 'Invisible' Disadvantaged Groups” could be seen and
download from http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/185935274X.pdf
375 http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/185935274X.pdf
376 Başyurt, Erhan. “Gerçekleşmesi Zor Bir Hayal: Euro–İslam.” Aksiyon 09/2004
377 www.toplumpostasi.net
378 Only in German prisons are 25000 Turks and more than this number involved to the street mobs.
379 Bradley, Harriet (2005) İlgisizlik ve Dışlanma, Londra Gazete, February17, 2005

--- Sayfa 236 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

234
for measuring poverty. In 2002, four out of ten Haringey GCSE cohort students required a free meal,
while nearly eight out of ten Kurdish students, 65 per cent of Turkish students and half of the Turkish
Cypriot students did so.380 Moreover, the percentage of unemployment in Haringey is 5.8 per cent,
compared to the England and Wales average of 3.4 per cent. In addition, three in every ten
households in Haringey live in rented social housing (renting from the council, a housing association
or a registered social landlord), while less than half of the households own their homes. The
remainder of the households rent privately or live rent free.381
This underprivileged status undoubtedly increases the numbers of illegal organisations within the
Turkish community itself. The members of socially un-integrated and economically underdeveloped
families choose to join crime organisations in order to complete –according to themselves- what is
missing in their life. For instance, The National Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS)382 states that
70% of the heroin coming into the UK is brought in by ethnic Turkish gangs based in Britain.
In fact, the situation is not so desperate since fairly small percentage of the second generation and
almost total entity of the third generation of the Turkish community are now struggling to diminish
this disadvantaged status. Nowadays, for instance, even it is likely to observe “shining examples” of
the Turkish youth in Western context who have achieved academic or professional excellence in
nationwide examinations.383

3. Gülen Movement’s Initiatives in Britain
The history of the Gülen Movement in the United Kingdom is fairly short compared to other Turkish
faith-based communities or movements, such as Suleymanci, Sheikh Nazim and other
Naqshibendiyya communities. Indeed, this fact could be deducted when the facilities and other
services of respective communities are observed. For instance, each of the aforementioned community
has its own an opus magnum in terms of religious architecture, such as Suleymaniye and Aziziye
Mosques that both situated in Hackney. To meet religious necessities of the Turkish community
during Ramadan, Gülen movement, however, hire small community centres for Ramadan activities.
The most established institution of the Movement is Axis Educational Trust which was established in
1994 as a charitable trust. Its founders and first trustees were Turkish-speaking businessmen and
academics resident in the UK. The objective of Axis is three-fold, advancement of the educational
attainment of the Turkish-speaking (Turkish, Kurdish, Turkish-Cypriot) youth in the UK,
encouragement of their social integration and inclusion within the wider society and support and

380 Haringey Local Education Authority website, http://www.haringey.gov.uk/education
381 Neighbourhood Statistics website, http://www.neighbourhoodstatistics.gov.uk/areaProfile
382 Now, the responsibilities of NCIS are resumed by The Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA). The Serious Organised
Crime Agency (SOCA) is an Executive Non-Departmental Public Body sponsored by, but operationally independent from,
the Home Office. The Agency has been formed from the amalgamation of the National Crime Squad (NCS), National
Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS), that part of HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) dealing with drug trafficking and
associated criminal finance and a part of UK Immigration dealing with organised immigration crime (UKIS).
(http://www.soca.gov.uk/index.html)
383 This sort of news has become very common particularly for Europe edition of Turkish newspapers such as Zaman and
Hurriyet, or local Turkish newspapers such as London based Haber and Olay newspapers. For examples, please visit
www.eurozaman.com/euro, www.habernewspaper.com or www.olaygazete.co.uk.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

235
guidance for the rest of the Turkish-speaking community in social, welfare and educational matters
that is of concern to them.
Although it has a history of slightly more than a decade, except a brief mainstream school experience,
Axis have mainly operated supplementary weekend schools until the opening of Wisdom Primary and
Secondary School in Tottenham, Haringey. In the supplementary schools whose number has
fluctuated over years, as other weekend schools of Turkish community, main emphasis has been on
the teaching of Turkish. Maths, science and English are among other important fields that taught each
year. As stated above, two years ago, the Trust managed to open Turkish community’s first private
mainstream school. The school, as its counterparts in different countries over the world, is an un-
denominational school which follow national curriculum. As second year running, it has nearly 70
students all of which from Turkish background. As the additional facilities, last year, it rented an old
school building in Bradford for thirty years as a consequence of an agreement with Pakistani
community that vacated the building due to inadequacy of students. Axis is planning to open this
building as a boarding secondary school by the spring term. Finally, following a mortgage agreement
with the building society the Trust started refurbishing an old building near Edmonton, an Enfield
town with a high density of Turkish and Kurdish population. This building will be opened next year as
primary and secondary school since Wisdom becomes small for future expansions in educational
field.384
Another organisation funded by the Movement is the Dialogue Society (DS). The Dialogue Society was
established in 1999 by a group of Turkish-Muslim intellectuals, academics and volunteers as a not-
for-profit charitable organisation. In its charter, the objective of DS is declared as “to promote
tolerance, understanding, mutual respect and acceptance of people as they are, between people from
all walks of life.” To achieve this goal, DS routinely organizes 5 different events throughout each year.
These events are Whirling Dervishes event (or the Whispers of Love), commemoration of Prophet
Muhammed’s birth (Mawlid an-Nabi), celebration of Kurbani festival (eid al-fitr) and
commemoration of Jesus’ birth which generally held on following days of Christmas and finally fast-
breaking Ifthar dinners in the holy month of Ramadan. In all programs, the preferred method by the
members of the Movement is not to explain or demonstrate solely the Islamic perception and
understanding of this event but allow other faiths to express themselves in the events. For instance, in
a Whirling Dervishes event which was held two years ago at Hackney Empire Theatre, the believers of
almost all faiths explain their perspectives on the general theme, which was love for that year, and
prayed for the good of all Londoners and humanity at the end of the event. There are several sister
organizations of DS all over Britain which are also established by the members of the movement
inhabited in that region.
Although the movement has other organizations founded for different aims, i.e. Koza Women
Association or Anatolian Muslim Society, either their scope or their activities are limited compared to
Axis and Dialogue Society; thus they are omitted in this paper.
The Gülen movement in the Turkey, and in the United Kingdom as its reflection, is a fairly
controversial formation with its philosophies and institutions run by its sympathisers all over the
world. They are severely criticized by two groups, hard-line laicists who mainly constitute the

384 Lighthouse Educational Foundation is another charity that is as the South London counterpart of the Axis Educational
Trust but neither its activities nor its facilities has developed like Axis. As new institutions are being opened via Axis, it
seems that the dual system of weekend school system will fade out and the main focus will only be the Axis.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

236
dominant state-elite and a minor radical group of Islamists whose support are mostly external and
politically oriented. Whilst the former group suspect of organising to takeover the state when the
conditions met, the latter group are not keen on their tolerant approach to the non-Muslims. For
example, during the latest international academic conference in London in which the Gülen
movement’s influence in the Muslim World was analysed, all of the Kemalist organisations and some
of the secular organisations launched a campaign to prevent the conference by pressuring the venues,
the editors and some of the organisers by insisting that the conference would undermine the secular
structure of the Turkish political system.
However, as Kömeçoğlu argues, the community is not a response of dissidents Muslims of a ‘social
breakdown’ or group of people with lower class background in order to protest social tension in
Turkey or in the world.385 Contrary, the members of the community are mostly university student and
large group of small and big businessmen, professionals from all sectors in the country, especially
from academics, media, music and the specialized strata that compose the elite as well as middle
layers of the society. Altunoğlu determined seven characteristics of the members of the movement;
individually pious, culturally ascetic, politically conservative, idealist in the mission of converting
souls, disengaged in active politics, success-oriented ‘Otherization’ and adversary component is
weak.386 Yavuz adds four additional attributes to the followers’ profile: they are “more predisposed to
tolerance, electoral politics, moderation, and a market economy than are other Islamic groups in
Turkey.”
Even though the devotees are enthusiastic believers of their faith, they formulise their mission with
humanitarian parameters and believe that salvation “is not only to be ‘saved from’ sinful activities, but
also to be engaged actively in the improvement of the world.” They think that serving the society in
the narrow sense and the humanity in the wide sense is the most crucial activity to gain God’s favour
and consent. They do not try to challenge the modernity but demonstrate how to be both good
Muslims and modern. They are willing to live in a secular democratic atmosphere rather than
rejecting it when they are trying to live their faith.
Following this concise information about the characteristics of the movement and its members, I’ll
endeavour to articulate its current and potential contributions to the integration process with
references to the Gülen’s ideas, and finally I’ll portray major constraints that define the movement’s
efficacy in the British context.

4. Concluding Remarks: Gülen Movement in Practice
The Gülen movement proved itself successful while we particularly take its educational and dialogue
activities around the world. But it is noteworthy that the rest of the world is not Europe vis-à-vis
political, social, financial and cultural characteristics. Until recently, with some exceptions, the
countries where the Movement opened educational or social institutions have been relatively
underdeveloped to Turkey. Beginning with the 1990, the members of the movement opened have
erected many facilities such as colleges, universities and dormitories from Turkic Republics in the

385 Kömeçoğlu, Uğur (1997) A Sociologically Interpretative Approach to the Fethullah Gülen Community Movement,
Istanbul, Boğaziçi University, p. 46
386 Altunoğlu, Ebru (1999) Fethullah Gülen’s Perception of State and Society, Istanbul: Boğaziçi University, p. 86

--- Sayfa 239 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

237
former Soviet Union, African countries, to Indo-China. Opening institutions were financially and
politically tough, but to be recognised by the host countries were not so testing especially with their
successful educational background in Turkey.
In my opinion, the real challenge is to prove the merit of the movement in the UK with a success in
education and with a representation of their commitment to the Western values. This is crucial
because in the UK neither the state nor society are expected to be more reluctant to welcome it. Not
only they have history between the sides or they experience Islamophobia, but also they would fear
due to past experiences with Turkish minorities in the West (as happened in Germany) or they simply
would not feel the necessity to accept assistance from a new actor. So the movement would not be
appealing for them.
Secondly, the movement heavily relies on donations and other financial assistance of the Turkish
community. As Ebaugh indicates movement’s all activities are performed with these donations of local
businessmen. However in UK context this could cause a financial trouble in the future as Turkish
minority’s economically underprivileged condition is pretty vulnerable. Also ethno-religious
differences within these communities fairly narrow the financial support base of the movements.
Apart from hardliner laicists, since most Alevi and some Kurdish minority members have opposed the
Gülen movement’s activities and Turkish Cypriot community has mostly remained indifferent, only
Sunni mainland Turkish community continues to be the main supporting group. Later group consists
of generally small businessmen, self-employed or students whose income is generally fluctuating
throughout the year and this makes the movement’s activities vulnerable.
Thirdly, the movement is voluntarily represented by young professionals who just moved in to the UK
and some Turkish graduates who either go to language courses or graduate schools. However, along
with their psychological conditions as newcomers, their lack of competence in some issues such as
native language does inevitably damage their roles as the guides for their surrounding Turkish
community. This problem also obstructs their efforts to present Gülen and his movement to the
mainstream British public. Even some newcomers find hard to communicate with third generation of
the Turkish community whose Turkish skills are fairly limited relative to their predecessors or
understand new generations’ lifestyles or thinking as it’s quite distinct from their counterparts in
Turkey. The members of the movement are trying to solve this problem by using young members who
were born in Britain as intermediary.
In the short run, Turkish minority’s social, economic and intellectually disadvantaged position would
cause unwillingness to assist or participate, or their shortcomings (such as incompetence in native
language) would prevent the members of the Movement from an efficient participation. However, at
this point, it should be noted that, although the history of the movement in Europe is quite short, as a
beginning, they have a good start in the Netherlands with almost all sorts of institutions and activities,
and in the United States with a striking raise in the number of intercultural dialogue institutions and
some schools.
Similarly, despite having unpleasant experiences with the Muslim minority presence, Danish society
has witnessed a profound change among Turkish population. With the intense exertion of the
movement, the politically isolated Turkish minority was convinced participating elections. Now,

--- Sayfa 240 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

238
Turks have an MP in the Danish parliament even though they constitute only 0.7% of the population
with scattered residential patterns.387
With their moderate message which contains tolerant and friendly messages for the Western world, it
can lessen the radical messages of radical ideologies coming from Saudi Arabia and Iran. In the larger
context, they can also weaken the impact of Islamism in the Muslim world. This process at one hand,
contributes the democratisation of Turkey and Islamic World, respectively via Muslim citizens within
European states. And in a possible accession of Turkey to the EU, aforementioned community can
significantly facilitate Turkey’s adaptation process. The democratisation process of whole Muslim
world will undeniably take pretty long time, but even in this situation Turkey can function as a buffer
between liberal and democratic Europe and the Middle East. A buffer which absorbs the shock
coming from the both sides of the alignment and, hence, would lessen the political and cultural
resentment for both sides.
The movement’s educational principle that favours the integration into the modern world, can assist
the second and third generations of Muslim minorities who undergo severe educational, vocational
and language problems. In the Netherlands, for example, one of the countries where the movement
well established, are tens of civil society institutions founded by Turks whose cooperation definitely
affects the integration process. The positive outcome of the movement’s course of action contributes
also the Turkish participation to the national politics. In Dutch parliament are five MPs with Turkish
origin. Additionally two candidates with Turkish origin succeeded to be elected for the European
Parliament. Additionally, with their emphasis of education, it is (hopefully) expected that by 2015, the
educational level of Turkish minority will be equalise with the native student’s level.388 Therefore, at
one side, with their specialisation in education, they can improve the educational level of Turkish
children by paying special care to their specific problems; at the other side since they do not refer any
religious and ideological orientation in the education progress, the young generations would not be
constrained in terms of interaction to the mainstream society.
In the UK context, it appears that, with the theological incentives, physical and intellectual potential,
the Gülen movement has the ability to promote integration process of the Turkish people, in the
medium-run, and the majority of the Muslim community, in the long-run even this requires a re-
identification phase for the minorities. As the religion is the principal identifier for most Muslims,
Gülen’s re-aligning of individual’s role and the re-positioning of host countries in religious context
would gradually benefit them to have civic values compatible with the prerequisites of modern states.
Since they can diffuse to all levels of everyday life, from schools to magazines, they can influence the
population more effectively and efficient. Especially when the movement’s success in Turkey, where
the operation grounds is so limited due to a fierce rivalry by the Kemalist state elite, is taken into
consideration, it can be claimed that the movement is fairly promising in Western context that is
characterised by democracy and freedom.

387 http://www.turkembassy.dk/mkt2.htm
388 Başyurt, Erhan. “Gerçekleşmesi Zor Bir Hayal: Euro–İslam.” Aksiyon 09/2004

--- Sayfa 241 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

239
INTEGRATION OF MUSLIMS IN EUROPE AND GÜLEN
MOVEMENT
ARAXS PASHAYAN 389

Abstract
In the beginning of the 21st century, mankind faces a few tendencies, first of all, related to the
resurgence of radical trends in major religions, the increasing role of religion in the universal
civilization, and cultural, ideological and religious diversity on global and local levels. In
particular, the troubled integration of Muslims into European societies is evidence of perceptible
incompatibility of Christian and Islamic traditions. There are two main tendencies within the
Muslim communities of Europe. The first one is related to radicalization processes. Gülen
mentions four reasons why Muslims often have problems with dialogue; he says that many
Muslims even educated believe that West seeks to undermine Islam. The second tendency is
related to a newly established identity. There are circles tending to retain their Muslim identity,
and as a distinctive feature they choose religious identity, which is more determining and
powerful element in the competition with the European/Christian civilization. Finally, this paper
is argued, that it is not Christian and Islamic civilizations that clash in Europe but post-Christian
secular/liberal values and Muslim traditional values. In this case, the only alternative for
sectarianism, isolation and radical relativism is interfaith and intercultural dialogue. To
oppose and resent the West, as Islamic scholar and peace activist Fethullah Gülen argues, will
never benefit Islam or Muslims. He indicates the method of dialogue: forgetting the arguments of
the past and concentrating on common points. He stresses the tolerance as an extremely
important virtue that should always be promoted. Gülen argues that Christianity and Judaism
have in common with Islam. He insists that the world is becoming more global and both sides
feel the need for a give-and-take relationship. Gülen movement aims to promote creative and
positive relations between the West and the Muslims.

1. Introduction
In the beginning of the 21st century, mankind faces a few complementary tendencies, first of all,
related to the resurgence of radical trends in major religions, the increasing role of religion in the
universal civilization, and cultural, ideological and religious diversity on global and local levels. In
particular, the troubled integration of Muslims into European societies is evidence of perceptible
incompatibility of Christian and Islamic traditions.
In spite of these tendencies, Islamic scholar and peace activist Fethullah Gülen argues that
Christianity has in common with Islam, since both religions consider they have missions. Gülen
insists that the world is becoming more global and both sides feel the need for a give-and-take

389 Assistant Professor in Yerevan State University, teaching a course on modern Islamic movements in Arab countries; an
expert on Middle East in Noravank Foundation, Yerevan; senior researcher on Arab countries at the Institute of Oriental
Studies, Armenia. Dr Pashayan specializes in political Islam, having done her doctorate on the ‘Organization of the Islamic
Conference 1969–2002’. She is the author of several learned articles and the monograph, Organization of the Islamic
Conference: The Objectives, Activity, Position Towards the Karabakh Conflict (Yerevan, 2003).

--- Sayfa 242 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

240
relationship. Gülen movement aims to promote creative and positive relations between the West and
the Muslims.
Since the events of 9/11 a great deal has been written on the growing religious fundamentalism and
violence among Europe’s Muslim population. Migration has recently been framed as a source of fear
and instability for the nation-states in the West, though it was rather a source of content in the 1960s.

2. The Gülen Movement: Theory and Practice
The Gülen movement of is one of interesting examples of liberal Islamic thinking in the Middle East.
The movement has Islamic, nationalist, liberal, and modern characteristics. Its ability is to reconcile
traditional Islamic values with modernity. Beginning in the 1960’s, Gülen Movement emerged as a
social force. In 1990’s political and economic developments in Turkey, global changes after the end of
cold war and increased Turkish migration to Europe contributed to the transformation of the Gülen
movement “from a modest community of Nursi followers to an international civil/cosmopolitan
Muslim social movement” active in nearly 70 countries. (1) The movement is influenced by the
moderate concept of “Turkish Islam” formulated by some nationalist thinkers, and also the Nurcu or
Nur (Light) movement that developed around the ideology of Said Nursi (1877-1961), a prominent
religious authority who rejects the idea of clash between the "East" and "West".(2)
The founder of the movement - Fethullah Gülen and his devotees accept Western civilization as a
suitable foundation for material life while considering Islamic civilization suitable for spiritual life.
Thomas Michel, who recognizes Gülen's movement importance, argues that Gülen is more famous as
an activist in public communication.(3)
Part of the Turkish secularist elite views Gülen as a progressive development, argue that the solution
to Turkey's problems depends on reaching a consensus. Though others see him as a threat as of using
different tactics to reach the same goal as the Islamists. The Islamists think that the secular
establishment uses Gülen's community to obstruct their ideology. Greg Barton argues that Gülen
movement is often mistaken for either an Islamist movement or a Sufi tarekat, but closer examination
reveals that it is in fact something very different, it is well developed and broad influential Islamic
social movement. (4) Gülen movement illustrates an ability to unify “Turkish-Islamic synthesis”, a
strong identity uniting Turkish-ness (or Kemalism) with Muslim-ness into one position.(5)
Fethullah Gülen does not favor the state applying Islamic law. He accepts Said Nursi's argument that
the idea of republicanism is very much in accord with the idea of "consultation" discussed in Islamic
sources. Gülen’s goals are simultaneously to Islamize the Turkish nationalist ideology and to Turkify
Islam. He proposes two keys to provide peace in society - tolerance and dialogue. He argues that
religion is a private matter, and its requirements should not be imposed on anyone concluding that
the democratic form of government is the best choice. Such an approach, he insists, would strengthen
the state, and thus protect society by widening the state's base of legitimacy and enhancing its ability
to mobilize the population.(6)
In fact, in a democratic society the source of law is colorblind and free from ethnic prejudice. It
promotes the creation of an environment for the development of human rights, political participation,
protection of minority rights, and the participation of individuals and society in decision-making
institutions which are supposed to be the characteristics of our modern world. Everybody should be
allowed to express themselves with the condition that no pressure should be made on others through

--- Sayfa 243 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

241
variety of means. Also, members of minority communities should be allowed to live according to their
beliefs. If these sorts of legislations are made within the norms of international law and international
agreements, Islam will have no objection to any of these. No one can ignore the universal values that
the Qur'an and the Sunnah have presented with regard to the rights mentioned above. Therefore, it is
impossible to prove in any way that Islam opposes democracy. (7)
About the reconciliation of Islam with democracy Gülen has his own approach:
Those who follow a more moderate pattern also believe that it would be much better to introduce
Islam as a complement to democracy instead of presenting it as an ideology. Such an introduction of
Islam may play an important role in the Muslim world through enriching local forms of democracy
and extending it in such a way that helps humans develop an understanding of the relationship
between the spiritual and material worlds. I believe that Islam also would enrich democracy in
answering the deep needs of humans, such as spiritual satisfaction, which cannot be fulfilled except
through the remembrance of the Eternal One. (8)
Gülen movement has been manifested in many groups and educational institutions. There are nearly
700 schools worldwide inspired by Gülen movement advocating for global toleration, dialogue, and
peace. To promote their views, Gülen's followers have set up a wide range of organizations. One of
them is the Turkish Teachers' Foundation publishes a monthly journal, Sizinti (“Disclosures”) and two
academic journals “Yeni Umit” (“New Hope”) and the “Fountain”. It also organizes national and
international symposiums, panel discussions, and conferences. Another foundation, the Turkish
Writers and Journalists Foundation, brings secularist and Islamist intellectuals together. The
foundation has organized national and international conferences on the attributes and benefits of
interfaith dialogue. Followers of Gülen manage a media network and are active in the construction of
clinics, research institutes, and cultural foundation around the world. Much of this kind of institutions
success is due to the Gülen movement policy of working in accordance with its host country’s national
laws regarding education, religion, and social organizing.
Fethullah Gülen is one of the contemporary Muslim thinkers advocating interreligious dialogue
between Christians and Muslims. Pim Valkenberg, speaking about Gülen’s contribution to Muslim-
Christian dialogue, argues that the most interesting thing about Gülen’s writings is not his originality,
“but the way in which he combines the wisdom of mystical and exegetical traditions of Islam with
references to Western philosophers and theologians”.(9) Gülen writings about dialogue have been
collected in Advocate of Dialogue. Gülen mentions four reasons why Muslims have problems with
dialogue. The first three reasons are connected with the historical reminiscence of Muslim world
about the western colonialism, so the Muslims suspicious about the dialogue using from the West as a
political matter. The fourth reason is theological and connected with the distorted image of Islam.
(10) These reasons are well described by Edward Said in his “Orientalism” as well.(11) Mentioning the
difficulties, Gülen is coming to the nodal point of his message: "Interfaith dialogue in a must today,
and the first step in establishing it is forgetting the past, ignoring polemical arguments, and giving
precedence to common points, which far outnumber polemical ones". (12)
Gülen considers that the dialogue is not only required by modernity but also by Qur’an urges Muslims
to respect the followers of other religions, former Prophets and their Books:
When dealing with People of the Book who are not oppressors, we have no right to behave violently
against them or to think about how to destroy them. Such behavior is non-Islamic, contrary to Islamic
rules and principles, and it can even be said that it is anti-Islamic. (13)

--- Sayfa 244 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

242
The Movement of Fethullah Gülen emerged as Turkey’s brand of Islamic modernity that seeks to
realize peace through education, tolerance and interfaith dialogue. (14)
Gülen argues that ‘dialogue meetings’ primarily concerning with religion. Basic Islamic sources advise
Muslims to engage in dialogue with other faiths. Gülen reaffirm that the dialogue is not his invention
or innovation, but a revival of the most neglected aspect of Islam. Tolerance is also central to the
Gülen movement’s conception of reality:
Among the many things we have lost, perhaps the first and most important is tolerance. From this
world we understand embracing people regardless of difference of opinion, worldview, ideology,
ethnicity, or belief. It also means putting up with matters we do not like by finding strength in a deep
conscience, faith and a generous heart or by strength of our emotions. (15)
Contradicting S. Huntington’s assertion that “Muslim have problems living at peace with their
neighbors, Gülen defines the movement’s project as follows:
In a world becoming more and more globalized, we are trying to get to know those who will be our
future neighbor…one of the most important factors here is to eliminate factors that separate
people…such as discrimination base on color, race, belief, and ethnicity…” (16)
In our modern day the relationship between Islam and terrorism is greatly debated and Gülen
approach to this issue is very interesting. Gülen emphasizes that terror harms to Islam, Muslims and
humanity at large. The scholar tries to show that Muslims responsible for terror attacks may first
change the image of Islam in their mind. They have no comprehensive understanding of the sources,
they read the texts out of context, they misinterpret their religion and then put this misunderstood
religion into practice, they are misguided and misguide others.(17)
I regret to say that in the countries Muslims live, some religious leaders and immature Muslims have
no other weapon on hand than their fundamentalist interpretation of Islam; they use this to engage
people in struggles that serve their own purposes. In fact, Islam is a true faith, and it should be lived
truly. On the way to attaining faith one can never use untrue methods…No person should kill another
human being. No one can touch an innocent person, even in time of war. No one can give a fatwa (a
legal pronouncement) commending this matter. No one should be a suicide bomber. No one can rush
into crowds with bombs tied to his or her body. Regardless of the religion of these crowds, this is not
religiously permissible. (18)
Gülen speaks about the problem of overcoming the global calamity of terror. In contrast to many
observers, Gülen thinks that the world situation is not detraining and there will be no clash of
civilization. According to Gülen, those who are looking forward to a catastrophic future for the world
hope that global antagonism will ensure the continuation of their power in the world. Gülen
emphasizes that education must play a very important role in helping to resolve the world’s
problems.(19)
“…Gülen not only is renewing Muslim discourses and practices but also transforming the public
sphere without claiming or boasting that he is doing so”.(20)

--- Sayfa 245 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

243

3. Turkish Community in Germany and Islamic Identity
The Turkish immigrant group is one of the largest Muslim communities that has settled in Europe
from the beginning of the 20th century. There are more than 4.5 million Euro-Turks dwelling in the
European Union countries /Germany, France, Netherlands, Belgium/. As of 2006, according to U.S.
Department of State, there are 3.2 million Muslims (roughly 4% of the population) in Germany. Most
Muslims live in Berlin and the larger cities of former West Germany. However, unlike in most other
European countries, sizeable Muslim communities exist in some rural regions of Germany, especially
Baden-Wurttemberg, Hessia and parts of Bavaria and North-Rhine Westphalia. Most Muslims in
Germany are Sunnis. Many Turkish Muslims are Alevis. The Turks have formed their own special
society within the Western societies, a feature, which distinguishes them from the other immigrant
communities. The Turks always adhere to their national identity and leave impressions on native
residents wherever they settle. The central element of their social life is the mosque also comprises a
café, a barbershop, food shops, a library, and a lodge for wayfarers. Furthermore, many mosques have
recently been equipped with modern means of communication like the Internet and
telecommunication lines. Especially women tend to stick to their distinctive outer appearance.
Turkish woman ties hijab in specific way.
The merchants are always keen on displaying Turkish goods. The shops have names like Istanbul,
Ankara, Amra, Mulana, Turkeya, and display the same quantity and types of goods supplied in
Turkey. No immigrant Turkish home lacks satellite dishes configured to receive homeland Turkish
channels. Beside TV channels, Turkish daily papers are delivered to most immigrant Turkish
doorsteps whether for free or on subscription. Most of these papers (Zaman, Turkiye, Hurriyet, etc)
are distributed all over Europe. Other periodicals include European-language magazines and papers
specialized in Turkish affairs and the Turkish immigrant community, which attract only a small
number of Turkish readers.
Charitable works are always observed by the Turkish residents. There are thousands of mosques that
have been built with the donations of the Turkish immigrant community. They are also noted for
seizing the opportunity to buy churches on sale and then transforming them into mosques. They try to
support Arab Muslim issues as well. The charity makes them feel they belong to the Muslim Ummah.
(21)
Islam is a visible religion in Germany and is the largest minority religion in the country. The history of
Islam in Germany started at the end of the 1960s. The Turkish migrants remained invisible in their
religious practices also because they did not regard Germany as a new home. Their intention was to
work only for a short period of time in Germany, and they were emotionally much more connected to
the political debate and public life in Turkey. They strongly believed that, they would certainly return
to Turkey. The first generation of migrants understood their practicing of their religion as a
homecoming. They practiced it in their homes or intimate, invisible places shielded from the outside,
because the outside was conceived of as foreign, as a foreign land, or - in Turkish - "gurbet." The
reality of migrants' live - homesickness and ignorance – even are characteristic of the so-called
"Gastarbeiter"-Turkish literature until the beginning of the 1980s.
When Turks in Germany had turned from migrant workers into immigrants in the second generation,
however, it was not only their institutional disposition, which became transformed, but also their
individual religious ones. For the first immigrants, the so-called Turkish 'People's Islam' was a

--- Sayfa 246 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

244
formative influence for their practice of religion in Germany. The People's Islam was oriented towards
and shaped by the practicalities of everyday life and was defined by distinct phases of an individual's
life. (22) The People's Islam was embedded into the culture at large, while in the Diaspora, religion
later became 'de-culturalized.' The migrants slowly began to study the Qur’an in Turkish, which was a
radical change to their religious lives. Young Muslims in Germany often declare that they "have
discovered Islam for themselves." The notion of “self-actualization” through Islam is particularly
highlighted by Sigrid Nökel in her study Die Töchter der Gastarbeiter und der Islam. As Nökel says,
personal growth is central to self-descriptions of phases in young Islamic women's lives. The decision
to wear a head-scarf and to model their lives individually, and out of their own free will, according to
Islamic principles becomes young women's means towards self-actualization and dominates their
relation to Islam. (23)
When second-generation migrants left from the idea to return to their parents' home country, this not
only changed their status as 'guest' to a status as immigrants, but also helped to shift the power
balance between immigrants and Germany. Germany has been forced to meet the immigrant on eye-
level, consider him a new citizen, and communicate with him in discussion about integration. In
contrast to the first generation, which practiced Islam defensively and invisibly, the second generation
uses Islam as an instrument to give meaning to their everyday, individual lives. It has become a highly
visible and irreversible part of German society. The second generation do not only study the Islamic
sources to find solutions to their everyday problems in Western society, but tries to counter Western
discourses about Islam.(24)
Applying Islam became a source of overcoming personal destruction, isolation and nihilism. The
Islamic identity helped to see the future. The religious factor allowed young people to find their
orientations in German society.(25)
Until 2001, migrants in Germany had not been perceived in religious terms, but in ethnic ones. Polls
in the 1990s, for instance, indicated that about three million people with a Turkish background live in
Germany. Within a couple of years, their identity changed - the majority society began to perceive
them differently. Now they are no longer perceived in ethic terms, but in religious ones: three million
Turks became three million Muslims - although they never had the chance to make a statement about
their religion on their own. While German Protestants and Catholics have the chance to tell the public
authorities whether they belong to the Catholic or to the Protestant church, Muslims have no chance
to tell whether they want to be registered as Muslims. The reason is that Islam has no organization
that is comparable to the Christian churches. There are some Muslim organizations, but the majority
of migrants from Turkey do not belong to them. (26)

4. Turkish integration in Germany and Gülen Movement
The discussions about the Euro-Turks have been heated in a time when Turkey has been given a full-
membership perspective to the European Union. These discussions have also become imbedded in the
debates on 9/11, the killing of anti-Islamist political leader Pim Fortuyn and film director Theo van
Gogh in the Netherlands, the cartoon crisis in Denmark, and the Pope's discussion about the Prophet
Mohammad. In the meantime, Euro-Muslims in general, and Euro-Turks in particular, have had a
greater visibility in the European public sphere in a way that has fueled Islamophobic sentiments.(27)

--- Sayfa 247 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

245
The relationship between Germany’s largely Turkish Muslim population and the German national
community was until recently conditioned by the political class’s refusal to acknowledge that the
“guestworkers” were there to stay. Since 2000, however, German outlook and policy have changed;
the reality of immigration and permanent settlement is now recognised and a new willingness, in
principle, to extend citizenship has developed. However, the view that integration should precede
naturalisation – the requirement that Turks and other Muslims should first integrate and
demonstrate their “German-ness” before they may acquire that citizenship – remains a formidable
brake on the process. It is unrealistic to expect those of Turkish origin to become fully integrated into
German society while citizenship and full participation in public life are withheld.(28)
The German government has spent the past years working with immigrant groups and independent
experts on a national integration plan. An estimated 15 million people in Germany have an immigrant
background, and Chancellor Angela Merkel's "grand coalition" of Social Democrats and Christian
conservatives sees integration as crucial to the country's future security and economic well-being.
Discussions over the past years have shown that Germany has a long way to go before immigrants feel
included in society. For decades, politicians have insisted that Germany is not an immigration
country, but Merkel's focus on integration points to an important shift in German politics.
Whether Germany will remain and become an even more civil multi-ethnic society will depend on a
number of factors. First, some of the most severe social problems have to be tackled and educational
system has to be improved. Germany needs a lot of effort to enable underprivileged - German and
non-German - young people to have a decent future, materially as well as emotionally. Even the
outcasts, even right-wing extremists, have the right to get emotional support and help. This has
nothing to do with approving their actions. On the contrary: only if a society stands firmly against
violence, only if there is an obvious will to protect the weaker and to care for the victims, can a civil
society survive in the long run.(29)
There are social, economic and political barriers to integration presented by the host societies and
there are many efforts among Muslim population to promote their own visions and models for
integration. Among these models is the Gülen movement, which is has embraced “a modern,
multicultural notion of political identity and community that is also deeply rooted in Muslim practice
and traditions”.(30)
The debate over Turkish-Muslim integration in Germany has resolved around three main educational
policy issues. The first involves the religious instruction in the schools. The second educational policy
debate involves the establishment of private Muslim or Turkish schools. The third educational policy
issue involves wearing of headscarves in the schools. In contrast of France, German schools permit
female students to wear headscarves in the classroom. The issue of headscarves has been in particular
area of concern all over Europe, and in Germany as well. While under the German Basic Law’s
freedom of religious expression clause, German students may wear headscarves in the classroom, the
situation concerning teachers has been much more complex. Since teachers are representatives of the
state, they have no permission wear a headscarf. Gülen movement’s approach to the issue is
interesting. The movement prefers to avoid direct controversy and eschews a highly visible role in the
current struggle over permitting teachers to wear the headscarf in the classroom. Jill Irvine argues
that such a stance is in keeping with the general goal of the movement in Germany to avoid highly
charged political battles that could detract from its educational mission.(31)

--- Sayfa 248 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

246
Gülen movement participants in Germany have founded a variety of educational institutions that
operates through the country.(32) In the past decade though the difficulties, the movement in
Germany has been building an educational infrastructure that aims to improve social situation of
Turkish residents and promote their integration into German society. They attempted to find “middle
way” between the cultural devastation implied by assimilation and the “globalization” of a minority
group living apart from the majority culture. Any solution to the challenges of integration must
involve the give and takes of cultural understanding and mutual enrichment. Turkish residents must
become educated according standards and fully capable of operating at the highest levels on German
professional society, but the key to integration is to provide the best possible education. (33)

5. Conclusion
Muslim communities /Turkish communities particularly/ are not adequately perceived by European
societies founded on tolerance which has generated two tendencies within the communities. The first
one is related to radicalization processes within the communities. The emigrants who encounter
various social problems, especially, unemployment, are subjected to discrimination which leads to
their isolation. Suffering from psychological discomfort, they gradually become an alien element for
the European society, they feel themselves as strangers. This fact leads to the increased consolidation
with one’s own ethnic group. The resultant ideological gap is bridged by Islam which functions as a
uniting factor.
The second tendency is related to a newly established identity. There is new generation which rejects
isolation, tries to overcome stereotypes and is ready to integrate into the European societies. These
are the circles which obtained European education, speak in the language of the given country and are
well aware of the local culture. At the same time, they tend to retain their Muslim (or national)
identity, and as a distinctive feature they choose religious identity, which is more determining and
powerful element in the competition with the European/Christian civilization.
The requirement of the institutional presence of Islam in European countries creates an immediate
contradiction with the fundamental values of the European societies. Europe is not willing to reject
the liberal cultural and moral values, which constitute the basis for the Western civilization, even
realizing that pluralistic multicultural community needs universal values. Europe which face
demographic and socio-moral problems in some cases feels threatened by the manifestations of
Islamic fanaticism.
It is not Christian and Islamic civilizations that clash in Europe but post-Christian secular/liberal
values and Muslim traditional values. In this case, the only alternative for sectarianism, isolation
and radical relativism is interfaith and intercultural dialogue. To oppose and resent the West, as
Gülen argues, will never benefit Islam or Muslims. He indicates the method of dialogue: forgetting the
arguments of the past and concentrating on common points. He stresses the tolerance as an extremely
important virtue that should always be promoted.

--- Sayfa 249 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

247
DIALOGICAL AND TRANSFORMATIVE RESOURCES:
PERSPECTIVES FROM FETHULLAH GÜLEN ON RELIGION
AND PUBLIC LIFE 390
PAUL WELLER  391

Abstract
With the continuing evolution of the European Union by incorporation of new member states
and the extension of its competence into ever-wider areas of social policy; the increasing ethnic
and religious diversity of its populations; the debate over the accession of Turkey into the EU;
and the emergent questioning of the previously held European models of, on the one hand,
‘multi-culturalism’, and on the other, of ‘laïcité’, there is growing debate on the relationship
between religion and public life in Europe. Since the Madrid train bombings and the 7/7 London
attacks; the murder in the Netherlands of Theo van Gogh; and so-called ‘cartoons affair’ in
Denmark, many of these debates have focused on the position of Islam and Muslims. Because of
these events, the debates have often, and unfortunately, been constructed in terms of a conflict
between ideologically Islamist and ideologically secularist positions, as if these were the only
alternatives. It is, however, the argument of this paper that there are other more constructive
ways forward that promote equity for religious minorities, inclusivity on the part of the state, and
participation in civic society. In exploring such alternatives, this paper brings perspectives from
the teaching of the Turkish Muslim, Fethullah Gülen, into critical interaction with seven recently
published theses on religion and public life in the UK and Europe that have been developed by
the author over the past quarter of a century of practical and academic engagement with issues of
religious diversity and public life. Through interaction with these theses, key aspects of Gűlen’s
thought and teaching are explored. These include, for example, Gűlen’s position, that ‘….Islam
does not need the state to survive, but rather needs educated and financially rich communities to
flourish. In a way, not the state but rather community is needed under a full democratic system’.
They also include Gűlen’s commitment to inter-religious dialogue. Taken together, these key
positions are then explored through the notion of what Ihsan Yilmaz articulates in terms of the
possibility of a commitment to dar al-hizmet, in which an Islamic contribution is made to public
life, as one contribution to civil society set alongside others.

390 Not for quotation without the author’s permission. The author can be contacted at: p.g.weller@derby.ac.uk
391 Professor of Inter-religious Relations at the University of Derby and Head of Research and Commercial Development in
its Faculty of Education, Health and Sciences; Visiting Fellow in the Oxford Centre for Christianity and Culture at Regent’s
Park College, University of Oxford; and Vice Chair of the Multi-Faith Centre at the University of Derby. Current interests:
issues in the relationships between religion, state and society. Recent publications: Time for Change: Reconfiguring
Religion, State and Society (London: T. & T. Clark, 2005) and ‘Fethullah Gülen, Religions, Globalization and Dialogue’, in R.
Hunt and Y. Aslandoğan (eds.), Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Somerset,
NJ: The Light Inc. and IID Press, 2006). He is editor of Religions in the UK: Directory, 2007–2010 (Derby: University of
Derby and Multi-Faith Centre at the University of Derby, 2007).

--- Sayfa 250 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

248
1. The European and Netherlands Context
In the Europe of today there are considerable tensions and challenges to peaceful co-existence in
terms of the relationship between Muslims and others in a secular context. These challenges are
perhaps particularly sharp and poignant in the Netherlands, the country in which this conference
takes place. This is because it is here that the murder of the artist Theo Van Gogh by Mohammed
Bouyeri, took place on 2nd November 2004.
This was an event that sent shockwaves through a society that, on the basis of its historical roots as a
seventeenth century refuge for Christian religious minorities392 as well as on the basis of its more
recent history, had generally had held to an image of itself as, on the whole politically liberal, and of
its religious minorities as generally well integrated with the wider society.
In the Netherlands, an historical approach to the pattern of relationships between different religious
groups, and also organised secular movements, had been developed a policy has been followed known
as Verzuiling, (Dobbelaere, 1988), often translated into English by means of the none too elegant
terminology of "pillarisation". The roots of this approach are to be found in the origins of the country
itself that emerged out of a revolt, inspired by Calvinist Christianity, against Spanish and Roman
Catholic rule.
The product of this was, in the first instance, the establishment of what was basically a Calvinist state,
but which also had a number of Roman Catholic enclaves. In the newly independent state the Dutch
Reformed Church was the only officially recognised Church. The worshipping life of Protestant
dissenters, Jews and Roman Catholic was tolerated, but initially they were excluded from holding
public office.
In his book on Dutch Society, Goudsblom (1967:18) argued that the commercial interests of the Dutch
burghers and merchants modified the initial religious zealotry of the Calvinists with the result that a
Dutch society of "varied religious composition" came into being.  In connection with this, he
(Goudsblom, 1967: 71-73) also went on to note that: "religious diversity has remained a pervasive
determinant of social and cultural distinctions, giving rise to the curious phenomenon of `bloc'
formation known as verzuiling." Commenting on the potentially wider relevance of this approach to
religious plurality for contexts beyond The Netherlands, Ahmed Andrews (1994: 127) described  this
“pillarisation” in the following terms:
At its most fully developed the structure of verzuiling enabled a person to live their whole
life within their confessional or secular bloc. Once born into the system it has been possible
to be educated in one particular bloc from school to University: join a confessional or non-
confessional trade union or professional body and be employed within the same bloc.
Marriage within the bloc was also the general rule. In addition, one could read a newspaper
published within one's bloc and even receive television and radio broadcasts put out by the
confessional or secular segment of society to which one belonged. Finally one's social and

392 Thus, for example, the Netherlands provided a refuge for the Mennonites and also for
a group of English Separatists who, under the leadership of John Smyth, migrated there in 1606 and founded, together with
the support of Thomas Helwys, the English Independent Church in Amsterdam. Helwys and others of the group returned to
England in 1611/12 to found the first General Baptist congregation in England and Helwys (in Groves, R., ed., 1998) penned
his 1612 A Short Declaration of the Mystery of Iniquity addressed to King James I of England, and in which he developed
one of the first theologically developed arguments for religious liberty to be published in the English language.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

249
sporting activities were catered for within the bloc, owing to each having its own sports and
social clubs.
Historically, conflicts between the “blocs” were generally managed within the overall framework of a
system that has some success in relation to the criteria of social and political stability. In Andrews'
(1994: 127) evaluation, this was due to two factors: “Firstly, the verzuiling structure arose in a society
which was already clear about its national identity to which all groups had an attachment, unlike
India or Pakistan, for example, where attachment to one's state or ethnic region often appears to be
stronger than attachment to the nation. Secondly, all blocs have equal access to resources."
Initially, however, state-funded education was initially an area in which verzuiling did not fully
operate. However, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, after a campaign that saw the
orthodox Calvinist and Roman Catholic blocs co-operating in opposition to the secular Liberal
Protestants, the principle was established that the state could support denominationally-based
schools to the same extent as non-denominational schools. Like Christopher Bagley (n.d.; 1971a,
1971b) before him (who undertook comparative work on race relations in the Netherlands and the
UK), writing in the mid-1990s, Andrews argued that he believed that this verzuiling model may have
had something wider to offer in relation to the challenges posed by religious diversity.
Thus Andrews (1994: 127) noted that, "At first sight this segmentation of Dutch society might appear
to lead to social instability." However, although "it is not as strong as it was in the 1960s," Andrews
arrived at the overall judgement that “pillarisation” could still offer a “useful model” and that,
especially when linked with a proportional representation model of democracy, it could remain a
"useful illustration of how a segmented society, a plural society, has met the needs of various
conflicting groups and achieved a stability based, since the late 1800s, on equal treatment for all".
However, in the Netherlands itself, questions increasingly began to be asked about the structure (see
Gowricharn and Mungra, 1996), with some arguing that it was becoming a relic of a previous age. In
particular, issues emerged about the extent to which this structure could, in reality, “stretch” to
accommodate new Muslim migrants in the Netherlands (Rath, Groenedijk and Penninix, 1991; Shahid
and van Koningsveld, 1996; Feirabend and Rath, 1996).
It is both because of its inheritance of toleration and of the system of verzuiling, as well as because of
the intensified social and political ferment that followed the killing of Theo Van Gogh, that it is all the
more appropriate that a conference of this kind and on this theme should take place here in The
Netherlands.

2. European Context for Religion(s), State and Society
But the issues involved and challenges for peaceful co-existence in Europe are not for the Netherlands
alone. With the continuing evolution of the European Union by incorporation of new member states;
the increasing ethnic and religious diversity of its populations (Davie, 2000); the debate over the
accession of Turkey into the EU (Bilici, ed., 2006); and the questioning of previously developed
European models for the relationship between religion(s), state(s) and society (Robbers, ed. 1996),
the issues in the relationship between religion(s), state and society are ones with which all states and
societies in the EU and in the wider Europe are having, once again, to wrestle with (Madeley and
Enyedi, eds., 2003).

--- Sayfa 252 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

250
While tensions and even violent conflict involving religions did continue to exist in parts of Europe
(for example in the religiously-related dimensions of the national conflict in the North of Ireland), for
the majority of Europeans these were seen largely as things of the past. Thus, the overall perspective
of the majority was one that – perhaps somewhat complacently – had come to see religion as
primarily something for the private sphere.
Although labour migration and refugee movements of peoples changed the composition of European
societies in the years following the Second World War, there was initially very little reflection on the
implications of this diversity in relation to religion, with ethnicity and culture receiving much more
emphasis. Thus, in 1989 in connection with the early years of The Satanic Verses controversy, the
veteran British socialist politician, Tony Benn MP (1989), could write: “Now, all of a sudden,
arguments which had almost disappeared into the mists of time have to come into sharp focus and are
hotly contested across the world, involving diplomatic relations, trade arrangements and stretching
into the heart of religious communities where people of different religious convictions have to live
side by side.”
In fact, it is arguable that the controversy around Salman Rushdie’s (1988) book, The Satanic Verses
contained in microcosm many of the themes, issues and debates which have since come to form such
a large part of public, religious and political debate and consciousness and, in relation to which, with
hindsight, one can see that the controversy was an early “lightning rod”.
Although there were firebombings of some bookshops stocking the book; threats against those
supporting Salman Rushdie; the killing of an imam in Belgium; and threats to a number of Muslim
organisations and place of worship, the form of conflicts that ensued were, in Europe, primarily
located in the cultural, social and political domains. More recently, many of the original issues
involved in The Satanic Verses controversy have been reprised in the so-called “Cartoons
Controversy” that developed around the images published in the 30th September 2005 edition of the
Danish daily newspaper, Jyllands-Posten, and which gave rise to similar widespread media, public
and street-level debate.
However, while the The Satanic Verses controversy entailed (following the fatwa or “legal opinion”
pronounced by the Iranian religious leader, the Ayatollah Khomeini) the threat of targeted violence
towards Salman Rushdie and those directly associated with the publication of his book, together with
some more generalised violence in other parts of the world, the “Cartoons Controversy” took place in
the context of a more general association of Islam and violence in Europe. This association was in
itself a contributory factor to the controversy since the Jyllands-Posten’s cartoons were deemed so
offensive by many Muslims because, among other things, they depicted the Prophet Muhammad as
having a bomb under his turban and the Shahadah - or basic Muslim declaration of faith - being
written on the bomb.
What had happened in between was, of course, the seismic and global impact of the events of 9/11 in
the USA, followed in Europe by the 3/11 (2003) Madrid train bombings; the 2nd November 2004 van
Gogh murder; and the 7/7 (2005) London transport attacks. In other words, in between The Satanic
Verses controversy and the “Cartoons Controversy” the violence associated with the emerging cultural
conflicts had become very explicit, and also in the heart of Europe itself (Guelke, 2006; Abbas, ed.,
2007). Because of these events, and others like them that would have taken place had they not been
foiled by the security services, the debates arising about the possibilities or otherwise for peaceful co-
existence of Muslims and non-Muslims in a secular and European context have become sharpened.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

251
3. Old Models and Their Alternatives
As a result of all this, the opening years of the 21st century have the seen a growth in questioning of the
previous European models for the management of religious and cultural diversity – including those of
“verzuiling” (or “pillarisation”) in the Netherlands; “multi-culturalism” in the UK; and “laïcité” in
France. Unfortunately it has often been the case that the debates that have emerged around this have
often been constructed in terms of a conflict between ideologically “secularist” and ideologically
“Islamist” positions, as if these were the only alternatives.
It is, however, the contention of this paper that there are other ways in which these debates can be
approached. On the basis of both academic reflection upon, and practical engagement with, issues
arising from religious plurality over the past quarter of a century the author of this paper has
elsewhere argued (see Weller, 2005a) that these alternatives are not the only options and that there
are other, more constructive ways forward.
Furthermore, it is argued that these alternatives are capable at one and the same time of promoting
equity for religious minorities, inclusivity on the part of the state, and participation in civic society, all
of which are necessary for the healthy functioning of diverse and plural European societies, including
the religious traditions, communities and groups within these societies. These perspectives that were
developed by the author are distilled into seven theses, propositions or principles on religion and
public life in the UK and Europe.393 In exploring these and other approaches it is important that this is
done in active dialogue with Muslims and their own thinking on these matters. This is because it is
unlikely that any positive way forward can be identified, and much less implemented, unless
European Muslims can contribute to its creation as active social participants rather than merely
passive recipients.
Of relevance to this is something that the historian of religion and theologian Wilfred Cantwell Smith
(1981: 101), in his book Towards a World Theology: Faith and the Comparative History of Religion,
spoke about as a process in scholarship of engaging with the otherness of the other that culminates in
a ‘“we all” are talking with each other about “us”’:
The traditional form of Western scholarship in the study of other men’s religion was that of
an impersonal presentation of an “it”. The first great innovation in recent times has been the
personalisation of the faiths observed, so that one finds a discussion of a “they”. Presently
the observer becomes personally involved, so that the situation is one of a “we” talking about
a “they”. The next step is dialogue, where “we” talk to “you”. If there is listening and
mutuality, this may become that “we” talk with “you”. The culmination of this process is
when “we all” are talking with each other about “us”.
Such ideas about methodology in the study of religion were applied to the practical field of inter-faith
relations by Kenneth Cracknell (the former Executive Secretary of the British Council of Churches’

393 The origin of these theses can, perhaps significantly, be found in a paper given by the
present author on the topic of “Jews and Muslims in Europe: Some Propositions and Questions for European States,
Societies and Religions”, presented at a conference organised by the Simon Wiesenthal Centre Europe’s initiative, Academic
Response to Racism and Anti-Semitism and Racism in Europe on “From Xenophobia to Tolerance: Jews and Muslims in
Europe”, and held at France-Amerique, Paris, 28th-30th October, 1995, as well as in a paper on “Religion(s), State and
Society: Theses and Propositions for Europe” prepared for the Council of Europe Seminar on Religion and the Integration
of Migrants, the Palais de l’Europe, Strasbourg, 24th-26th. They have subsequently been published in slightly variant forms.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

252
Committee for Relations with People of Other Faiths) in a thought-provoking lecture published as
Cracknell (1986), ‘We Talking About Us’: The Implications of the Ending of Religious Isolationism.
They also, I would suggest, have contemporary relevance and resonance in reflecting on the
relationships between religion(s), state and society in Europe.
And in facilitating the kind of approach that enables a “we talking about us” and which can contribute
to the overcoming of religious isolationism, a key Muslim contribution to this dialogue (albeit one that
is not yet as well-known as it should in many parts of Europe) comes from the teaching of the Turkish
Muslim, Fethullah Gülen, and the work of the movement associated with his teaching.

4. Theses on Religion(s), State and Society: A Conversation with Gülen
Having set something of the current European context, this paper now focuses on key themes in
Gülen’s teaching by bringing them into critical interaction with the theses on the relationships
between religion(s), state and society that have previously been developed by the present author. The
theses have developed over the past decade since they were first formulated, and so have appeared in
slightly variant published form (see Weller, 2002a; 2002b; 2002c; 2005a; and 2005b).
As presented below,394 they are, in a way, the equivalent of newspaper headlines, with some brief
editorial comment appended. There is much that could be said about them by way of qualification. As
propositions they do not claim to be either a detailed survey or the last word. They paint on a broad
canvas, standing back a little from the detailed histories and variations that exist within the European
context. Thus they are intended to provoke reaction, not as systematic statements, but as succinct
formulations that others can react to in affirmation or disagreement, uncovering the presuppositions
that underlie particular positions on the relationships between religion(s), state and society.
At the same time, they were formulated not only as “debating principles” in the sense of facilitating
abstract discussion alone. Like Gülen’s teaching, the theses outlined below are intended to have at
least the potential of being “principles for a change” that can be translatable into “working principle”
that could inform a direction of social and religious change to which they might themselves also
actively contribute.

5. “The Importance of Not Marginalizing Religions from Public Life”
“States which assign religions to the private sphere will impoverish themselves by marginalising
important social resources and might unwittingly be encouraging of those reactive, backward- and
inward-looking expressions of religious life that are popularly characterised as “fundamentalisms”
(Weller, 2005a: 197).
Gülen rightly does not accept the kind of uncritical use of the term “fundamentalism” – which in the
thesis is also deliberately framed by inverted commas to indicate that the term can only be
legitimately used in the context of more carefully defined meanings – that has become among the
media and among the commentators of the “chattering classes” when referring to a whole range of

394 The form in which they are quoted in this paper is taken from the form in which they  are published and discussed in P.
Weller. (2005a) Time for a Change: Reconfiguring Religion, State and Society. (London: T & T Clark), 197-198

--- Sayfa 255 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

253
different religious phenomena beyond those of liberal religion. Thus Gülen (2004: 35) points out that
the term has become “another fashionable term with which to smear ….those who did nothing more
than express their religious feelings have been branded as reactionaries, fanatics, and
fundamentalists.”
In other words, in the context of concerns about the emergence of conflictual and violent religion
there can all too easily emerge a simplistic secular misunderstanding in which, as Gülen puts it,
“Unfortunately some people do not distinguish between being truly religious and blind fanaticism”,
and fail to differentiate between different strands of more conservative religious expression. But given
that there do exist religious expressions by those who are called Muslims (and others) that, in the
name of religion, tend towards the undermining of civility and co-existence, the irony is that
particular approaches of the secular that are concerned with keeping such expressions out of public
life can, in fact, be precisely those kind of approaches that can lead to the further entrenchment and
development of these forms of religion.
While the “secular” is often said to be the foundational of contemporary European models for the
relationship between religions states and societies its meaning is not self-evident, and it is in fact
referred to in ways that relate to a variety of diverse and contested meanings (see Weller, 2006a). As
explained by Hakan Yavuz and John Esposito (2003: xvii), “In many developing countries, secularism
has become a theology of progress and development” and that “normative fault lines of modernity are
nowhere else as clear as in Turkey.” This is, of course, the context from which Gülen and the
community that has emerged around his teaching derive and in the setting of which they have had to
chart a course that both engages with, and also differentiates itself from the twin challenges that arise
from ideological “secularism” and political “Islamism”.
In the twentieth century Turkey’s story is one that has been dominated by the ideology of Mustafa
Kemal Ataturk (1881–1938), the founder of the modern Turkish state who abolished the Muslim
Caliphate in 1924. Yavuz and Esposito (2003: xxiii) point out that in Kemalist ideology, “modernity
and democracy require secularism”. Indeed, the version of secularism that has been dominant in
Turkey is that of what these authors (Yavuz and Esposito, 2003: xvi) call a “radical Jacobin liaicism”
in which secularism is treated “as above and outside politics” and in which, therefore, “secularism
draws the boundaries of public reasoning”.
Thus, until only a few years ago, any attempts to use religious language in public debate could result
in the banning of any political party that did so and, notwithstanding recent developments following
the double electoral victory of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the leader of the Justice and Development Party
(Adalet ve Kalkinma Partisi, or AKP), ongoing conflicts related to the historical inheritance are, as yet,
to be fully resolved.  Forged in this crucible, Gülen’s teaching offers a critique of a socially exclusive
secularism. Thus of the Turkish Republic, Gülen (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A. ed., 2000: 148) warned
that “The republic is obligated to protect its citizens’ religious faith, feelings, and thoughts. If its
leaders do not do so, but rather hold people in contempt because of their religious feelings and
thoughts, violate their rights, and smear their good names, in reality they are holding the republic in
contempt and violating all that it represents.”
At the same time, in contrast to those Muslims who advocate a defensive holding back from the public
sphere Gülen’s teaching – as also, and importantly, expressed in the educational, media, and other
social institutions created by the movement associated with it - encourages Muslims actively to
engage with the wider (religious and secular) society. On the other hand, it also critiques those forms

--- Sayfa 256 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

254
of involvement in which religion is politically instrumentalised and instead argues for engagement
that is based on a distinctive Islamic vision characterised by robustness and civility.
Thus, in ways that speak both to ideological “secularists” and political “Islamists”, and with relevance
beyond the Turkish context, Gülen distinguishes between an understanding of the “secular” that is
concerned with the participation of citizens of all religions and none in the public life of a society and
an ideological form of secularism that is concerned to promote positivist philosophical positions and
their philosophical and political consequences.

6. “The Need to Recognize the Specificity of Religions”
“Religious traditions and communities offer important alternative perspectives to the predominant
values and power structures of states and societies. Religions are a reminder of the importance of the
things that cannot be seen, touched, smelled, tasted and heard, for a more balanced perspective on
those things that can be experienced in these ways” (Weller, 2005a: 197).
Because of the distinctive perspectives held by religions, there is a fundamental sense in which
religions cannot allow nation, state, or political ideology to claim ultimate value for itself. In the
perspective of religious traditions, this is a usurpation of the loyalty that should only be offered to that
which is unconditioned.  Perhaps precisely because the ideas of the modern nation and of the state
can have such a tendency to claim absolute power for themselves and their political values, religions
offer important institutionalized reminders that the nation and the state are not the only significant
realities; that they do not represent the only form of authority; and that the authority that they do
have is not absolute.
As Gülen (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A. ed., 2000: 149) summarises it in his own words, “Power’s
dominance is transitory, while that of truth and justice is eternal. Even if these do not exist today, they
will be victorious in the very near future. For this reason, sincere politicians should align themselves
and their policies with truth and justice.” This does not, of course, mean that civil belonging and
loyalty is unimportant. But it does mean that they are to be understood in the context of other and
more ultimate values. In his historical reflections on what are still the historically recent European
attempts made to build societies in the absence of spiritual values. Again, as Gülen (2004: 194)
explains in his own words, but which also have resonance with this particular thesis:
Enlightenment movements that began in the eighteenth century saw human beings as
consisting of the mind only. Following that, positivist and materialist movements saw
humans as solely material or corporeal entities. As a result, spiritual crises have followed
one after another. It is no exaggeration to say that these crises and the absence of spiritual
satisfaction were the major factors behind the conflict of interests that enveloped the last
two centuries and that reached its apex in the two world wars.
At the same time, it is clear that the historical record of religions has not always been in line with that
to which they seek to point. Gülen (2004: 194) recognises this, noting that, “Claims are made today
that religion is divisive and opens the way for the killing of others.” Nevertheless, while it is certainly
the case that religions have been historically ambiguous, Gülen points out it is possible for the
criticism of the role of religions by those who are secular to be informed by as much lack of self-
criticism as can be found among the religious. This, in turn, can lead to a superficial criticism being
made of religion as something that is at the root of social conflict, but without adequate reflection

--- Sayfa 257 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

255
taking place on the significance of the suffering brought about by the secular ideologies of fascism,
Bolshevik communism, and capitalism.
As Gülen (2004: 196-197) explains it, religion (and especially not Islam) did not lead to what he calls
the “merciless exploitation” that could be found in, “….the wars and revolutions of the twentieth
century that killed hundreds of millions of people and left behind even more homeless, widows,
orphans, and wounded ….”  Rather, Gülen argues that the roots of this suffering was to be found in
“Scientific materialism, a view of life and the world that had severed itself from religion and a clash of
interests caused this exploitation” and also that this brought about environmental pollution as a
consequence of a perspective that “nature is an accumulation of things that has no value outside its
ability to meet physical needs”.
In contrast, Gülen speaks of nature as having “a certain sacredness” because he sees it as “an arena in
which God’s Beautiful Names are displayed.” He (Gülen, 2004: 194) also reflects that, “Humans are
creatures composed not only of a body and a mind, or feelings and a spirit; rather, we are harmonious
compositions of all these elements”. Developing this further, he explains that “Each of us is a body
writhing in a network of needs; but this is not all, we also possess a mind that has more subtle and
vital needs than the body” and that, “Moreover, each person is a creature made up of feelings that
cannot be satisfied by the mind, and a creature of spirit; it is through the spirit that we acquire our
essential human identity”.

7. “The Imperative for Religious Engagement with the Wider Community”
“Religious communities and traditions should beware of what can be seductive calls from within their
traditions to form ‘religious unity fronts’ against what is characterised as ‘the secular state’ and what
is perceived as the amorality and fragmentation of modern and post-modern society” (Weller, 2005a:
197).
While setting out the distinctive contribution that religion can offer, Gülen’s approach can be seen as
being over and against an understanding of religion which (by analogy with what used to the internal
perspective of Soviet Communism and its fellow-travelling supporters) takes a form of an idealisation
that is blind to the failings of the communities of “really existing Islam”. At the same time, it is also to
be distinguished from the (ironically) modernist and political “Islamism” which (also by analogy with
the history of Communism) could be seen as a kind of “Trotskyite Islam” that is dedicated to a
permanent revolution against not only of “secular”, but also all existing forms of governance
developed among “really existing” Muslims, and which seeks the future establishment of an ideal
global Muslim Khalifate which is not yet here.
As a defensive mechanism in societies in which there is clear evidence of at least some degree of
hostility towards Muslims and Islam (see Allen and Nielsen, 2002), a significant section of the “really
existing” Muslim community with migrant origins tend towards a defensive cultural and intellectual
insularity over against their perceptions of the secular. Such Muslim reactions and groups are
concerned primarily with trying to preserve Islam – sometimes understood in a way that is all too
uncritically elided with manifestly specific minority cultural traditions – in what can be perceived as a
sea of alien cultural, religious, intellectual and legal influences. In relation to this response among
Muslims, Gülen (in Capan, 2004: 3), “Islam has become a way of living, a culture; it is not being
followed as a faith.”

--- Sayfa 258 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

256
Other Muslims – often identified by the term “Islamists” - have a more ideological project in relation
to the secular and that is concerned with what, for example, the more modernist “Islamist” group
Hizb ut-Tahrir calls the “carrying” or “passing on” of “the concepts” (see Husain, 2007) which they
seek to inculcate among Muslims in contradiction to what is seen as a “kafir” secular system. Thus
they campaign against this system using the slogan “democracy is hypocrisy”, on the basis that it is
“haram” or forbidden to participate in something that is rooted in secular principles that are, by them,
deemed to be contrary to the fundamental principles of Islam.
With regard to “Islamism”, the contradictions that can emerge among the adherents to its principal
groupings are well illustrated in Ed Husain’s recent book, The Islamist: Why I Joined Radical Islam in
Britain, What I Saw Inside and Why I Left. Of his personal experience, Husain (2007: 148) says, “My
life was consumed by fury, inner confusion, a desire to dominate everything, and my abject failure to
be a good Muslim. I had started out on this journey ‘wanting more Islam’ and ended up losing its
essence.”  By contrast, while teaching that that religions do indeed have something distinctive to offer,
Gülen, stresses that only those who are self-critical can make an effective contribution.
Therefore, instead of spiritually bankrupt “Islamism” vividly portrayed by Husain, Gülen (2000: 9)
argues that, “Those who want to reform the world must first reform themselves. In order to bring
others to the path of traveling to a better world, they must purify their inner worlds of hatred, rancor,
and jealousy, and adorn their outer worlds with all kinds of virtues.” And because of this, rather than
anathematising the secular world, Gülen’s practical actions have been geared towards overcoming the
divide between the “religious” and the “secular” that can otherwise so easily be exploited by the
ideological zealots of both traditions.
What this means can be seen especially in the work of the Journalists and Writers’ Foundation,
founded in 1994, and the seminars held by the so-called Abant Platform, one of the aims of which is
“dialogue and reconciliation in the light of knowledge and experience”. The Platform’s first meeting
three meetings (1998-2000) – all held in Abant, Turkey – were on, respectively, the themes of “Islam
and Secularism”; “Religion, State and Society”; and “Pluralism and Social Reconcilitiation”. Two
meetings have also been held in Europe, one on “Culture, Identity and Religion in the Process of
Turkey’s EU Membership”, held in Brussels, Belgium, in 2004; and “Republic, Multiculturalism and
Europe”, held in Paris, France, in 2006.
The last two of these meetings were also followed up outside Europe, but with a Turkey-France
emphasis in the Platform’s 2007 meeting in Istanbul, Turkey, on “Turkey-French Conversations II.“
This has been of particular significance both because of the relatively strong French opposition to
Turkish membership of the European Union, but also because it has been the French model of
republicanism, citizenship and secularism that has played an important role in relation to the Turkish
intelligentsia following the Kemalist revolution. Such Turkish-French political and philosophical
dialogue is therefore of significance both in Turkey and in the EU.
The principles of the Platform can be seen as embodied in the commitment to it of some of its key
participants. Thus a former chair of the Platform was Professor Mehmet Aydin who, between 2002-
2007 was Minister of State for Religious Affairs in the AKP (Justice and Development Party)
Government. Since 2006, Professor Dr. Mete Tuncay of Bilgi University has been Academic Co-
Ordinator of the Abant Platform. This is itself a clear embodiment in action of the principle of a
Platform created out of a religious spirit. This is because Professor Tuncay refers to himself as, “a

--- Sayfa 259 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

257
person who believes in agnosticism in religion” and as one those “who accept the notion of living in
justice and freedom without referring metaphysics.”
In relation to his own context, Professor Tuncay points out that, “In Turkey, there has been a dispute
among those who acknowledge religion and those who believed that religion and religious thought
was the cause and the sign of ignorance and underdevelopment for at least two hundred years” and so
“We have to comprehend and implement secularism in an appropriate manner” which he defines in
the following way: “The bottom line is to attain a capacity of living together with a common sense of
citizenship without changing each other.” (http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1778/18/)
In relation to a “secularism” that is understood in this way, as Gülen (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A. ed.,
2000:167) summarises it, “Secularism should not be an obstacle to religious devoutness, nor should
devoutness constitute a danger to secularism.”

8. “The Need for A Reality Check”
“National and political self-understandings that exclude people of other than the majority religious
traditions, either by design or by default are, historically speaking, fundamentally distorted. Politically
and religiously such self-understandings are dangerous and need to be challenged” (Weller, 2005a:
197).
Gülen’s thought has sometimes been seen as being related to a strain of Turkish nationalism in which
there was deemed to be a close relationship between the Turkish nation, the religion of Islam, and the
glorious past of the Ottoman Empire. Thus Bekim Agai (2003: 63) argues that Gülen’s notion of a
“Turkish Muslim identity” (Türkiye Müslümanliğı) was, until the late 1980s, “….to a large extent
based on a nationalistic, Islamic chauvinism” which included such ideas as “Europe wanting to
destroy Turkey by Christianizing it” and “enemies within Turkey wanting to destroy the Islamic
identity of the Turks”, but that this changed during the 1990s.
Therefore in a 2000 interview with Hakan Yavuz (2003: 45), Gűlen acknowledged: “We all change,
don’t we? ……By visiting the States and many other European countries, I realized the virtues and the
role of religion in these societies. Islam flourishes in Europe and America much better than in many
Muslim countries.” At the same time Gülen (2004: 42) is certainly not apologetic about the
achievements of Ottoman civilization and, in particular, highlights the religiously informed realism of
the Ottoman rulers in dealing with the cultural and religious diversity of their Empire:
…..our glorious ancestors captured the hearts of people by means of tolerance and became
the protectors of the general peace. The longest period of peace in the Balkans and the
Middle East, which have always been volatile areas, was realized with the enduring tolerance
of our ancestors. From the moment that tolerance and those great representatives left
history, this region became void of peace and contentment.
At the same time, while noting and praising the close relationship that there has been between the
Turkish nation, the Ottoman Empire and the religion of Islam, Gülen (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A.
ed., 2000:166) makes the telling observation that, “Politicizing religion would be more dangerous for
religion than for the regime, for such people want to make politics a means for all their ends. Religion
would grow dark within them, and they would say: ‘We are the representatives of religion.’ This is a

--- Sayfa 260 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

258
dangerous matter. Religion is the name of the relationship between humanity and God, which
everyone can respect.”
In the European inheritance, very close relationships have existed between religion and the state. In
the first instance in western Europe this was manifested in terms of the religio-political entity of
Catholic Christendom. But with the historical eruption of a Protestantism that was strongly related to
areas of princely rule and territorial belonging, there also emerged what the Church of England
Bishop and critic of established forms of religion, Colin Buchanan (1994), has called religion as a
“nationalised monopoly”.
The forms of these “nationalised monopolies” varied throughout Europe (Robbers, G, ed, 1996) but in
each case they reflect the outcome of struggles for power and influence between different versions of
Christianity as well as the espousal by rulers and politicians of these various forms of religion for
diverse motives. In various ways these “institutionalised monopolies” of religion and state have been
responsible for centuries of discrimination on the basis of religion. This discrimination has extended
from the perhaps more “passive” effects of disadvantage experienced by those with less “social space”
and less access to the instruments of state power, through to the active persecution of religious
minorities.
The tensions between these new forms of relationship and the old socio-religious order resulted in the
savage and bloody religious bigotry of the Wars of Religion. It was then partly the moral reaction to
the suffering and destruction of these years led to a growing religious indifference, scepticism, and the
desire to confine religion to the private sphere. Eventually, this reaction also led to the development of
the notion of the secular state. For much of the second half of the twentieth century, in the central and
eastern parts of the continent with Communist governments, this reactive historical inheritance was
further reinforced by the state-enforced separation of religion and state, informed and under girded
by the promotion of state-sponsored atheism, more less vigorously pursued according to specific
national contexts.
In contrast to much of this European history of Christendom and the secular reaction to it, as also the
“Islamist” attempts to form either nation state-based (for example, Iran under the mullahs or
Afghanistan under the Taliban) or more global forms of theocratic systems (of the kind that Hizb ut-
Tahrir and others are seeking to establish), Gülen (in Capan, 2004: 3) argues that, “In my opinion, an
Islamic world does not really exist. There are places where Muslims live. They are more Muslims in
some places and fewer in other.”

9. “The Need to Recognize the Transnational Dimensions of Religions”
“Religious communities and traditions need to pre-empt the dangers involved in becoming proxy sites
for imported conflicts involving their co-religionists in other parts of the world. But because they are
themselves part of wider global communities of faith, religions have the potential for positively
contributing to a better understanding of role of the states and societies of their own countries within
a globalising world” (Weller, 2005a: 198).
The salience of this thesis is much clearer in the European context after the Madrid and London
bombings than it was when it was first articulated in the mid-1990s. In between times, there have
been significant research programmes on transnationalism with regard to communities, including
especially one sponsored by the UK Economic and Social Research Council and led by Dr. Steve

--- Sayfa 261 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

259
Vertovec at the University of Oxford. In relation to this globalised work of transnational ethnic and
religious communities, Gülen (2004: 230) has observed:
Modern means of communication and transportation have transformed the world into a large,
global village. So, those who expect that any radical changes in a country will be determined by
that country alone and remain limited to it, are unaware of current realities. This time is a
period of interactive relations. Nations and people are more in need of and dependent on each
other, which causes closeness in mutual relations.
In an increasingly “glocalised” world in which all religions are increasingly becoming “diaspora”
religions, the transnational connections of religions have the positive benefit of offering channels of
insight into varied cultural contexts. But tragically they can also become conduits through which
conflicts are transported from one part of the world to another. This, of course, is also a by product
not only of scientific and technological developments, but also is a result of the history of colonialism
and imperialism - words and concepts which are in many ways out of fashion in the polite western
society of today, but which do describe historical realities of immense significance and import for
contemporary life, including the question of co-existence between religious groups. As Gülen (2004a:
239) has observed in realistically evaluating the current global context:
Islamic societies entered the twentieth century as a world of the oppressed, the wronged,
and the colonized; the first half of the century was occupied with wars of liberation and
independence, wars that carried over from the nineteenth century. In all these wars, Islam
assumed the role of an important factor uniting people and spurring them to action. As
these wars were waged against what were seen as invaders, Islam, national independence
and liberation came to mean the same thing.
And it is against such a background that, despite the routine denials of, for example, the UK
Government that terror actions should be discussed in relation to the impact of foreign policy and
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, there can be little doubt that for radicalised young Muslims in Europe
such a connection exists. Thus, as clearly explained by Shehzad Tanweer, one the young 7/7 bombers
in London, in a taped message broadcast on the al-Jazeera satellite TV station on the first anniversary
of the bombing:
For the non-Muslims in Britain, you may wonder what you have done to deserve this. You
are those who have voted in your government who in turn have and still continue to this day
continue to oppress our mothers and children, brothers and sisters from the east to the west
in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq and Chechnya. Your government has openly supported the
genocide of more than 150,000 innocent Muslims in Fallujah.
The message concluded that, “You will never experience peace until our children in Palestine, our
mothers and sisters in Kashmir, and our brothers in Afghanistan and Iraq feel peace.”  In the face of
such perceptions of the world that are held much more widely among Muslims far beyond the small
numbers who carry out acts of terror, the US and UK governments have argued and acted on the basis
that military intervention in Afghanistan and Iraq and a “War on Terror” is necessary for ultimately
enabling the possibility of peaceful co-existence. But in relation to the actions of Osama Bin Laden
and those inspired by him, such as Shehzad Tanweer, Gülen (in Çapan, 2004: 5) explains his position
that: “…the only way to prevent this kind of deeds is that Muslims living the countries seeming to be
Islamic – and I stated earlier that I do not perceive an Islamic world, there are only countries in which
Muslims live – will solve their own problems.”

--- Sayfa 262 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

260
10. “The Importance of Religious Inclusivity”
“Religious establishments as well as other traditions and social arrangements that provide particular
forms of religion with privileged access to social and political institutions need to be re-evaluated.
There is a growing need to imagine and to construct new structural forms for the relationship between
religion(s), state(s) and society(ies) that can more adequately express an inclusive social and political
self-understanding than those which currently privilege majority religious traditions” (Weller, 2005a:
198).
In recent years there has been considerable debate among both Muslims and others around the
relationship between Islam and democracy. Radical secular liberals, traditional “Islamists” such as the
Muslim Brotherhood or the Jamaat-I-Islami, and modern “Islamists” have all shared agreement that
there is a fundamental incompatibility between the two. However, beyond that basic point of
agreement, these three groups diverge. Secular liberals, for example, insist that Muslims have to
“reform” and to “modernize” Islam in order for Islam and democracy to be a compatible in a way that,
from the perspective of the “Islamists”, would be tantamount of “selling-out” authentic Islam.
Traditional “Islamists” – while ultimately seeking to use the modern instrument of the state to
introduce a polity based on the application of the Shar’iah throughout society – have generally been
prepared to use electoral politics as a means towards this end. Others, such the Wahabis of Saudi
Arabia assert their traditions as the authentic form of Islam, while the dominant clerical groupings
among the Shi’a in Iran claim that the revolution that was ushered in by the Ayatollah Khomeini has
created a real Islamic state.
In contrast to these views, Gülen (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A. ed., 2000: 151) points out that while
“Supposedly there are Islamic regimes in Iran and Saudi Arabia”, in fact “they are state-determined
and limited to sectarian approval”.
Gülen’s perspective is different and starts from the position that, “Islam is a religion. It can’t be called
anything else. When the West defeated the Islamic world in military and technology, salvation was
sought in politicizing Islam or transforming it into a political system…. Islam as a religion is based on
enlightening the mind and brightening the heart. Thus faith and worship come first. The fruit of faith
and worship is morality.” Thus, although as previously noted, Gűlen does sometimes point to the
positive aspects of the Ottoman heritage, this is not on the basis that it was a model Islamic state.
In contrast to the regimes in majority Muslim countries who claim to adopt the mantle of Islam,
modern “Islamists” seek to bring about an Islamic polity that is not national in scope, but global,
under that is understood to be a recreated global Muslim Khalifate. As Husain (2007: 142) explains it,
in such a vision, existing majority Muslim countries are “imperial creations and deserved no
recognition”, while the duty of Muslims living in any historical state is, “to prepare the ummah for the
caliph, to swear allegiance to the future Islamic state” (Husain, 2007: 135).
In such an approach, in words originally coined by the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, “al-Islam huwa
as-hall”, or “Islam is the solution” – a phrase which has widespread resonance among ordinary
Muslims but which, in the thinking and action of Islamists of both the more traditional and more
modern kinds, is reinterpreted to refer to the establishment of an Islamic state as the answer to the
fragmentation, tensions, conflicts of the contemporary world.
Again, Gűlen’s vision is one that different from this. Based not only on political realism but also
Islamic scholarship and Qur’anic interpretation, Gűlen (2004: 249-250) argues strongly against

--- Sayfa 263 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

261
entertaining the illusion that difference will  be left behind, maintaining rather that the “….different
beliefs, races, customs and traditions will continue to cohabit in this village”, and also that wanting
anything else is “nothing more than wishing for the impossible.” As a result, he argues that the future
peace of the world lies in “respecting all these differences, considering these differences to be part of
our nature and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences.” Without such dialogue Gülen
believes that  “….it is unavoidable that the world will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes,
fights, and the bloodiest of wars, thus preparing the way for its own end.”
Thus Gűlen accepts neither the attempt to recreate an imagined historical unity, nor one to bring this
about in the future. At the same time, he does advocate a future-oriented vision of Islam, but of a
different kind and with equal relevance to Islam and Muslims in both majority and minority contexts.
Thus in a 2000 interview with Hakan Yavuz, Gűlen (in Yavuz, 2003: 45) summarized his position as
being that, “….Islam does not need the state to survive, but rather needs educated and financially rich
communities to flourish. In a way, not the state but rather community is needed under a full
democratic system”.

11. “The Imperative of Inter-Religious Dialogue”
“Inter-religious dialogue is an imperative for the religious communities and for the states and
societies of which they are a part. There is a need to continue the task of developing appropriate inter-
faith structures at all levels within states and societies and in appropriate transnational and
international structures” (Weller, 2005a: 198).
Modern Islamists have no time for dialogue – certainly not as a principled activity, but also not either
as a pragmatic or even tactical response to the existence of religious and philosophical plurality. As
Husain (2007: 142) puts it, “Muslims who advocated inter-faith dialogue and co-existence we
condemned as having a ‘defeated mind’.” By contrast, Gülen most certainly does not accept such a
contention, nor even does he see dialogue only as a pragmatic response to the need for co-existence
amidst the realities of a pluralistic world. Rather, he sees inter-faith dialogue as an Islamic imperative,
rooted in the Sunnah of the Prophet.
The core of Gűlen’s (in Ünal, A. and Williams, A. ed., 2000: 241-256) commitment to such dialogue is
set out in his article on “The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue: A Muslim Perspective”. This, it is
important to note, was published prior to 9/11. His commitment to dialogue is therefore not merely
reactive and pragmatic, but is rooted in his vision of Islam and the contemporary world. Perhaps the
most comprehensive collection of his thinking about dialogue was developed in his (Gülen: 2004)
book, Towards a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance.
Of this book, the Catholic priest Thomas Michel (in Gülen 2004: i) has said in a foreword that a
significant part of its purpose was as “…..a call to Muslims to a greater awareness that Islam teaches
the need for dialogue and that Muslims are called to be agents and witnesses to God’s universal
mercy” while at the same time (Michel, in Gülen 2004: i-ii) it was also “an invitation to non-Muslims
to move beyond prejudice, suspicion, and half-truths in order to arrive at an understanding of what
Islam is really about.” In his reflections for the Millennium, published Towards a Global Civilization
of Love and Tolerance, Gülen (2004: 231) set out his conviction about the importance of dialogue in
the following way:

--- Sayfa 264 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

262
I believe and hope that the world of the new millennium will be a happier, more just and
more compassionate place, contrary to the fears of some people. Islam, Christianity and
Judaism all come from the same root, have almost the same essentials and are nourished
from the same source. Although they have lived as rival religions for centuries, the common
points between them and their shared responsibility to build a happy world for all of the
creatures of God, make interfaith dialogue among them necessary. This dialogue has now
expanded to include the religions of Asia and other areas. The results have been positive. As
mentioned above, this dialogue will develop as a necessary process, and the followers of all
religion will find ways to become closer and assist each other.

12. Conclusion
In Europe at this historical juncture, there is a need for positive resources that can be drawn upon by
Muslims, Christians and other members of civil society, to contribute to a transformation in the
relationships between religion(s), state and society that will allow peaceful co-existence to become
embedded in the present and to flourish for the future.
That the historic relationships in Europe between religion(s), state and society - and especially
between religion(s) and secularity – are shot through with ambiguity is clear for all to see. And that
the presence of Islam and Muslims presents a challenge to previous models is also clear. Within this
ferment, it is important for Muslims to engage with, and try to understand, the particular histories
that gave rise to the current sets of arrangements (see, for example, Weller, 2006b) in different
European countries. It is also important for the wider society to try, in relation to these matters, to
gain a better and more refined understanding about the inherited traditions of the Islamic world that
have a bearing upon contemporary Muslim understandings of these questions – from classical forms
of Islam found Muslim Empires of the past, through the newer perspectives of traditional “Islamists”,
and of more modernist “Islamists”, to the kind of ideas expressed by Fethullah Gülen.
In parts of the world where Islam has had particularly strong influence, such as the Middle East, the
image of a “mosaic” of religions and culture rather than a “melting pot” of them has historically been
invoked as one that offers the most appropriate pattern for structuring these complex and challenging
relationships. In many ways the classical expression of this was the “millet system” that developed in
the Ottoman Empire and has often been held up by Muslims as an example of the Islamic
accommodation of the plurality of beliefs. In reality this was historically far from perfect, with
Christians and Jews often being treated as inferior members of the Islamic empires (see Ma’oz, 1978).
But in due course reforms granted Christians and Jews official equality within the political
community, although those who insisted on their legal rights of emancipation were often bitterly
opposed.
Thus, partly due to the historical inheritance of this pattern, and partly as a consequence of the
history of colonialism and present global conflicts, the contemporary position of the ancient Christian
communities (see Wessels, 1995) in the Middle East is one in which, as minorities, they have suffered
considerable social and demographic pressure and consequent population attrition, leading to
migratory and refugee movements to the Netherlands and other European countries. Consequently, in
their key areas of historic geographic presence in Syria, Turkey and other similar countries, the
ancient Christian Churches have been struggling to maintain a social foothold.

--- Sayfa 265 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

263
It is also the case that, within the Islamic Empires, Muslims of traditions other than the majority
Sunnis, such as the Shi’as, Ismailis, ‘Alawis and Druzes, have often had an even more difficult position
since they were viewed as being unorthodox or, at best heterodox. They were therefore sometimes
seen as more of a threat to the unity of the ummah than people of religious traditions and
communities that were completely distinct from the household of Islam.
Nevertheless, relative to the history of the patterns found in Christendom for the relationships
between religion(s), state and society and exemplified by the Holy Roman Empire and the Papacy, or
the later Protestant-influenced approach of cujus regio, ejus religio, the traditional “mosaic” approach
was relatively successful within the boundaries of the predominantly Muslim societies in which it
operated. Hence, for many Muslim minorities in Europe today, it continues to have an appeal as a
possible model that, with appropriate modifications, it is argued could now be applied for
understanding and accommodating a variety of religious beliefs and practices in public life.
In fact, within contemporary Europe there are some adaptations of this classic “treaty-based”
approach that might to some extent resonate with what Muslims could realistically hope for within a
European context where they are in the minority rather than majority position. An example of this can
be found in the not widely known but significant Acuerdo de Cooperacíon del Estado Español con las
Comisíon islamica de España395 that, in 1992, was ratified by the Spanish Parliament. This is an
agreement between the Spanish state and its Islamic communities (see P. Antes, 1994, 49-50) and is
parallel to other treaties of a similar kind established with both Protestant Christian and Jewish
communities.
It guarantees a range of rights for Muslims such as civil recognition of religious marriages and the
declaration of mosques as inviolable. As Peter Antes (1994: 50) commented, “The treaty is the most
comprehensive recognition of Muslim rights signed in Europe so far”. However, while this traditional
“mosaic” model might be able to claim some historical success in relation to diverse populations of
broadly settled geographies, its weakness is that it admits of little movement or change. It is therefore
questionable how adequate it is in the context of the globalized population movements and the highly
mixed societies of the contemporary world.
There are no easy solutions here. But in moving towards a conclusion, with regard to the situation of
Christians, people of other faiths and the secular in Europe, it perhaps worth bearing in mind the
following points about “the secular” within the contemporary Christian, secular and religiously plural
landscape of Europe, and as identified by the author as summarised in a recent paper.396

395 In English, “Co-Operation Agreement of the Spanish State with the Islamic  Commission of Spain.”
396  The title of the paper was “Human Rights’, ‘Religion’ and the ‘Secular’: Variant Configurations of Religion(s), State(s)
and Society(ies)”, and it was given at the Institute of Commonwealth Studies, Clemens Nathan Research Centre and
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers’ Colloquium on Human Rights and Religion, held at The Institute of Commonwealth Studies,
London, On 28th February 2005. These summary forms were also presented at in an unpublished conference paper by the
author on “Insiders or Outsiders? Religious Groups, Polite Society and the (Post?) Modern State” at St. Columb’s Park
House 8th Inter-Isles Forum on “Faith and State: Getting the Balance Right”, held at the University of Westminster,
London, 27th January 2007. Publications by the author that expand upon and discuss the summary presentations of these
points as presented here include Weller, 2006b and Weller, 2007.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

264
1.
In the totality of a global historical perspective it is perhaps worth remembering that it is the
“secular” that must be considered to be a new experiment in social organization and
integration.
2.
The reactive origins of the “secular” can be found in the European inheritance of the
Inquisition, “nationalised monopolies of religion” and the impact of the seventeenth century
Wars of Religion and the responses to these of economic liberalism, revolutionary
Republicanism, and the emergence of socialism and Marxism
3.
The European roots of the “secular”, which can make it problematic for societies whose
other experience of imports from Europe has been in terms of colonial and imperial take-
over.
4.
There remains a need to see especially how the “secular” can relate with the Muslim
civilisational heritage.
5.
Acknowledgement of the need explicitly to consider the “secular” can result in formerly
“common sense” formulations of problems and issues being turned on their head, making it
possible to see them from new and previously unrecognized perspectives.
The Christian theologian Robin Gill (1975) once argued that, while reductionist sociological theory
seeks to “explain away” religion in terms of social and economic determinates, because religious
teaching is itself a social factor, and religious bodies are social actors, it is entirely possible that,
“theological variables can become social determinates”.
Bearing this in mind, it is the argument of this paper that the thinking of Gülen and the practical
initiatives of the community that has been inspired by him offers resources that engage with the
secular; are ready for dialogue with Christians; are confident of what Islam can offer, and yet also
acknowledge the current reality of the situation for Muslims and Islam in Europe rather than
promoting only an idealized vision.
While reflecting in a mature way about the achievements of Islamic and Ottoman civilization, they do
not idealize past Islamic states, support current theocratic claims of “really existing Islam”, or support
a radical Trotskyite type “Islamism” that seeks for a future global Khalifate. Because of all this, it is
argued the “theological variables” of Gülen’s teaching and of the movement associated with him have
the potential to become positively transformative “social determinates” towards the embedding and
development of co-existence in European societies.
For the Muslims of Europe, the transformative resources offered by Gülen’s teaching recognise the
need for Muslims, by the way in which they articulate and seek to live out Islam, to overcome the
association that, post-9/11 and 7/7 has become widespread between Islam, Muslims and terror. As
Gülen (in Ünal & Williams, eds., 2000: 248) puts it: “The present, distorted image of Islam that has
resulted from its misuse, by both Muslims and non-Muslims for their own goals, scares both Muslims
and non-Muslims.” Taken in the round, Gülen’s key approaches offer the possibility to Muslims to live
not according to a traditional distinction between dar al-Islam (the land of Islam, or peace) and dar
al-harb (the land of war, or conflict) – which in the hands of “Islamists” have become corrupted
politicised concepts that tend to accentuate division and promote conflictual understandings that
undermine the possibility for peaceful co-existence – but according to to the newly articulated
concept of dar al-hizmet (country of service).

--- Sayfa 267 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

265
Such a rethinking is not an example of the kind of calls for superficial “modernization” of Islam heard
so often today among the secular liberal elites of Europe. Rather, as Yilmaz (2003: 208-237) puts it in
the title of a paper on the movement that has formed around Gülen’s teaching, what his Gülen’s
teaching stimulates is an “ijtihad and tajid by conduct”. In other words, it is the deployment of an
appropriate ijtihad or interpretation that is directed towards Islamically faithful engagement with the
realities of the current historical and geographical and socio-political contexts. And such ijtihad is
both based upon, and directed towards, a tajid or “renewal” of Islam and of Muslims in which
Muslims are once again called to live according to the authentic spirit Islam, whether doing so in
majority Muslim societies or as minorities.
Indeed, it is the argument of this paper there is benefit both to Muslims and the wider society, when a
contribution is made to civil society and to public life that is based on clear Islamic perspectives and
motivations, but which is offered, seen and accepted as one contribution alongside others which also
have their own integrity. For the wider society, the challenge is to appreciate the great depth and
breadth of resources that exist in the heritage of Islamic civilization; the contribution that Anatolian
heritage can make through the full membership of Turkey in the European Union; and also the
spiritual insights and alternative perspectives offered by Islam itself.
For both Muslims and European societies and states, neither phantasmagoric and prejudicial enemy
images, nor real threats to co-existence, can ultimately be overcome by security measures, however
important such measures may be for the immediate safety of citizens and residents. Rather, whatever
are the enemy images and whatever might be the enemy realities that exist, Muslims and others have
no choice but to live alongside one another in Europe.
The only question is about the way in which Muslims and others are currently living in European
societies, and about how they will do so in the future. In responding to that question, this paper
argues that resources from Fethullah Gülen and the movement associated with his thinking offer
important and transformative resources for religion in public life, and for the co-existence of people of
diverse religions and philosophical beliefs.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

266

--- Sayfa 269 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

267

Motivating Peaceful Coexistence:
Understanding Gülen's Pluralism

PART
5

--- Sayfa 270 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

268

--- Sayfa 271 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

269
DIALOGUE AS A SOURCE FOR PEACEFUL CO-EXISTENCE
BETWEEN MUSLIM AND ORTHODOX CHRISTIANS IN A
SECULAR STATE
KARINA V. KOROSTELINA 397

Abstract
In his speeches and writings, Fethullah Gülen stresses the role of democracy, peace, dialogue,
and tolerance in the development of peaceful co-existence between Muslim and non-Muslim
peoples. Some Western concepts of national identity connect tolerance with the submission to
the values of a majority. But, as Gülen explains, ‘Tolerance does not mean being influenced by
others or joining them; it means accepting others as they are and knowing how to get along with
them’. He points out that dialogue decreases our disagreements with one another. This paper
considers dialogue about the formation of common secular identity (national or regional) as a
tool for the development of peaceful co-existence between Muslim and non-Muslim groups in a
secular context. Such dialogue aims to develop a new dual identity, one which is connected with
religious identity and the other which reflects membership in a secular nation. The paper
describes the role of interfaith dialogue in developing tolerance and a common secular identity
with respect to religious identity. Such a dialogue must involve participants in a discussion of the
values, needs, and traditions of each religious group as well as the possibilities for the creation of
a common identity concept that would satisfy and respect the values and needs of all religious
groups. This new common identity resolves contradictions between region and secular state,
changes people’s conceptions of themselves as members of different groups in conflict to
members in a much more inclusive group, and makes attitudes toward other religious groups
more positive, even if they have had a long history of offences. On the basis of a new positive
balance of religious and secular values, of differences and similarities, all members of the new
group can build positive attitudes toward each other.

1. Introduction
In his speeches and writings, Fethullah Gülen stresses the role of democracy, peace, dialogue, and
tolerance in the development of peaceful co-existence between Muslim and non-Muslim populations.
Some Western concepts of national identity connect tolerance with submission to the values of a
majority. But, as Gülen explains, “Tolerance does not mean being influenced by others or joining
them; it means accepting others as they are and knowing how to get along with them”(Gülen 2004a).

397 Associate Professor at the Institute for Conflict Analysis and Resolution, George Mason University, and a Fellow of the
European Research Center of Migration and Ethnic Relation. Prof. Korostelina has been a Fulbright New Century Scholar, a
Kennan Institute Fellow and received grants from the MacArthur Foundation, Soros Foundation, the United State Institute
of Peace, US National Academy of Education, USDS, INTAS, IREX, and Council of Europe. Current interests: identity
conflicts, the relationships between Muslim and non-Muslim populations, conflict resolution and identity management,
history education in conflict and post-conflict societies. Recent publications: The Social Identity and Conflict: Structure,
Dynamic and Implications (Palgrave Macmillian, 2007), Interrelations between National and Ethnic Identity and the
Readiness for Conflict Behavior, in James Peacock (ed.) Identity Matters (Berghahn, 2007). She is an editor of Identity,
Morality and Threat (Lexington, 2007) and Conflicts in Central Asia (Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 4, 2007).

--- Sayfa 272 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

270
As Gülen repeatedly stresses, to overcome violence and hate, people of different religions and faiths
must develop an atmosphere of mutual respect and peaceful co-existence and engage in dialogue. He
stresses that dialogue decreases our disagreements with one another.
This paper analyzes Fethullah Gülen’s approach to dialogue and tolerance and uses it as a framework
for the development of a dialogue considering the formation of a common secular identity (national or
regional). The paper argues that it is possible to negotiate different identities and shows how to
employ dialogue as a tool for reconciling identity differences. The aim of a dialogue like this is the
development of a peaceful co-existence between Muslim and non-Muslim groups within a secular
context. Such a dialogue leads to the development of a new dual identity with one component
connected to religious identity and another component that reflects membership in a secular nation.
The paper concludes with a summary of the role of interfaith dialogue in the promotion of national
and international tolerance, peace, and mutual understanding.

2. Gülen’s Approach to Dialogue
Since the early 1980’s, Gülen has developed an approach to inter-religious understanding and has
formulated a framework for an Islamic approach to interfaith dialogue. “Gülen, in his career as a state
preacher in Turkey and as an inspirational scholar and teacher to people throughout Turkey and
beyond, has championed dialogue as a necessary commitment and activity in the contemporary
world” (Carroll 2007:12). Through his “dialogue” with other thinkers and writers with different
perspectives, Gülen showed the importance of dialogue in the process of revision of knowledge by
focusing profoundly on the issues of peace and human life. Gülen formulated his conception of
dialogue within the framework of the religio-philosophical worldview of Islam, which protects
humanity and categorically forbids any disrespect for it. “Gülen… has a clear vision of human
greatness, of the traits that define great human beings, those who actualize in themselves the highest
and best of human potential” (Carroll 2007:38).
Even though Gülen acknowledges the differences between the West and Muslim countries, he sees no
innate incongruity between Islam and democracy in general.  He shows that both approaches have a
basic commitment to human beings and their essential rights. Thus, dialogue between people of
different cultures and faiths could bring mutual understanding, respect, and dedication to justice.
“Dialogue means the coming together of two or more people to discuss certain issues, and thus the
forming of a bond between these people. In that respect, we can call dialogue an activity that has
human beings at its axis” (Gülen 2004b). Dialogue about identities does not require the acceptance of
another group’s way of life or values, nor does it provoke assimilation. It offers an opportunity to
understand the beliefs, ideas, and positions of others, as well as the basis of their identity. “Accepting
all people as they are, regardless of who they are, does not mean putting believers and unbelievers on
the same side of the scales. According to our way of thinking, the position of believers and unbelievers
has its own specific value… I have such strong feelings and thoughts about him this does not prevent
me from entering into dialogue with someone who does not think or believe the same.” (2002a).
The conflicts between European governments and Muslim minorities in the past several years have
made clear the necessity of dialogue about vital issues of tolerance, identity and religion in society. As
Carroll stresses, “We may isolate ourselves and craft the arc of our lives into familiar orbits of people
who look, think, speak, believe, and pray like us, but such isolation or minimizing of difference is not
workable over time. In today’s world of global connectedness, we must develop the capacity to

--- Sayfa 273 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

271
dialogue and create relatedness with people vastly different from us. Part of that project involves
finding ideas, beliefs, purposes, projects, and so forth, on which we can achieve resonance with each
other” (Carroll 2007:11).  In his article Tolerance in the Life of the Individual and Society, Fethullah
Gülen points out that “Today, more than anything else, our society is in need of tolerance… our
citizens in European countries can only live in harmony in those countries by means of a vast
atmosphere of tolerance” (Gülen 2004a). For Gülen, dialogue, tolerance, and trust reinforce each
other: tolerance is the acceptance of differences that arise from dialogue in order to pursue the larger
goal of cooperation. “Hostility is unacceptable. Relationships must be based on belief, love, mutual
respect, assistance, and understanding instead of conflict and realization of personal interest. Social
education encourages people to pursue lofty ideals and to strive for perfection, not just to run after
their own desires. Right calls for unity, virtues bring mutual support and solidarity, and belief secures
brotherhood and sisterhood. Encouraging the soul to attain perfection brings happiness in both
worlds” (Gülen 2002a).
Gülen has not only helped develop the conception of interfaith dialogue, but has actively contributed
to the development of concrete action across the globe. He personally brought about several initiatives
that strengthened connections among people and cultures involved in conflict. "Our ongoing activities
are for the good of all humanity. They should not be considered limited to our own country, Turkey"
(Gülen 1993). Thus, in the late 1980’s, Gülen initiated dialogue between Greeks and Turks in Turkey
in order to discuss discrimination and prejudice against the Greeks. He established good relations
with the Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew. This dialogue brought hope and positive change for
Greeks in Turkey. Gülen also supported education in Armenia and encouraged Turkish businessmen
to establish a high school in Yerevan. A similar school was also established in Moscow. Activities such
as these emphasize the prospects and importance of interfaith dialogue.

3. Negotiating Identities
As theories show, people sharing the same identity believe they have similar fates and interests and, in
some cases, share a mutual experience of deprivation and aggravation due to another group. Identity
groups like these establish the common goals of improving their social situation and of reinforcing
ingroup loyalty and support in order to achieve their aims. Radical religious identity leads to the clear
recognition of intergroup differences and can even reinforce the willingness of group members to
perceive others as enemies, encouraging them to fight for power and resources. The negotiation of a
national identity aims at bringing together previously incompatible identities within a larger, common
group concept that would be mutually acceptable to everyone and would connect all groups and
parties. As Kelman (1997b, 2001) stresses, the possibility of negotiating and changing identity rests on
two facts: (1) identities are not zero-sum concepts like territory and resources; and (2) as social
constructs, they can be reconstructed and redefined. “In fact, the reconstruction of identity is a
regular, ongoing process in the life of any national group. Identities are commonly reconstructed,
sometimes gradually and sometimes radically, as historical circumstances change, crises emerge,
opportunities present themselves, or new elites come to the fore” (Kelman 1997b:338).
Undoubtedly, national identities contain some core elements that cannot be negotiated: a sense of
peoplehood, attachment to the land, confidence in history, and commitment to culture and religion
(Kelman 2001). In order to protect the essential components of identity, only a few central elements
can be reconsidered and redefined. To reduce intergroup tensions and develop a common

--- Sayfa 274 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

272
understanding, these elements can be discussed and negotiated during specially organized
workshops.
One of the basic assumptions of the theory of protracted identity-based conflict is that basic needs are
not negotiable and that people need universal justice. In reality, basic needs and conceptions of justice
are also identity-based concepts, and their meaning depends on the meaning and structure of
particular ingroup identities. Security, freedom, and community have different meanings and are
perceived in various ways among people with different social identities. Even for the same person, a
basic human need can have a different meaning depending on which social identity is most salient for
that individual at that moment.
Conceptions of justice also differ among groups. For some, justice means revenge and prosecution of
perpetrators; for others, it suggests reimbursement in terms of money, contributions, or labor. In
other cases, people can be satisfied with truth and reconciliation committees where people who have
committed violence confess and admit their crimes, and some communities are ready to forgive the
perpetrators if they show their commitment to peace. The study conducted in Uganda (Pham et al.
2005) has showed that four groups within the country (the Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, and Soroti regions)
have different perceptions of justice. Nearly half of the respondents perceived “reconciliation” as
“forgiveness” (52%). Thirty-one percent defined justice as trials; however, the respondents in Soroti
showed only 15 percent agreement with this statement. For one-third (35%) of people in that region,
justice meant reconciliation, while only 12 percent and 3 percent of Gulu and Kitgum, respectively,
agreed that justice was reconciliation. Eleven percent of all respondents associated justice with “truth
and fairness,” while 22 percent of the respondents in Kitgum saw this association.
Out of all the respondents in the study, 24 percent thought that reconciliation required confession,
while 23 percent said that reconciliation was connected with “togetherness, unity, and peace.” Only 9
percent associated reconciliation with a traditional ceremony. The understanding of human rights
also varied among the respondents: 29 percent said that human rights meant a “life with peace and
security and without fear”; more than one-third of them mentioned freedom of speech, 21 percent
mentioned dignity, 18 percent noted socioeconomic rights, 16 percent cited justice, and 12 percent
mentioned freedom of movement.
Understanding of the different meanings associated with concepts like justice, reconciliation and
basic human needs can help to reconcile different identities, even conflictual ones. An identity
negotiation workshop includes a dialogue which considers differences in the meaning of these basic
concepts, and which develops ways for their accommodation. Because of variations in the perception
of basic human needs and justice among different groups, it is possible to negotiate these concepts
among groups in order to develop new common perceptions and a new identity which reconciles
existing identities.
The process of identity negotiation in a workshop setting has been described by Kelman (1982, 1997b,
2001, 2004) as an informal, unofficial progression of give-and-take among groups whose ideas of
their respective national identities conflict with one another. In this paper I describe negotiation
processes that are designed to create a new common identity or reconcile conflictual identities. Such a
practice can be organized into different forms, ranging from mediation between ethnic groups in the
self-determination process of creating a new nation, to the redefinition of identity through
reconsidering history, and from negotiations among political leaders to discussion workshops in
communities.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

273
Kelman (2001) describes negotiation of national identity within the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. He stresses that each group perceives its own relationship to land and history, the defining
element of identity, as its exclusive right, rejecting the claims of the opposing group as illegitimate. To
overcome this, the parties have to “accept the possibility that certain elements of identity may be
shared with the other, acknowledging that the other also has a profound attachment to the land,
anchored in authentic historical ties to it” (Kelman 2001:193). Sharing the land requires developing
common elements of identity as well as an understanding that land can belong to two groups
simultaneously. As Kelman describes in his work, the Israelis and Palestinians began to accept a
shared concept of land but failed to perceive Jerusalem as a mutual element of their identities.
The example of Morocco shows that national identity can be negotiated in two ways: through an
exchange among the new nationalist elites, and by stressing characteristics and traditions common for
all groups. A vision of a national Moroccan identity was developed during a negotiation led by the
king as a compromise among various visions of the elite (for a more in-depth analysis, see Mezran
2001).
One of the most important problems for newly independent Morocco was a confrontation between the
mainly urban Arab Istiqlal and the Berber tribes of the interior. During its period of dominance, the
Istiqlal government forced the assimilation of the Berbers into a larger Moroccan identity. A Berber
was defined as a man who had never been to school, and the Istiqlal goal was to change the Berbers’
identity, language, and way of life to fit its Arab nationalist model. Between 1956 and 1958, the Istiqlal
Party developed policies to impose a dominant Arab identity on the Berber parts of Morocco. All local
leadership posts were held by Arabs; the Berber college, established by the French, was transformed
into an ordinary school; Berber-language broadcasts were prohibited. These Istiqlal policies soon led
to Berber uprisings against the Arab-dominated government and its policies.
King Mohammed realized the importance of creating a common concept of Morocco’s national
identity and decided to act as a mediator in order to facilitate agreement around the various
competing concepts of identity. The concept of national Moroccan identity had various meanings
among different parties, including the Arabist party, the Islamist conservative portion of the Istiqlal
party, the Democratic Party, the Berber socialist Popular Movement, and secular republican Marxist
groups. Instead of acting as a party in this conflict over identity, Mohammed V declared himself a
national leader and symbol of national unity. He aimed to develop a shared national identity and to
unite fragmented elites under the monarchy. To make the negotiation process more compelling, the
king himself intervened as the mediator at the center of numerous competing visions and interests.
A series of meetings with the leaders of all the competing groups was organized to discuss visions of
national identity and to find common ground for a final agreement. The basic concept of national
identity which emerged included three main components: Islam, Arabism, and Moroccanism.
Moroccan Islam became the central component of the uniting national identity. Mohammed V
stressed the strong connection between Islamic and democratic principles, the “innovative” role of
Islam in society, and its function as a basis for national identity.
To mediate differences between the Arabist Istiqlal and the Berberist Popular Movement, the king
developed the idea of Moroccan Arabism, stressing that the vast majority of Moroccans are not pure
Arabs but rather Arabized Berbers. As a basis for territorial nationalism that would unite different
elites, Mohammed V developed the conception of Moroccanism (Marocaineté). This national

--- Sayfa 276 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

274
territorial idea became the main content of a new Moroccan national identity that encompassed, but
never denied, local Arab and Berber as well as tribal and urban identities.
Using these three concepts, King Mohammed developed agreement among all the rival groups. He
conducted his negotiations on the basis of an “issue” framework, approaching the development of a
common identity by discussing single issues. As Mezran (2001) describes, “in dealing with the
democratization issue, he [the King] acted in such a way as to appease each party within this
framework while asking concessions of others. Thus, in exchange for their consent to the formation of
a National Consultative Assembly, the King offered to the left wing of the Istiqlal a wide agrarian
reform. To the Berbers, after secret negotiations the monarch offered recognition of their political
party, the Popular Movement. On another table, in exchange for their acquiescence on the Berber
issue, the King offered to the Istiqlal the implementation of a wide campaign of Arabization through
the school development program to be held in Arabic and to the Berbers wider representation in the
army and in the bureaucracy.” (156)
Thus, while negotiating a new national identity, the king of Morocco invented the concept of
“Arabized Berbers” and satisfied the most important concerns of Arabs (such as teaching Arabic in all
schools) and Berbers (recognition of political party) within the framework of a unified nation (Byman
1997; Mezran 2001).
In addition to being an integral part of nation building, the negotiation of identities is also essential in
the process of developing peaceful coexistence between former adversaries. Conflictual identities have
to be reconfigured to accommodate a new type of intergroup relations and to accept multiple
meanings of events. Such a step-by-step process of re-creating identity, demanding the cooperation of
both parties, characterized the negotiations between France and Germany  after the World War II.
These negotiations focused on overcoming the conflictual past and accentuating the two nations’
commonalities through a process of mutual reidentification: “brothers who have engaged in a long
fratricidal war” (for a more in-depth analysis, see Rosoux 2001).
For centuries, French and German people had negative stereotypes of one another, perceiving each
other as unfriendly and aggressive. As Rosoux (2001) stresses, in the last century, the French
associated the German and Prussian identities with “barbarism”, a concept further tied to
Protestantism in the eyes of Catholics and militarism in the eyes of  Republicans. The French
considered the Germans physically and intellectually inferior as well as morally uncivilized. The
Germans, on the other hand, accused the French of lacking fundamental public and private ethical
norms and religious beliefs. The Germans perceived their nation as dynamic and prosperous, while
describing France as weak and decadent. This mutual hatred and opposition were inflamed by
numerous wars and conflicts. These negative perceptions became a significant part of each nation’s
identity, stressing differences and opposition between the two nations.
In 1958, Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer decided to redefine the relationship between France
and Germany. This required a reconsideration of perceptions and memories, the reconstruction of a
common past, as well as the development of a basis for the common interpretation of future events
and collaborations. This process necessitated the acceptance of the complexity contradictions of the
past as well as an understanding of the other party’s meaning of events and actions.
Between 1958 and 1962, de Gaulle and Adenauer had several meetings aimed at overcoming the
negative perceptions rooted in past events and at achieving reconciliation. They stressed that the
former enemies were determined to become friends. One of the most crucial steps was understanding

--- Sayfa 277 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

275
and officially recognizing the sufferings of the other nation. The new changes in German national
identity included a confrontation with the past and acceptance of responsibility for the most difficult
episodes of national history. De Gaulle also recognized the negative actions of France and described
Germany as a “great nation.” Both nations decided not to emphasize the conflictual past, but instead
to highlight the solidarity that also characterized relations between them. The history of war and
conflict between the French and Germans was redefined as a common past of collective suffering, and
both nations became brothers who had mutually endured a common tragedy.
In Ukraine, I conducted workshops with community and NGO leaders on negotiating the meaning of
national identity and sources for the formation of a new common identity. The participants discussed
the values, needs, and traditions of each ethnic group and the possibilities for the creation of a
common identity concept that would satisfy and respect the values and needs of all groups. By using
the appreciative inquiry method, I encouraged the participants to think about possible actions which
might help lead to national identity formation. A catalogue of such actions was created and several
activities were developed in the participants’ communities. Among them were celebrations of holidays
of other ethnic groups, the Common Culture festival, and the Day of Crimea. One of the most amazing
initiatives was the creation of a collage of the elements of Common Culture in several schools.
Students drew different objects that characterized their culture and then created a wall collage that
included all the ethnic groups of Ukraine.

4. Identity Dialogue
Identity dialogue aims to transform dominant identities into multiple identities with polymodal
meanings. The structure of narratives that are based on the perception of “They as an enemy” and that
reflect negative attitudes, feeling, and stereotypes, can be replaced by a new structure rooted in a
nonviolent self-image. This type of dialogue has to involve participants in a discussion of the values,
needs, and traditions of each religious group and the possibilities for the creation of a common
identity concept that would satisfy and respect the values and needs of all religious groups. This new
common identity resolves contradictions between religion and the secular state, expands people’s
conceptions of membership from exclusive groups in conflict to a single more inclusive group, and
makes attitudes toward other religious groups more positive, even in spite of a long history of mutual
offences. On the basis of a positive balance between religious and secular values as well as differences
and similarities, all members of the new group develop positive attitudes and stereotypes of each
other.
The first step for identity reconstruction involves increasing awareness of the role of identity in
conflicts, of We-They perceptions, and of collective axiology which leads to violence. Stories of
different conflicts and violent actions, analyzed through the prism of identity, provide insights about
salience and dominance of identity, alterations of perception, misbalanced and projective axiologies,
and accepted or expected aggressive behaviors. It is important that the cases of conflict discussed at
this stage of the workshop be dissimilar to the conflict in which the participants are themselves
involved. Similar events and situations will provoke comparisons and strengthen negative attitudes
and emotions. The more distinct the cases are from the participants’ experience, the lower the
resistance to understanding the possibility of misperceptions. Thus, in Crimea, where conflict
developed between Muslim Crimean Tartars and Orthodox Russians, the discussion of conflict in
Bosnia exacerbates strong negative feelings and aggravates aggressive attitudes toward other ethnic

--- Sayfa 278 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

276
groups. On the other hand, the discussion of conflicts perceived as very different from the Crimean
situation, such as discriminative practices in the Dominican Republic or violence in Sudan and
Rwanda, allows for more objective analysis which increases the understanding of the roots of vicious
actions and which facilitates changes in perceptions, leading to the recognition of aggressive
behaviors of one’s own group.
The recognition of the violent actions of one’s ingroup, as well as the human rights of outgroups,
poses a threat to ingroup identity, which rests on the idea of “positive We–negative They”. As Gülen
stressed, “Many Muslims, even educated and conscious ones, believe the West seeks to undermine
Islam with ever-more subtle and sophisticated methods… Western colonialism is remembered. The
Ottoman State collapsed due to European attacks. Foreign invasions of Muslim lands were followed
with great interest in Turkey. The gradual "transformation" of Islam into an ideology of conflict and
reaction or into a party ideology also made people suspicious of Islam and Muslims… For interfaith
dialogue to succeed, we must forget the past, ignore polemics, and focus on common points” (Gülen
2002b). Dialogue also can change the negative perception of Muslims: “This negative image has been
fed to the world and now we must once more communicate the essential facet of Islam to those who
are presumed to be civilized, using the principle of "gentle persuasion" (Gülen 2004b).
 The acknowledgment of negative ingroup actions requires reviewing and reconceptualizing ingroup
identity in ways that always invoke strong resistance. Ingroup members have a strong desire to defend
their positive self-image and defy negative information that can destroy it. Stressing other positive
components of the group’s identity, such as cultural heritage, deep traditions, history of peaceful
coexistence with other groups, and so on, can help preserve a high level of self-esteem and ingroup
pride.
 Such narrative intervention has to emphasize the positive features in the self-description of an
ingroup, such as “peaceful people,” “value of tolerance,” “open-mindedness and understanding,” and
“pleasure of forgiveness.” These features always exist in the self-descriptions of all peoples and serve
as powerful sources of self-esteem and pride. As Gülen points out, “I can and do say that peace, love,
forgiveness, and tolerance are fundamental to Islam” (Gülen 2004c). He continues: “Indeed, peace is
of the utmost importance to Islam; fighting and war are only secondary occurrences which are bound
to specific reasons and conditions. In that respect, we can say that if an environment of peace where
all can live in peace and security cannot be achieved in this land, then it would be impossible for us to
do any good service for society or for humanity” (Gülen 2004b).
As Gülen describes, “Another aspect of establishing and maintaining dialogue is the necessity of
increasing the interests we have in common with other people. In fact, even if the people we talk with
are Jews and Christians, this approach still should be adopted and issues that can separate us should
be avoided altogether” (Gülen 2004c).
By stressing peaceful images of the ingroup and the outgroup simultaneously, dialogue can provoke
supporting narratives that describe the ingroup’s peaceful history and glory as well as positive
situations in interethnic relations. Such storytelling by different constituents of each group will
reinforce these narratives through complimentary ideas. The positive emotions produced during the
dialogue workshops will strengthen the formation of peaceful self-concepts, with an emphasis on
tolerance, reconciliation, and goodwill.
To turn such models into positive attitudes and actions, the intervener has to take the next step: form
a common, overarching identity that can lead to the de-escalation of conflict. Common or shared

--- Sayfa 279 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

277
identities can reduce intergroup hostility by minimizing attention to ethnic/racial/religious
differences and instead creating the sense that all involved are “one unit.” Sources for an overarching
identity can be found in a common geographic location, common national ideas, shared community
problems, and so forth.  For example, Gülen shows the similarities of democracy and Islam: “In
democratic societies, people govern themselves as opposed to being ruled by someone above. The
individual has priority over the community in this type of political system, being free to determine
how to live his or her own life. Individualism is not absolute, though. People achieve a better existence
by living within a society and this requires that they adjust and limit their freedom according to the
criteria of social life... As Islam holds individuals and societies responsible for their own fate, people
must be responsible for governing themselves” (Gülen 2002a).
By asking questions about positive present and future developments and the possibilities of
collaboration with others, the intervener can reinforce the formation of a common identity. The
intervener’s task is to facilitate the creation of narratives of productive partnership, which are based
on peaceful concepts of the ingroup and which emphasize possible positive images of outgroups.
The formation of a new common identity is possible only if ingroup members do not perceive that the
new overarching identity being created poses any danger or threat to their primary identity
(ethnic/racial/religious).. If values, core ideas, or new identity needs contradict the possible
(perceived) values and ideas of the existing identity, a new circle of violence can begin as a response to
this sense of threat. The intervener has to construct the concept and perception of the new common
identity very carefully, using narratives of existing collaboration and situations of successful
teamwork. By asking such questions as “What can we do together to make our future better?” and
“What can we do for our children?”, practitioners can shift the emphasis of narratives from past
opposition to mutual understanding, mutual responsibilities, and the mutual defense of human rights
among former enemies. In this case, the concepts of a peaceful ingroup and of a new “We-ness” will be
developed simultaneously and will reinforce each other.

5. Conclusion
In his teaching and writing, Gülen constantly stresses the necessity of dialogue as the way to overcome
differences and bring about peace to society. “People with different ideas and thoughts are either
going to seek ways of getting along by means of reconciliation or they will constantly fight with one
another…. In fact, our nation should have this dynamic today and should give it priority; it should
represent tolerance to the world because our glorious ancestors captured the hearts of people by
means of tolerance and became the protectors of the general peace. The longest period of peace in the
Balkans and the Middle East, which have always been volatile areas, was realized with the enduring
tolerance of our ancestors. From the moment that tolerance and those great representatives left
history, this region became void of peace and contentment…At the same time, our citizens in
European countries can only live in harmony in those countries by means of a vast atmosphere of
tolerance” (Gülen 2004a).
The formation of a peaceful common identity requires a set of actions that includes increasing
identity awareness, re-conceptualizing salient identities, negotiating a common identity concept,
and forming a civic and multicultural meaning of national identity. The construction and
understanding of national identity can be created by the facilitation and mediation of an ongoing
dialogue among representatives of ethnic and religious groups. Gülen points out essential

--- Sayfa 280 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

278
components of the process of dialogue, including the recognition of the ingroup’s violent actions
and the human rights of the outgroup, and focusing on common points.  He also stresses the
importance of emphasizing the positive features in the self-description of an ingroup, such as
“peaceful people,” “value of tolerance,” “open-mindedness and understanding,” and “pleasure of
forgiveness.” Gülen argues that no interfaith dialogue will be successful without increasing
interest in the values and ideas that people have in common and without an understanding of the
similarities between democracy and Islam.
Dialogue about the meaning and content of a common national identity also includes discussion of
and planning for specific actions in specific regions that must be achieved in order for the successful
formation of this identity to take place. The formation of a national identity with an emphasis on
multicultural and civic meanings will help to construct a society with (1) equal rights for all ethnic
groups and adequate resources to maintain their ethnic culture and (2) a distinctive non-ethnic civic
culture with peaceful coexistence and civic responsibility among all citizens. A new common identity
would include elements of the particular ethnic and religious identities and common goals, values,
and aims. It would be based on the reconciliation of past grievances, with an emphasis on future
mutual development and peaceful coexistence within the state. As  Gülen stresses “we can say that if
an environment of peace where all can live in peace and security cannot be achieved in this land, then
it would be impossible for us to do any good service for society or for humanity” (Gülen 2004b).

--- Sayfa 281 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

279
REFLECTIONS ON EUROPEAN MULTICULTURALISM,
ISLAM AND PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE: TARIQ RAMADAN
AND FETHULLAH GÜLEN
ERKAN TOGUSLU 398

Abstract
The Islamic scholars Fethullah Gülen and Tariq Ramadan are two major personalities whose
ideas and views are admired and valued by the Muslim community, especially its younger
generations, in Europe. These two thinkers are calling for a better understanding of civilizational
and religious pluralism, a moderate way of practising Islam, and the coexistence of different
ethnic and religious affiliations. Their ideas promote universal human rights, tolerance and
forgiveness among European peoples in contexts marked by mistrust, intolerance and fear. The
assassination of Theo van Gogh, the Pope’s lecture in Regensburg, the ‘cartoons affairs’, revealed
the heightening of tensions and how much European multicultural societies are in need peaceful
voices to reduce the misunderstandings that create fearful communities on the brink of open
hostilities. Both these scholars affirm the role of democracy, and speak out against terrorism,
racism, Islamophobia and prejudice, and in favour of cultural pluralism. This paper analyses the
circulation of their ideas among the younger generation, their education and dialogue initiatives,
and the cassettes of lectures that have opened up a space where ideas about human civic
responsibility, democracy, citizenship, pluralism, dialogue and tolerance can take root.

1. Introduction
In recent years questions take on particular importance between Muslims and western societies that
these issues not only lead Muslims to reformulate things but also the interaction between Islam and
Europe in spaces, discursive parallel arenas as describes Frazer,399 and The nature of Muslim’s
presence in Europe is changing and we cannot identify Europeans Muslim temporary guest worker.
Göle notes that the interpenetration and interaction make close West and East, Islam and Europe and
give the new challenges.400 As a result of this new phenomena, Islam cannot only still link to Arabs,
Turks, Pakistanis, it becomes as a European phenomena. Muslims are now permanent part of
Western civilization, however the history of relations between Europe and Islam is dated till 7th
century, begun with conquest of Spain by Omayyad’s and from east the Turkish pressure, but this
presence is obviously limited and did not touch the whole Europe. The phenomena of growing Muslim
presence in Europe is a new phenomena, is looked with new visibility like as Muslim headscarf,
Muslim schools, market, the everyday life practices. In major European capital cities, the Muslim
population’s presence and visibility is clearly seen. The demographical aspect, the increase of later,

398 Currently studying for PhD in sociology at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Paris. Research interests:
the production of Islamic actors in the public sphere, pietist movements such as the Fethullah Gülen movement,
interactions between Muslim and Christians in a secular context.
399 Nancy Fraser,. "Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy" in
Habermas and the Public Sphere, Craig Calhoun, (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992, pp. 109-142.
400 Nilüfer Göle, Interpénétrations. L'Islam et l'Europe, Paris, Galaade Editions, 2005

--- Sayfa 282 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

280
the existence of different ethnics Muslims among European societies are dealing with coexistence,
plurality, integration, terrorism, democracy, the ability of habits and manners in public life and
nowadays Islam and Muslim actors through their visibility and demands shape European mind and
history. They take part the symbolic role in definition of European identity by creating new debates
and challenges that Europe faces today as the relation between state and religion, the place of sacred
in the common public sphere, the collective European identity. The Muslim factor is not only
considered a geographical and demographical terms, the new dimension in a multicultural Europe
offer a range of opportunities containing new challenges for new Europe. Europe’s engagement with
enlightenment is not achieved; this communal project is continued as a response inherited with
intellectual, practical of Islamic-Muslim occurrence. Nevertheless, the new issues relating the place of
religion, especially Islam in Europe, the western societies seem to pursue a closer Union. The debate
issue Turkish membership candidate mention us this question; the political and religious tolerance,
European identity, the relation between sacred and profane.
Multiple face of Islam, even ethnic diversity, cleavages due sociopolitical and generational differences,
is at the core of the institution of Islam en Europe. Europe’s Muslims is divided in several groups and
don’t form a monolithic group.401 New young Muslim generation choose to identify themselves with
their country in which they live and raise, prefer to speak in French, English or Dutch. The emergence
of Islamic identities with national local loyalty is reinforced and enhanced by schooling, working.
Bayat remarks the shift from the discourse of politicization of Islam to personal pietism, ethics after 11
September terrorists attacks.402 In this new period of accentuation on pietism and on ethic, the new
Islamic faces in challenging with ancient discourses. Gülen’s and Ramadan’s views, their typology and
portrait as new pioneer of Islam in secular context remain us the shifting of pioneers of Islamic
thinkers and thinking.  The emergence of new personalities is quiet different  in terms of the
evaluation of the West, nationalization, ijtihad, coexistence between non Muslims  while the first
generation like Mawdudi, Al-Banna emphasizes on anti imperialism and against westernization, the
second group of Islamic intellectuals speak about the coexistence between East and West, the
pluralism, the democracy and human rights.

2. Making of Muslim Youth and the New Islamic Intellectuals: Speaking for Western
Muslims
After a traditional Islamic education in eastern medreses and mosque school, he continued his
formation at secular school. This was fallowed the official preacher in Religious affairs. Gülen makes
speak about him since the nineties when he was appeared in public secular sphere during the
interfaith dinner organized by the journalist and writer foundation affiliated Gülen movement.403
These dinners contribute gathering people from various religious, political and ideological identities.
Since 1998, he lives a voluntary exile in the United States after laics pressure. His close relations with
political leaders, his charisma, and his sermons eloquent make him surfer on the media. As a matter
of fact, his sphere of activity should have increased over the past years. He shows a capacity to adopt
his discourses and speeches in variable secular context, having a talent to fascinate his supporters,

401 Leïla BABES, L'islam positif. La religion des jeunes musulmans de France, Editions de l'Atelier, Paris, 1997.
402 Asef Bayat, “Piety, Privilege and Egyptian Youths”, ISIM Newsletter 10, July 2002.
403 For more information see www.gyv.org.tr

--- Sayfa 283 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

281
spreading among the young university students and businessman.  Fascinating people by his tears
during his sermons, his ability to contact and circulate his message reveals new Islamic intellectual
character shaped Islamic discourse and emotional aspect that form his spiritual dimension. Raised in
conservative pious family, received religious education and secular teaching, acquiring these two
spheres, offer him the possibility to speak about different themes. After secular project and forced
laicization and modernization by the new rulers of Turkish Republic which deligitimate and decline
the ulama’s powers replaced by the new bureaucrates elites whose formation is culturally and socially
differentiate. On this point, Özdalga notes:
 “ (Gülen) adopts a solid, conventional Hanafi/Sunni understanding of the religious traditions. So it
does not seem to be the content of the religious interpretation as such, but the very existence of a new
relatively strong group, filled with religious fervor and claiming a place in the public arena that
annoys the establishment in Turkey radical margins who see this as a threat to their ideology.”404
His profile is closer to the alim-arif typology. Gaborieau indicates “oulema-soufi” type that is seen in
the same character.405 A heuristic glance at Gülen’s works and speeches enable us to define him as
arif-alim who gather two poles which are called zahiri (exoteric) and batini (esoteric). Gülen plays the
double role and figure: arif and alim, spiritual and rational, the sacred and the profane. This two
figures intermingle in an extricable way as noting Watt that many soufis were retired from this world,
at the same time a great astonishing number of Sufis were lawyer, Muslim scholars, scientist like Al-
Qusahyri, on of the great personage soufi at his time, was a shafite lawyer.406
Gülen’s sermons are marked by a strong emotion, sacred tears which accompany pain and psychic
state that encourages the cry of people who are present in his sermon. Through this emotional aspect
relating with esoteric style of interpretation of Qur’an, in various subjects, Gülen refers a spiritual
knowledge (marifa), is pointed out. He emphasizes this sufistic way of interpretation, while
Ramadan’s discourse is outlined by an academic critical position and scholar’s approach, Gülen
develops a language shaped sufistic idioms, narrations.
Ramadan was born in Geneva, a Swiss Muslim. His grandfather Hasan al-Banna was the founder of
Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and his father was also is a figure in that community and exiled to
Switzerland. He studied philosophy, French literature, social scinces and Islamic studies. He is an
advisor in many governments and teaching in many universities as a visiting professeur. His works
emphasize on Islamic studies, theology and European Muslims and he endeavors the reinterpretation
of Islam on many issues.
Ramadan’s use of fluent English and French is very influent on young Muslims. Ramadan wants to
penetrate in European public sphere via political critics, his Islamic talent and capacity. He uses a
political language which is not contradictory to the principles of democracy and the rule of law. This
critical and reactionary language and discourse is different from the Gülen’s discourse which is not

404 Özdalga, “Redeemer or Outsider? The Gülen Community in the Civilizing Process”, in Islam in Contemporary Turkey:
The Contributions of Fethullah Gülen, The Muslim World, V. 95, N. 3, 2005, p. 441
405 Marc Gaborieau et Malika Zeghal, « Autorités religieuses en islam », Archives de sciences sociales des religions, 125
(2004) Autorité religieuses en islam, p. 7 and Ahmet Turan Alkan, “Entellektüel ile Arifin Kesişme Noktası”, in Ufuk Turu,
op.cit, p. 202-203
406 W. Montgomery Watt, Muslim Intellectual, A study of al-Ghazali, Edinburg, Edinburg University Press, 1971, p. 128
www.muslimphilosophy.com/gz/articles/watt-p1.htm

--- Sayfa 284 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

282
protest. While Gülen’s discourse outlines the moral values to the fulfillment of Muslim’s morality
through the formation of ethical principles and he opposes to violence, thus the main aim is to
develop the inner life of all Muslims, in Ramadan’s writings we see the critical approach which is
result of his scholar background.
The controversial multifaced discourse of Gülen and Ramadan is hard to analyze and classify, so
people call them ‘double faced’, ‘making takiyya’, ‘having a hidden agenda’, ‘hypocrite’.407 One claims
that they threaten the universal democratic values, human rights by hiding their real identity and
strategy concerning islamization of people. To followers, they are man of dialogue and Islamic
reformer who want to reformulate Islamic issues dealing with new questions in secular world. Both of
them refused that they are called islamist. Their reflects about putting a distance vis-à-vis islamists
and political Islam are lacking in their approach.
The Europe and Occident is major theme seens in his writings. He believed that the crusades,
European colonialism had influenced Muslim community and Westernization have a deep impact on
Muslim societies.
This appearance of a new charismatic leader testifies in modern society where secular orientation is
dominant in cultural, political and scientific fields. They push their faith oriented views in hosted
societies and Muslim’s daily life. Among the secular elites and intellectuals, the modern Islamic
figures are raised and a new style of Muslim intellectual emerged. These new could be identified
authentically Islamic and
“… a continuation of the radical tajdid tradition in Islam. In practice, they built on the
accomplishments of the early Islamic modernists and the new-style Muslim associations.
…but at the same time, went far beyond the traditionalism of the remaining conservative
ulama establishment.”408
Thus Fethullah Gülen and Ramadan assume this role of old traditional ulema left by the secular
politics and they represent an orthodox modern Islam. In turkey, at the end of Ottoman Empire, this
new Islamic corps appears and starts from Tanzimad period marked by young ottomans who are
identified as bureaucrats-ulemas.409

3. Ijtihad and Islamic Renaissance
Ijtihad is an important element of renewal in Islamic history and tradition through which the ulema
play a crucial role to determine the needs in modern time.410 They speak about Islamic renaissance in

407 Lionel Favrot, Tariq Ramadan dévoilé, Lyon, Lyon Mag, 2004. Caroline Fourest, Frère Tariq : discours stratégie et
méthode de Tariq Ramadan, Paris, Grasset, 2004. For Gülen see Faik Bulut, Kim Bu Fethullah Gülen : Dünü, Bugünü,
Hedefi (Who is Fethullah Gülen ? His Past, Today and Target), Istanbul, Ozan Yayıncılık, 1998 and Hikmet Çetinkaya,
Fethullah Gülen’in Kırk Yıllık Serüveni (The 40 years adventure of Fethullah Gülen) , Istanbul, Günizi Yayıncılık, 2004.
408 John L. Esposito and John O. Voll, Makers of contemporary Islam, New York, Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 20
409 Muhammad Qasim Zaman, The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: custodians of change, Princeton, Princeton University
Press, 2002
410 John O. Voll, “Renewal and Reform in Islamic History: Taıjdid and Islah”, in Voices of Resurgent Islam, John L.
Esposito (edt), New York, Oxford University Press, pp. 32-47, 1983

--- Sayfa 285 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

283
Muslim world that the Muslim generation need to develop consisting the rediscovery of human values
and morals, knowledge, fine arts, religious thought in a new manner. Gülen says:
“We are in search of an awakening of reason, as well as of heart, spirit and mind. Yet, if it
possible to assume a harvest fruits of efforts and works resulting from this.”411
Thus, Islamic renaissance in modern world give intellectual rebirth. Beside his positive approach to
the reformulation and a new way to understand Islamic interpretation, he outlines some of the
hindrances and the reasons why ijtihad have been forgotten and was lost: “political oppression, inner
struggles, the misuse of the institution of ijtihad, an extreme trust in the present legal system, the
denial of reform, the blindness caused by the dominant monotonous present system of the time.” He
says also that the door of ijtihad has never been closed. After saying some reasons why the door of
ijtihad was considered closed, Gülen expects a great revival of religion and religiosity in Islamic world.
The similar motivation is claimed and formulated in Ramadan’s writings. He described an open mind
and tolerant Islam promotes enlightenment of Muslim world. Referring the European Muslim is
understood as a way of Modern Islam. He notes a reflexive approach to interpret and reconstruct
Islamic knowledge.
“a new, positive and constructive posture which relies on a fine comprehension of Islam’s
priorities, a clear vision of what is absolute definitively fixed and what is subject to change
and adopting…”412
We took the example of ijtihad and the question of dar al-harb and dar al-islam that are
reformulated by Gülen and Ramadan to understand how they apply Islamic knowledge on modern
not only theological, also social and cultural issues. In western societies, this traditional binary
formulation does not respond Muslims demands.
On this issue, Gülen uses term of dar al-hizmet which is an “intention to serve Islam by presenting
good example, then one or she has to obey the lex loci, to respect others’ rights and to be just, and has
to disregard discussions of dar al-harb and dar al-Islam.”413
Before giving his reflection on ijtihad on this issue, Ramadan identifies the essential elements of
Muslim personality and identity.414 His treatment and analyze on Muslim personality serve us why he
supports a renewal on this binary opposite conception. The first element is faith and spirituality which
is manifested in several cases by practice that is the second element. Practices perform Muslim’s faith
like praying, fasting. Thirdly, the protection of human being based on respect and toleration that
provide the recognition of humankind. Freedom is also indicated as an important element. The fifth
element is based on participation on social affairs which means, for Ramadan, to act in favor of his
society and environment. The analysis of this five elements of muslim blooming identity goes
alongside with rights and responsibility. The European arena appears a land and a space within which
Muslims can profess their faith; participate in social affairs, in which Muslim take care the social and

411 Gülen, in Muslim World, op. cit., p. 458
412 Tariq Ramadan, To Be a European Muslim, Leicester, The Islamic Foundation, 1999, p. 101
413 Ihsan Yılmaz, “Ijtihad and Tajdid by Conduct”, in Turkish Islam and Secular State, The Gülen Movement, M Hakan
Yavuz, John L. Esposito (edts), New York, Syracuse University Press, 2003
414 Ramadan, ibid, pp. 132-134

--- Sayfa 286 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

284
political responsibility. Ramadan emphasizes on Fiqh and Islamic tradition to find a way to preserve
the Muslim’s spirituality and identity.
He does not refer to the notion of dar (abode) and this old binary geographical representation. In
Ramadan’s formulation, Western societies have a crucial role and a specific space which leads
Muslims to express their faith and Islamic message. Muslims enforce to create in this new space “to
avoid reactive and overcautious attitudes and to develop a feeling of self-confidence, based on a deep
sense of responsibility.”415
The treatise of complexity of sciences in contemporary context remains main hindrance, Ramadan
argues that ijtihad is the most important instrument to reinterpretation et reconstruction of Islam.416
Ramadan urges the necessity of ijtihad in specific situation, giving example Muslim Europeans,
dealing with the participation of women in public life, the distinguish of geographical boundaries as
dar al-Islam and dar al-harb, foods, mosques, cemeteries, hospitals, schools, headscarf which have
occupied detailed points of European Muslim’s life.
The debate on definition Muslim land and non-muslim land based an old conception and thought
which, in Ramadan’s views, is not sufficient to draw out the dilemma of binary vision of world.
Applying this binary model is a methodological mistake that increase the complexity of problem.417
Thus, Ramadan discusses old conceptions in new context examining their ability and utility in new
political, economical and social issues.
Identified three observations, the westernization as a model and closed lies between Muslim and
European countries, Muslim generation who live in western societies and the time of diversity and
complexity which prevent a simplistic vision, force to find the required way and solution to act with
accordance Muslim’s belief and with environment. The internalization of matter pushes to Muslim
leaders and scholars to debate not only Islamic issues, but to intend coexistence among variable
thoughts.
Contrary some ulama who accept that the old distinguish of dar al-islam and dar al-harb is still
relevant and exist, like Hizb at-Tahrir movement or Tabligh movement in Europe who defend
applying of this classification following literally, Gülen and Ramadan are in favor of reformulation, at
least they are calling redebate on this concepts.
After discussed the traditional appellations, Ramadan suggest the concept of shada (testimony) which
seems him more applicable in a global period, which permits Muslims to participate and involve in
their society.
“ This shahada is not only a matter of speech. A Muslim is the one who believes and acts
consequently and consistently. “Those who attain to Faith and do good works”, as we read
in the Qur’an, stresses the fact that the shahada has an inevitable impact on the actions of
the Muslim whatever society he/she lives in. To observe the shahada signifies being
involved in the society in all fields where need requires it: unemployment, marginalization,
delinquency, etc. This also means being engaged in those processes which could lead to a

415 Ramadan, p. 150
416 Ramadan, p. 89
417 Ramadan p. 127

--- Sayfa 287 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

285
positive reform of both the institutions and the legal, economic, social and political system
in order to bring about more justice and a real popular participation at grassroots level.”418
In this sense, referring to term shada, Ramadan is overlapping the ancient forms of binary opposition
to demonstrate a further overture for Muslims.
Analyzing and classifying on conditions and qualities required to become a mujtahid and to make an
ijtihad, Ramadan’s position is rather opaque then Gülen’s, nevertheless Gülen does not claim that the
gate of ijtihad is have been closed.

4. European Islam and Citizenship
Muslims who have grown up in Western Europe, themselves think about the implication of their faith
and daily practice which continue to form theirs lives and it is evident that Muslims face with issues,
thus they research new approach for their questions to exit increasingly deeply about their dilemma:
between European and Muslim.419 It is not only an identity and
So called faith based movement, Gülen movement seeks to escape the minority status and isolation of
Muslim in Western societies. In last years, Gülen’s followers who inspired his ideas, establish non
denominational educational and dialogue activities all around world. Creating private schools,
foundations and organizing intercultural activities are serving to make connection between Muslims
and non Muslim. Gülen encourages hi followers and sympathizers to achieve the exemplarity of god
Muslim, being devote and ascetic in their daily life. The essential element of integration used by the
movement is education. Although these schools do not give religious courses, the essential orientation
is based on the teaching of ethics420. Gülen stresses on education inspired an “ethical vision rooted in
Islam but not limited in its expression to sympathizers of the umma (community).”421 The Gülen’s
inspired schools’ education style aims to respond the question of how to generate an ethical human
with common values. Teaching is considered a holy duty422 to achieve the finality to demonstrate the
right way of ethical dimension of life with daily conduct as many scholars indicate the methods
applied in schools.423 Many scholars, like Balci and Michel, note that the coexistence of pupils comes
from different religious, ethnic origins.424 The choice of secular education rather than religious
Qur’anic school mainly is adopted in Gülen’s inspired schools to find common spaces with host
society which provide an enormous impact to diminish Muslim’s profiles in western context.
Ramadan says that his first aim is reconciliation between two sides, firstly Muslims can profess their
faith and loyal to the secular principles and he wants to show the comptability of Islam and Muslim
ethics in secular western societies.425 Thus, Muslims become an actor in public space where people

418 Ramadan, p. 147
419 Robert J. Pauly, Islam in Europe: Integration or Marginalization? Burlington, VT Ashgate Publishing, 2004.
420 Bekim Agai, « The Gülen Movement’s Islamic Ethic of Education », in Esposito and Yavuz, op.cit, p. 49
421 Thomas Michel, “Fethullah Gülen as Educator”, in Esposito and Yavuz (edts), p. 82
422 Agai, op. cit, p. 58
423 Özdalga, Elisabeth, “Worldly ascetism in islamic casting Fethullah Gülen's inspired piety and activisms”,
in.Critique:Journal for critical studies of the Middle East, n. 17, septembre 2000  and Balcı, op.cit,  p. 221
424 Michel, op.cit.
425 The Christian Science Monitor, 31 October 2006

--- Sayfa 288 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

286
bring common to debate and formulate a common good. Muslim identity operates in publicly through
their demands with construction of spaces, visibility.

5. Civility That Matters
Muslim actors participate in western social imaginary giving new debates. The presence of Islam is
shaping secular modern life and practices through the visibility of body, discourse. Penetrating in
public sphere, they create inconvenient asymmetric relations426 and they are seeking to perform their
manners and habits in Europeanization process. Muslims in Western Europe is confronted; firstly;
they immersed deeply in a secularized societies. Paralell of the loose of structuring capacity of the
religion, Islam take his part in this secularized situation and paradoxically religious feelings are
recombined and manifested in terms of enthusiasm, emotion.427 Secondly, the visibility of Muslim
community in public sphere create the challenge which faced Muslims of western societies, or in
Europe, the dominant religious and cultural figure is Christianity, even with his plurality in different
forms.
In this sense, Gülen movement certainly contribute Muslim’s assertion with their own distinctiveness,
it is not an assimilations and symmetric project of modernization.   Inspired by the Sufistic
terminology, the followers elaborate a language to strengthen their good conduct. One is an ascetic
body, consciously or unconsciously, that affects one’s acts such as eating, drinking, going to bed and
getting up, talking and keeping silent, remaining in solitude or with people. Fashioned and displayed,
the ascetic adab rules govern everyday life of the believers. The pleasure in this world is considered
ephemeral and the followers do not pursue the hedonism because they believe that they are sent to
this world to enhance his devotion and seek God’s contentment. He has the idea that he will not stay
for a long time here in this world for the reason that the essential duty is in the terrestrial world,
therefore, it is necessary to move away from cheerfulness, joy, and temporary happiness to live the
eternal life. The hedonism kills the idealism of the sympathizers. Against the hedonism, the
sympathizers follow the value of altruism which Gülen regards as the criteria of life according to the
ideal man which requires the effort of follower as developing the detachment from the pleasure and
seductive needs, except that the intellectual and aesthetic dimension is allowed and accepted.428
Ramadan remarks profession of faith in secular modern world that makes matter.
“The public space has become non-religious, if not sometimes anti-religious, and growing numbers of
Believers find it difficult to face this situation. …the power of attraction of the public sphere, with its
“sacred values” founded on individualism, money and entertainment is so powerful and efficient that
it seems illusory to imagine that any kind of resistance might be possible.”429
Gülen’s and Ramadan views as a third way, via dialog, affect the problem between sacred and
religious that is considered a secularization on Muslims practices and faith.

426 Göle, op. cit.
427 Danièle HERVIEU-LEGER, Le pèlerin et le converti. La religion en mouvement, Flammarion, coll. " Essais ", Paris, 1999
and also Peter L. Berger, The Desecularization of the World, Resurgent Religion in World Politics, Washington, Ethics and
Public Policy Center, 1999
428Fethullah Gülen, İkindi Yağmurları, İstanbul, Gazeteciler ve Yazarlar Vakfı yayınları, 2006, p. 187
429 Ramadan, To Be…, op. cit, p. 216

--- Sayfa 289 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

287

6. A Possible Peaceful Coexistence
The picture of Islam presented via events, the political situation, and manipulation raise the
prejudices and meta-discourse about Islam, binary against western societies and Muslims.430 To
involve and prevent from this manipulation, Muslim should admit in loyal field to protect theirs rights
and have a consistent dialogue with their neighbours, so Muslims can to modify the negative image of
Islam. Gülen’s inspired dialogue and educational activities serve the recognition of Muslims in host
society.431
Gülen encourages interfaith dialogue among different representants of religions. In his early
publication of The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue, he demonstrates his interest and commitment to
interfaith dialogue. In Turkey and via dialogue foundations, he establishes a major force in dialogue.
His writings and encouragement, concern set out the principles for his followers to participate in
dialogue and social action. He is e mentor, nevertheless lacking a scholar approach to the study of
comparative religions, his argument produce a practical aspect to a response for the difficulties of his
engagement, provides the critics of nationalist and conservators. 432
In terms of human responsibility which is seen to transcending theological and civilizational
differences and a realization of studying on common good, his endeavour remarks the notion of
civility logic.433 He presumes that the people whatever his faith, race and nation, have much in
common and forgot the ancient misunderstanding and conflicts. He invites to debate and find
solution against poverty, environment questions, and undeniable human rights. This civic logic
contains to involve in society, diminish the borders with others.
Ramadan also urges that it is becoming urgent that Muslims rediscover the power of unity not only
between Muslims and it is not sufficient but he remarks the urgent of engagement in dialogue and
collaboration with others. But at least, he emphasizes the intra community dialogue.434

430 Van P.S. Koningsveld and W. Shadid, “The Negative Image of Islam and Muslims in the West: Causes and Solution” in
Shadid, W & P.S. van Koningsveld, P.S (eds).Religious Freedom and the Neutrality of the State: The Position of Islam in the
European Union. Leuven, 2002, pp. 174-196.
431 Anne-Sophie Lamine notes that in dialogue activities the main issues debated and the final target is mutual recognition
of altérite which play a central role in definition of modern subject. Anne Sophie Lamine, La coexistence des Dieux,
Pluralité religieuse et laïcité, Paris, Puf, 2004
432 Anne-Sophie Lamine, op. cit
433 Ibid
434 Ramadan, To Be..., p. 220

--- Sayfa 290 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

288

--- Sayfa 291 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

289
INTERFAITH DIALOGUE AND RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE IN
CONTEMPORARY ISLAMIC THOUGHT: A COMPARATIVE
STUDY OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN AND ABDUL KARIM
SOROUSH
HEYDAR SHADI 435

Abstract
Contemporary Muslim scholars hold different positions on religious pluralism and tolerance;
some (so-called ‘fundamentalists’) are exclusivist and regard Islam as the only true religion and
reject the religious pluralism and tolerance, others (so-called ‘traditionalists’ and ‘modernists’)
believe that religious pluralism and tolerance are acceptable in Islam. Traditionalists mainly rely
on Islamic concepts and Sufism and generally do not emphasize or explicitly endorse pluralism,
preferring to promote only the religious virtue of religious tolerance. The modernists on the other
hand use modern Western philosophical theories and explicitly espouse religious pluralism. This
article discusses the approaches, sources and arguments of Fethullah Gülen and Abdul Karim
Soroush as contemporary Muslim scholars on religious pluralism and tolerance. It concludes that
both thinkers emphasize the necessity of peaceful communication with the followers of other
religions, as well as with secular groups, and also both use theological and Sufi sources. However
there are some differences between them. While Soroush mainly relies on epistemological
arguments, Gülen reasons as a pragmatist. Also, Gülen, adhering to the traditional interpretation
of Islam, believes in Islam’s superior position. Soroush departs from the traditional
interpretation of Islam and admits to the same truth of other religions. Perhaps because of his
adherence to the traditional interpretations of religion, Gülen has been more successful than Dr.
Soroush in winning a following among people of his own country and around the world.
Nevertheless, the practical outcome of both thinkers’ positions  is the same and both espouse
tolerance and peaceful co-existence with the followers of other religions.

1. Introduction
Religious pluralism and tolerance is one of the basic foundations of a civil society. It is the belief that
no religion, singularly, has a monopoly of the truth or of the life that leads to salvation. Religious
pluralism establishes the possibility of tolerance and co-existence of followers of different religions
and cultures (Hick 1993)

435 Currently doing a PhD in of Islamic Studies in Erfurt University, Germany. (Graduate of the Seminary of Qom (1996), he
also holds a BA from Mofid University (2000) and an MA from Tehran University (2003), whre his dissertation was  a
critique of modernity based on Charles Taylor’s Three Malaises of Modernity.) He has worked as researcher in Research
Center of Iranian Radio & TV Organization (2002–2003), as lecturer in Philosophy and Islamic Thought in Jami`
University, Tehran (2004–2007) and  the Bioethics Institute of Tehran University (2003–2007). Among his recent papers
are: ‘Theological Critique of Jon Hick’s Religious Pluralism’, Seminary and University Quarterly, 3 (2001); ‘The Ethics of
Authenticity’, Name-ye Farhang, 14/53 (2004); ‘Modernism and Postmodernism’ (2004); ‘Four Principles of Bioethics from
the Islamic Point of View’, Iranian Journal of Diabetes and Lipid Disorders, 6 (2006); ‘Euthanasia: an Islamic Point of
View’, American Journal of Bioethics, 7/ 4 (2007); ‘Iran's Reaction to the Pope’s Speech at Regensburg University’, The
Conference of Islamic World’s Reaction to Pope’s Speech (Eichstätt, 2007).

--- Sayfa 292 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

290
Islam, one of the main religions of the world, is often labeled exclusivist and accordingly intolerant
(Mesalmany 2006). Here it is important to examine what is the real attitude of Islam towards
pluralism and tolerance? Is there a pluralistic interpretation of Islam?
Muslim scholars have different views on this subject. Among the three main intellectual movements
in Islamic world (Kurzman 1998: 3), fundamentalists reject religious pluralism and tolerance, and
consider it as an aspect of the ideological war of the western world (Mesbah Yazdi 2002.14) but both
traditionalists and modernists accept it, though traditionalists generally do not emphasize and specify
pluralism and prefer to accept solely the religious tolerance.
Traditionalists mainly rely on Islamic transcripts and Sufism, but modernists use modern western
philosophical theories such as Kant’s noman-phenomena theory and John Hick’s religious pluralism
theory.
This article is a short review of the approaches, sources and arguments of Fethullah Gülen and Abdul
Karim Soroush as two contemporary Muslim scholars on religious pluralism and tolerance.

2. Fethullah Gülen’s Views on Religious Pluralism and Tolerance
2.1. Definition and Background
Gülen believes in the religious tolerance and interfaith dialogue and has several important activities
and achievements in this field. In 1999, his paper “The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue” was
presented to the Parliament of World’s Religions in Cape Town. He maintains that “dialogue is a
must” and that people, regardless of nation or political borders, have far more in common than they
realize (Gülen 2005b: IX).
He suggests tolerance and dialogue as two keys to provide peace in society. And in his view, "no one
should condemn another for being a member of a religion or scold him for being an atheist” (Bulent
and Omer 2000). He personally visited religious leaders, including Pope John Paul II, the Greek
Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomeos, and Israeli Sephardic Head Rabbi Eliyahu Bakshi-Doron.
(Wikipedia, Fethullah Gülen) and (Gülen 2004: XIII)
Gülen realized a very important progress in interfaith dialogue by establishing “Foundation of Writers
and Journalists” which he is its honorary chairman. This foundation, by its activities including annual
meetings, has reconciled different intellectual movements in Turkey. In the meetings the
representatives of different movements are invited.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

291
2.2. Arguments
In Gülen’s opinion interfaith dialogue has five main reasons:
Saving Modern Human from Materialism
The first reason of Gülen for interfaith dialogue is cooperation among religions in saving modern man
from materialism which has deprived human from the original, natural, and harmonic life. He
believes that materialist worldview which limits religion’s influence in contemporary social life, is the
main cause of modern human’s problems. According to Gülen’s view social harmony and peace with
nature, between people, and within the individual only can come about when the material and
spiritual realms are reconciled. Peace with nature, peace and justice in society, and personal integrity
are possible when one is at peace with Heaven. Religion reconciles nature–Divine Books, the
material–the spiritual. (Gülen 2000: 4-9)
The Same Source and Nature of All Religions
The second reason of interfaith dialogue from Gülen’s point of view is the very nature of religion.
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and even Hinduism and other world religions accept the same
source for themselves, and, including Buddhism, pursue the same goal. He states: “as a Muslim, I
accept all Prophets and Books sent to different peoples throughout history, and regard belief in them
as an essential principle of being Muslim. A Muslim is a true follower of Abraham, Moses, David,
Jesus, and all other Prophets. Not believing in one Prophet or Book means that one is not a Muslim.
Thus we acknowledge the oneness and basic unity of religion, which is a symphony of God’s blessings
and mercy, and the universality of belief in religion. So, religion is a system of belief embracing all
races and all beliefs, a road bringing everyone together in brotherhood.” (Gülen, 2004: 376)
Gülen argues that regardless of how their adherents implement their faith in their daily lives, such
generally accepted values as love, respect, tolerance, forgiveness, mercy, human rights, peace,
brotherhood, and freedom are exalted by religion. Most of them are accorded with the highest
precedence in the messages brought by Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, as well as in the messages of
Buddha and even Zarathustra, Lao-Tzu, Confucius, and the Hindu scholars.
Gülen’s metaphor is very helpful to understand his true belief in diversity. He likens the diversity of
religion to a symphony and names all religions as “a symphony of God’s blessings and mercy.” Of
course, the diversity of a collection of notes and instruments brought together in a collaborative unity
that characterizes a symphony. Musical harmony cannot consist of people playing the same notes and
a symphony cannot be played by a collection of people all playing the same instrument (Kurtz 2005:
375).
Qur’an’s Call to Interfaith Dialogue
In addition to rational reasons for the necessity of interfaith dialogue, Gülen refers to Verses of Qur’an
and Prophet’s deeds: “Fourteen centuries ago, Islam made the greatest ecumenical call the world has
ever seen. The Qur’an calls the People of the Book (Christians and Jews primarily): Say: "O People of
the Book! Come to common terms as between us and you: that we worship none but God; that we
associate no partners with Him; that we take not, from among ourselves lords and patrons other than
God." If then they turn back, say you: "Bear witness that we are Muslims (i.e., those who have
surrendered to God’s Will). (Qur’an 3:64) This call comes in the ninth year of the Hijra. A very
important point is that in case this call was rejected, Muslims were to adopt the attitude expressed in

--- Sayfa 294 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

292
another sura: "Your religion is for you; my religion is for me." That is, if you do not accept this call, we
have surrendered to God. We will continue on the path we have accepted and leave you to go on your
own path" (Gülen 2000: 5).
Religious Tolerance as the Request of Human Life
Gülen believes that diversity is a necessary part of human life and if we do not respect the diversity
and unlikely desire to unify all people under one religion we will be engaged in an unlimited net of
conflicts: “Different beliefs, races, customs and traditions will continue to cohabit in this village. Each
individual is like a unique realm unto themselves; therefore the desire for all humanity to be similar to
one another is nothing more than wishing for the impossible. For this reason, the peace of this
(global) village lies in respecting all these differences, considering these differences to be part of our
nature and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences. Otherwise, it is unavoidable that the
world will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes, fights, and the bloodiest of wars, thus preparing
the way for its own end.”(Weller 2006: 77).
Love as the Essence of Being Requests Tolerance
Inspired from Sufism as the inner side of Islam, Gülen insists on love as the essence of being; “Love is
the most essential element of every being, and it is the most radiant light, and it is the greatest power;
able to resist and overcome all else.” (Gülen, 2004: 1) Sufism emphasizes on love as a central attribute
of a believer and focuses on love for others. Gülen especially is influenced by Turkish Sufis and he
follows a line that stretches from Yesevi to Rumi, then from Yunus to Haci Bektas-i Veli. Gülen,
following this very basis, re-generates this tolerant interpretation and understanding of Muslim-
Turkish Sufism within contemporary circumstances. He insists that “Love is the most essential
element in every being, and it is a most radiant light and a great power which can resist and overcome
every force.” (Gülen 2004: IX). Gülen uses the metaphor of the famous Sufi poet Mawlana Rumi to
explain how one can be both rooted in one’s own tradition, but open to others: “such a person is like a
compass with one foot well-established in the center of belief and Islam and the other foot with people
of many nations.” (Kurtz 2005: 375-7).
Gülen in his book Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance argues on the necessity of love
in the words of the famous Turkish poet Yunus, “loving the created simply because of the Creator.” He
explains that every creator, for example, a painter loves his/her creatures, so God loves all creature
especially humans, and we must love humans at least as the God’s creatures. (Gülen, 2004: 46)
Gülen is himself a true Sufi when says: “Applaud the good for their goodness; appreciate those who
have believing hearts; be kind to the believers. Approach unbelievers so gently that their envy and
hatred would melt away. Like a Messiah, revive people with your breath.” (Gülen 2005a: 75)

3. Dr Soroush’s Views on Religious Pluralism and Tolerance
3.1. Definition and Background
Dr Soroush, the Iranian contemporary religious thinker and theorist, is considered as one of the most
significant religious intellectuals of the Islamic world. In spite of his fundamental thoughts and
activities during the 1970s -80s, as well as his close cooperation with Islamic Republic of Iran, Dr.
Soroush has converted into one of the modern critical interpreters of religion and Islam. He has
written several books on interpretations and understanding of religion and Islam in modern times up

--- Sayfa 295 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

293
to now. Dr Soroush started his movement in the field of intellectual religious thoughts by introducing
The Theory of Evolution of Religious Knowledge Or-Text in Context in the late years of 90s he started
to emphasize on pluralism and religious tolerance in the middle of the closing decade of the twentieth
century (Hashemi 2006: 123). In the recent decade he has become one of the most critical advocates
of religious pluralism and tolerance in Iran, as well as in the Islamic world. Writing several books and
articles, as well as participating in national and international conferences and meeting the scholars
and thinkers of other religions is just a part of his activities in relation to religious pluralism.
Dr. Abdul Karim Soroush was chosen by Time Magazine (April 2005) as one of the 100 most
influential people of 2005 in the world. Scott MacLeod has introduced Dr. Soroush as the Iran’s
democratic voice. He also received the Erasmus Prize (2004) of the Praemium Erasmianum
Foundation.436

3.2. Arguments
Dr Soroush in clarifying and classifying the theory of pluralism has used mainly four sources and
characters including: first of all Emanuel Kant the 18th German philosopher and his theory of noman-
phenomena, second, Jalal-al-Din Rumi and his mystical and sufistic world view which pluralism and
tolerance are a significant part of it, third, Karl Popper the science and political philosopher of the
20th century and his critical realism theory, and fourth, John Hick, the contemporary theologian and
religions philosopher who puts forward the theory of religious pluralism in the modern era.
Dr Soroush's reasoning and argumentations can be mentioned briefly as follows:
Epistemological Argument
The basis of Dr. Soroush's argumentation in believing in religious polarity is his belief in diversity of
religious knowledge and epistemology. In his opinion religion has two major sources: religious texts
and religious experiences437, since these two sources are silent, and people are influenced by their
outer side and by their interpreters, therefore none of these two, religious knowledge and religious
interpretations, might be definitely regarded as the monopolistic and exclusive authority.
Consequently, there is no way out of accepting religious plurality and tolerance. This argument can be
explained and clarified through the following arguments (Jhanbakhsh 2004: 231).
•
Religious texts and experiences are the primary sources for gaining religious     knowledge.
Therefore human does not have access to the essence of religion itself.  In fact religion is
nothing but various interpretations of it, throughout history.
•
Religious texts and experiences are silent; human beings interpret them.
•
 In interpreting religious texts, interpreter employs his/her own expectations, questions,
and presuppositions.
•
These expectations, questions, and presuppositions come from somewhere out of religion.

436 for more information visit Dr. Soroush's official site:  http://www.drsoroush.com/English.htm
437 In a recent speech Dr. Soroush stated that prophethood and revelation are religious experiences, just like Sufis religious
experiences. The difference is that prophets have the mission of preaching. Refer to: Soroush, A. Expansion of Prophetic
Experience, Serat Publication, Tehran, 1378. [In Farsi].

--- Sayfa 296 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

294
•
Out of religion is changeable, variable, and indeterminate. Science, philosophy, and human
properties are constantly increasing and changing.
•
 Inevitably interpretations that come out of such expectations, questions, and
presuppositions would be also variable and changing.
•
Considering the fact that human being is always liable to err, therefore not any
interpretation can be claimed as the single and definite authority.
Mystical Argumentation
Dr. Soroush also employs other reasoning mainly derived from mystics and Sufism, especially from
Rumi that can be summarized as follows: according to mystical trainings there is an obvious
difference between the internal [Baten] and external [Zaher] world. What human see of religious
diversity is just the apparent and outward of religion, the shell of it, and the essence is hidden in all
religions. Although the followers of different religions are worshiping different names, they are in fact
in search of one single essence. The external diversity is caused by the limitation of materialistic
world.
Incompatibility of Religious Exclusiveness with God's Guidance and Conduct
If just as the exclusivists, for instance, just 70-80 millions Twelve Imam Shiite Muslims have been
guided, or if just 12 millions of Jews are guided, this would contradict Divine attributes of conduct
and leadership. It definitely contradicts divine attributes of mercy, wisdom, and conducts, if most of
human beings are not guided and remain misled and imperfect.
Hereditariness of Religious Believes Among the Pious
It is not always like this that followers of all religions, for instance Christians, all choose their religion
based on reason and research, but people become Muslim, Christian, or Jew on the spur of family and
society demands. In other words human beings' religion has some "cause" rather than "reason".
Therefore, is that logical or compatible with God's wisdom to say that human's salvation or tribulation
is a result of something hereditary and unintentional? (Soroush 2001: 50-51).

4. Comparison and Conclusion
According to the comparison made on Fethullah Gülen and Dr. Soroush's views on pluralism and
religious tolerance, some similarities and some differences between the two views are recognizable.
Both of the thinkers emphasize the necessity of peaceful and positive communication with the
followers of different religions, as well as with secular groups. Furthermore, they reject the
fundamental, violent, and exclusivist interpretations of religion. Both put emphasis on the
comprehensive tolerance and do not restrict it to some religions (for example, those having heavenly
books). Concerning their sources and arguments, both of them use mystical, especially Rumi’s
heritage, and theological sources and arguments. Their books and activities prove this claim.
However, in spite of their major common point of view they are different in their approaches,
arguments, sources, results and achievements. While Dr. Soroush employs mystical and theological
(Shiite-Mu’tazeli) sources as well as western sources, Fethullah Gülen mainly uses theological
(Ashari-Hanafi) and mystical sources. Soroush uses theological (Divine conduct), mystical
(distinction between shell and essence of religion), experimental (hereditariness in religion) reasoning

--- Sayfa 297 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

295
and epistemological argumentations. Gülen uses mystical (comprehensive love), theological (referring
to Qur’an and Prophet’s tradition) and pragmatist (common goal of all religions).  Consequently, it is
possible to conclude that Soroush mainly has an epistemological approach and with an emphasis on
religious diversity, ends up in pluralism and religious tolerance. Gülen emphasizes on pragmatist
reasoning (to help the common goal of all religions that is to fight materialism and to revive the
existence of God in people's lives).
In sum, Fethullah Gülen is seriously concerned with religion and in order to improve the religious life
of contemporary human being suggests tolerance and interfaith dialogues. To achieve this goal he
maintains his traditional interpretation of Islam, which is to believe in Islam's superior position and
tending to reject other religions' truth. But Soroush because of epistemological necessity and probably
because of his concern with modernity chooses the path of religious pluralism. And because of this
closeness and fairness to traditional interpretations of religion, Gülen has been more successful than
Dr. Soroush, not only, in the eyes of the people of his own country, but also among the people
throughout the world. Nevertheless, the practical results of both points of views are the same and both
of these thinkers suggest tolerance and influential communications with the followers of other
religions.

Acknowledgments:
I would like to thank Ms. Maryam Najafi for her review of the entire text and helpful comments.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

296

--- Sayfa 299 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

297
GÜLEN’S PARADIGM ON PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE:
THEORETICAL INSIGHTS AND SOME PRACTICAL
PERSPECTIVES
GURKAN CELIK 438, KATE KIRK 439 AND YUSUF ALAN 440

Abstract
This paper contains an exposition of Fethullah Gülen’s model of peaceful coexistence. Based on
qualitative analysis of his writings, conversations, sermons and public speeches, the authors
distinguish four dimensions of peace — eternal peace, inner peace, interpersonal or inter-
communal peace, and global peace — not from a theoretical perspective, but as a practical
guideline for those who seek to pursue peace. The paper argues that these four dimensions of
peace are possible only when accompanied by moral values, mutual knowledge and acceptance of
cultural and religious identity. In particular, the authors present and describe Gülen’s idea of
education as a practical means to achieve peace, and his dialogue approach as an alternative for
dispute resolution and as a tool for building a culture of peace between and within societies. This
analytical exploration of Gülen’s teaching is helpful in challenging the thesis of an impending
clash of civilizations in two ways: first, to live in peace as a result of dialogue and education is
vital in today’s world, where globalization, mass communication, and technology have pushed
individuals and groups together in ways never before seen in human history. Second, Gülen
pursues an inclusive middle way between fundamental futures of modernity and the Muslim
tradition — science and Islamic knowledge, reason and revelation, progress and conservation,
and free will and destiny — accepting them as two sides of the same reality.

1. Introduction
Cultural diversity and social plurality are inevitable both in Western and Eastern democracies. Over
the past few decades, the passive, but accepting approach towards ethnic and religious multi-

438 Gurkan Celik: Currently preparing a doctoral dissertation on Gülen's views on peace and the human condition from the
perspectives of education, dialogue and theological anthropology at Radboud University, Nijmegen. (MA in policy and
organization studies at Tilburg University in the Netherlands.) He has written articles for learned journals, and is (co-
)author of several publications, including ‘Gülen’s Approach to Dialogue and Peace’ in The International Journal of
Diversity in Organizations, Communities and Nations (2007); ‘Fethullah Gülen as a Servant Leader’ in International
Journal of Servant-Leadership (2007); Voorlopers in de Vrede [Forerunners for Peace] (2005); Hizmetkar Liderlik [Servant
Leadership] (2003).
439 Kate Kirk: Currently writing a doctoral dissertation, at Queens University, Belfast, on Dutch integration policies and
their implications on citizenship practices. (A graduate in social science, University College Utrecht; MA in political science,
Leiden University.) Ms Kirk is also doing research on social problems in a deprived neighbourhood in Amsterdam for the
Wiardi Beckman Foundation (WBS), the Dutch Labour Party think tank. She has recently published ‘Enlightened
Embodiment: the Submissive Islamic Female Body in the Contemporary Dutch Enlightenment Project’ in The International
Journal of Diversity in Organizations, Communities and Nations.
440 Yusuf Alan: (MA in English translation and interpretation at the Hacettepe University in Ankara, Turkey.) Editor at
Time Media Group in Rotterdam. Some publications: Aktif Dusunme ve Yenilenme [Active Thinking and Self-renewal]
(Rotterdam: Libertas Media, 2001); Sozun Gucu [The Power of Discourse] (Rotterdam: Libertas Media, 2003).

--- Sayfa 300 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

298
culturalism in European societies has been replaced with concerned pleas for integration and even
assimilation. This ideological and policy transition started with a number of intellectual contributions
(Schnabel 1997; Bolkestein 1997; Scheffer 2000; Shadid & Van Koningsveld 2002), and was brought
into full swing by a number of developments such as the 9-11 attacks and the subsequent atmosphere
of unrest and mutual distrust between Muslims and non-Muslims around the world. European
countries, in which a large number of Muslims are now living, have prided themselves for their open
attitude and assumed a smooth accommodation of immigrants. Following the 9-11 terrorist attacks,
European countries experienced some violence on their own soil convincing people that social,
cultural and religious boundaries are deeper than previously thought. Particularly, in the Netherlands
Pim Fortuyn, a charismatic politician with a number of anti-immigrant arguments on his agenda,
gained tremendous popularity. His legacy—he was murdered in 2002 by a native Dutch
environmentalist—consists of a disregard for leftist multiculturalists politicians and of the belief that
adjustment on the side of ethnic minorities was urgently needed (Ter Wal 2004). In November 2004
interethnic and inter-religious tension was stirred up again, when a young Dutch-Moroccan Muslim
murdered another critic of Islamic culture, filmmaker Theo van Gogh. This incident provoked a wave
of vandalism directed at mosques and Islamic schools, extremely prejudiced utterances, and an
almost tangible discomfort among the Dutch of all descents. Considerably, the Dutch have long
renowned for their tolerance, an image they seem to thank to their tradition of pillarization, in which
Catholics, Protestants, socialists, and liberals lived separately in harmony (Vermeij 2006:19). The
need to live in peace has been underscored by all these events of the past few years.
M. Fethullah Gülen [1941] is  considered to be one of the most prominent Islamic scholars and a
pioneer of dialogue that contributes to world peace. He has had great influence on young people with
his modern approach in interpreting the Qur’ān and with his global activities in promoting education
and seeking dialogue between members of different religions and cultures. Gülen is an important
advocate of intercultural dialogue and in particular interfaith dialogue. He provides a source of
inspiration for a new and cooperative approach to all monotheistic religions (Valkenberg 2006),
which aims at supporting dialogue, harmony and conciliation between the ´People of the Book´:
Christians, Jews and Muslims. Gülen’s vision for the future is an inspirational hope, where peace and
justice are maintained in the world (Gülen 2005b). He has inspired an immense civil society
movement that since the late 1960s has evolved and grown to encompass many facets of social life
(Yavuz & Esposito 2003; Hunt & Aslandoğan 2006). The movement is trying to act as a bridge in
realising unity in multiplicity, synergy, social innovation, interaction and dialogue between the
members of different cultures and civilizations. The movement advocates diversity and dialogue, and
pays at great deal of attention to the reality of social and religious pluralism, contributing to
communality and solidarity within society. More specifically, the Gülen movement is offering
Muslims a way to live out Islamic values amidst the complex demands of modern societies. As well as
belief and finding peace or the danger of being drowned in disbelief and distrust, Gülen expends
efforts to solve a multitude of social, economic, political and cultural problems. Along with Mohandas

--- Sayfa 301 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

299
Gandhi, Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa, Fethullah Gülen can be seen as one
of the twentieth century’s great exponents of non-violent resistance.441
Through the writings of Fethullah Gülen we find a proper interpretation of Islamic teaching leads to
truly spiritual values like forgiveness, social justice, inner peace, social harmony, honesty, and trust in
God. This paper contains an exposition of Fethullah Gülen’s understanding of peaceful coexistence. In
particular, this paper highlights Gülen’s idea of education as a practical concept of peace, and as a tool
of building a culture of peace. Gülen has the conviction that the reliable and real road to peace and
justice for humanity is dependent on the provision of an adequate and appropriate universal,
multicultural and moral education integrating scientific knowledge and spiritual and ethical values.
After a quick survey on the index of words in Gülen’s works, we found that ‘peace’ is one of the most
used terms among other words like love, tolerance, affection, reason, faith, and humanity. Based on
our analysis of his writings, conversations and public speeches, we distinguish and debate some
aspects of peace, not only from a theoretical perspective, but also as a practical guideline for those
who seek to pursue peace. In addition to a systematic review of Gülen’s works we used a number of
semi-structured interviews with his sympathisers and the Gülen experts to give some ontological
explanations concerning the following four dimensions of peace and to demonstrate its social
implementations and implications in human life’s and societies: eternal peace, inner peace,
interpersonal and intercommunal peace, and universal peace. Interviews were conducted face-to-face
or via electronic mail—in either Turkish or English—lasting an average of one hour each. Interviewees
were randomly chosen from a group of pre-selected experts and sympathisers who know Gülen’s
movement and are well acquainted with his ideas and initiatives as well. It is of particular interest to
investigate what these respondents think about the Gülen’s teaching, how they interpret his
discourses and actions regarding peace. Interview questions were both open and close-ended and
attempts to identity his vision of peace. We prepared an interview protocol, and pre-tested the
interview by interviewing a religious studies scholar and a member of the Gülen movement. The
interview guide was modified according to the suggestions made by these people.
After an examination of Gülen’s understanding on moderate Islam and peaceful West, we will begin
with the detailed and analytical exploration of Gülen’s theological and sociological point of views on
peace. Then, we will discuss peaceful coexistence through Gülen’s educational initiatives, and his
dialogue method as an alternative for dispute resolution between and within societies. The paper will
end with some concluding remarks.

441 A series symposia, entitled 'Frontrunners for Peace', held on February 11, 2004 (Radboud University Nijmegen), and
March 16-17-18, 2005 (Tilburg University, Erasmus University Rotterdam, and University of Amsterdam) at four Dutch
universities, discussed Gülen among contemporary heroes of peace; see the booklet edited by Gurkan Celik, et al. 2005,
Voorlopers in de Vrede [Forerunners for peace]. Damon: Budel, The Netherlands; Gülen’s efforts for worldwide peace have
also been echoed at “The Peaceful Heroes Symposium”, organized on April 11-13, 2003 at the University of Texas, Austin.
Furthermore, in March 2004, the Spirituality Foundation of Kyrgyzstan awarded Gülen with its “Intersociety Adaptation
and Contribution to Peace Prize” for his contributions to International peace through his thoughts and initiatives in
education.

--- Sayfa 302 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

300
2. “Moderate” Islam and Peaceful West
Gülen’s views are dictated primarily by his religious belief and interpretation of Islam. Therefore, in
order to understand what Gülen thinks about the West, it is important to first explore how Gülen
understands Islam.
For Gülen, Islam is by its very nature moderate and therefore the recently popular phrase “moderate
Islam” is incorrect as it implies that Islam can be anything but moderate or that there are some
versions that are not moderate. Gülen espouses the conviction that moderation is such a central
characteristic of Islam that any understanding of it that does not embody this cannot be Islamic.
Moderation for Gülen means the middle-way and this is what he argues Islam is: “Islam, being the
middle way of absolute balance between all temporal and spiritual extremes and containing the ways
of all previous Prophets, makes a choice according to the situation” (Gülen 2005:145).
Gülen holds the conviction that while there are certain fundamental tenets of Islam that are uniform
and not open to interpretation, there are other realms of Islam which are. This provides Islam with a
degree of flexibility and allows for various practices of Islam to develop that can manifest differences
in terms of nuances and points of emphasis. Historical conditions, disparate settings, socio-cultural
characteristics, language, and so forth are all factors that can help develop and produce a particular
idiosyncratic practice of Islam unique to that region. So in Morocco, the Islamic conception of life
came to mean activism, moralism, and intense individuality, while in Indonesia the same concept
emphasized aestheticism, inwardness, and the radical dissolution of personality (Geertz 1971). Gülen
firmly argues that “Anatolian Islam” resulted from the willing conversion of the Anatolian Turks, a
number of influential Sufi orders originated in Central Asia and Anatolia emphasising Islam’s value of
love, tolerance and inclusiveness and the adoption of the Hanafi maddhab (school of law) by the
Turks in their practice of Islam. The Ottoman State experience with Islam meant that the Turkish
people had greater opportunity to explore and experience Islam in various ways and thereby develop a
better understanding of this religion. According to Gülen this all contributed to a broader, deeper,
more tolerant, inclusive, pluralistic, spiritual and loving practice of Islam.
Gülen states that the word ‘Islam’ has three meanings, one within the other like three concentric
circles. The narrow meaning at the very core of the three circles is that Islam is the name of the
religion  which stipulates how human should conduct his or her life. The second meaning is that Islam
refers to the attributes and actions of people in the abstract, completely independent of the person
himself. According to this meaning therefore, being honest is an Islamic attribute and may be found
within a non-Muslim. Thus, a persons attribute(s) and action(s) may be Muslim while, she or he by
social or religious classification is not. Likewise, the act that manifests itself from this attribute is
categorised according to this meaning as either Islamic or non-Islamic. For example, stealing is a non-
Islamic act and may be committed by a Muslim. Therefore, a Muslim who subscribes to the religion of
Islam may, nonetheless, commit non-Muslim actions. The third concentric circle and most wide and
encapsulating meaning of Islam, as emphasised by Gülen, is that it means the “laws of creation”
(seriat-i fitriye) according to which the universe conducts itself. These laws, just as the rules of
religion, were ordained by God. The only difference between the two is that while human beings have
the free will to follow the laws of religion or not, he or she has no such choice when it comes to the
laws of creation. Therefore, according to this view, everything, whether animate or otherwise, is a
Muslim because it, unavoidably, continues its existence in accordance with the “laws of creation”.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

301
Important to note here is that the above analysis of the meaning of Islam does not include any
reference to the notion of Iman, that is belief in God. Gülen emphasises the importance of the
difference between the two. Islam is the laws and rules of God, Iman on the other hand is belief in
God. Therefore, in drawing this distinction, Gülen states being a Mumin (one with faith) does not
necessarily mean that one is a Muslim (one who follows Islam) and vice versa. In other words, a
person may have faith and belief in God and as a result be a Mumin, but may not conduct his or her
life according to the rules of Islam and thereby fail to be a Muslim. The opposite is also possible
according to Gülen. A person may be a Muslim by attribute in the second concentric meaning of the
word Islam but not have any belief in God. The following diagram visualises the three concentric
meanings of Islam with its relation to Iman.

Diagram I. Three Concentric Meanings of Islam
Having looked at how Gülen understands the ethos, semantics and practice of Islam we will now
attempt to evaluate how he views Western civilisation. It is clear from Gülen’s views about Islam in
general and Anatolian Islam in particular that Gülen adopts an inclusive, embracing and moderate
approach. Therefore, Gülen’s views of the West are primarily based on these dynamics. Furthermore,
Gülen considers his belief in God to be his greatest asset. Therefore, in light of recent
misrepresentations of Islam in the West, Gülen argues that a Muslim’s primary obligation is to make
sure that this is rectified through showing Islam’s true character to the world. This can only be done
by engaging with that world.
On a practical level, Gülen states that the world has become a global village and that it is no longer
either desirable, if it ever was, nor possible to close borders and not engage with the rest of the world.
Thus, Gülen’s view that Turkey and all other Muslim-populated countries should engage with the
West rests on an inclusive, embracing and loving understanding of Islam as well as practical
considerations of the time. In this regard, Gülen does not agree with those who are against the idea of
interaction with the West on the basis that this will lead to the assimilation of the Muslim identity.
Gülen argues that Muslims should have no such fear if they are sincere in their belief.
Iman

Attributes and actions
Laws of creation
Islam

--- Sayfa 304 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

302
On the basis of the three concentric meanings of Islam, Gülen states that the West is more Muslim
than the geographical Muslim countries because (a) it has more Muslim attributes than the Muslim
countries in being just, progressive etc and (b) it has inevitably explored, discovered and engaged
nature and cause in order to succeed in scientific and technological advancement. In discovering coal,
melting steal, enhancing rocket science and reaching the moon, the West has learnt the laws of
creation and used it to its advantage. Whether Western civilisation has done good or bad with this
scientific knowledge and experience is another matter. The point here is that in attaining such an
understanding of science and in engaging the laws of creation, Western civilisation has become
Muslim in the second and third sense of the word. As a result of this perspective Gülen states that he
cannot understand how a devout Muslim would be against the West, as the West has attained it’s
supremacy through inevitably following and obeying the universally applicable laws of creation
ordained and created by God.
Having noted that, Gülen stresses that the scientific advancement in the West and its notion of
modernity have also lead to materialism at the exclusion of belief, spirituality and morals. This, Gülen
argues, has resulted in crude fanaticism. The opposite however, the plight of  Muslim countries is one
of ignorance and bigotry. Thus, while Gülen finds that Western civilisation embodies some certain
commendable attributes and a beneficial collective knowledge and experience of positive science, he
also criticises it’s exclusively materialistic approach that, at present, provides  no space for belief in
God or spirituality within its realm of modernity. This sense of belief and spirituality remains and can
be found in the Eastern world. Thus, Gülen strongly believes that the East and West have a lot to learn
from each other and that a balanced and prosperous civilisation with a correct understanding of life
can only be achieved through the fusion of the two. Therefore engaging with the West is a two-way
process for Gülen, that which involves taking and giving.

3. The Middle Way and the Nature of Human Being
In his comprehensive study, Pannenberg (1985) considers human beings to be part of nature and
discusses the human person in his or her social world: its culture, history and institutions. Hence, it
could be said that the human being is the essence and the vital element of being, the index and core
element of the universe and societies. Democritus described the human being as “a world in
miniature”, a microcosm (Diels, Frag. 34). A human being is an image of the macrocosm by virtue of
containing all the strata of reality (body, mind and spirit). The Stoic approach understood humanity
in the framework of the cosmic order as a microcosm that reflects on the macrocosm of the physical
universe (Pannenberg 1985:27). In a similar respect, Gülen considers the human person as a sample
or a model of the universe. Gülen (2000:7-8) symbolizes human beings as mirrors for God’s names
and attributes, and confidently argues that therefore human beings are distinguished from the rest of
creation with the honour of being responsible for making the Earth prosperous in God’s name. He
argues that the individual and collective happiness lie in disciplining three innate faculties (reason,
anger, and lust) to produce a young, “golden generation” that will learn theoretical aspects of the
middle way between materialism and metaphysics, between modernity and tradition, and will bring it
into practice. This generation is supposed to absorb and represent both modern realities and Muslim
morality and identities through its mind, its behaviours and its spirituality.
The middle way is an important concept in Gülen’s understanding, which is, to a great extent, similar
to Aristotle’s (Kuru 2003). Aristotle criticized the Platonic ‘virtue versus vice’ categorization and

--- Sayfa 305 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

303
classified phenomena in three groups, two of which are vices (excess and deficiency) and one of which
is virtue (the mean or the middle way). In his typed series of sermons entitled Ahlaki Mülahazalar
(vols. 1-14) Gülen (1998) interprets and repeats the important Islamic concept of sırat-ı müstakim
(the straight path), which is recited in a Muslim’s prayers forty times a day, as the middle way
between ifrat (excesses) and tefrit (deficiency). From this perspective and since the time of Ibn Miska-
wayh442, human faculties or “drives” have been dealt with in three categories: intellect, zeal, and lust
(Ünal 2006:30). Intellect or reason enables the human person to make the right decision, and encom-
passes all human powers such as conception, imagination, calculation, memory, learning, and so on.
Zeal or anger covers the power of self-defence, which according to Islamic jurisprudence is defined as
that needed to defend the faith and religion, sanity, possessions, life and family, and other sacred val-
ues. The man and woman desires or lusts after the opposite sex and loves their children and worldly
possessions. In other words, lust or desire is the name for the driving force of one’s animal appetites.
These three main drives or faculties are presented in the following matrix (Celik & Alan 2003:25-26):
LEVELS / LIMITS
DRIVES
Excess
Middle way
Deficiency
Intellect
demogogy
wisdom
stupidity
Zeal
rage
courage
cowardice
Lust
licentiousness
chastity
frigidity
Table I. Drives of a human person
In sum, a most important characteristic of ideal human is that he or she finds a balance in the middle
way and practices these sources of all abilities and qualities in human life.

4. Four Dimensions of Peace from Gülen Perspective
In this section, we examine how the concept of peace fits into Gülen’s ethical thoughts. In his writings
and speeches, we find that he treats various aspects and elements of peace. Using some practical
consequences of his thoughts and teachings, we have identified four main dimensions of peace (Celik
& Valkenberg 2007) which will allow us to conceptualise Gülen’s ethic of peace within a theoretical
framework.

4.1. Eternal Peace
First, Gülen envisages eternal peace as the ultimate goal of human life, almost synonymous with
salvation. Specifically, it is the final destination of the collective personality of those who serve
humanity (hizmet). In the eschatological sense, when one manages to direct oneself toward the path

442 Ibn Miskawayh [c.930-1030] is a Muslim moralist, philosopher and historian. His moral treatise Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, in-
fluenced by the Aristotelian concept of the mean, is considered one of the best statements of Islamic philosophy. His univer-
sal history Kitab Tajarib al-Umam wa Ta’aqub al-Himam (Eclipse of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate), was noted for its use of all
available sources and greatly stimulated the development of Islamic historiography.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

304
of eternal life and happiness, however miserable and troublesome one’s life may be, as one considers
this world to be the waiting lounge for Heaven, one accepts everything contentedly and gives thanks.
He sees the members of his hizmet (service) movement, through their efforts carried out in solidarity
and sincerity, as contributing in their diverse activities to the building of an eternal realm of peace and
happiness. This concept not only gives meaning and direction to individual acts, but in this way the
believer also achieves a kind of conquest over death. Gülen (2004a:78) indicates that people have a
great need for religion, and for the peace and security provided by religion. In his writings, Gülen
relates to a hadith including: “deeds are judged by intentions”443 and he emphasized that the intention
of the believers is more important than the act itself. Human beings will try to live with a greatness of
intention that will be great enough to enable them to appreciate eternity and thus imbue them with an
inner peace that comes from being connected to eternity. For Gülen, eternal peace means achieving
God’s approval, walking in the greatest spiritual ecstasy, overstepping the boundaries of existence and
reaching Eden, with contemplation of the eternal togetherness in the hereafter. On the contrary, a
believing soul, giving expression to the chilling nature of the denial of truth and any attempt to
conceal it, yet at the same time, expressing the eternal peace that faith promises, calls out in the
following ode of Akif:444 “A rusted (rotten or morally corrupt spiritual) heart which has no faith is a
burden for the breast” (Gülen 2004a:137).
Islam literally means ‘surrender’. Epistemologically, the word ‘Islam’ derived from the root words
silm (security) and salamah (safety), means surrendering, guiding to peace and contentment, and
establishing security, safety and accord. Etymologically speaking, the word Muslim and the verb sa-li-
ma, both come from the root silm. Muslims greet everyone with salaam, thereby placing love for
themselves in everyone’s heart.445 They end their prayers with salaam. According to Gülen
(2004a:54), these principles are essentials to and permeate the lives of Muslims: When Muslims
stand to pray, they cut their connection with this world, turning to their Lord in faith and obedience,
and standing at attention in His presence. Completing the prayer, as if they were returning back to
life, they greet those on their right and left by wishing peace: ‘Remain safe and in peace’. With a wish
for safety and security, peace and contentment, they return to the ordinary world once again. Gülen
(2004a:58) considers this peaceful attitude of greeting and wishing safety and security for others as
one of the most beneficial acts in Islam. Gülen (2004a:218) describes those who dedicate themselves
to doing good for humanity as altruistic that they can even sacrifice their lives for others, and in doing
so they have found peace in their conscience.

4. 2.  Inner Peace
A second dimension of peace might be called inner peace: tranquillity and peace of mind, an inner
confidence born of faith that enables the religious believer to face adversity without anxiety or
despair. In the psychological sense, peace of mind has been seen as being in the possession of new
technological equipments and the achievements of physical comfort. At times it has been connected
with tranquillity, hard work, financial wealth, the satisfaction of carnal desires, and boundless
freedom. However, for Gülen (2004a:159) it is only possible as the peace of mind pursued of is the

443 Bukhari, Bad’ul-Vahy 1, Itk 6; Muslim, Imarat, 155; Abu Dawud, Talak, 11.
444 Mehmed Akif Ersoy [1873-1936] is the renowned Turkish poet who also wrote the Turkish National Anthem.
445 Buhhari, Iman, 20; Muslim, Iman, 63.

--- Sayfa 307 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

305
fruit of virtue within faith and can only be attained through perfect faith. Particularly when one is
facing the approach of death, the believer can attain a peace of mind which will enable them to
overcome spiritual turmoil and fear. He describes the people of faith as peaceful with themselves:
“worldly people who are enslaved by their egos live only to fulfil their carnal desires. Never content,
they feel no tranquillity. But ideal people are always at peace with themselves (interior peace) and
always feel secure. They are content and, furthermore, they place their knowledge and understanding
at the service of humanity” (Gülen 2004a:129,159). As a result, people of faith feel themselves to be in
an expansive atmosphere of peace and the society becomes a society of conscience and peace.
‘Jihad’ is an element of Islam which is primarily defined as the inner struggle of a believer against all
that stands between the believer and God. Gülen (2004:171-172; 1998a,b) describes that jihad occurs
on two fronts; the internal and the external. The internal struggle (the greater jihad) is the effort to
attain one’s essence; the external struggle (the lesser jihad) is the process of enabling someone else to
attain his or her essence. The first is conducted on the spiritual front, for it is one’s struggle with their
own inner world and carnal soul (nefs). In other words, the greater jihad is based on overcoming
obstacles between oneself and one’s essence, and the soul’s reaching knowledge, eventually divine
knowledge, divine love, and spiritual bliss. The second is, however, material and based on removing
obstacles between people and faith so that people can choose freely between belief and disbelief. Both
of these jihads have been carried out successfully, the desired is established. If one is missing, the
balance is destroyed. Gülen argues that believers find peace and vitality in such a balanced jihad.
Further, Gülen (2004a:1-2) states that love is the most essential element of every being, and becomes
a magic elixir to overcome every obstacle, a powerful key to open every door, and a source of altruism,
stating: “Those who possess such an elixir will sooner or later open the gates to all parts of the world
and spread the fragrance of peace everywhere, using the ‘censers’ of love in their hands”. Moreover,
Gülen (2004a:6) stresses that “a human is a mirror of another human”. He emphasises that the level
of one’s understanding and appreciation of one another depends on how well one recognize the
qualities and riches that each person possesses. Also, he has the conviction that peace, happiness and
security at home is the mutual accord between the spouses in thought, morals, and belief, which can
result in a healthy family life and a good education for their children (Ünal & Williams, 2000:311).

4. 3.  Interpersonal and Intercommunal Peace
A third aspect of peace refers to interpersonal, and broadly formulated, intercommunal peace. Gülen
sees interior peace, not only of individuals but of environs, communities and whole societies, as a
precondition for healthy and hearty dialogue among peoples, and as one of the marks of Islamic
civilization. He has the conviction that along with justice, harmony, brotherhood, solidarity, human
progress and spiritual advancement, peace should characterize the Muslim’s daily life. It is peace as
the basis of societal relations which should be the force that attracts others to Islam. So important is
the element of forgiveness and pardon in human relations that Gülen constantly recommends his
students and followers to pardon each other’s faults immediately. Gülen (2005a:75) expresses the
core of his massage regarding tolerance, dialogue and peace in his book “Pearls of Wisdom”: “be so
tolerant that your heart becomes wide like the ocean. Become inspired with faith and love for others.
Offer a hand to those in trouble, and be concerned about everyone.” He defines tolerance as the most
essential element of moral systems, a very important source of spiritual discipline and a celestial
virtue of perfected people (Gülen, 2004a:33-34). To him, tolerance does not mean being influenced by

--- Sayfa 308 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

306
others or joining them; it means accepting others as they are and knowing how to get along with them
and to become protectors of the general peace and contentment (ibid:42). At the same time, Gülen
claims that Muslim citizens in European countries can only live in harmony in those countries by
means of a vast atmosphere of tolerance (ibid:43).
In addition, Gülen frequently refers to the Qur’ān accepting forgiveness and tolerance as basic
principles. He suggests that to expend efforts for dialogue with the belief that “peace is better” (Qur’ān
4:128), and continuously advocates peace, nationally and internationally. The Qur’ānic verses that
introduce ‘the servants of God’ are as fellow:
[…] And the servants of (God) the All-Merciful are those who move on the Earth
in humility, and when the ignorant address them, they say: ‘Peace’ (Qur’ān
25:63).” […] When they meet hollow words or unseemly behaviour, they pass
them by with dignity (Qur’ān 25:72). […] And when they hear vain talk, they turn
away there from and say: “To us our deeds, and to you yours. (Qur’ān 28:55).
The general gist of these verses is that when those who have been favoured with true servitude to God
encounter meaningless and ugly words or behaviour they say nothing unbecoming, but rather pass by
in a dignified manner. In short: “everyone acts according to his own disposition” (Qur’ān 17:84) and
thus displays his or her own character. The character of heroes of dialogue is gentleness,
consideration, and tolerance. This mildness is presented in the Qur’ān as ‘gentle words’. “When God
sent Moses and Aaron to a man who claimed to possess divinity, as the Pharaoh had done, he
commanded them to behave tolerantly and to speak softly” (Qur’ān 20:44).
Without exception and regardless of differences in faith, ethnicity and culture, one meets everyone
and this generally breaks the tension of people toward probable opponents. For Gülen, it is an Islamic
principle to love those things or people who must be loved in the way of God and to dislike those
things or people who must be disliked on the way of God. Disliking in the way of God” applies only to
feelings, thoughts and attributes. Thus, people should dislike such things as immorality, disbelief and
polytheism, not the people who engage in such activities. Gülen (2004a:60) cites that Prophet
Muhammad once stood up out of respect for humanity as the funeral procession of a Jew passed by.
When reminded that the deceased was a Jew, the Prophet replied: “but he is a human,” thereby
showing the value Islam gives to human beings in general. This action demonstrates how people of
different faiths and cultures should respect every person to coexist peacefully.
Besides this, Gülen (2004a:61) gives another example to state that the Prophet was inordinately
sensitive with regard to respecting others: the Prophet one day admonished a Companion who had
been heard insulting Abu Jahl, when in an assembly of Companions where Abu Jahl’s son Ikrimah
was present: “Do not hurt others by criticizing their fathers.”446 Gülen (2004a:74-75) also significantly
views the form and style of debate inherited from Nursi: “Anyone who is happy about defeating an
opponent in debate is without mercy.” He explains the reason for this further: “You gain nothing by
such a defeat. If you were defeated and the other was victorious, you would have corrected one of your
mistakes.” Debate should not be for the sake of one’s ego, but rather to enable the truth to come out.
He suggests that debate can only take place in an environment that is conductive to dialogue. The
Qur’ān (29:46) prescribes: “[…] And discuss you not with the People of the Book, except with means
better (than mere disputation)”. This verse describes the method, approach, and manner that should

446 Hakim, al-Mustadrak, 3:241; Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, 13: 540.

--- Sayfa 309 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

307
be used to communicate and interact with the other(s).Those who consider themselves addressed by
these aforementioned verses, all devotees of love who dream of becoming true servants of God merely
because they are human beings, those who have declared their faith and thereby become Muslims and
performed the mandated social and religious duties, must behave with tolerance and forbearance and
expect nothing from other people. Gülen (2004a:61) suggests the approach of Yunus Emre:447 not to
strike those who hit them, not to respond harshly to those who curse them, and not to hold any secret
grudge against those who abuse them. In addition, one conspicuous characteristic of Gülen’s
understanding of peaceful coexistence is that he begins by addressing closed circles and subsequently
seeks ways to approach broader and more open societies (Celik & Valkenberg 2007).

4.4.  Universal Peace
A fourth dimension of peace distinguished by Gülen is universal or global peace. He emphasized the
importance of the indispensability of religion and intercultural dialogue for world peace through his
efforts to meet with other religious and community leaders within his native country and abroad. In
addition to rules that guarantee peace and security, there are also verses in the Qur’ān related to
attitudes that should be taken against criminals and people who cause anarchy and terror; for such
people there are legal sanctions, punishments, and retaliations. Indeed, the Qur’ān (4:128) states
“peace is better” as a general rule. Gülen (2004a:72) stresses that peace, justice and stability are of the
utmost importance to Islam; fighting and war are only secondary occurrences which are bound to
specific reasons and conditions. He opposites the use of violence to attain political ends, and teaches
his followers that the days of getting things done by brute force are over. In today’s enlightened world
the only way to get others to accept your ideas and ways is by persuasion and the use of convincing
argument.” (Ünal & Williams, 2000:319). Only through cooperative understanding, interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, and a process of mutual respect can communities coexist in harmony.
He expresses the longing for a time of peace and prosperity for all. Even though the consideration of
the world as a village becomes firmer and more prevalent over the course of time, different beliefs,
races, customs, and traditions will continue to cohabit in this village. Gülen (2004a:250) powerfully
argues that the peace of this global village lies in respecting all these differences, considering these
differences to be part of  nature and in ensuring that people appreciate and share these differences. A
major concept related to Gülen’s teaching on peace is his understanding of ‘nation’. Although this
concept refers particularly to the Muslim world and the Turkish nation in the context of their roles in
shaping human history, as major players and representatives of global peace, there is certainly more
to it than just the concept of one particular nation, especially when we look with Gülen’s vision and
his idealism of dialogue and tolerance. In his teaching, Gülen discourse-solutions for freedom and an
honourable stand can be used by any suppressed community. The motivating ethos behind Gülen’s
career as clearly manifested in numerous dialogue activities and education initiatives is one of a
worldwide peace which will be accomplished by the participation of all nations. His definition of
nation does not comprise one race or ethnic group; Anatolian has always been a land of diverse ethnic
groups throughout human history, which form one united nation today. Exempt from any chauvinist

447 Yunus Emre [1238-1320] is a poet and Sufi who had a powerful influence on Turkish literature. He was well versed in
Sufi philosophy, especially that of Rumi, and, like Rumi, became a leading representative of Sufism in Anatolia on a more
popular level.

--- Sayfa 310 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

308
characteristic, he addresses the colourful mosaic of Anatolia including like a crucible for peoples that
have come from Central Asia, Balkans, and Mesopotamia.
Concretely, Gülen (2004a:261-262; Capan, 2005) was one of the first Muslims who released a press
declaration within 24 hours of September 11th terrorist attacks renouncing them. He regarded these
atrocities as a great blow to world peace that unfairly tarnished the credit of believers:
“[…] terror can never be used in the name of Islam or for the sake of any Islamic
ends. A terrorist cannot be a Muslim and a Muslim cannot be a terrorist. A
Muslim can only be the representative and symbol of peace, welfare, and
prosperity. [….] If a ship is carrying nine criminals and one innocent person,
Islam does not allow for the ship to be sunk in order to punish the nine criminals;
doing so would violate the rights of the one innocent person (Gülen,
2004a:62,261).
He further defines a Muslim as a person of love and affection who avoids every kind of terrorist
activity and who has no malice or hatred for anyone or anything. To him, true Muslims can only the
most trustworthy representatives of universal peace.
Gülen proposes education as a method to realise global peace and progress. In the following section
we will discuss educational initiatives inspired by him from the perspective of peaceful coexistence.

5. Peaceful Coexistence through Universal Education
Gülen is convinced that a better and peaceful future for humanity can be established only through
universal and intercultural education. An education of the heart and soul as well as of the mind and
character, aimed at reviving and invigorating the whole being to achieve competence and providing
goods and services useful to others. Education is the most important element in the Gülen movement
and it is also an effective tool for the longevity of the movement (Agai 2002; Celik & Celik 2005). The
Gülen movement opened about 500 schools all around the world (Agai 2004). In these schools
children from different ethnic, and cultural backgrounds are educated by mainly Turkish graduates
from renowned Turkish universities (Ates, Karakas & Ortayli 2005). Thomas Michel, who was active
for years in Asia as part of the Vatican’s Council’s initiative for inter-religious dialogue, was impressed
by such schools. Michel describes how he came into contact with schools inspired by Gülen during his
residence in Zamboanga, on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao. Initially, Michel found the
name of the school, The Philippine-Turkish School of Tolerance, in Zamboanga rather surprising and
a startling affirmation in an area characterized by outbursts of violence between Muslims and
Christians. Michel (2003) indicates that the school seems to do justice to its name by employing an
equal number of Christian and Muslim teachers, by educating Muslim and Christian children and by
promoting cooperation with Christian institutions in the area. An overwhelming majority of the
respondents emphasized that the process of education for harvesting peace is a lifelong process and
continuum that extends from early childhood to adulthood as modes and levels of education. Related
to the role of education in peace and dialogue process respondents also stressed:
“Gülen’s educational understanding for building peace encourages learners to
draw lessons and inspirations from the role models provided by innumerable
human beings respected for practising values, virtues and conduct that transcend
greed, animosities, and desires to control and possess others or things.”

--- Sayfa 311 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

309
In addition, respondents pointed out that Gülen’s conviction is that the reliable and true road to peace
and justice for humanity is dependent on the provision of an adequate and appropriate education
integrating scientific knowledge and spiritual and ethical values. Many of Gülen’s followers say that
educational practices, media activities and dialogue projects inspired by him to build a culture of
peace promote key values in various faith and spirituality traditions that have been recognized
through interfaith and intercultural dialogue as a body of common and shared values for guiding
peaceful conduct and relations among peoples, communities and nations.
The movement’s schools form ‘white islands’ on the Earth, what Gülen calls “islands of peace”. To
many respondents, the schools of his volunteer movement make a significant contribution to the
construction of a happy world, and attempt to build on universal values and peace:
“The Gülen’s movement attempts to build on universal values and peace. The
schools form, “peace islands” where cultures and civilizations meet and reach a
consensus. His volunteer movement is a framework of emphasizing and gathering
around universal humane virtues, and a framework of respect for the position of
those with "different" perceptions, beliefs, and thoughts.”
The respondents maintained that building peace through education is a sustainable reconciliation in
divided societies. Gülen’s educational vision involves not only schools, but also families, communities,
and the media. Interviewees indicated that Gülen claims a holistic education requiring a learning
circle that consists of family, school, friends, neighbours, faith and cultural organizations, and
workplaces. This allows children from an early age, to learn that they are members of communities
(local or global) who need to live together in harmony and peace.

6. Dispute Resolution through Dialogical Approach
In this section, we set out to highlight insights on dispute resolution through dialogue and tolerance,
using some paradigms contained in Gülen’s and others’ teaching. From tolerance and dialogue, Gülen
(2004a:45) understands embracing people regardless of differences of opinion, world-view, ideology,
ethnicity, or belief. There is a need to recognize that differences do exist and the objective is not to
“correct” but to hear and listen to the other side. From another approach, for Gülen it means—in the
words of the Turkish poet Yunus Emre—loving the created simply because of the Creator. On the basis
of our study, we proposes here that Gülen’s tolerance and intercultural dialogue method can be seen
as an alternative method for dispute resolution in and between societies. So important is the element
of forgiveness in human relations that Gülen (2004a:27-29,34) recommends that his followers and
sympathizers pardon each other’s faults and mistakes immediately. Comparably, the Pope John Paul
II (2002) believed that forgiveness and justice will heal most of our wounds in social life, and are the
divine instruments to coexist peacefully. Similarly, Gopin (2001) presents forgiveness as an element
of conflict resolution in religious cultures to walk the tightrope of reconciliation and justice.
Religion is usually cited as the cause of or at least a factor to conflict around the world (Coward &
Smith 2003; Smock 2002; Gopin 1997, 2002; Abu-Nimer 2001). Arthur Schneier (in: Smock 2002)
points out that religion is never the real cause of conflict within or between societies, but it is often
identified as an excuse for other causes such as ethnicity, economic disparities, and regional
differences. Based on his experience and studies on conflict resolution, Abu-Nimer (2003) identifies
four phases of development in an effective experiment of interfaith dialogue. He suggests that the

--- Sayfa 312 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

310
earlier encounters should focus on individual and group similarities in theologies and scriptures. One
example could be to jointly study the sacred texts of each religion. It must be remembered that the
goal for these studies is not debate or conversions. These shared studies should yield deeper bonds
through invitations to homes and meetings with families. The second phase is to deepen the
relationship through joint prayers that are not contradictory to the other faith and by participating in
the other faith’s rituals. Having established trust and an understanding of the other faith, the third
phase is to discover and confirm differences in religious values and faith practices. The final step
should be exploring the ways in which messages of different faiths can benefit people from other
religious traditions in the same community.
The core of Huntington’s (1993) clash of civilizations thesis is based on the observation of a shift of
paradigm. A paradigm is the product of the interaction of the cultural medium and of the thinking
minds and provides a basis for understanding. A shift in paradigm means that we start to understand,
or interpret same realities in a different way. Huntington claimed that the clash of civilizations is
inevitable because the modern paradigm was a paradigm of clash and conflict. Huntington has been
harshly criticized by advocates of dialogue for his remarks on the inevitability of clash. But one has to
give the credibility to Huntington on the observation he made about the shift of paradigm. Indeed, the
world is more and more exposed to a possible ‘clash of civilizations’. The twentieth century produced
more prejudices than the totality of the twenty preceding centuries: now we need a strategy to heal
these wounds. In medical terminology curing an illness is something, preventing its symptoms is
another. Conflict resolution strategies, usually do not ‘cure’, they only suppress the symptoms.
Prejudices, and paradigmatic thinking patterns are learnt behaviours; a person does not forget them
easily, and needs to replace them with other habits, patterns, bits of knowledge.
Paradigms do not shift daily. They are produced through continuous hermeneutical circles that
change us by changing how we interpret reality. Gadamer formulated the philosophy of hermeneutical
circles to show how understanding the ‘other’ changes the ‘self’. If these hermeneutical circles of
understanding are healthy than a dialogue between different cultures gives way to a higher level of
understanding, a new paradigm where members of each cultures learn how to appreciate the others.
But if these hermeneutical circles are false, if the ‘other’ is a ‘false, imagined, non-existent other’ than
the circles give way to an unhealthy shift in the paradigm. In epistemological terms the ‘real other’ is
killed through ‘not knowing it’. Once the ‘other’ is killed, in Levinas’s understanding, the ‘self’ is also
killed, and the subject of knowing, the ‘I’ commits suicide.
An interviewee exemplified what a false hermeneutical circle means in practical life:
“Let’s think that Muhammad and Jonathan are speaking. Muhammad is not free
of his cultural medium. He has been educated about the crusading, colonizing and
evangelizing Western Christian. And Jonathan knows of 9/11, Jihad, suicide
bombers, invading Ottomans, and of course the mushrooming mosques all over
his country. These are not necessarily wrong. But any hermeneutical circle that
will be based on these perceptions is going to be a false circle of understanding. In
the end their speech will turn out to be more of a dialectical or apologetic nature,
than a dialogical one.”
A collection of such contacts in time forces the paradigm to shift further. What produced a shift in the
civilizational paradigm is actually a continuity of ‘false hermeneutical circles’. False, because the
dialogue is done not with the other, but with the ‘false other’, or the ‘perceived other’, or in Levinasian

--- Sayfa 313 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

311
terms, the ‘killed other’; and false, because once the other is false, the self is false either; a ‘perceived
self’, or ‘a self that committed suicide through killing the other’, or a Bakhtinian ‘non-existent self’.
Healing of the paradigm, as such, necessitates a creation of the other and the self through ‘reverse
hermeneutical circles’.
In practical terms, we can say that a dialoguer needs to create a new, local or universal, paradigm so
as to facilitate peaceful interpretation of the actual reality. We, as different ontologisms, or as
adherents of different faiths, ideologies, religions, need to speak to each other, in a way to heal the
paradigm, to reverse the vicious circles of misunderstandings, prejudices, libels. And the end product
of this healing of the paradigm is not only peace, but existence. “You are not really you, because you
define yourself according to your definition of me and of others. And since you define me wrong, you
define yourself wrong. Epistemologically you have committed suicide. Give me my life back, and be
resurrected.” This is the promise of dialogical philosophy for the sake of peaceful coexistence.

7. Concluding Remarks
In today’s global village, borders have blurred and several cultures come into contact more often and
more intensively with each other. The interethnic and interreligious climate throughout the world, in
particular in the Netherlands, has undergone a dramatic change in recent years. Social mediation and
peaceful coexistence within the context of cultural, ethnic and religious divisions, hierarchies, rivalries
and conflicts that are grounded in socio-economic and political realities have become vital necessities
of our time in order to maintain social cohesion where an appreciation of diversity must stand as a
main point of reference, paving the way for intercultural dialogue vis-à-vis processes of globalisation,
migration and the transnationalization of social relations. In order to achieve this and to build bridges
between different cultures socially innovative projects should be implemented to tackle the problems
stemming from the migration, the emergence of transnational and diaspora communities and their
role in (inter)national conflicts, as well as the re-emergence of religious groups and identities, the
politicisation of religion and the rise of religious fundamentalisms in the context of global geo-
political and economic coalitions, and hence new conflicts and wars. Both compassionate love as a
way for inner peace and intercultural dialogue as a preventive strategy for dispute resolution and
social mediation are important socially innovative methods in our age of globalization that refers to
the intensification of worldwide social relations and the multiplicity of linkages and interconnections
between the states, societies and peoples, which make up the modern world system.
Our analysis of Gülen’s ideas is helpful in disproving the thesis of clash of civilisation, and provides a
healing of this paradigm in two ways. First, to live in peace as a result of dialogue and education is
vital in today’s world, where globalization, mass communication, and technology have pushed
individuals and groups together in ways never before seen in human history. In today’s world of
global connectedness, peoples must develop the capacity to dialogue and create relatedness with
people coming from vastly different worldviews. Developing strategies and capacities for peaceful
coexistence amidst radical difference and shrinking natural resources is the central challenge of our
era. Second, Gülen pursues an inclusive middle way between fundamental futures of modernity and
the Muslim tradition—science and Islamic knowledge, reason and revelation, progress and
conservation, and free will and destiny—accepting them as two faces of the same reality.
Dialogue and the four aforementioned dimensions of peace are possible only when accompanied by
moral values, mutual knowledge and acceptance of cultural and religious identity. We can arguably

--- Sayfa 314 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

312
say that the movement that has evolved around the ideas of Fethullah Gülen provides initially and
primarily an example of a renewal with a potential to influence both the Muslim and non-Muslim
individuals (Yilmaz 2003). A number of positive NGOs and peaceful institutions (e.g. schools) led by
volunteers, social innovators and peaceful, servant leaders can form “islands of peace” throughout the
globe. This depends on deep and large-scale systems change, involving work with idealist people from
all faiths, multi-national corporations, government agencies, and civil society organizations all over
the world. The Gülen movement provides a unique case in this regard.
The movement is a growing approach to the reunification of faith and reason with hopes for a peaceful
coexistence between liberal democracies and the religiously diverse. Gülen has developed a peaceful
approach to religion and science as two aspects of the same reality complementing one another. By-
him inspired civic movement challenges to build a peaceful world based on dialogue, tolerance,
respect and compassion, and to raise individuals who use their intellect, zeal and lust lawfully and in
moderation.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

313

Anatolian Muslimness in Practice:
Gülen's Initiatives for Dialogue and Education

PART
6

--- Sayfa 316 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

314

--- Sayfa 317 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

315
INVESTIGATING THE CONTRIBUTION OF FETHULLAH
GÜLEN THROUGH THE ACTIVITIES OF A GÜLEN-INSPIRED
RELIGIO-CULTURAL SOCIETY BASED IN IRELAND
JONATHAN LACEY 448

Abstract
Fethullah Gülen motivates his followers to mobilize by insisting that the mere aversion of
transgressions is not sufficient to being a ‘good Muslim’. One must also become active in order to
improve the conditions in the world. This principle has inspired the establishment of a multitude
of organizations around the world devoted to interfaith dialogue and peaceful co-existence. This
article focuses on a Gülen-inspired society based in Ireland, namely the Turkish Irish
Educational and Cultural Society (TIECS). This society provides a range of interfaith and
intercultural activities, several of which I discuss in this paper. I draw on ethnographic work and
qualitative interviews I conducted with members of TIECS. The study hopes to shed light on the
real and practical contribution of Fethullah Gülen. Ireland provides an interesting site for this
study because unlike Holland, France and Britain, inward migration is a relatively new
phenomenon in Ireland, as are debates on multiculturalism and integration. Since the mid-
1990s, Ireland’s economy has grown from strength to strength to become one of the leading
economies in Europe. Consequently, it has witnessed unprecedented levels of immigration and
likewise an unprecedented mixture of cultures and religions. Until recent years interfaith
dialogue in Ireland was dominated by Catholicism and Protestantism and the dialogue was often
focused on crisis intervention. Islam is now the fastest growing religion in Ireland, with over
31,000 adherents and has now become part of the national conversation vis-à-vis Irish identity.
Muslims living in Ireland originate from a multitude of nations, counting Ireland, and from a
number of Islamic zones. The paper argues that TIECS and the Gülen community practice
‘Turkish Islam’ which has Sufi principles at its core, promoting tolerance and reason as the keys
to peaceful coexistence. This article illustrates how Fethullah Gülen’s principles are practiced in a
European context.

1. Introduction
Fethullah Gülen motivates his followers to mobilise by insisting that the mere aversion of
transgressions is not sufficient to being a ‘good Muslim’. One must also become active in order to
improve the conditions in the world. Islam, according to Gülen’s articulation, is action-oriented. This
principle has inspired the establishment of a multitude of organisations around the world devoted to
interfaith dialogue and peaceful co-existence. This article focuses a Gülen-inspired society based in
Ireland, namely the Turkish Irish Educational and Cultural Society (TIECS). This society provides a
range of inter-faith and intercultural activities. From my study of this group, I hope to shed light on
the real and practical contribution of Fethullah Gülen.

448 Doing a PhD in the Department of Sociology in Trinity College Dublin, where he did an MPhil in Ethnic and Racial
Studies. Part-time research assistant with one of Intel’s Senior Ethnographic Researchers, focusing on Independent Living
for older people. Current interests: the sociology of religion, social movements and global networks.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

316
Ireland provides an interesting site for this study because unlike Holland, France, Britain and
Germany, inward migration is a relatively new phenomenon in Ireland and likewise debates on
multiculturalism and integration. Piaras MacEinri and Paddy Walley argue that Ireland can now be
understood ‘as a microcosm of the realities of globalisation’ (2003: 18) and Fintan O’Toole insists that
‘The Republic of Ireland is the most globalised country on earth’ (2003: 4). Trade and finance pass
fluently in and out of the territorial boundaries of Ireland. As of 1993, Ireland received 25% of all new
U.S. investment into Europe, employing 94,000 people in 2002 (O’Toole, 2003: 6). This inward
investment since the early 1990’s along with EU contributions over the last two decades has resulted
in Ireland’s economy flourishing, making it one of the strongest economies in the world (O’Toole,
2003). This effervescent economy is necessarily coupled with inward migration to Ireland. Since 1997,
Ireland, for so long suffering from an emigration haemorrhage, became an immigration destination
(Lentin and McVeigh, 2002; Ruhs, 2005). Immigrants were courted by Irish companies and the
government to fill job shortages. Consequentially, we have witnessed unprecedented levels of
immigration in Ireland and likewise an unprecedented mixture of cultures and religions. Irish culture
has moved from one defined by Catholicism, nationalism and economic isolationism, to one oriented
towards economic and cultural liberalism. Ireland has moved from a nation that largely perceived
itself as homogenous to one that is renegotiating its identity on the recognition of heterogeneity.
Irish culture has been steeped in the Catholic tradition for centuries and though their has been a
decline in practicing Catholics in Ireland (see Inglis, 1998; Tovey and Share, 2003), over 3.6 million of
the total population of nearly 4.2 million in Ireland still claim to be Catholics (Central Statistics Office
(CSO), 2007). The Irish state still pays great deference to religion in Ireland, inviting religious groups
to perform prayers at state events. The most recent example of this was the ‘National Day of
Commemoration’; an event that pays tribute to all the Irish people who died in wars or on United
Nations duty. Leaders of the Jewish, Christian and Islamic communities were invited to say a prayer
peculiar to their faith tradition, at this event (O’Reagan, 2007).
Until recent years interfaith dialogue in Ireland was dominated by Catholicism and Protestantism and
the dialogue was often focused on crisis intervention. Islam is now the fastest growing religion in
Ireland, with over 31,000 subscribers (CSO, 2007) and has now become part of the national
conversation vis-à-vis Irish identity. Muslims living in Ireland originate from a multitude of nations,
counting Ireland, and from a number of Islamic zones. I maintain that due to historical, geographical
and cultural reasons, we can talk of Islam in the plural sense. Drawing on the work of M. Hakan Yavuz
(2004), I argue that TIECS and the Gülen Movement practice ‘Turkish Islam’449 which has Sufi
principles at its core, promoting tolerance and reason as the keys to peaceful coexistence. This article
illustrates how Fethullah Gülen’s principles are practiced in a European context.
I begin this paper by surveying the various Islamic institutions in Ireland. I describe the multiple and
diverse expressions of Islam practiced by Muslims living there and issues arising vis-à-vis integration
into Irish society. This is followed by an articulation of the need to talk about Islam in the plural sense
and a description of one expression of Islam, namely, Turkish Islam. I establish the links between
Fethullah Gülen and Turkish Islam before describing the potential for Gülen’s approach to dialogue as
a possible remedy to the integration problems faced by the Turkish diaspora in the complex German
situation. Subsequent to this I introduce the Gülen-inspired TIECS. I firstly focus on its members’

449 This expression of Islam has also been referred to as ‘Anatolian Islam’. However for consistency’s sake I will use the
term Turkish Islam throughout this paper.

--- Sayfa 319 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

317
attitudes towards integration in Ireland before analysing their principal pursuit, namely, conferences
celebrating the commonalities amongst the ‘Abrahamic religions’. I show how members implement
the thought of Fethullah Gülen in these symposiums and evaluate their effect in the Irish context.

2. Islam in Ireland
Islam is the fastest growing religion in Ireland. Census figures indicate that in 1991 there were only
3,873 Muslims living in this country. The 2006 Census shows a massive increase with over 31,000
Muslims now living there (CSO, 2007). The activities of Muslims in Ireland have, however, attracted
little academic attention. An exception is Kieran Flynn (2006) who offers a timely survey of Muslims
in Ireland. Importantly, he notes the diversity of practices amongst Muslims and observes that despite
its small size, it is quite fragmented.
Flynn notes that whilst the early Muslims living in Ireland were typically students or working in the
textile or catering industries, Muslims are now predominantly middle-class and involved in a much
wider range of professions, including medicine and information technology. There appears to be a
strong Arab influence amongst Islamic institutions in Ireland. One of the most prominent
establishments, the Sunni-oriented Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland (ICCI) based in Dublin, is run
by the Al-Maktoum Foundation and directed from the United Arab Emirates. This has caused some
tension amongst the Islamic community, some of whom feel disturbed by the fact that they do not
have control of their local centre. Flynn astutely recognises that the heavily subsidised ICCI cannot be
considered independent given the fact that it is fiscally dependent upon this Arab Foundation.
Despite this, he insists that the ICCI is an important organisation for Muslims all across Ireland,
playing a vital role in civil society by hosting politicians and religious groups, and operating several
Qur’anic schools, with hundreds of students attending. Though there are several state recognised
Muslim primary schools in Ireland (though no secondary schools), the majority of Muslims in Ireland
attend mainstream schools.
Surveying the various Islamic communities in Ireland Flynn notes a wide diversity. Besides the Sunni-
oriented ICCI, there is also a strong Shi’a presence in Ireland with up to 2,000 members, originating
predominantly from the Middle East and Pakistan. 1996 saw the official opening of Shi’a Ahlul Bayt
Islamic Centre in Milltown, Dublin. Flynn pays tribute to this organisation claiming that  ‘The Shi’a
community and its leadership have emerged as the voice of moderation within the Irish Islamic
community, representing an Islam that is at once tolerant, progressive and in tune with the challenges
of a modern society’ (2006: 227). Flynn cites its endorsement of democracy and human rights in the
Middle East as evidence of its commitment to moderation, noting that this has also gained the group
positive regard vis-à-vis the media in Ireland.
Flynn (2006) also notes the emergence of the Urdu-speaking Islamic Communities in Ireland and
points to the opening of two prayer rooms as evidence of this. The numbers attending Friday prayers
reach 1,000 and members originate from Pakistan, Bangladesh and India. This group has courted a
degree of scandal in relation to some of their ‘more radical and reactionary members’ (ibid: 227).
There are also a number of other Islamic communities around the country, notably in Cork (which
hosts the second largest Muslim population in Ireland) and Mayo. Writing in The Irish Times, Mary
Fitzgerald (2006) notes that around the country there are many different prayer rooms subscribing to
different schools of thought within Islam, including several different Sufi-inspired groups.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

318
Flynn argues that the greatest challenge to Islam in Ireland is its diversity. This is supported by
Fitzgerald who notes that one of the newest Muslim communities in Ireland is that of Nigerian
Muslims, led by an imam originating from Lagos, who claims to preach “African Sufism”. The
preacher argues that “It’s a real Nigerian community thing. Islam as a religion is based on unity and
we recognise that but we are different in some respects to Arab and south Asian Muslims” (cited in
Fitzgerald, 2006). I believe this statement, describing the specificity of culture and geography is the
key to understanding Islam in Ireland. This will be discussed in greater detail in the next section,
when I introduce the concept of Turkish Islam.
According to Fitzgerald (2006) there has been thus far no comparable institution to the Muslim
Council of Britain, with a ‘clearly defined leadership’ in Ireland. This has led to a spate of squabbling
between different groups and personalities vying for control. The outspoken South African, Sheikh
Shaheed Satardien argued that Muslim leaders in Ireland were “in denial” regarding a growing
number of extremist Muslims here. These claims have been denied by most Muslims and remain
largely unproven. The South African Sheikh gained a lot of media attention for his outburst and has
subsequently been ‘ostracised’ by some members of the Muslim community in Ireland (Fitzgerald,
2006).  This incident is an illustration of the lack of consensus amongst Muslims in this country.
This brief survey of Islamic communities in Ireland is an explicit illustration of their diversity and
indicates the desire of different groups to organise societies peculiar to their faith and culture.
According to the National Consultative Committee on Racism and Interculturalism (NCCRI) (2007),
most Muslims living in Ireland have successfully integrated. However, they have faced some
difficulties due to racism/Islamaphobia from members of the host society.
Until recent years there was a fallacious notion that Ireland was free of racism. Given that Ireland was
a post-colonial state, it was argued that how could they be racist. Ronit Lentin and Robbie McVeigh
led the charge in 2002 illustrating that racism has been present in Ireland for a long time, noting that
anti-Traveller racism and anti-Semitism were seen as ‘common sense’ and unproblematic. With the
dramatic increase in migrants over the last 15 years, racism has become far more conspicuous to the
point whereby there is a general acceptance of the problem of racism by the state and civil society.
There has been quite a lot written in recent years about racism in Ireland (see Lentin and McVeigh,
2002; 2006; Fanning, 2002; Garner, 2004) though little attention given to the topic of Islamaphobia
(exceptions include, NCCRI, 2007; Lentin and McVeigh, 2006). In this regard, Flynn argues that
‘Muslims in Ireland tend to experience racism through avoidance and indifference’ (2006: 235). There
may be some truth in this, though the NCCRI argue that there have been more explicit forms of
Islamaphobia in Ireland, especially in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist attack on the ‘twin
towers’ in NewYork on September 11, 2001. These incidents included physical and verbal abuse. The
NCCRI (2007) also note that ‘typical’ Islamaphobic abuse reported to them include ‘verbal abuse,
other forms of harassment and disrespect rather than physical assaults or criminal damage’. They also
draw attention to some recent hyperbolic headlines in major Irish newspapers that help create a
milieu whereby Islamaphobia can thrive. Examples include:

‘Fascist fundamentalism is rife among young Irish Muslims’ (cited in NCCRI, 2007)

‘The green jihads’ (cited in NCCRI, 2007).
The NCCRI note that whilst the actual article may be balanced, these sensationalist headlines can
have a powerful impact on the reader, leading to irrational fear of Muslims. Wilson and Gutierrez
(1985) take this point up in a more general context, arguing that because there is a lack of positive

--- Sayfa 321 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

319
portrayals of minority ethnic groups in the media, then it is quite conceivable that in the minds of the
audience, this partial representation of minority ethnic groups becomes accepted as the reality (cited
in Campbell, 1995: 83). It becomes the taken for granted expression of ‘how things really are’. It thus
enters into the realm of ‘common sense’ and largely goes unchallenged (Hall, 1982). The race theorist
Teun Van Dijk insists that this systematic negative representation of the ‘Other’ leads ‘indirectly to the
enactments and reproduction of racism’ (Van Dijk, 2000:48). Stuart Hall (1982) contends that this
reproduction of the ideology of racism often takes place on the unconscious level. He does not believe
that there is a group of media elite who consciously and malignly promote their version of reality to
the explicit exclusion of others. Rather he argues that ‘…statements may be unconsciously drawing on
the ideological frameworks and classifying schemes of a society and reproducing them –so that they
appear ideologically ‘grammatical’ – without those making them being aware of so doing’ (Hall, 1982:
72). In other words, when journalists and broadcasters frame media narratives, they do so drawing on
classifications signified by the ruling group in society. Those working in the media therefore
unconsciously reproduce these categories as if they were natural and immutable. Returning
specifically to the Irish context, despite some Muslims in Ireland experiencing Islamaphobia, the
NCCRI note that the majority of Muslims in Ireland have integrated successfully and Islamaphobic
incidents are isolated.

3. Turkish Islam
Edward Said (1997) argues, rightly in my view, that the majority of opinion-makers in Europe and
America, both journalists and academics, have predominantly portrayed Islam as a monolithic group
determined to challenge the West through terrorist activities. This articulation has intensified in
recent years due to high-profile terrorist attacks by Muslim fundamentalists. Said points out that
many Western scholars understand western civilization as complex and heterogeneous and have
devised a multitude of theories in an attempt to understand its multifaceted nature. Yet when it comes
to Islamic society, it is treated as a single undifferentiated group. Aziz Al-Azmeh is critical of this view
and rightly argues that “there are as many Islams as there are situations that sustain it” (cited in
Yilmaz, 2005: 385). Too often ignored are the distinguishing factors of geography, culture and history.
These features are integral in order to account for the manifold differences across borders (both
territorial and symbolic). This point is supported by the Turkish-born sociologist Talip Küçükcan,
who argues that ‘Islamic movements are very diverse in terms of their clientele, origins, ideology and
composition. This leads us to conclude that one should talk about ‘Islams’ in the modern world rather
than one bounded and fixed ‘Islam’’ (1999: 191). Social, historical and geographical conditions must
be taken into consideration when discussing what one means by ‘Islam’.
Yavuz (2004) concurs with Küçükcan’s position regarding the existence of multiple ‘Islams’. He
maintains that there are seven different ‘ethno-cultural’ zones of Islam: Arab countries, Persia,
Turkey, South Asia, Malay-Indonesia, African and places where Islam is a minority faith (Yavuz 2004:
215). Each zone is peculiar to a particular region and its interpretations of Islam differ due to a variety
of factors: ‘Each zone’s understanding of Islam is primarily informed by its own national culture and
by diverse historical and economic factors’ (ibid: 215). He argues that Turkey has its own zone that
offers something unique regarding Islamic thought. This zone, however, is not restricted to the
territorial boundaries of Turkey but rather refers to the Turkic people. Yavuz draws on Ahmet Ocak,
who suggests that ‘We should accept the fact that there is a specific way of being Muslim which
reflects the Turkish understanding and practices in those region [which] stretch from Central Asia to

--- Sayfa 322 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

320
the Balkans. (cited in Yavuz, 2004: 218). Ocak refers to this form of Islam as ‘Turkish Islam’. Yavuz
argues that it differs vastly from Arab and Persian Islam regarding ‘the interpretation of Islamic
principles’ (Yavuz, 2004: 218). He argues that Sufism is an integral part of Turkish Islam and the
‘Turkish understanding of Islam is very much punctuated by the tolerance of Rumi, love of Yunus and
reasonability of Hacı Bektasi Veli’ (2004: 219). Rumi, Yunus and Hacı Bektasi Veli are all Turkish Sufi
mystics, who according to Yavuz have been extremely influential to Turkish Islam (for a more
comprehensive discussion on the origins of the concept of Turkish Islam see Uğur, 2004; Bilir, 2004;
Küçükcan, 2004).

4. Fethullah Gülen and Turkish Islam
Writing in the Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, Űnal Bilir (2004) attributes the popularising of
the concept of Turkish Islam to Fethullah Gülen.  Narrating the history of Islam in Turkey, Gülen, of
course, recognises that Islam emerged from Mecca and Medina, but goes on to insist that Islam did
not come directly from these areas but was routed through Central Asia. (cited in Unal and Williams,
2000). The Turkic people of Central Asia adapted Islam to their own culture before exporting it
through migration to the Anatolian region. A key point, according to Gülen, is the fact that Islam was
not forced on the Anatolians but they embraced it freely and wholeheartedly in great numbers. The
corollary of this, he maintains, is that Islam in Turkey has remained ‘tolerant, open, and un-dogmatic’
(Bilir, 2004: 267). Gülen calls himself a Muslim Turk because he sees the two as inseparable, noting
that ‘the Turkish nation put its true values on a solid foundation after becoming Muslim’ (cited in
Unal and Williams, 2000: 56). Islam in Turkey has gone through many phases since the founding of
the Turkish Republic and abolition of the Caliph in the 1920s. It has, however, undoubtedly remained
a constant feature vis-à-vis identity formation amongst Turks, despite the various state and military
interferences over peoples practice of Islam (privately and politically) over the years. The discursive
construction of Turkish Islam may be understood as an attempt to enshrine a sense of national
patriotism within Islam in order to conjure up consensus as Turkey continues to modernise.
Gülen acknowledges that some may see a contradiction within his articulation of Turkish Islam, given
the importance to universality within Islam. He responds:
Islam is universal with respect to its principles. Details can be interpreted differently. It’s my
humble opinion that the Turkish nation has interpreted those interpretable matters quite
well. If Ottoman tolerance existed today in the world, I believe there would be a very good
basis for dialogue not only among Muslims but also humanity. In a world that is becoming
more and more globalized, being open to dialogue is very important. (cited in Unal and
Williams, 2000: 56)
Gülen clearly recognises the universal principles of Islam, though he importantly notes the differences
in interpretation. As I argued above, based on geographical, cultural and social elements Islam is
interpreted and expressed in different ways which leads us to talk about Islam in the plural sense.
Gülen draws on the Ottoman legacy as an example of tolerance and relatively convivial relations
between various religious groups further noting that “In our history, a synagogue, a church, and a
mosque stood side by side in many places” (cited in Yilmaz, 2005: 395). Zeki Saritoprak of the John
Carroll University and Sidney Griffith of the Catholic University of America, echo this sentiment:

--- Sayfa 323 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

321
The Empire was composed not only of Muslims, but of many Christian and Jewish groups, and
Zoroastrians. Until the emergence of modern nationalistic ideas, Muslims, Christians and Jews had
managed to live together more peacefully and productively in Ottoman times than has been possible
more recently in the twentieth century (2005: 332).
Though this is a largely uncritical view of the Ottoman Empire, it is still fair to claim that relative to
most other empires of this period, the Ottoman Empire had a comparatively more tolerant attitude
towards minority religions.
In recent years, Fethullah Gülen has become renowned for his work on dialogue between different
groups supporting different interpretations of Islam and between different monotheistic faith groups.
In his pursuit of peaceful coexistence he has met with several world religious leaders, including the
former Roman Catholic Pope, John Paul II, the leader of the Orthodox Church, Patriarch
Barthalemeos; Turkey’s Chief Rabbi, David Aseo; Israel’s Sephardic Head Rabbi, Eliyahu Bakshi
Doron. He has also met with and influenced Turkish presidents and academics. These endeavours
have made Gülen an important religious figure both in Turkey and around the world.
With a belief in the necessity of Dialogue between different cultures and religions he helped establish
the Journalists and Writers Foundation in 1994. He is the honorary president of this Foundation
which organises conferences and meetings to promote dialogue and tolerance between different
sections of Turkish society. Gülen has also inspired hundreds, if not thousands, of organisations in all
continents promoting interfaith and intercultural dialogue. All of these activities come out of Gülen’s
articulation of Turkish Islam as grounded in openness and tolerance. It is my intention to analyse the
practical contribution of Gülen’s work by focusing on a society inspired by him, based in Dublin.
Firstly however, I briefly look at the role of Turkish Islam vis-à-vis social and cultural integration of
Turkish migrants in the German context.

5. The Gülen Movement and Turkish Islam in Germany: Prospects for Integration?
Űnal Bilir (2004) investigated the potential for Gülen’s articulation of Turkish Islam in helping the
Turkish diaspora in Germany to integrate. The majority of foreign settlers in Germany were the part
of the “guestworker” system and by far the largest group of settlers were Turks. The number of Turks
in Germany is estimated to be around two million, many of whom born in Germany (Oezcan, 2004;
Yurdakul, 2006). Atalik and Beeley are correct, in my view, to suggest that ‘The cultural impact of
Turkish labour migration to Europe may prove to be at least as durable and penetrating as the
economic’ (1993: 168). Turkish people differ from the majority of Germans with regard to culture,
religion and language. These factors made Turks in Germany easily visible as a separate ethnic group.
Landau is right to claim that they met ‘with serious cultural and linguistic difficulties of acculturation
to their new milieu’ (1996: 223). He further contends that because the Turkish language is very
different in both syntax and origin, it was difficult for Turks to acquire the German language: ‘[like] a
left-handed person having to master physical skills with his right hand’ (Landau, 1996: 222). This
cultural and linguistic distance made Turkish migrants susceptible to prejudices and racism by some
Germans. They were an easy target for scape-goating during the economic recession of the 1970’s and
again during the anomic conditions of reunification between East and West Germany (Castles and
Miller, 2003).

--- Sayfa 324 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

322
According to Doomernik, ‘assimilation into German society or a return to the country of origin appear
to be the only options which the German government is willing to accept’ (1995:12). Due to these
assimilationist tendencies, Castles et al suggest that for a Turkish youth in Germany to be successful
‘…in education…often means rejecting their origins and accepting middle-class cultural dominance as
a pre-condition for selection from higher levels of education (Castles et al 1987:167). This is anathema
for many Turks who take great pride in their national heritage, culture, customs and language. This
results in a high failure rate amongst Turkish children in German schools (Castles and Miller, 2003).
Yagmur contends that rejection and subordination by the majority population can lead to a boost in
‘language maintenance’ (2004:139). This was to prove the case for the Turks in Germany. In many
German cities, Turks have carved out areas with a ‘quasi-oriental character’ (Gogolin and Reich,
2001). In such areas, one can acquire all one’s daily needs, including goods and services, through the
Turkish language. Gogolin and Reich (2001) acknowledge that youths that are raised in these quarters
from an early age are normally as linguistically competent in Turkish as most monolinguistic youths
living in Turkey.
The German citizenship law has traditionally been based on jus sanguinis (law of blood). With the
Citizenship law (1999) there was a shift in orientation towards jus soli (law of land) which makes it
easier for immigrants to become naturalised Germans. However Castles and Miller (2003) note that
this measure disallows the immigrants from holding dual citizenship. They note that a variety of
Turkish immigrant organisations have been established to challenge such issues at the political level.
Gökçe Yurdakul (2006) takes up this point in her study of Turkish associations in Berlin. More will be
said about this in a later section. It is enough to note at this stage that Yurdakul makes the point that
Turkish migrants in Germany are not “passive recipients” (2006: 437) of German state policy. She
illustrates that Turkish migrant associations are active participants in negotiating and lobbying for
their rights in Germany, despite the various obstacles.
Bilir (2004) notes that although the presence of the Gülen Movement in Germany is small it has the
potential to grow and have a large impact on the Turkish diaspora there. The Islamic political group,
Milli Gorus (National Outlook Movement) is popular amongst Turks in Germany, though the German
government is unwilling to engage with them.  This is due to Milli Gorus’ checkered past where until
recent years its ideology was underpinned by a strong anti-Western stance (Yilmaz, 2005: 401). Bilir
contends that Gülen’s moderate articulation of Islam has the potential to counter radical Islamic
Turkish groups in Germany. He argues that Germany’s Gülen Movement can gain the confidence of
the German government to act as a mediator between the Turkish diaspora and the German state in
order to improve conditions for integration. He does, however, acknowledge that the Gülen
Movement’s emphasis on the priority of Turkish culture may prove difficult for the German state that
still prioritises assimilationist policies.
Jill Irvine of the University of Oklahoma is optimistic about the impact of the Gülen Movement in
Germany. She conducted a series of interviews with members of the Gülen Movement in Munich,
Berlin and Ingolstadt. She argues that their vision of integration  ‘is one of cultural exchange and
enrichment rather than assimilation’ (Irvine, 2007: 83). She contends that the activities of this
movement in Germany may act as a ‘middle way’ between the German population and the isolated
Turkish migrants. Due to the complexity of the German situation, much more analysis is needed in
this regard. I now turn to the Irish case and analyse the contribution of the Gülen Movement and its
expression of Turkish Islam in the context of an emerging multicultural society.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

323
6. TIECS’ Attitudes to Integration
Before describing how TIECS was initiated, I relate some demographics regarding the number of
Turkish migrants living in Ireland. According to the Turkish embassy in Ireland, there are 650
Turkish migrants living in the Republic of Ireland (phone call with the Turkish embassy, 21 February,
2006). However, this is contested by Turkish migrants themselves who suggest it is between 2,000
and 3,000. The Turkish embassy may have an investment in down-playing the number of Turks in
Ireland given the negative reception of Turks in other European countries, such as Germany, Holland
and France (Castles and Miller 2003; Atalik and Beeley 1993). Another reason for understating these
statistics may be due to the negative attention the Turkish construction company GAMA received vis-
à-vis the alleged underpaying of Turkish workers in Ireland (Barry 2006). Coupled with the ever-
increasing racism in Ireland (Lentin and McVeigh 2002; 2006;Garner 2004), the embassy may have
thought it wise to keep its guesstimate low. The numbers provided by the Turkish embassy are only an
educated guess, as Turkish migrants do not have to declare themselves at the embassy on arrival.
The Turkish Irish Educational and Cultural Society (TIECS) was established by Turkish labour
migrants living in Ireland. The precursor to TIECS involved gatherings of Turkish migrants
congregating in order to deal with common bureaucratic issues such as visa problems. Another issue
discussed amongst these migrants at this early stage concerned the socialisation of their children in a
society dominated by a different culture than their own. The most prominent members of the Turkish
community in Ireland are men and several members claimed to have difficulties gaining a visa that
would allow them to bring their families to Ireland.
As these Turkish migrants settled down a few years, bureaucratic issues became less urgent. They
began to focus on developing a social and cultural society. This culminated in the establishment of
TIECS in 2004. Though TIECS was established by members of the Turkish diaspora living in Ireland,
its composition has changed and it now includes temporary migrants from Turkey and Turkmenistan.
These migrants were recruited in order to build up an affiliate of the Gülen Movement in Ireland.
With the growth of the organisation and the lack of manpower, other members of the Gülen
Movement contributed.
It appears then that members of the Gülen Movement help set up organisations whereby members of
the Turkish diaspora have already established a base. Active members of the Movement periodically
travel to Gülen-inspired organisations and advise its members on the best way to implement the
objectives of the Movement. Ireland has become an important European centre for business and
culture and the initiation of the Gülen-inspired TIECS may be seen as a strategic move in order to
make an impact in Europe. There appears to be a concerted attempt to gain influence in Europe by the
Gülen Movement in recent years with the initiation of other Gülen-inspired associations not only in
Dublin, but also in Belfast (NITECA), Edinburgh (Dialogue Society for Scotland) and Brighton
(Interfaith Dialogue Society) all opened in 2004/5. The Dialogue Society in London preceded these
and was established in 1998.450 One cannot fail to notice that the mushrooming of these organisations
run concurrent with the opening up of talks between Turkey and the European Union (EU) regarding
Turkey’s possible accession into the EU.
The political scientist Hasan T. Kösebalaban draws attention to some interesting insights in the
context of Gülen’s views on European integration. He argues that ‘Fethullah Gülen is the leader of a

450 www.dialoguesociety.org

--- Sayfa 326 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

324
formally apolitical social movement who nevertheless has influenced Turkish political debates,
including those related to international relations’ (Kösebalaban 2003: 171). This has particularly been
the case regarding European Union (EU) accession. Kösebalaban (2003) notes the polarisation of
opinion regarding Turkey’s relationship with Europe. Some argue that European integration will lead
to the loss of Turkish-Muslim identity. Alternatively, Gülen has been an avid supporter of EU
accession from the start (see Gülerce, 2004; Yilmaz, 2003: 235). He maintains that Islamic identity
and European identity are not necessarily incongruous but can be complimentary. Given Gülen’s
support for European integration of Turkey, it is plausible to view the emergence of Gülen-inspired
organisation as a concerted attempt to promote a positive image of Turkey in an attempt to gain
support for European accession.
TIECS is inspired by the thought of Fethullah Gülen and consistent with his emphasis on Turkish
culture, tolerance and dialogue, its members developed a variety of pursuits. These include Turkish
language classes, interfaith dialogue conferences and several trips to Turkey per year for Irish people
and others. It is important to note that TIECS’ members do not appear to be involved in any sustained
transnational economic activity. Nor are they involved in any political quests. Indeed several
members of TIECS noted that both TIECS and the Gülen Movement are apolitical. TIECS endeavours
appear to be purely of the ‘socio-cultural’ type.
Surveying TIECS website we can get a summarised version of its aims and objectives:
…It is the mission of Turkish Irish Educational and Cultural Society (TIECS) to serve
societal peace, love, and friendship by striving to bring forth the common values of
humanity; values such as tolerance, respect, and compassion. TIECS acknowledges the
importance of spreading these most significant values within Dublin's diverse
communities, hoping for all to take them on as a common virtue. In order to build a better
future, TIECS will work hand in hand with Irish and other communities and groups that
recognize the same mission and uphold the same values (TIECS Homepage)
From their earliest meetings, members of TIECS were adamant that they did not want to assimilate
into Irish society. They rather intend to simultaneously integrate whilst preserving their own culture
and traditions and passing these down to their children. Integration according to these early members
was the key to successful settlement. This is echoed in their Mission Statement above, which
emphasises ‘values such as tolerance, respect, and compassion’. It is furthermore consistent with the
wider goals of the Gülen Movement. This is a useful starting point to outline the principal goals of
TIECS. However, by interviewing various members of this society, I was enabled to explore these
goals in more depth and establish the principles adopted from Fethullah Gülen.
It is useful to look a little deeper at the views of TIECS vis-à-vis integration into Irish society.
Members of TIECS I spoke to insisted that they had learned from the mistakes of other Turkish
migrants abroad who made little attempt to integrate in the early years, which led to subsequent
generations of Turks feeling displaced and isolated from the mainstream society. Several participants
pointed to Germany as the principal site where Turkish migrants were caught in an ‘in between’ or
liminal space. The majority of these Turks are a legacy of the ‘guestworker’ system established in the
1960’s.
One member of TIECS claims that:

--- Sayfa 327 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

325
…what happened to the Turkish people in Germany? They didn’t start to do volunteering
work or social work 30 years ago and now they have big problems with the young generation
because they have a kind of dual identification, actually not dual identification, no identity.
They don’t feel they belong to any society. They don’t describe themselves as German. It is
not easy to say “I am Turkish”. So they are kind of in the middle somewhere. And this is not
integration, not assimilation even, just standing in the middle of somewhere and you don’t
know where you are, who you are. And we want to stop this because we were lucky here, our
generation, our children are very small at the moment, so if we start now we can provide
them with a healthy environment.
I discussed the complex nature of the Turkish diaspora in Germany in a previous section and
illustrated how the German government must take a large proportion of the responsibility regarding
the lack of integration of Turkish migrants there. The TIECS member above is dismayed that Turks in
Germany are caught in a liminal space, arguing that they are neither here nor there. They are unsure if
they are Turks or Germans. They are neither integrated, nor assimilated. In the words of the above
respondent, they have ‘no identity’; ‘they are kind of in the middle somewhere’; ‘just standing in the
middle somewhere, and you don’t know where you are, who you are’. This articulation of the position
in Turkish migrants in Germany has been well documented (Castles et al, 1987; Atalik and Beeley
1993). However what is less discussed is the important contribution Turkish associations in Germany
make to immigration reform and integration through political engagement in Germany.
Gökçe Yurdakul (2006) analysed the role of two Turkish associations, TBB and the Cemaat (Gülen
movement), in Berlin. Acknowledging the difficulties faced by Turkish migrants in Germany, she
shatters the racialised view of the Turkish diaspora in Germany as a single homogenous group, by
illustrating the diversity in attitudes and actions of its various members. Her principle focus, as
mentioned previously, is to show that some Turkish associations in Germany are actively promoting
integration and reform through political engagement. She notes that ‘Many German political
authorities refer to the TBB and the Cemaat as the supporters and guardians of immigrant
integration’. (ibid: 444). Yurdakul’s study is important as it shows not all Turkish migrants are caught
in a liminal space but many have adapted to the German context, whilst often preserving their own
culture.
Though the TIECS member quoted above referred to Turks in Germany in a stereotypical fashion, his
main point is that members of TIECS want to avoid the problems of integration that did indeed face
many Turkish migrants in Germany. Later in the interview, he says that:
And also, we are part of this culture. We are not here just here for doing this work. We are living here
and we are contributing as part of society.
This is an interesting example of the promotion of integration of the Turkish community in Ireland.
The interviewee insists that they are not just here as representatives of Turkey but they are now also
part of Irish society and they are keen to contribute. They are part of the broader Irish society and not
just part of the diaspora community. However, they have no intention of assimilating but instead
intend to integrate, whilst simultaneously showing their culture and learning others culture. I now
look at one of TIECS main activities in order to evaluate the contribution of Fethullah Gülen in a very
real and practical way.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

326

7. TIECS, Dialogue and Turkish Islam
TIECS has initiated a variety of social and cultural events. This section focuses on a series of
conferences celebrating the Abrahamic Religions, organised by this society. I have chosen to discuss
this event as I believe it best illustrates TIECS’ relationship with the work of Fethullah Gülen and his
promotion of Turkish Islam. TIECS has held two conferences celebrating the ‘Abrahamic Religions’;
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. In 2005 the conference was staged in University College Dublin
(UCD) and in 2006 it was held in Trinity College Dublin (TCD). There were speakers from each of the
three religions and all were interested in promoting interfaith dialogue. The Jewish and Christian
speakers were residents in Ireland, whilst the Muslim speakers were rather of Turkish origin, living in
London, and related to Gülen-inspired organisations in England. In 2005 Kerim Balci, a journalist
with the Gülen-inspired Zaman newspaper represented the Muslim view of interfaith dialogue. In
2006, Ozcan Kelesh, of the Dialogue Society of London (a Gülen-inspired organisation promoting
interfaith dialogue), spoke on the theme of compassion in Islam. Admission to these conferences was
free and the attendees included representatives of different faith groups, academics and students.
I asked one member of TIECS, why this society organised these conferences:
The conferences are so important to introduce…the correct Islamic views to the society,
because nowadays Islam is one of the main religions, which is…[misunderstood] by the
people, especially in the Western world. There are many reasons and also because of the
mistakes of some Muslims... Also because of bias[es] and prejudices by some of the
intellectuals in the western world. So as a Muslim, we believe we have some responsibility to
introduce our belief to the society… some people have forced it to be recognised as a kind of
religion for violence. And it was not easy for us to accept this without doing anything. The
conference series is one of the projects which we would like to tackle this misunderstanding
problem...
From this excerpt we can see that the main aim of the interfaith conferences organised by TIECS is to
‘introduce the correct Islamic views’. It may be argued that interfaith dialogue is of secondary
importance to members of TIECS whilst promoting a tolerant understanding of Islam is the main
objective. This is understandable given the imbalanced nature of reports regarding Muslims in both
academia and the mainstream media. The above respondent maintains that Islam has been largely
misunderstood in the Western world. He blames both the ‘prejudices’ of various intellectuals towards
Islam and indeed some Muslims who ‘misinterpret’ the Koran and engage in violence. With regards to
the former, Edward Said (1997) takes up this point, claiming:
Malicious generalizations about Islam have become the last acceptable form of denigration
of foreign culture in the West; what is said about the Muslim mind, or character, or religion,
or culture as a whole cannot now be said in mainstream discussion about Africans, Jews,
other Orientals, or Asians.  (1997: xi/xii)
In any other context, such denigration would be rightly regarded as racism. However in the context of
Islam, such vilification appears acceptable as it has become part of the ‘common sense thinking’ of
many people in the Western world. In the absence of a collective effort to portray positive
representations of Muslims by western opinion-makers, it is only the negative depictions that filter
down to the general media consumer. Said (1997) notes that for every book written fairly on the

--- Sayfa 329 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

327
subject of Islam, there are numerous written with an unbalanced orientation towards depicting
Muslims as terrorists. The corollary of this, according to Said, is that ‘the average reader comes to see
Islam and fundamentalism as essentially the same thing’ (ibid: xvi). For the average person, Islam
becomes synonymous with terrorism, violence and atavism. Said’s position was articulated before the
terrorist attacks in New York (2001). A variety of authors have since shown that the denigration of
Islam by Western opinion-makers has intensified since the attacks in New York (Modood, 2005;
Anwar, 2005; Parekh, 2006; Ishay, 2004; Wu, 2004). The objective of TIECS in this context is to
illustrate that not only is Islam not synonymous with violence, but on the contrary, the religion is
tantamount to peace.
Another member of TIECS explained other reasons for holding these conferences:
…it is…good to show the similarities between the Abrahamic religions,
Christianity, Islam and Judaism…this really builds a bridge in society between
believers and it really brings a kind of synergy between the people, breaking
prejudices and biases. And it is good for a healthy society because when Irish
society knows what Islam is, what true Islam is: when they deal with the Muslim
people in Ireland, they have more open and healthy perspective because of the
information and knowledge they get. So conferences help us to achieve this
goal… and also it helps us to make good friendships and to collaborate with
other groups... And we are focusing on the common point between us. All of us
believe that there is one God. And this is the main moving point for us and when
you put common points on the table, you see more common points than which
you conflict on and you can just focus on the common points. This doesn’t mean
we are all the same. That is normal, the differences, but respect and tolerance
[are] the magic words if you live. So conferences help us to succeed these goals.
By illustrating the parallels amongst the ‘Abrahamic religions’, members of TIECS are attempting to
find common ground with other monotheistic religions in Ireland. The reasons for this are two-fold.
Firstly, as mentioned previously, to educate other faiths on the tenets of Islam in order to dispel the
malign myth that Islam is tantamount to brutality. Secondly, the above TIECS member believes that it
will aid the integration process for Muslims and serve to prevent them being isolated from the
mainstream society. He recognizes that people are different but stresses that ‘respect and tolerance
[are] the magic words’.
The words spoken above and actions taken through the conferences are entirely consistent with
Fethullah Gülen’s articulation of Turkish Islam, grounded in the Sufi principles of tolerance and
dialogue. Members of TIECS use the same strategy as Gülen to bring apparently irreconcilable groups
together around the one table. The focus on commonalities to build a strong and secure foundation
upon is the key to their success, ignoring or suspending the dogma of each sect, faith or cultural
group.
Through TIECS interfaith conferences, members naturally attempt to promote Islam as they
understand it. In the two conferences they have held so far, the Muslim speakers were of Turkish
origin and members of Gülen-affiliated groups. They emphasised ‘tolerance’, ‘love’ and the
‘reasonability’ of Islam as promoted by Gülen and other Turkish Sufi mystics. There is, however,
competition regarding the interpretation of Islam in Ireland. As previously mention, Islam is the
fastest growing religion in Ireland today, and these followers of Islam come from many different

--- Sayfa 330 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

328
regions in the world, including Ireland, and from all the Islamic zones mentioned by Yavuz (2004).
TIECS is now involved in a competitive market with other interpretations of Islam.
TIECS is first and foremost a Turkic religio-cultural society, with an emphasis on Turkish culture and
the Turkish understanding of Islam. It is too much to ask this small organisation to solve the
problems of multiculturalism in Ireland. Indeed it is too much to ask that this group resolve the
complexities of even Muslim integration in Ireland. What this society has, however, accomplished is a
small platform, whereby they promote a positive and moderate image of Islam, countering the
overwhelmingly negative portrayal of this religion by leading opinion-makers in the West. They have
further contributed to Irish society by engaging in dialogue with different faith groups and cultures.
Indeed, the efforts of this group are an example of how migrants with different cultural, linguistic and
religious differences can adapt and integrate into a host society dominated by a very different culture.
Furthermore, the presence of this Gülen-inspired organisation is an illustration of the very real and
practical contribution of the thought and action of Fethullah Gülen. The fact that such an organisation
is present in Ireland (a country that up until 15 years ago was understood by many outsiders as a
backwater of Britain), is indicative of the reach of the thought of Fethullah Gülen. Their various
activities, inspired by Gülen, are an example of how peaceful coexistence is possible amongst different
ethnic groups in a diverse society in a European context.

8. Conclusion
This article began by surveying the various Islamic communities living in Ireland. I noted that there
has been an academic deficit in this department in Ireland, though Kieran Flynn (2006) must be
commended for his work. My principle aim in this section was to illustrate the diversity and different
expressions of Islam practiced in Ireland and support my argument that based on geographical,
cultural and social differences we can talk about Islam in the plural sense. This section also served to
contextualise TIECS in the Irish setting. Subsequent to this I introduced the theme of Turkish Islam
as one expression of Islam, before evaluating Fethullah Gülen’s contribution to the popularising of
this concept. Drawing on the work of Bilir and Irvine this section questioned the potential of the
Gülen Movement in Germany to act as a positive force in helping the Turkish diaspora in Germany to
integrate into their host society. I then moved to the heart of this article by introducing the Gülen-
inspired TIECS and exploring its member’s attitudes to integration. They show a deep commitment to
becoming part of Irish society, whilst simultaneously maintaining their Turkish identity. They refuse
to isolate themselves, arguing that they have learned from the mistakes of other Turkish migrants,
especially in Germany. Drawing on Yurdakul’s work I also noted the active role Turkish associations
in Germany play vis-à-vis promoting integration and lobbying for better conditions for Turkish
settlers in Germany. This section then showed how TIECS are an exemplary of Gülen’s thought
regarding openness and tolerance.
The final section focused on TIECS very practical and visible contribution to integration and interfaith
dialogue in Ireland. I examined their motivations for organising a series of conferences devoted to
exploring the commonalities between the Abrahamic religions. I argued that one of the main reasons
for this conference was to counteract the overwhelmingly negative media portrayal of Muslims as
violent and atavistic. Drawing on the work of Said, I contended that in any other context such
denigration would be referred to as racism but in the context of Islam, such denigration appears
uncritically acceptable to many in the West. This section also showed how TIECS adopts Gülen’s

--- Sayfa 331 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

329
articulation of Turkish Islam grounded in the principles of openness, tolerance and reason and
promote these in their conferences.
Despite the lack of consensus amongst Muslims in Ireland, Flynn (2006) points out several positive
points, arguing that both the main Shi’a and Sunni institutions in Ireland have made attempts to
engage with the Irish public and civil society through a variety of activities. It is my contention that
TIECS will become another major player in the debate about the role of Islam in Ireland. Drawing on
the experience of Fethullah Gülen’s dialogical work between apparently irreconcilable groups in
Turkey, TIECS may be able to draw together the different expressions of Islam as well as different
world faiths present in Ireland in a spirit of open discourse.
In conclusion, this article has attempted to show the real and practical contribution of Fethullah
Gülen by focusing on a society inspired by his thoughts. By analysing the motivations and activities of
TIECS, I illustrated how a group of Turkish Muslims have comfortably settled into a country with a
very different culture and contributed in a very meaningful way. This may be understood as an
exemplary case of peaceful coexistence amongst different ethnic and religious groups in a European
context.

--- Sayfa 332 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

330

--- Sayfa 333 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

331
RESEMBLANCE OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN'S IDEAS AND
CURRENT POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN UZBEKISTAN
VICTORIA LEVINSKAYA 451

Abstract
This paper reflects on Turkish influence and specifically the ideas of Fethullah Gülen and his
community on formation of identity and values in Central Asia. After the collapse of the Soviet
Ideology new independent states in Central Asia started to look for a new value system. The
beginning of the 1990s was a time of great enthusiasm among researches and scholars, who tried
to revive Islamic values and cultural traditions in the region. Many of them looked to Turkey as a
moderate Muslim state with a democratic form of government. It was the time when Fethullah
Gülen’s ideas began to be introduced to a wider Central Asian audience. Uzbeks and other
Central Asians could appreciate Gülen’s approach to Islam, and his two keys to peace in society —
tolerance and dialogue — because they were very much in tune with the modernist ideas of the
Jadidis of the 1920s and very close to the temperament of the local people. The teaching of
Gülen, with his state-oriented philosophy and ideas about market and neo-liberal economic
policies, was very much in tune with the state ideology. One of the most crucial phenomena in
post-Soviet Central Asia was the establishment of a wide network of Fethullah Gülen community
schools in Central Asia. These schools provided the best standards of education, excellent
teaching materials and IT equipment and emphasized respect between teachers and students.
But in 2000 in Uzbekistan these schools were closed down due to the deterioration of
relationships with Turkey. Some state officials were looking for an aggressively visible ‘Islamic
factor’ and Gülen become undesirable, since they wanted to see a backward, radical Islam, in
order to justify authoritarian measures in the country. However, Gülen’s ideas and writings
surely will be used by Central Asian nations for further development in the region in order to
create a better society based on religious tolerance and modern values, and alert to the
importance of education and the pursuit of knowledge, and to the positive role of religion and
spiritual life in forming a peaceful and harmonious social order.

1. Introduction
This paper analyzes the Turkish influence and specifically ideas of Fethullah Gülen and his movement
on the formation of identity and values in Central Asia.

451 (PhD in social and political philosophy.) Senior Lecturer in Philosophy at the National University of Uzbekistan, Head of
the Learning Resource Centre at the Westminster International University in Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Visiting Fulbright
scholar at the Catholic University of America, Visiting Fulbright specialist in Jackson State University (Mississippi). She has
organized a number of International Summer schools for young faculty members of NIS in Uzbekistan, including an ‘Islam
and Civil Society’ summer school. She is the author of over 20 publications on different topics of social, political and
environmental philosophy, has participated in many different international conferences, and been a visiting lecturer in
many US and European universities. Research interests: civil society and the process of democratization in Central Asia;
Islamic philosophy and political Islam; sustainable development and globalization.

--- Sayfa 334 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

332
Gülen has published more then 30 books, the majority deal with explicitly Islamic topics. They range
from studies of the biography of Prophet Muhammad, to a basic induction to Sufism and elaborations
of essential themes of Islamic faith. These studies are directed not toward specialists but at a more
general audience of educated Muslims and adherents of other religious systems or beliefs. Fethullah
Gülen’s educational vision is ‘profundity of ideas, clarity of thought, and depth of feeling, cultural
appreciation and spiritual values’. At the same time he has very deep ideas regarding improving
quality of education by harmonizing modern secular education, with its orientation on material values
and traditional  religious education, oriented on spiritual values. These ideas are realized by Gülen’s
“missionary” schools in Central Asia and throughout the world.
Unfortunately, these days Gülen schools were closed down in Uzbekistan, the most populace country
of Central Asia, because of the misunderstanding by the government of this country the goals and
missions of these schools. But, in a long run, educational approaches suggested by Gülen and his
followers and educational standards accomplished by his schools will be valued much higher by
people in Central Asia.

2. Islam in Central Asia
Islam arrived in Central Asia (CA) with Arab armies at the down of the eighth century. By the ninth
century, Muslim geographers considered Transoxiana (“as the lend beyond the Amy Darya river” or
Central Asia) to be an integral part of the Muslim world. Indeed, some of the most important figures
in Islamic civilization came from this region. Sunni Muslims hold six compilations of hadith to be
authoritative. Two of the six compilers, Abu Ismail al-Bukhari (810-70) and Abu Isa Muhammad al-
Tirmudhi (825-92) were from Central Asia.; the great scientist Abu Nasr al-Muhammad al-Faraby
(950), known as “the second teacher” (after Aristotel); and the rationalist philosopher Abu Ali ibn
Sina (980-1037, known in the West as Avicenna) - figures of absolutely central importance in the
Islamic civilization were all born in this region.
Although it was Arab invaders who took Islam to the region, the conversion patterns and sociocultural
structure created a vernacular Turkic-Islam. One of the commonly disseminating myths was that of
Baba Tukles or Saman one of the Muslim saints, (although Islam does not have officially canonized
saints), who converted Uzbek Khan, the Genghizid ruler of the Golden Horde, to Islam by beating the
khan’s court shaman in a religious contest. Saman and Kam, as legendary religious and charismatic
leaders, known as baba and ata452, personified the old religion and become the agents of Islamization
in Central Asia.
By thirteen century Sufism also had become a dominant part of religious and cultural life of the Turkic
world. Sufism represents a complex of diverse religious trends and includes mystical philosophy, a
cult of saintly figures and distinctive liturgical practices. In Central Asia three Sufi orders: Yessavie,
Kubreviyye and Naksibendiyye were very powerful.
Russian conquest of Central Asia brought this region into the modern world via colonialism.
Educated people in Turkistan (they’ve been called Jadids in Russia and in Turkic world) thought

452 De Weese, D. (2000) Sacred History for a Central Asian Towns: Saints, Shrines, and Legends of Origin. London, 89-90;
Ibid. (1994) Islamization and Native Religion in the Golden Horde: BabaTukles and Conversation to Islam in Historical and
Epic Tradition., University Park, Penn,  541-43

--- Sayfa 335 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

333
that Muslim society of Central Asia is in a serious crises. According to Jadidish, social reforms
have to be based on the traditional identity of the people and acknowledged by the Koran.
Everything was in need of change, with traditional education at central stage. The course of action
was clear: enlightenment and modern education would solve all the problems of the society. Many
of them opened private schools, where they tried to combine religious with secular education.
Much more attention was devoted to secular (hard and economic) sciences as an alternative to the
educational standards providing by old madreses.
The Jaddids453 emphasized the idea of progress and incorporating the elements of modern scientific
education into traditional religious Islamic education and also importance to educate girls along with
boys. In 1906 in Urgench one of them – Khusan Dushaev open the first school for girls. In other cities
of Turkistan girl-schools were also opened, where mostly secular sciences were thought. Such
outstanding jaddid scholars as Avlony, Rasuly, Fitrit, Bekhbudy and others worked as schoolteachers.
They wrote and published the textbooks for their schools and promoted equality between men and
women.
These ideas if Jadids were very much in tune with Fethullah Gülen’s philosophy of a holistic education
system, which promotes spiritual enrichment and critical thinking for man and women. He sees the
economic and moral decline in the Muslim world as a result of spiritual and intellectual decline, and
aims to renew the Muslim tradition. The main strategy for achieving this aim is education. For Gülen,
serving Allah means “raising ‘perfect youth’ who combine spirituality with intellectual training, reason
with revelation, and mind with heart”. 454
The call of reform was made from a self-consciously Islamic position. The acquisition of modern
knowledge, the Jadids argued, was mandated by Islam itself. In common with other modernists of the
period, the Jadids ascribed the “decline” and ” degeneration” of their community to its departure from
true path of Islam. When Muslims followed true Islam they were leaders of the world in knowledge,
and Muslim empire were mighty. Corruption of the faith led them to ignorance and political and
military weakness. The solution was a return to ‘true Islam’. The main idea that united the most
outstanding thinkers in Turkestan was oriented towards spiritual freedom and human dignity. Rather
then oppose one class or group against another; they believed that all human beings are equal
irrespective of their religion, social origins and so on.
The overwhelming population of the region is Sunni and belongs to the Hanafi school of law (one of
four interpretation of Islam), which was founded by Abu Hanifa an-Numon ibn Sobit in the 8 century.
Hanafi is considered to be the most liberal, modest, and convenient as far as rituals are concerned,
among other interpretations of Islam.
The Jadid movement played a key role in articulation of national identities. Turkic and Islamic
identity were used interchangeably which, in turn, played a constitutive role in forming national
identities of the new Central Asian states. Therefore, religious network played an important role in
Central Asian relations with Turkey.

453 Khalid, A. (1998) The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: Jadidism in Central Asia., Berkley, University of California
Press, 75-124
454 Gülen, F (2005) An analyses of the Prophet’s life (The Messenger of God Muhammad), (Rutherford N.J., The Light),
257-261

--- Sayfa 336 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

334
3. Islam after the Independence. (1990s). “Turkish-Islam”
After obtaining of the independence, Central Asian republics started the process of reviving of Islam.
Interest in religion soared throughout the Soviet Union on the Gorbachev years. Glasnost led to quest
for moral and spiritual values that were now seen to have been corroded by Communism. Islam
becomes to be used as a leading source for constructing of national identity and selfhood. Many
people, who never prayed before began to pray regularly and to observe other Islamic injunctions. It
become possible again travel to Mecca, new mosques began to build, some old ones were put back to
service and religious education began. A number of madrassas were opened in the first years of
independence to provide higher Islamic education.
Of course, this revival was not a simple return to the past. The legacy of the Soviet era did not
evaporate. The governments of Central Asian republics have tried a dual strategy to cooperate with
Islam while controlling it.
In the beginning of the era of independence (1991-1995), Turkey was the main model of development
for Uzbekistan and other Central Asian republics. Democratic Islamic state with a strong economy
and pro-Western orientation and at the same time a very close to all five Central Asian republics in
language, traditions and customs was the ideal model from the point of view of Central Asian policy-
makers. Turkey also has been trying to use commonly shared ethnoreligious culture to create a
number of institutions that will develop cooperation.
Turkey has been very active in Central Asia in exporting “soft and nationalized Turkish Islam” to this
region. The nature of Islam in Central Asia was the same as it is in Turkey: modern and moderate; not
at all hostile to secular power. Sufi-oriented and softer Turkish-Islam has been more appealing to the
younger people of Central Asia as they reconstruct their faith rather then Saudi-based Wahhabism or
the Iranian version of the rigid Islam. This time ideas of Fethullah Gülen become known and popular
in Central Asia and especially in Uzbekistan, country with the most populace Muslim community.
Being Hanafi Muslims, Uzbeks could appreciate Gülen’s approach to Islam, because they were very
much in tune with modernists ideas of Jadids of 1920s and very close to the national mentality of the
local people.
With strong ethical sense at the heart of his understanding of Islam, Gülen’s many writings of the life
of Muhammad affirm his role as Prophet who brought the Qur’anic  revelation but emphasize even
more strongly the figure of Muhammad as moral exemplar for Muslims, Muhammad as the first
hearer of the Qur’an whose life was preeminently shaped  by its message. Gülen’s central concern
could seem to be Muhammad as role-model for the Muslim of today.  This leads him to concentrate
on the moral qualities of Muhammad manifested in personal relationships with his companions,
wives and enemies, and the qualities of leadership shown in being Commander of the Faithful. What
Gülen seems to find a special importance of the life of Muhammad are personal qualities such as
piety, sincerity generosity, modesty, determination, truthfulness, compassion, patience,  and
tolerance. And also his leadership characteristics, such as realism, courage, a sense of responsibility
and farsightedness, and a readiness to consult, delegate and forgive.455

455  Gülen, F.  (1998) Prophet Muhammad as Commander, Konak-Iznir (Kaynak)  122-123

--- Sayfa 337 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

335
Gülen does not favor to the state applying Islamic law, the Shari’a. He points out that most Islamic
regulations concern private life and only a small portion of them concern state and government. 456
These latter needs to be enforced because religion is a private matter and its requirements should not
to be imposed on anyone. He looks at the Islamic regulation bearing directly on government (such as
taxation and warfare) in light of contemporary realities. This leads him to the conclusion, for example,
that the democratic form of government is the best choice, an outlook that causes Gülen to oppose
strongly the regimes in Iran and Saudi Arabia.457
After seventy years of domination of planned economy and communist ideology, Central Asian states
has become free-market oriented and started to seek for new neo-liberal values.  Doctrine of Gülen,
with his state-oriented philosophy and ideas about market and neo-liberal economic policies, was very
much in spirit of the state ideology.
According to Gülen, in order to preserve their uniqueness and respect uniqueness of others as well.
Muslims need to share a new legal code, and to have a free-market economy, private education and
free thinking. Being a Muslim in a modern world necessary to support and consolidate modern
institutions of democracy, the rule of law, a free-market economy, and so forth458.
On the question of women, Gülen also has progressive views. The veiling of women is a detail in Islam
and ‘no one can suppress the progress of women through the clothes they have to wear”459.
Furthermore he said that Muslim women can be administrator and guide men, if it is necessary.
Gülen holds that the Anatolian people’s interpretation and experiences of Islam are different from
those of others, especially the Arabs. He frequently emphasizes that there should be freedom of
worship and thinking among Muslims.  He writes of an “Anatolian Islam” based on tolerance and
excluding harsh restrictions or fanaticism. He proposes two keys to provide peace in society: tolerance
and dialog. In the philosophical dilemma: “What should we do: to modernize Islam or Islamize
modernity?” Gülen choose to modernize Islam. These ideas were widely discussed on some scientific
conferences, such as “Tolerance and Islam” (1999), “Islam and Modernity” (2000) and many others.
Therefore, ideas of Fethullah Gülen have no difficulties in adapting to this region. Some of his works
(for example, “The essentials of Islamic Faith”, ”Religious  Education of the Child”, “An analysis of the
Prophet Life”) been translated to Russian and Central Asian languages. These books were easy to find
near mosques and in some private book shops.
The most popular become ideas of interfaith dialog between adherents of Islam and other religions. In
his view, “no one should condemn the other for being a member of a religion or scold him for being an
atheist”460. Gülen believes that interfaith cooperation is imperative today and should be compulsory
for Muslim to support peace and harmony. Referencing the Medina Constitution, Gülen stressed that
the Prophet himself practiced such cooperation. For some reason Muslim neglected this tradition for
a certain period of time, yet its roots are well grounded in core teaching of Islam.461 Because of it,

456 Gülen, F (1996) Understanding and Belief, ( Rutherford N.J., The Light),  45
457 Gülen, F. (2002) Essays, Perspectives, Opinions ( Rutherford N.J., The Light), 67-69
458 Gülen,F.  (2002) Essays, Perspectives, Opinions ( Rutherford N.J., The Light), 97-103
459 Gülen,F.  (2002) Essays, Perspectives, Opinions ( Rutherford N.J., The Light). 25-28
460 Gülen, F. (2004) Towards to Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance,  (Rutherford N.J., The Light)
461 Gülen, F. (2005) An analyses of the Prophet’s life (The Messenger of God Muhammad), (Rutherford N.J., The Light)

--- Sayfa 338 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

336
Gülen has become a symbol of interfaith cooperation among many Muslim intellectuals in Central
Asia.

4. Educational Vision of Fethullah Gülen and Establishment of the Network of his
Schools in Central Asia
Gülen believes that the main problem in the world is lack of knowledge, which involves related
problems concerning the production and control of knowledge. He thinks it can only be done through
education. Education is very important if one wants to become a better Muslim. Not religious
education: he is talking about secular education, science and humanities – and of course religion as
well. Gülen believes that those three forms of education should enhance and compliment each other
rather then compete with each other. The Kyrgyzstan Spirituality Foundation in 2004, for example,
awarded him an honor for his contribution for the world peace through his educational efforts.
Analyzing an educational system in Turkey in 20th century, Fethullah Gülen brought to light a
problem of lack of coordination among the various types and systems of education. He regards the
development of education in Turkey as an unhealthy competition among mutely exclusive systems of
education, which has produced graduates who lack an integrated perspective towards the future of
society.  “At a time when modern schools concentrated on ideological dogmas, institutions of religious
education (madrasas) broke with life, institutions of spiritual training (takyas) were immersed in
sheer metaphysics, and the army restricted itself to sheer force, this coordination was essentially not
possible”.462 Challenge of the modern time, according to Gülen, is to find a way in which these
traditional pedagogical systems can move beyond regarding each other as rivals so that they can learn
from each other. This principle he implemented in schools, which been associated with his name. He
tried ‘to marry’ modern secular education and traditional values. “Cut off from traditional values,
young people are in danger of being educated with no values at all beyond those of material success.
Non-material values such as profundity of ideas, clarity of thought, depth of feeling, cultural
appreciation, or interest in spirituality tend to be ignored in the modern educational ventures which
are largely aimed at mass –producing functionaries of a global market system”.463 School’s
educational goal has to be the integration of the study of science with character development. Calling
for a type of education that seeks to develop both the material and spiritual needs of the students,
Gülen sees educational reform as the key to positive societal change. He said: “The permanence of the
nation depends upon the education of its people, upon their lives being guided to spiritual perfection.
If nation have not be able to bring up well-rounded generation to whom they can entrust their future,
when their future will be dark”.464
Like other former Soviet republics, Central Asian states have been struggling to maintain high
educational standards since they gained independence.  Yet, economic depletion has forced them to
reduce their educational budgets, leading to a significant decrease in teaching standards. In addition,
unattractive salaries have drained the profession of many of its most competent teachers and
university professors.

462  Gülen,  F. (1996), Towards the Lost Paradise, London: Truestar, , 11
463  Gülen, F. (1996) Towards the Lost Paradise, London, Truestar,  16
464 Gülen, F. (1996) Towards the Lost Paradise, London, Truestar,  55-56

--- Sayfa 339 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

337
The Gülen schools arrived to Central Asia as early as 1992, in the wake of considerable Turkish
investment, which helped to local governments to overcome this situation. They have had the tactic
support of Turkish government, which sees in them a Turkish presence in the region. The schools
have quickly covered a niche for themselves everywhere in Central Asia.  The schools are private, and
initially had been free-based institutions are thus accessible for elites, which whom they were popular
because they offered a rigorous, world-class education and impart skills in the contemporary world.
Leading businessmen and bureaucrats send their children to these schools because of the high
probability that they will pass their university entrance examinations. The language of instruction in
these schools is English, though some subjects are taught in language of the host country; the
curriculum also includes Turkish and Russian. The schools posses excellent teaching materials and
computer equipment and emphasize such traditional themes as respect to teachers and students,
hygiene, personal appearance and discipline. They also provided scholarship to poor but brilliant
students.
Although Gülen’s teachers are devoted Muslim believers, they do not teach religion at school and
strictly observe Turkey’s state-sponsored secular curriculum. As in Turkey, a strong emphasis on
sciences, ethics, and self-discipline is what characterizes these schools. They are also open to non-
Muslim students, including representatives of ethnic Slav minorities.
Rather, the Gülen community seeks to win hearts and minds by setting an example of excellence.
There is nothing traditional, and then about the Gülen schools, which has little precedent in the
Muslim tradition, either in Turkey and Central Asia. In their enthusiasm in education, the followers of
Gülen are heirs to the Jadids, but as Bayram Balci argues, they are best understood as Muslim Jesuits
in that they seek to transform society through educating of elites465. They provide a good image of
Islam, not so much through introduction, but to teach Islam through its members setting a good
example by becoming good specialists in different areas of specialization.
Rather then teaching religion, the Gülen schools stress the transmitting of ethical and moral values
(ahlak). The two key notions in the Gülen movement’s understanding of Islam are morality and
identity. The Gülen schools see themselves as working for Islam because they provide guidance and
moral example for students. Another key notion is tamsil, meaning representation. Rather than
preaching Islam, the teachers are expected to be good role models for the students, and personify the
values of Islam through their good deeds and moral conduct.
Teachers in Gülen schools tried to establish excellent relationships with parents. It was very
important because it helped to defend these schools. After the first crises in Uzbekistan the
intervention of some important parents dissuaded the authorities from expelling schools from the
country altogether. Of course these groups were not strong enough ultimately to save schools, as it
was shown in September 2000, when all of them finally been closed down in this country.

465 Balchy, B. (2003) Fethullah Gülen’s Missionary Schools, New York.

--- Sayfa 340 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

338
5. Worsening of the Relationships between Turkey and Uzbekistan and Its Negative
Effect on Dissemination of Gülen’s Ideas
Paradoxically, while Gülen’s schools served the interests of official Ankara by paving the ground for
extensive business cooperation between Turkey and Central Asia, many state officials in Turkey view
the Gülen community with suspicion.
That is true that in the early 1990s a crises between the schools and Uzbek government was provoked
by a report produced by the Turkish embassy about the nature of Gülen’s movement. The report
warned the Uzbek government about danger of this movement, which according to the embassy’s
research had proved to be fundamentalist and Islamist.
In reality in order to guarantee its presence in each country, these educational establishments offered
their support for the governmental policy and post soviet ideology.  In the schools Gülen’s followers
teach the students to love the new independent state, the president, the flag, the new institutions, and
the new heroes, who have been chosen by the new regimes and so on. For the same purpose, the
General Directorate of the high schools will have translated some of the president’s works into
Turkish and distributed in Turkey. The schools become ambassadors to Turkey for these CA regimes,
promoting their culture and history and also contributing to the formation of new local elites.466
After the crises with the Uzbek government in 1993 the General Directorate of the schools and the
director of each high school decided to forbid Islamic practice in the schools as dangerous for the
future of the movement in Central Asia. Of course there are numerous differences amongst Central
Asian republics. In Uzbekistan the Gülen movement has engaged in no proselytizing since the very
beginning, in 1992-93. President Karimov’s anger against Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU)
limited religious education and Islamization of society. In Kazakhstan until recently it used to be
easier to teach Islam at schools, but not any more. In Kyrgyzstan everything is possible. In
Turkmenistan under Turkmenbashy, state control was even stricter then in Uzbekistan, but the
situation is slowly changing in that country after his death and at this point there is no clarity which
way it will take.
Since September, 2000 Gülen schools were forbidden in the most populous country of Central Asia, in
Uzbekistan. For various reasons Tashkent has always tried to limit their presence from the first years
of independence. The Uzbek government in fact has been trying to place limits on any kind of Turkish
presence in the country. Crises are chronic between Tashkent and Ankara. The first   crises arose
because Uzbek opposition leaders – Muhammad Solih, chairman of Erk and Abdurahhman Polat,
chairman of Birlik, fled as refugees to Turkey, when they were threatened by the Uzbek government.
Uzbek president demanded that the Turkish authorities expel them, fearing that they would influence
Uzbek students in Turkey, but met with a refusal. Karimov is also hostile of the strong Turkish foreign
policy in Uzbekistan (and indeed in Central Asia as a whole). He blamed Turkey for the aspiration to
be a new ‘big brother’ in the region. The official reason for shutting down all Gülen schools in
Uzbekistan was the open teaching of namaz and recommendation to girls to wear headscarves.467
However, Ecevit urged calm: “The Uzbek President has several unjust concerns about Turkey…Turkey
does not intervene in the domestic affairs of other countries. I attribute great importance to relations

466 Khalid, A.(2007) Islam after Communism, Berkley: University of California Press, 124-125
467  Sobranie Zakonodotalstv Respubliki Uzbekistan, N 37-38, September, 2000.

--- Sayfa 341 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

339
with Uzbekistan. We cannot allow that these relations have been damaged by unnecessary
touchiness”.468
Another reason for closing down Gülen’s schools in Uzbekistan was the differences in educational
philosophy between the state and the Gülen schools. According to Anne Solberg469 there are four key
categories in traditional educational approaches:
1.
Non-denominationalism, school system which do not include any form of structures religious
education.
2.
Single- denominationalism, school system which include the teaching of one particular
religion using methods which protects, and operate from the tradition of that religion.
3.
Multi- denominationalism, school system which include the teaching of many religions.
However, each religion is taught separately, with students electing for classes in their religion.
4.
Inter- denominationalism, school system which include the teaching of all religion to all
students regardless of their particular religion of any group of students. The teaching methods
based on respect and understanding each religion. (Fethullah Gülen’s approach to education).
Educational system in Uzbekistan is strictly non- denominationalists and does not allow any other
types of education to be presented in the country.
In 2000 it became clear that Uzbek model of economic reforms is not effective. Uzbekistan always
followed the path of gradual economic transition to a market-based economy. The Government has
tried to balance the transition to a market economy by retaining aspects of a command economy. The
rate and depth of Uzbekistan’s economic and political liberalization have been modest and tightly
controlled by Government sought to move cautiously to establish a market economy, while at the
same time maintaining social expenditures. Privatization has been very slow and prices more strictly
controlled then in other Central Asian republics.
In general, the transition has resulted in a significant fall in living standards for most of the
population. It has been accompanied by decline in production, an increase in unemployment, high
inflation, decreasing standards of living, and finally increasing income differentiation and inequality.
Of course, all of these negative factors challenged the respect to the government among population. In
order to justify poor economic course of action and reinforce their positions, Uzbek government called
for an ostensible ‘Islamic factor’. They started to present contemporary Islam as innately political,
intolerant, oppressive for women and inimical to the secular state and its values, democracy and
modernity. Gülen has become unlikable for these people, because they want to see a backward, radical
Islam, in order to justify authoritarianism.
Officially Islam nowadays is recognized only as a cultural and traditional heritage of people, modern
Islam considered being aggressive and dangerous, contemporary thinkers, who are presenting an
alternative view on Islam, are not encouraged to disseminate their ideas in the country.

468 Middle East review of International Affairs, (December, 2000),  Vol. 4, No 4. 6.
469 Solberg, A. The Gülen schools: A perfect compromise or compromising perfectly?, Internet article.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

340
6. Fethullah Gülen’s Community and Development of Civil Society in Central Asia
Previously we already described the most important activity of Fethullah Gülen’s community through
establishing of a wider network of Gülen schools in Central Asia. But this movement is also important
as the model of Turkish civil society organization. Formation of the strong civil society, which can be
an equal player along with states on the political stage, is a very important and timely goal for all
Central Asian republics.
The contemporary theoretical literature on civil society tends to divide civil society groups into ‘ideal
types’ to help the observer understand their empiric manifestation in various context, and to
appreciate the different roles they can play in effecting change. These ‘ideal types’ suggest ways that
civil society has developed as system of values, political projects and organizational form. Many of
contributions here with have sought to engage with unfolding debate about the possibility of
categorizing models of civil society by testing their applicability in Central Asia. The two such types of
civil society that are the most relevant in the region can be termed ‘neo-liberal’ and ‘communal’470.
During the late 1980s, as massive social and political upheavals transformed the nature of the state in
East and Central Europe, civil society was (re)defined as primarily a neo-liberal concept. At that time
civil society’s emergence was linked to the empowerment of dissident opposition movements who
launched a liberal political project to terminate their region’s communist experiment. Civil society
groups clamoured for the protection of the value of freedom, justice, human rights and democracy. As
changes swept the region, citizens in independent organizations were empowered to open the
dialogue with government to protect their interests. Neo-liberal civil society was the primarily
conceived of as a political project, where activists were engaged in lobbing and advocacy. According to
the neo-liberal definition, civil society can best be associated with the values of 18 century Western
Europe ‘modernity’ during the time of nation-states’ creation. Based on this understanding ‘to be a
member of a civil society was to be a citizen- a member of the state’471. Members of such a society had
the right to vote and serve in public office; participation in public affairs was institutionalized. It was
also voluntary. Citizens were engaged in civil society independent of state, family and community
bonds.
As an organizational form most often neo-liberal civil society has been described as ‘the realm of
autonomous voluntary organization, acting in the public sphere as an intermediary between the state
and private life’472. It is best represented by non-government organizations (NGOs) and the voluntary
sector made up of organizations that are private, non-profit distributing, self-governing and
voluntary473.
Yet it is possible to argue that a second form of civil society much more powerful in Central Asia. Civil
society as a communal concept can be considered as having roots in centuries of community

470 Sabine Freizer, (2004) ‘Central Asian fragmented civil society: communal and neo-liberal forms in Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan’, in Marlies Glasius, David Lewis and Hakan  Sekinelgin, edc., Exploring Civil Society: Political and Cultural
Contexts ( London, Rutledge) 130-141
471 Joan Keane, (1988) ‘Civil Society and the State’ (London, Verso) 36
472  Larry Diamond and Mark F. Plattner, eds., (1996) The Global Resurgence of Democracy, Baltimore, MD, John Hopkins
University Press
473 Leslie Salamon and Helmut Anheier, (1996) ‘Social origins of civil society: explaining in the non for profit sector cross
nationally’, Voluntas, Vol.9, # 3,  213-148

--- Sayfa 343 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

341
organizing, with the development of mutual aid and localized forms of decision making. This
argument is substantiated by a second wave of theorizing on civil society, which began through the
expansion of the civil society debate to non-Western contexts on mid-late 1990s. Scholars from the
Islamic world were frequently in the forefront of this re-conceptualization of a civil society as a
communal concept. Here civil society was not viewed as a neo-liberal construct but as a communal
one. Communal civil society was less concerned with state-society relations, and the ability of citizens
to resist amoral and power hungry political elites, then with relationship within society, with
community solidarity, self-help and trust. The main aim of this civil society is to insure that members
of the group had the necessary means for survival. Based on family ties, friendship or good
neighborliness – it organized to offer services, community infrastructure and other essentials.
Religious and ethnically based organizations also fit a communal definition of civil society.
Communal civil society could be defined as sphere of social interaction where people come together
on a voluntary basis along interest lines, to exchange information, deliberate about collective action
and define public opinion. It is a space made up of organization as well as highly informal model of
interaction. Communal, civil society could be located in ‘families, communities, friendship network,
solidaristic workplace ties, spontaneous groups and movements’.474 It is most often bound by a set
territory and focused on a local community, the site of face-to-face encounters. The values that this
civil society espouses aim first and foremost to maintain community stability and security; they tend
to be conservative and patriarchal. Community meetings generally seek consensus; shared ideas and
values tend to be more appreciated then divisive and innovative ones. Commitment to civil society is
not necessary based on the assertion of an individual’s will, but often on group and community
expression of solidarity. The ensuing environment can be oppressive to those who did not wish
conform to the majority. This civil society contains repression as well as democracy, vice as well as
virtue475.
Various organizational representations of communal civil society involved in Central Asia, often
adopted new functions, and forms of interaction with the state, in changing political environment.
They include Kazakh and Kyrgyz nomadic hordes (zhuz), which were based on extended clan
networks through which economic, political and social issues were addressed. Amongst urbanized and
sedentary populations – especially Tajiks and Uzbeks- kinship ties were strengthened by links on
proximity in mahallas. These were geographic neighborhoods but also the site of intensive contacts,
information exchange, opinion formation and decision making. In the post-Soviet period mahallas
survived in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan but often with new occupations and levels of accountability.
Throughout Central Asian traditions forms of community self-help termed hashar still have empirical
meaning today.
Development of civil society in a neo-liberal sense in Central Asia and in Uzbekistan particularly is
still in rudimentary stage. There are a lot of debates in academic sphere that some communal
institutions of civil society, such as Mahalla have a long history and still very powerful in the region.
Fethullah Gülen’s movement is included as neo-liberal as well as communal aspects of civil society. It
is voluntary organization which trying to harmonize traditions with modernity and brings together
Islamic intellectuals (journalists, teachers and students) and businessmen. Gülen’s community is

474 Dekker, P. and Van den Broek, A. (1998) Civil society in contemporary perspective” involvement in voluntary
associations in North America and Western Europe’, Voluntas, Vol 9, #1, 13
475 Van Rooy, A. (2000) Civil Society and the Aid Industry,  London, Earthscan.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

342
based on complex of business networks and controls a large media empire. In addition it controls one
of the fastest growing financial institutions, Asya Finance.
The main principles, which underlie their activity, are taken from Fethullah Gülen doctrine. They are
included following list of elements:
1.
the first principle is belief;
2.
self-sacrifice – with resources and self and altruism;
3.
dialog/tolerance;
4.
avoidance of political and ideological conflict;
5.
taken action on a positive and harmonious way;
6.
taking responsibility;
7.
to give with no expectation of praise or reword;
8.
humbleness.
There is no official way for joining Gülen’s community. Members encounter the movement through
context such as secondary or university educational setting or perhaps through personal contacts.
Community becomes a family for a new adherent. Like in any family, it has a father-founder, older
sisters and older brothers. Mahalla communities in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan also have a very similar
structure.  At the end necessary to mark that Gülen’s community has a very broad support at all levels
of Turkish society and can be used as a valuable source for civil society development in Central Asia.

7. Concluding Remarks
The formation of the modern nation is not a smooth or straightforward process.  Obstacles and
drawbacks are common. There is no doubt that relationships between Turkey and Central Asia are
very important for both regions and have a very bright future despite of present divisions in a political
sphere. Gülen’s ideas and writings can be used  for further development in our region in order to
create a better society, based  on religious tolerance, modernity, value and the importance of
education and the pursuit of knowledge, and the formative role  which played by religion and spiritual
life. His quest to establish an accommodation between Islam and modernity, its resonance with the
contemporary concern with civil society, and its possible contribution towards more harmonious
relationship between East and West at a time when many are unfortunately using the language of
clash of civilization is one of the most valuable resources, which have to be applied in a modern
society because the two key words are dominated the Gülen philosophy: tolerance and dialog.
Fethullah Gülen sees Medina at the time of Prophet as proof that there is room for other religions and
even non-believers to coexist with Islam.
Although many Islamic leaders may talk of tolerance in Islam, it may be problematic to put in into
practice. Gülen himself has shown that he has no fears of meeting leaders of other religions, including
the Pope and the representatives of Jewish community in Istanbul. He also crossed the boarders of
Islamic discourse to meet with important people in Turkish society who are atheists.

--- Sayfa 345 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

343
His educational approach, which is integrated traditional religious education, with its emphasis on
spiritual values with modern secular scientific education, and technologies of the twenty first century
is very important especially in Central Asian countries. Because from one hand overwhelming
majority of people living in these countries are Muslim and they  are one of the most educated people
in Islamic world. But the most important thing that the new world requires top professionals in any
area of human activity and at the same time people who have high moral principles, enable them to
co-exist in peace.

--- Sayfa 346 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

344

--- Sayfa 347 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

345
A COMMUNITARIAN IMPERATIVE: FETHULLAH GÜLEN’S
MODERN TURKEY AS A MODEL
MARK SCHEEL 476

Abstract
 In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in a ‘communitarian’ philosophic
approach, such as that espoused by Amitai Etzioni to American societal reform and progress.
Communitarianism is a social philosophy defined as ‘the third way’ beyond liberalism and
conservatism. Upon close examination, the vision embodied in it has close parallels with much of
the peaceful, educational, spiritual and moral philosophy found in the work of the M. Fethullah
Gülen Movement and in much of modern Turkish culture and society as a whole. The paper
examines the particulars of each and what exactly is being advocated ,with emphasis on the
common ground between the two, drawing especially on the efforts of the Institute of Interfaith
Dialogue and their sponsored trips to Turkey. It then recommends ways in which Etzioni’s group
might reach out to the Gülen Movement for mutual understanding and borrowing of the most
effective methods evident in their approach to peace, dialogue and understanding. It suggests
that co-operative ventures in a similar vein might also be initiated between communitarian-
minded groups in Europe and the Dialogue Society. It anticipates what might be some obstacles
peculiar to American society in adopting such an effort and how these obstacles might be
circumvented. There is also much that American society, and perhaps others as well, could learn
from the spiritual and moral framework displayed in present Turkish society that embraces the
Gülen spirit. As the paper concludes: The possibilities for a true communitarian imperative
become manifest but will demand great joint effort. An effort, however, that can bear sweet fruit,
like the trees along the thoroughfares in Turkey, for all. The Turkish word to describe the
impetus of the Gülen movement is hizmet. That translates into English as ‘service’, which is a
near perfect description of communitarianism.

 1. Introductory Overview
One avenue in the furtherance of peaceful Muslim and non-Muslim relations is the identification of
shared values and the adoption of joint efforts based on those values toward building civility and good
citizenship among peoples.  It would seem that many of the core values of the M. Fethullah Gülen
movement and modern Turkish society together with those of the American-based Communitarian
movement might offer one such fecund opportunity.  Through dialogue and personal interaction,
these two groups might discover ways of jointly advancing their mutual goals toward a more

476 Author and editor based in Kansas City, working on Voices magazine. Past vocations include Red Cross worker, teacher
and librarian. His Red Cross service included overseas assignments in Vietnam, Thailand, West Germany and England. He
took graduate studies in English and taught at Emporia State University. He retired from the Johnson County Library in
Shawnee Mission, Kansas, in 1997. His essays, articles, stories and poems have appeared in numerous periodicals and on
several Web sites such as Kansas Quarterly, The Midwest Quarterly, The Kansas City Star and roguescholars.com. He has
published three books; the most recent, A Backward View: Stories and Poems, received the J. Donald Coffin Memorial Book
Award from the Kansas Authors Club. His latest book Star Chaser is not yet  published, and he has work forthcoming in
Fountain magazine.

--- Sayfa 348 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

346
harmonious and pious society for all.  The following treatise attempts to explore that possibility and
offer some concrete steps to begin the process.  While, in the interests of specificity, the discussion
will focus on the Gülen movement’s Institute of Interfaith Dialog (IID) headquartered in Houston and
the Communitarian Network located in Washington, D.C., it is hoped that the principles elucidated
will by extension be equally applicable to other groups around the globe such as the Dialogue Society
of London in Europe and the U.K. and European social movements sympathetic to and in
communication with the Communitarian Network.
The discussion proper is divided into seven subsections.  The first, A Century of Turmoil, establishes
the historical and political context of communitarianism.  The second, The Third Way, defines the
communitarian movement in the U.S.  Next, The Turkish Connection relates discovering the
relevance of modern Turkish society and the Gülen movement to communitarian ideals.  Then, A
Communitarian Cousin compares the elements of the Gülen movement with those of “The
Responsive Communitarian Platform,” stressing the underlying similarities to be found there.  Next, A
Communitarian Fertile Ground explores modern Turkish society and community and the Gülen
influence as a possible communitarian model structure.  Then, The Challenge of Community in
America examines whether the present American social and political fabric would realistically
support a broad communitarian appeal, giving special attention to the two greatest obstacles–a failing
education system and an oppressive tax code.  Finally, A Blueprint for Action suggests several
practical steps that might be taken by both the Gülen movement and the communitarian supporters
to further their mutual interests and broaden their common ground into the population at large.

2. A Century of Turmoil
If there has been one great political lesson the 20th century has taught us, surely it is the undeniable
truth of Lord Acton's astute dictum "Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."
Notable examples abound such as Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, Fascist Italy, communist Russia,
communist North Korea, Pol Pot's Cambodia, Idi Amin's Uganda, Saddam Hussein's Iraq—tragically
the list goes on and on.  It would seem only logical, then, that a benevolent thinker on the cusp of the
21st century would naturally distrust and eschew those political systems embracing some form of
"central planning" warned about by F. A. Hayek and be drawn instead to one variety or another of a
"classical liberal" or libertarian alternative.  (Hayek, 1944, p. 34)  Those words "individual freedom,"
when set against the term "totalitarianism," do possess an appealing ring.  But as the post-9/11 world
has revealed, liberty does come with its own set of challenges.
Although a segment of the political sympathies in the U.S. throughout much of the '90s did align well
with a libertarian spirit, over time, particularly with the Libertarian Party's paltry response to 9/11,
certain inadequacies in any strict adherence to that outlook began to reveal themselves.  A libertarian
system, almost by definition, presupposes a citizenry that is already educated, moral, ethical,
informed, self-disciplined and respecting of the natural rights of every individual within that system.
In that regard, it would seem to be a reward for a well-developed society rather than the beginning
point for nurturing one.
Specifically, weaknesses in two main areas of that philosophy might be assailed.  The first concerns
the question of exactly how does a free society inculcate a moral point of view among its people,
especially the youth, such that the interactions within that society can be conducted from a common
frame of reference?  And the second relates to the question of how does a free society deal with the

--- Sayfa 349 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

347
citizen who refuses to observe its most basic precepts in his conduct toward his fellow citizens?  Under
scrutiny it appeared that libertarianism could offer no satisfactory practical answer to either.

3. The Third Way
The communitarian movement commenced to gain some currency in the mid-90s through references
to them in the political literature and discourse of the time.  Dr. Amitai Etzioni founded the
Communitarian Network in 1990 and serves at present as the director of the Institute for
Communitarian Policy Studies, both organizations being based at The George Washington University,
Washington, D.C.  (Etzioni, 2003, home page)  The Communitarian Network is a nonpartisan,
nonsectarian, transnational coalition of individuals and organizations who have come together to
shore up the social, moral and political environment.  (The Communitarian Network Web site, home
page)  The Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies is a research organization dedicated to finding
constructive solutions to social problems through morally informed policy analysis and open moral
dialogue, bringing the best scholarship and analysis to bear on policy issues affecting family, schools,
the community and the moral climate of society.
[The Institute] is committed to fostering a greater sense of personal and social
responsibility among individual citizens; to strengthening the cohesion of families and
local communities; to encouraging reconciliation among different racial, ethnic, and
religious groups; and to fostering a national policy debate more cognizant of
humankind’s moral horizon and the social responsibilities of the individual and the
community.  (Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies Web site, Who We Are page)
Upon examination of their tenets, some intellectuals discovered much to like there.  Those with a
social science background were especially appreciative of their recognition that, within the world in
which we find ourselves, man is first and foremost a social being with social needs to be addressed.
Man does, and should—regardless of individual preferences concerning degrees of autonomy—always
exist within the body of a society.  Furthermore, especially appealing to persons of faith  was their
recognition that man is additionally a moral and spiritual being.  And any societal system that fails to
take that into account is doomed to unravel.
Perhaps the greatest charge that could be leveled against them was their lack of specificity.  One might
characterize communitarianism as basically an attitude, not a policy—long on theory and ideals and
short on practical detail, lacking a clear mechanism to effect their vision.  And we all do well to bear in
mind that adage "the devil is always in the details."  Nevertheless, in 2003 a serendipitous chain of
events commenced that would lead me personally to a whole new assessment of the possibilities for a
"living" communitarian imperative.

4. The Turkish Connection
Following the explosion of the evolution/education debates of 2000 in Kansas, I joined an Internet
listserv to keep abreast of the ongoing controversy.  I was intrigued with the frequent postings of a
Turkish Muslim in Istanbul, a rising young journalist named Mustafa Akyol.  (Akyol, 2004)  We
struck up an e-mail friendship and working journalistic relationship, which in turn led to my
acquaintance with a group of Turkish students in my locale who were associated with IID—an

--- Sayfa 350 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

348
organization promoting the vision of compassion, education and peace espoused by the Turkish
spiritual leader M. Fethullah Gülen.  (The Institute of Interfaith Dialog, 2002, p. 5)  And this
connection eventually resulted in my joining with a group of clergy in December, 2005, for an 11-day
tour of Turkey to witness the Gülen philosophy in action.  It was, for me, an experience of profound
import.
What the tour provided to the participants was an opportunity to experience directly the history,
culture, faith and people from which the Gülen movement took root and flourished.  We were
privileged to visit Istanbul, Izmir, Antalya, Konya, Ankara, Gaziantep, Urfa and Harran.  At every stay
the occasion for personal interaction with the people was made available and encouraged, especially
during home visits.  And guides were at our elbow at every turn to field our bevy of questions and
serve as interpreters.  (Scheel, 2006)
By way of background, M. Fethullah Gülen was born in Erzurum, Turkey, in 1941 and, following his
retirement, came to the United States and presently resides in Pennsylvania.  Often referred to as the
"Mahatma Gandhi of Turkey" and "the modern Rumi," Mr. Gülen has been a teacher, Islamic scholar,
thinker, prolific writer and poet of broad and significant influence.  Topics of interest in his speeches
and writings have ranged far beyond religious matters to include education, science, Darwinism,
history, economics and social justice; however, his efforts in world interfaith dialogue and interfaith
education have been groundbreaking and monumental.  Gülen has observed, “There are so many
things we have in common to emphasize.”  (Unal, 2000, p. 205)  A unique aspect of the following he's
engendered is that it is self-sustaining and self-proliferating, not dependent upon the charisma of its
founder but rather upon the efficacy of his vision.  (Gülen, 2004, pp. 3-9)

5. A Communitarian Cousin
It might be said that the core of the Gülen philosophy is a theistic view of the universe—in his case
specifically a moderate Islamic one, but one compatible with the other Abrahamic faiths—and the
moral order of man descending from that recognition.  In contrast to the libertarian stance, Gülen
articulates his perspective on individualism by stating, “…[I]t is impossible to have unrestricted
individualism.  This is because humans are either both free with no acceptance of any moral values
and rebellious with no moral criteria, or they are servants who are dependent on God and seriously
obedient to His commands.” (Saritoprak, 2005, p. 447)  Much of his religious writing quotes both
Christian and Judaic sources as well as Qu'ranic ones.  And the central corollary to this view is the
great emphasis on education "cradle to grave," education that encompasses the whole person—
intellectually, physically, emotionally and spiritually—and is geared toward invigorating that person's
heart and soul as well as mind to achieve competence in a societal niche useful to both himself and
others.  Education that occurs optimally within the context of a strong family structure, a historical
heritage and a democratic polity.  (Gülen, 2004, pp. 66-90)  Education that awakens the individual’s
sense of responsibility because, according to Gülen, “Connecting or relating action to responsibility
gives action its primary humane dimension.”  (Gülen, 2005, p. 99)
This vision has spawned a host of humanitarianlike efforts on an international scale.  More than 700
Gülen schools of every academic level, where students of all faiths are taught together (sans "religious
indoctrination" per se) by teachers of Turkish background, have sprung up across Turkey and in many
countries far beyond on every continent.  (Unal, 2000, p. vi)  The emphasis is on academic excellence,
and Gülen students always take the lion's share of trophies at world science, math, biology, chemistry

--- Sayfa 351 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

349
and physics olympiads.  Gülen was quick to recognize the power of mass media in disseminating his
views and toward that end helped found the Journalists and Writers Foundation in 1994.  In the area
of health care, Gülen hospitals were established.  (Scheel, 2006)  In the interests of world peace and
understanding, numerous intercultural and interfaith dialogue activities were created, our tour of
Turkey sponsored by the IID being one.  Businessmen and industrialists, power elite and community
leaders have rallied to his call to help fund and support the creation and maintenance of these
programs.  A community spirit of good will and desire for harmony and progress permeates the Gülen
vision throughout.   (Unal, 2000, p. 325)
So, might there not be a correlation to communitarian philosophy evident in Gülen's perspective?  A
reading of "The Responsive Communitarian Platform" reveals clearly that movement's most salient
concerns: the reciprocity of social life; renewed moral values; the importance of historical context;
strong, participatory democracy; a vibrant family structure; schools and education; government
involvement guided by degree of necessity; responsibilities of citizenship; protection of human rights;
social justice; public safety and public health; and internationalizing the primacy of human
community.  (The Communitarian Network Web site, Project and Activities page)  It would appear to
be a most sensible outline of focus areas for community-minded attention that would, indeed, mesh
well with the Gülen aim.  In the words of Gülen himself, speaking of a spiritually-centered life: "Order
is evident in every effort, and compassion resides in every achievement." (Gülen, 2004, p. 55)  And
elsewhere in an interview he states: “Personal and social responsibilities are inter-related…the life of
heart and spirit, and social and governmental issues are all facets of one unit.”  (Saritoprak, 2005, p.
449)  Words which, it strikes me, apply equally to both the Gülen vision and the communitarian
platform.

6. A Communitarian Fertile Ground
What cultural milieu might best be suited to fostering a communitarian approach?  Might the land
which nurtured the heart and soul of Fethullah Gülen be a candidate?  Although all societies to one
degree or another bear some burden of past injustices and current internal strife—Turkey being no
exception as is vividly depicted in the novel Snow (Pamuk, 2004)—a focus on, and examination of, life
and interaction at the local, community level can yield propitious insights regarding communitarian
possibilities.
The modern Republic of Turkey dates back to 1923 and owes much of its progressive societal
advancements to the efforts of its revered founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk; however, its legacy as the
heart of the once sprawling Ottoman Empire still exerts a measurable influence.  (Ergener, 2002, p. 5)
Traveling there, one quickly comes to appreciate certain bedrock strengths evident throughout the
culture.  To begin with, while Turkey prides itself on its secular governance, religiosity in day to day
life is almost exclusively Muslim and pervasive.  The call to prayer defines the structure of each day
and provides a commonality to the flow of life.  The moral obligations of one man to another revealed
in the Qu'ran are taken very seriously and inform the interactions at all social levels.  Discretion is left
up to the individual in matters such as imbibing alcohol or the wearing of the head scarf, but a spirit
of comity is instilled at an early age and is evident everywhere, especially in domestic hospitality.
When one is invited to a Turkish home for a meal, one comes away not only with a satisfied palate but
also with a storehouse of good stories and lovely gifts. Tesekkur ederim, which means "thank you," are
bound to be the first Turkish words learned and the most frequently employed.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

350
Historically the land area now occupied by Turkey has been both a geographic and a cultural bridge
between Europe and the Middle East.  Countless armies and evangelists have crisscrossed these
mountains and shores leaving behind their legacy in stone.  And the Turkish people are mindful
always to take pride in and preserve their archeological treasures as stones in the foundation of their
modern civilization.  (Ergener, 2002, p. 5)
Standing as a bulwark against civil unrest is a firm, ubiquitous military presence, and all young men
must undergo a brief period of military training and service.  Yet a great deal of emphasis is placed on
individual responsibility and self-reliance throughout that society.  Family structure is of the extended
variety and sons are expected to care for their old.  The family is also obliged to direct the religious
training of the young and to oversee their schooling and education.  Welfare assistance, when
necessary, is often administered anonymously family to family or through the local mosque.
(Ergener, 2002, pp. 31-37)
The culture is rich with charming observances and customs that in one way or another reveal a
concern and charity toward one's fellow man.  The prevalence of beautiful fruit trees and water
fountains in public space, of which anyone may avail themselves without charge, is said to be provided
so that no man need be left hungry or thirsty.  The concept of neighborhood is inclusive of many
dwellings round about any given one such that a family may quite literally be acquainted with more
than 100 neighbors.  And on an occasion such as the Festival of Sacrifice, these neighbors visit one
another and exchange sacrificial meat.  That would seem to be, indeed, the very definition of
"community."  (Ergener, 2002, p. 38)
All in all, Turkey is a modern nation putting itself on a par with many of its European brethren, yet at
the same time retaining many of its classical traditions.  Its strength as a nation of caring people
derives from its moderate form of Islam, the secular reforms of Ataturk and, now, the compassionate
vision of Gülen.  During our visit there as we were departing a Turkish home one evening, an
American priest remarked to me, "You know, there's a 'communitarian' flavor to all of this."
This observation is by no means confined alone to our travel companion of the cloth but rather is one
shared by a number of other religious scholars writing on Gülen and Turkey.  Dr. Tom W. Boyd at the
University of Oklahoma states unequivocally, “…Gülen’s strategy is predominantly communitarian.”
(Boyd, 2006, p. 48)   Marie-Elisabeth Maigre, in alluding to Gülen’s analogy of society as an organism
with interrelated parts “in need of one another,” characterizes his view as defending “a
communitarian vision of society….”  (Maigre, 2006)

7. The Challenge of Community in America
The contrasts of American and Turkish societies are, admittedly, apparent and many.  America is a
young land of mobile, nuclear families and religious differences underscored by a materialistic bent.
Yet Americans are caring in their own way and generous, too, particularly with domestic and
international relief efforts.  And as for group spirit, ask any fan what it is that reigns at any college or
professional football or basketball game.  But of the numerous conundrums facing the nation, there
would seem to be two overweening obstacles to a "communitarian reformation" in America: a broken
public education system and an out-of-control federal government.  Discipline and achievement are
waning in U.S. schools.  Philosophical naturalism and "political correctness" dominate the zeitgeist of
America’s learning institutions as opposed to the universal theistic/Islamic frame of reference in

--- Sayfa 353 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

351
Turkey.  (Santos, 2006, p. 97)  And government increasingly intrudes into the citizens’ private lives,
forcing them to pay for those intrusions with an oppressive tax system.  Neither major political party
seems willing or able to confront those stifling excesses and pursue serious corrective action.  These
conditions prevail as obstacles to revision in both external societal circumstances and within the
internal mind-set of a significant segment of the population who have adopted an attitude of “what
can Washington, D.C., do for me” rather than “what can I do for my community.”  So efforts toward
substantive change are bound to be fragmented.
From a personal perspective and experience, it seems to me that the two largest subgroups in America
today most closely resembling what we observe in Turkish society are the Catholic diocese and The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.  Although one would be less than candid not to stress the
differences in doctrine and ritual practices of these two Abrahamic-tradition religions, there is much
common ground to be observed in the communal order, values and ethos of their adherents.  Here we
find superior education and discipline in the school system—especially the Catholic parochial
schools—coupled with a nurturing of the spirit.  (Boffetti, 2001)  Each population is bonded by a
common liturgy as well as various social activities and religious observances.  There is a strong
emphasis on tradition,  family, charity, responsible stewardship and missionary efforts.  An ambience
of healing concern for one's neighbor is evident among the various congregations.  For the individual,
life is centered and grounded in the faith, and all one’s decisions and actions emanate from that core,
contributing to a stable, comely social environment.  All of which proves that some of the most
laudable attributes of the Turkish community are certainly evident in some form in America also.
(Whitney, 2007)  (Handbook for Today’s Catholic, 1991)
Much of the systemic, bloated rot observable in American government today can be traced to the
structure of the IRS and the lobbyist-driven manipulation of the tax code.  To put it simply and
bluntly, tax favors are sold for votes.  Votes beget power.  Power perpetuates itself.  And now we're
back to Lord Acton's admonishment.  All of which results in an ever-ballooning federal bureaucracy
with bumbling tentacles stifling the autonomy of those local and regional communities so necessary to
an effective communitarian initiative.  It would be disingenuous and remiss to pretend that realistic
gains might be achieved in moving the social order toward a more communitarian structure without
first confronting these gross impediments.
At present there are two major activist groups working at the grassroots level to address this problem
and offer a reasoned, logical solution.  Americans for Fair Taxation and Citizens for an Alternative Tax
System (CATS) both advocate a retail sales tax at the national level concomitant with the abolishment
of the income tax and IRS, and eventual repeal of the 16th Amendment.  (Americans for Fair
Taxation, Home page)  (Citizens for an Alternative Tax System, Home page)  Such a revised system
would devolve power from both lobbyists and politicians while maintaining a revenue-neutral funding
source for necessary government services.  An additional monumental step, although not one
advocated by either tax reform group, would be the enactment of Congressional term limits.
With these measures in place, it would then become feasible to earnestly address the public education
dilemma.  I believe a great starting point would be the elimination of the U.S. Department of
Education, a concept that once held great currency, and a return to local control of the constitutional
responsibility for educating the young.  Let's be frank—the No Child Left Behind Act is an abysmal
failure.  And with local control would come the renewed opportunity for community input and
direction in other areas as well.  And, yes, for the preparation of a seedbed for the planting, tending
and flowering of a true "communitarian imperative."  This axial role of education is aptly described by

--- Sayfa 354 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

352
Gülen himself:
The main duty and purpose of human life is to seek understanding. The effort of
doing so, known as education, is a perfecting process through which we earn, in
the spiritual, intellectual and physical dimensions of our beings, the rank
appointed for us as the perfect pattern of creation. (Unal, 2000, p. 305)

8. A Blueprint for Action
Having once been introduced to the communitarian concept, it was my acquaintance with students
associated with the IID and my fortuitous travel to Turkey to experience the land and people that
enabled me to envision its practical implementation.  At its most fundamental, I see
communitarianism as a mind-set and life style of individual social responsibility and reciprocal moral
obligation.  In many ways, I believe Turkish society infused by the Gülen movement offers a sterling
example thereof.  But what of its recognition and influence within the American homeland?  How can
it more effectively suffuse its message throughout the nation regarding a third approach for a
concordant social order?
It is my perception that the character of government and education in America today precludes an
optimal receptivity to communitarian ideals and must undergo some radical changes before such can
hold sway.  Because there is strength in numbers and leverage in coalition, I'd strongly urge
communitarian leaders to join forces with Americans for Fair Taxation and Citizens for an Alternative
Tax System to rid this nation of the scourge of the IRS and lobbyist domination.  I would further
encourage making Congressional term limits and the abolition of the U.S. Department of Education
items on the communitarian agenda.  The people desperately need to regain local control of their
children's education and future.  Once progress is accomplished in these areas, I believe the Gülen
movement has much to teach and share with communitarians.
First, in that regard, I would encourage communitarian leaders to establish a relationship with the IID
and attend the conferences/symposiums they sponsor annually such as the recent one in Norman,
Oklahoma, titled Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and
Practice. An abundance of information can be obtained from the IID Web site.  (The Institute of
Interfaith Dialog Web site, home page)  I would suggest in turn that IID leaders extend invitations to
communitarian leaders to participate in an Interfaith Trip to Turkey.  The cross-pollinization of ideas
could be immense.
Second, because communitarianism’s influence at present tends to be centered in academic settings,
IID might consider establishing a liaison with the Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies with the
aim of promoting the common elements of their respective messages beyond the classroom into
American society at large.  Both would profit from an increased exposure at the grassroots level.
Third, it might prove most beneficial for both IID and the Communitarian Network to foster a closer
relationship with both the Catholic and Mormon churches.  A reciprocity of good will there could reap
quick results in spreading a recognition of communitarian goals among large numbers of people,
especially those with a faith-based life style.
I believe with the reestablishment of the balance of power within American society combined with a
greater public awareness of the communitarian mind-set, the possibilities for a true communitarian

--- Sayfa 355 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

353
imperative become manifest.  But achieving that balance of power will demand great joint effort.  An
effort, however, that can bear sweet fruit, like the trees along the thoroughfares in Turkey, for all.  The
Turkish word to describe the impetus of the Gülen movement is hizmet.  (Kalyoncu, 2006)  That
translates into English as "service."  What a perfect word to describe communitarianism.

9. Concluding Summary
How might peace-loving Muslims, such as those associated with the M. Fethullah Gülen movement,
contribute directly to the promotion of a more harmonious, community-minded and spiritually-
directed society in a Western nation such as the U.S.?  Where the social and political theory of
communitarianism relies mainly on abstract concepts, can the daily life in a Muslim nation such as
Turkey suggest practical guidelines for that philosophy’s implementation?  An inquiry has been
undertaken here as to whether a substantial possibility exists for the broader dissemination of
communitarian ideas and ideals into present-day U.S. society and by extension internationally as well,
and whether an approach employing peace-promoting, interfaith joint efforts with the Gülen
movement might prove a feasible course.
The particulars of both “The Responsive Communitarian Platform” and the Gülen vision were
outlined with especial attention drawn to the parallels therein.  One can observe numerous attributes
in common including a reverence for the spiritual and moral needs of humankind, a focus on bonding
in a community venue, a strong emphasis on the centrality of education, an awareness of the
responsibilities of citizenship and a desire for spreading good will internationally.  Additionally, of
vital importance is the fact that both groups exhibit a compassionate commitment to outreach.  Then
modern Turkish society at the community level was described and offered as an example of how a
living communitarian ethos might take form, illustrated by such customs as the Festival of Sacrifice
and the general domestic hospitality of the people.  Following that, a comparison was drawn between
the Turkish example and the Catholic and Mormon church groups in American society, stressing
social similarities with that of the Turkish Muslim community and establishing the realistic potential
for a true communitarian structure in the U.S.  Then two especially formidable obstacles to progress
were identified—the failing public education system dominated by Washington, D.C., and the
stranglehold of IRS and lobbyist influences—and remedies were suggested for both to better permit a
groundwork receptive to communitarian thought.  Finally, suggestions were put forth as to the ways
and means the Gülen movement and the communitarian movement might exchange ideas and initiate
joint ventures to the mutual benefit of both including attendance at the Gülen conferences,
establishment of a liaison with the Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies and participation in the
Interfaith Trip to Turkey project.
All in all, an evaluation of the facts herein presented would seem to indicate a cooperative relationship
between the two above-mentioned groups that would broaden the awareness of communitarian ideals
and promote a positive public image of Islam would, indeed, be quite practicable.  Furthermore, it is
hoped that the recommendations pertaining to the work of IID and the Communitarian Network may
by implication be germane to similar groups in other global regions such as the Dialogue Society
(www.dialoguesociety.org) in Europe.  The promise of deeper mutual understanding among those of
Muslim and non-Muslim faiths through shared projects encouraging peace, responsibility and civility
within communities is certainly one to be cherished, nurtured and embraced throughout the world.

--- Sayfa 356 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

354

--- Sayfa 357 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

355
NEW RELIGIOUS SOCIABILITIES IN EURO-ISLAM: THE
ORGANIZATIONAL LOGICS AND RECOGNITION POLITICS
OF GÜLEN MOVEMENT IN FRANCE AND GERMANY
EMRE DEMIR 477

Abstract
This paper examines the individual and collective de-stigmatization strategies of the Gülen
Movement in France and Germany. Firstly, it describes the organizational structures of the ‘neo-
communitarian’ Gülen Movement in Europe. Despite the large Turkish population in western
Europe, the Movement arrived relatively late, compared to other Islamic organizations —it has
been present in Europe for almost 10 years. We seek to analyse particularly the educational and
interfaith dialogue activities of the Movement. Secondly, by following the theoretical approaches
of Erving Goffman and Charles Taylor, we examine the recognition politics and de-stigmatization
strategies of Gülen Movement members. At the individual level, the search for recognition
through visibility in the public sphere indicates the struggle of the members to cope with the
‘stigmatized’ image of Muslims and to compensate for this ‘public deficit’ by excelling in their
occupation (at university or professional life etc.) This consciously appropriated religio-
communitarian identity — paradoxically — may become in some cases a factor for integration to
the global societies. Consequently, the Islamic identity is transformed from a stigma to a
‘subcultural advantage’. At the collective level, the Gülen Movement is primarily focused on the
problems of the immigrant youth population in Europe. The reintegration of immigrant students
into the educational system of the host societies is defined as a first goal. The total absence of
religious discourse in these educational establishments constitutes the most interesting and
paradoxical feature of this Movement’s strategy: by softening the visibility of their religious
identification, the Movement look for recognition in the public sphere in Germany and France in
order to build an educational network in these countries.

1. Introduction
This paper examines the individual and collective destigmatization strategies of the Gülen movement
members in France and Germany. Firstly, we will describe the organizational structures of the “neo-
communitarian” Gülen movement in Europe. Despite the large Turkish population in Western
Europe, the movement took hold relatively late from other Islamic organizations and they have been
present in Europe since almost 10 years. We seek to analyze particularly the educational and
interfaith dialogue activities of the movement.

477 PhD student of sociology of religions at Strasbourg Marc Bloch University in France. He wrote a thesis titled Les
identités echelle néo-communautaires dans la communauté Turque en Allemagne et en France (‘Neo-
communitarian identities in the Turkish community in Germany and France’). Current interests: Turkish faith-based social
movements; political Islam in Turkey; the organization of Turkish Islam in France and Germany; Islam in Europe; and
religious minorities in France.

--- Sayfa 358 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

356
Secondly, by following the theoretical approaches of Erving Goffman and Charles Taylor we examine
the recognition politics and destigmatization strategies of the Gülen movement members. At the
individual level, the search for recognition through visibility within public sphere actually indicates
the struggle of the members to cope with the “stigmatized” image of Muslims and to compensate this
“public deficit” by excelling in their occupation (at university or professional life etc.) This consciously
appropriated religio-communitarian identity -paradoxically- may become in some cases an
“integrator force” to the global societies.  Consequently, the Islamic identity transform stigma to a
“subcultural advantage.”
At the collective level, the Gülen movement is primarily focused on the problems of immigrant youth
population in Europe. The reintegration of immigrant students to the educational system of the host
societies is defined as a first goal. The total absence of the religious discourse in these educational
establishments constitutes the most interesting and paradoxical point of this movement. By softening
the visibility of their religious identification, the movement seek for recognition in the public sphere
in Germany and France in order to build an educational network in these countries.  This article is
based on semi-directive interviews with the directors of the learning centres in Germany and France
and a 6 month participative observation of Gülen-inspired-activities in Strasbourg.

2. Islamic Movements as Socialization Agents in Europe
The studies on the social organization of the Turkish immigration in Europe show that the ethnic-
religious identity plays an important role amongst the Turkish Diaspora in Europe. In a recent
research on Turkish immigrants in France and Germany, two Turkish scholars noticed this
accentuated religious identification.478 The majority of the immigrants defined themselves as
“Turkish-Muslim” (40%). This investigation indicates us that the “Turkish-Muslim” identity
constitutes the majority amongst Turks of France and Germany. (61% in Germany, 56% in France)
Thus, the religious practice becomes an important identity-maker in the minority situation. Because
of importance of the “Turkish-Muslim” identity, Islamic communities of Turkish origin naturally play
an extremely active role amongst the Turkish immigrants. These organisations of Turkish origin
shape opinions of the Turkish community and play a significant role in transmission of
communitarian values to younger generations.479 Although these various Islamic associations are
often regarded as centres of “Islamic fundamentalism” and also as an obstacle for ‘integration’, the
Turkish immigrants who participate in these communal organisations are not generally motivated by
such a commitment. These collective initiatives are not only actuated by a certain determination to
preserve the ethnic-religious identity. Their reattachment to ethnic-religious organisations appears as
an opportunity to establish solidarity networks. Such networks also occur as defensive structures
against the everyday life experiences of the socio-economic life in Europe such as racism, social
isolation, insecurity and exclusion.480 We suggest that the emergence of such institutions at the local

478 Ayhan Kaya and Ferhat Kentel, “Euro-Turks: A Bridge or a Breach between Turkey and the European Union? A
Comparative Study of French-Turks and German-Turks.” CEPS EU-Turkey Working Papers No. 14, 1 January 2005
479 Manço, Ural, La question de l’émigration Turque : Une diaspora de cinquante ans en Europe occidentale et dans le reste
du monde, in « La Turquie » sous la direction de Semih Vaner, Fayard-Ceri, 2005, Paris pg.567
480 Altay Manço, Turquie : vers de nouveaux horizons migratoires ?, Paris, Turin, Budapest, L’Harmattan, coll.
« Compétences interculturelles », 2004, op. cit. 152

--- Sayfa 359 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

357
and transnational level indicates the motivation for a sub-integration481 to the host society. These
organisations offer a socialization opportunity to young people who do not actually have an easy
access to autochthon social structures. Lastly, these associations led by Islamic mobility became active
agents of socialization in the sedentarisation process of the Turkish community in Europe along with
a conservative role of the Turkish-Islamic identity through the religious and ideological transmission.
These associations fulfil multiple functions such as disseminating information, finding jobs,
facilitating new friendships and allowing access to diverse social networks in the Turkish community.
By the valorisation of the Islamic communities, the first generation of immigrants who are poor-
educated and non-speakers of the host country language (German, French etc.), commonly live in
suburbs, sought to rebuild an authority on their family. They consider the Islamic associations as an
alternative to “vices of the street” such as prostitution, drug consumption and urban delinquency and
so on. Owing to the “legitimacy” of these associations, the young generation could meet out of the
family enclosure, without concerning their parents. Moreover, the women branches of these
associations promote inter-individual relations between women immigrants which constitute the
most excluded group of the immigrant population. The existence of such common platforms of
meeting relieves the members from social exclusion, isolation and loneliness.482 In short, Islam is a
tool for an integration which refuses assimilation, a way through which young Muslims strive for a
public visibility as both a member of the global society and Muslim. Islam provides this young
generation with an opportunity to be the part of the society differently, and to do this, they need to
make their difference visible in the public sphere in a positive way.483
In spite of this fact, we observe a dilemma between two dimensions in the activity fields of these
Islamic organizations: a social dimension which consists in dealing with the daily problems of
migrants, and other, political activities which are particularly based on anti-western and
communitarian vision. In the discourse of  the mainstream Turkish Islamic movements such as Milli
Görüş, Suleymanci community and the fundamentalist movements like Kaplanci community etc., the
Western influence are always considered as a threat more than a resource or an enrichment. This
“mistrust” also comes from historical competition between two religious universes, Christianity and
Islam.  The essential differentiation of the Gülen movement from the other Islamic communities
occurs in this anti-western attitude.484
The social role of the Islamic associations led by various cultural, educational and sportive activities
which favours a socialization ( following a sub-integration to host society) were always defined as a
secondary goal by disciples of these organizations. The ultimate goal was “reislamization of the
society” or “reestablishment of the shariah regime in Turkey” etc; however, particularly after the
“failure of political Islam”485 in early 1990s, the big ideological goals are replaced by more pragmatic
objects. Furthermore, the Islamic associative institutionalization and bureaucratisation process gave

481 The term “sub-integration” indicates an indirect integration to autochton social structures by participating in communal
organisations.  The indivudal attempts  of diaspora members to publicly affirm an identity give birth to an integration
process to the host society. Muslim citizens have dialogue with society through their expressions of identity and difference.
482 Idem, p. 152-153
483 Farhad Khosrokhavar, Islam des Jeunes
484 Nadine A Weibel, Pour une ébauche de l’islamisme Turc en Alsace et en Allemagne, Jund Alain, Dumont Paul, Stéphane
de Tapia « Enjeux de l’immigration Turque en Europe » Harmattan, 1995, pg. 267
485 Olivier Roy, “L’echec de l’Islam politique”, Paris, Seuil, 1992

--- Sayfa 360 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

358
birth to an inner-secularisation amongst the members. Recently, these various socio-religious
associations however witness a relative secularisation process as a result of the rejuvenation of their
administrative staff.  The administrative staff of these associations preoccupies more and more with
the everyday life problems of Turkish immigrants who are victims of a social and economic exclusion
and who suffer from a constant alienation process.  As a result, the social, educational and sportive
activities of these associations which were always considered as a “medium” to gain more members
have become an ultimate goal. 486 During the 1980s and early 1990s, the communitarian functioning
of these associations generated an ideological and psychological closure amongst the younger
generations. But today we witness the emergence of a new religious discourse in the Turkish Diaspora
in Europe. Associations whether they refer directly to “Islam” or not, engage in a social militancy
which concerns the activities such as after-school tutoring and political participation etc.

3. The Gülen Movement in Germany and France
3.1. The Settlement Process of Gülen Movement in Europe
Despite the large Turkish population in Western Europe, the movement took hold relatively late from
other Islamic organizations and they have been present in Europe since almost 10 years. After a
research on Fethullah Gülen’s old sermon records, we learned that Fethullah Gülen frequently visited
some French and German cities at the end of 1980s. But the institutionalization process of the
movement started after mid-1990s. Contrary to the other Islamic movements, the Gülen community
did not follow the Turkish migratory flow. We can explain this late arrival by two essential reasons:
1) The appearance of the Gülen movement in Turkey is relatively recent from the other mainstream
Islamic movements such Milli Görüş and Suleymanci community. When Suleymanci community and
Milli Görüş started to institutionalise their European affiliation in 1970s, Gülen movement was a little
religious community in Izmir, a city located in the Aegean coast of Turkey.  This religious-
conservative community transformed to a transnational educational movement in the early 1990s.
2) After the demise of Soviet Union, Fethullah Gülen gave a priority to the Turkish world in Central
Asia and other Post-Soviet countries. Thus he allocated a major part of social and economic capital of
the community to these regions. Especially, Central Asia, as an unoccupied region by the other Islamic
movements, was more attractive than Europe. In early 1990s, the Turkish diasporic Islam scene was
largely dominated by Milli Görüş (National Outlook) movement.
However, in the last years, the followers of Gülen have disseminate their ideas in the Turkish
Diaspora which live in the immigrant-populated cities such as Paris, Lyon, Strasbourg, Frankfurt,
Stuttgart, Berlin and Köln. In fact, the movement adapted its educational strategy to the European
conditions by creating learning centres. Generally, the Gülen-led associations primarily prefer to
establish private schools in Central Asia, Africa and Balkan countries. But, due to the difficult
administrative procedure of establishment a private school, Gülen community adapted a different
settlement strategy in Europe. The first arriving members found a learning centre, and after the
institutionalization period, they took initiatives to found a private school.  As a result of our

486 Ahmet Kuru and Ahmet Yükleyen, “Avrupa’da İslam, Demokrasi ve Laiklik:Fransa, Almanya ve Hollanda
örnekleri”(Islam, Democracy, and Secularism in Europe: the cases of France, Germany, and the Netherlands), Istanbul,
TESEV Yayınları, 2007, p. 59

--- Sayfa 361 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

359
observation, we suggest that the community considers the learning centres as a “preparative period”
to reach the main goal, i.e. the private school.  For instance, as we learned from the community
members, the first learning centre “BIL Learning House” (Das Bildungshaus BIL) in Germany was
established at Stuttgart in 1995. After the BIL learning centre gained a considerable popularity
amongst Turkish families and developed good relations with the local administration, they
transformed the BIL learning centre to a private school in 2003.487

3.2. Organisational Structure of the Gülen Movement in Europe
Discursive and organisational strategies of the Gülen movement differ from the other Turkish Islamic
communities. Mainly, the associational organisation of Turkish Islam in Europe base on two axes:  the
construction and sponsoring of mosques and Quran schools. Contrary to two other settlement
strategies of Islamic movements, the Gülen movement members in Europe insist on “the great
importance of secular education” and they refuse to build or sponsor mosques. They also do not focus
on Quran education for the youth like Suleymanci community.  The mosques and Quran schools led
by Turkish Islamic movements play an important role in transmission of religious and communitarian
values to the new generation. Instead of trying to build mosques or Quran schools, the Gülen
movement transposed the Islamic mobilisation in the educational, cultural and entrepreneurial field
by forming new voluntary associations.
Gülen movement members in Europe have founded a variety of establishments which operate in the
major European cities. Essentially, we observe three main types of establishments: 1) Learning
centres which offer particular courses in after-school groups to the students of the primary school by
the college and private schools 2) “Intercultural dialogue” associations which organise intercultural
events and meetings in order to promote the cultural exchanges between the Turkish population and
the native society 3) Entrepreneurial associations which assemble Turkish businessmen who
financially support the movement. In this article, we especially focus on the educational activities of
the movement.
Learning centres, intercultural centres, entrepreneurial establishments and high schools are typically
governed by a registered association. The members of the association, typically Turkish immigrant
members of the movement, choose a board of directors, generally consisting of seven members.488
These centres typically serve about a hundred students at a variety of levels from grades secondary
school to college-preparatory class offering courses such as English, French, German, math,
chemistry, physics and biology. In addition, the learning centres offer language courses for newcomer
adults. Furthermore, the learning centres try to encounter the needs of the students primarily of
Turkish background.  The centres organise seminars for the student parents “to make them conscious
about the importance of education”. The staff at learning centres is composed by paid French/German
teachers and volunteer university students of Turkish descent. Although with some exceptions-such
as the Horizon learning centre in Mulhouse, France-, the learning centres don’t receive direct
financial support from the state and local administrative institutions. In the last years, administrative

487 Aydın, Ali İhsan, “Dynamiques religieuses et logiques éducatives: Les Centres d’éducation du mouvement de Fethullah
Gülen en France”, Unpublished M.Athesis, Instıtut d’Etudes Politiques de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 2004, p.68
488 Jill Irvine, “Gülen Movement and Turkish Integration” in RobertHunt and Yuksel Aslandogan, “ Muslim Citizens of the
Globalized World: Contributions of  the Gülen Movement” The Light Publicaition, 2006. pg.59

--- Sayfa 362 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

360
staff of the movement in Germany established good relations with the local and national political
leaders. In France, the relations with the local political authorities are in the minimum level because
of the secular context of France and modest visibility of the movement in the public sphere. But we
observed that learning centres in Strasbourg and Colmar have close relationship with the deputies of
their region and local administrative institutions.
Gülen inspired associations possess more than 100 learning centres in Germany and 16 learning
centres in France. More recently, Gülen-led associations in Germany established three private high
schools in Stuttgart, Berlin and Dortmund. The private schools offer a full college-preparatory
curriculum to the students primarily of Turkish origin. These schools offer the same curriculum as
public college preparatory high schools with the difference that they offer Turkish as the third
language choice, after German and English. The Gülen movement doesn’t have any private school in
France.  Although the movement members express their eagerness to establish a private school in
France, the community hasn’t reached a tangible size to realise their purpose. 489
The Islamic organizations are usually managed by a head organization in Köln, the city which became
“the capital of Turkish Diaspora in Europe”. Unlike the centralist organization of the other Turkish
Islamic communities such as National Outlook Movement and Suleymanci community, inter-
institutional relations between Gülen-led associations is loose and there is not any head organization
or federation in Köln for assembling the Gülen educational associations. As a typical character of the
movement, the Gülen community in Europe is highly decentralised. In Germany and France, each city
or town is responsible for organising and maintaining its own schools and centres. Strasbourg Le
Dialogue Learning Centre director Nihat Sarıer says:
We have no official relation with the other learning centres in France.
Furthermore, we don’t have a common strategy. Maybe, we are all inspired by the
ideas of Fethullah Gülen but we are not controlled by a top organisation which
decides everything. Sometimes I discuss my problems with the directors of other
centres in Paris, Metz etc. and we share our experiences. But everybody lives in a
different region or country, in different social and political circumstances; so
everybody works with his own method.490
Despite this decentralized structure of the movement, the movement developed a complicated
network on country level, continental level and inter-continental level. Firstly, the European edition of
Zaman Daily Newspaper491 which is located at Offenbach, Germany plays a central role on the
communication between the community members in different European countries.  Every day, the
journal publishes articles (particularly in the 17th page) about local activities of the Gülen-led
associations, the educational achievement of private schools etc. By this way, a member of the

489 When we compare the settlement degree of movement in Belgium, Denmark and Netherlands with France, we see a
relative success of the movement due to the more liberal immigration policy of these countries. The first school of the
movement in Europe was founded in Copenhagen, Denmark (HAY Skolen) in 1993. There are also five private schools in
Belgium and two in Netherlands.
490 Interview with Nihat Sarıer, 12.05.2007
491 The principal media organ of the community, Zaman (Time) daily newspaper publishes a special edition for Turkish
diaspora in Europe.  The European edition of Zaman is published in Offenbach (Close to Frankfurt). The newspaper is sold
more than 45.000 in 12 European countries.  Zaman organized a large campaign called as “Football Unites” during the
World Cup 2006 in Germany. The daily newspaper made a call to the Turkish community to support the national team of
Germany.

--- Sayfa 363 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

361
movement in Paris gets informed about the activities in other French cities, or in Germany,
Netherlands, and Belgium etc. Secondly, members of the movement constantly organise touristic
voyages to the other countries in Europe, and even in Asia of Africa. In these touristic voyages, they
also visit the Gülen-led educational establishments. For example, the local representatives of Zaman
Daily Newspaper in Metz recently organised a visit to Turkmenistan and Kirgizstan for the Turkish
origin entrepreneurs who financially support the local establishments of the community. They visited
also the Gülen-led schools in these countries.  Thirdly, according to information given by Hüseyin
Gülerce, a columnist in Zaman and Fethullah Gülen’s close friend, every city or town in different
European countries sponsors the Gülen inspired educational activities in the African countries.492 As a
result of these strategies, the members feel themselves not only as a participant of a local association
in his city but also as a part of the worldwide educational movement.

3.3. Stigma Correction Strategies of the Gülen Movement
We will borrow Erving Goffman’s concept of “stigma” to understand the normalisation strategies of
Gülen movement and immigration-originated youth in the host societies. Stigma refers to an
individual sign, to social information the individual transmits about himself that disqualifies him and
creates an obstacle to being fully accepted by society. A stigma therefore designates an attribute that
profoundly discredits the individual.493 But we must emphasize that the “normal” and “stigmatised”
are not persons, but viewpoints. These viewpoints are socially constructed by the mainstream values
of the society.494 According to Goffman, ethnic, racial, religious or national identities are also the
particularities which can put a distance with the “normal”. Goffman named these types of stigmas as
the “tribal stigmas”. The young population of the Turkish community who are separated from their
peers by the denominations such as “the suburban youth”, “immigration-originated youth” etc. are
marginalised by the majority of the native society. They suffer from a stigmatization due to the
negative image (delinquency, drug, urban violence, religious extremism etc) which sticks to the
suburbs/ghettos where they live. The majority of the young generation experiences the school failure
in an early age and they are oriented towards non-qualified works. Even when they have reached an
adequate school level for a qualified employment, they face with discrimination because of the “tribal
stigmas” which they carry.

A.  Individual Destigmatization Strategies
a. Quest for the recognition of authenticity
To put it bluntly, the principal actors of the Gülen movement are Turkish origin university students.
In this section, we focus on the transmission of communitarian and religious values of the Gülen
movement. We are also interested in individual normalization strategies of it’s members.

492 Hüseyin Gülerce, “Gönüllüler Hareketi”, Zaman, 12.03.2005
493 Goffman, Erving. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. New York: Touchstone Books, 1963.
494 ibid, pg.61

--- Sayfa 364 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

362
In the imagination of Gülen, the “golden generation” must hold in her womb Islamic values and
vocabulary of the community. The most leading features of this generation are worldly activism and
asceticism.
The key opposition of the Gülen movement members to the Western life produces in the private
space. The moralization (or islamisation) is done by creating informal networks in the Gülen
movement. Through light houses and religious study circles, the community offers a pietistic life to its
members. In their daily life, they avoid from alcohol, cigarette, no halal food and nightlife etc.
But in the case of Gülen movement, the moralization of daily life does not prevent its members to
penetrate friendship circles at school or in professional life. Per contra, the discourse of the movement
favors these kinds of relationships, because the representation (temsil) of a "good Muslim" is merely
possible through the active participation to the social life. The words of the President of the
Association of Intercultural Dialogue Strasbourg (ADIS) Mr Talat is interesting in this manner:
Every week, we meet with our members in our local. I often ask them these kind
of questions: How many French friends do you have? How many have you met
this week? Maybe, it looks like a bizarre question but it is important! I know
many Turks working in qualified jobs, but they have no French descent friend. I
find it normal. Because these people have a social environment quite satisfactory
within the Turkish community. But we must now put an end to this conformism.
But for some members of the community in Strasbourg, it’s not merely a matter of "conformism."
My relations with my friends at university are rather good. We often hang out
after school. But I am not like the others. So, our friendship is therefore
somewhat limited. Sometimes they invite me to go to night-club and sometimes I
refuse their propositons. I attempt to explain them why I don’t use alcohol. But,
at the end, i think that they find me a little bit odd. But over time, they got used to
this situation. Now I think everybody accept and respect each other as they are.
(Mehmet, a community member at Strasbourg)

As we can see in the case of Ali, movement members are concerned about issues relating to their
identities. Repeating the words of Anne Sophie Lamine, “when one asserts his/her own identity,
obviously a different comprehension of one’s identity becomes worrisome.” 495 So, the member is
motivated by a communitirian discourse which favors an active participation to the social life of the
main society, which favors to try to find his/her place among the "establisheds"496 of the main society
while keeping his/her tribal stigmas497. This dilemme sends us to Charles Taylor’s famous discussion
about authenticity. Taylor defines authenticity as being in touch with one’s inner feelings. He
acknowledges that our significant others make a major impact on those “inner feelings,” and not only
while the self forms, but throughout the whole life of an individual. 498At a multi-cultural and multi-
modern context, the authenticity is one of the characteristics of a believer of any religion. In our case,

495 Anne Sophie Lamine, « La Cohabitation des Dieux, Pluralité Religieuse et Laïcité », Puf, Paris, 2005, p. 276
496 Selon la formule de Norbert Elias
497 Selon la formule d’Erving Goffman
498 Charles Taylor, Multiculturalism and “The Politics of Recognition”, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992

--- Sayfa 365 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

363
we suggest that the Gülen movement members strives or the recognition of its authenticity.
Interestingly, the community members don’t create new ghettoisations, but rather encourages one to
find a solution to his/her problem of recognition of authenticity in the public sphere.

b. Dar-al Hizmet: The Inclusive Discourse of Gülen in the Immigration Context
The second important actor of Gülen movement is the Turkish descent entrepreneur and working-
class.  In this section we will analyze normalization strategies of the movement regarding to this
second type of members.
Many scholars who specialise in European Islam build their analysis on the traditional Islamic
contrast between dar al-Islam (House of Islam) and dar al-harb (House of war) which presents
somehow the historical antagonism of Islam toward non-Muslims. But the conflict is merely one facet
of the complex relationship of Muslims with 'Western' society.  Contrary, for a great part of the
Muslim population in Europe dar al-Islam and dar al-harb distinction is not a pertinent method to
define relationship to non-Muslim societies.  In Germany and France, “many religious Muslims have
recently undergone a significant shift toward a more 'integrational' stance”.499 Gülen’s frequently
used term dar al-hizmet (country of service) is a new concept in this regard, which helps to his
followers to develop a particular discourse for propagation in the Turkish Diaspora. According to
Gülen, “If one’s intention is to serve Islam by presenting a good example, then one can stay wherever
one desires. Gülen stresses a Muslim who lives in a non Muslim society; he or she has to obey the lex
loci, to respect others’ rights and to be just, and has to disregard discussions of dar al-harb and dar al-
Islam.”500 The conceptualisation and practical use of the term Dar al-hizmet looks like a “practical
solution” offered by Gülen, more than a new politico-legal contribution to the Islamic law.
A separate note is needed here to summarise Gülen’s geostrategic vision and particularly his pro-
western attitude. Gülen has always been a strong supporter of economic and political integration with
the EU, while he has a sceptical attitude towards cooperation with Iran and the Arabic world. This
pro-European attitude represents a differentiation in the Turkish Islamic scene. The other leading
Islamic groups such as Erbakan’s National Outlook Movement appropriated an essentialist anti-
Europe or anti-western discourse since 1970s.501 Most of the Turkish Islamic community leaders
considered the EU membership as a “danger of assimilation in the Judeo-Christian world”. But Gülen
affirms that Europe represents no danger to the Turkish-Islamic identity:
We should be comfortable in our outreach to the world. We will not lose anything
from our religion, nationality and culture because of developments like
globalisation, customs union or membership in the European Union. We firmly
believe that the dynamics that hold our unity are strong. Again, we also firmly
believe that the Quran is based on revelation and offers solution[s] to all the

499 Heiko Henkel, “Rethinking the dar al-harb: social change and changing perceptions of the West in Turkish Islam.”
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 9/2004
500 Ihsan Yılmaz, “İjtihad and Tajdid by Conduct» in  “Turkish Islam and the Secular State The Gülen Movement by M
Hakan Yavuz and John L Esposito (ed), Syracuse University Press, 2003, New York
501 Hasan Kösebalaban, “The Making of Enemy and Friend: Fethullah Gülen’s National-Security Identity » in “Turkish
Islam and the Secular State The Gülen Movement by M Hakan Yavuz and John L Esposito (ed), Syracuse University Press,
2003, New York

--- Sayfa 366 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

364
problems of humanity. Therefore, if there is anybody who is afraid, they should
be those who persistently live away from the invigorating climate of Quran.
(2003)502
Furthermore, in an interview in 1995, he assigns a particular task to the Turkish Diaspora in Europe:
Our people who live in Europe must come off from their old situation and become
a part of the European society. Their children must be oriented to universities
more then artisanal high schools. Also, they must transmit our cultural and
religious richness to European society. In the future, they will constitute our
lobbies which we highly need today. In the past, only the 2 percent of the Turkish
immigrant population was fulfilling their religious requirements. But today, 40
or maybe 60 per cent of the young population regularly prays in the mosques.
Obviously, our people didn’t undergo to an assimilation process, contrary, they
impressed the host societies by their conviction and culture. 503
The essential idea of the Gülen movement regarding to the Turkish Diaspora is to become a
recognized part of the main society without losing one’s “Turkish-Islamic” identity. During our
research, we observed that the concepts such as “dar al-hizmet” and “renewal of intention” (tashih-i
niyet) are frequently used by the disciples of the Gülen community in Europe. As a matter of fact, The
Turkish immigrants mainly immigrated for the economic reasons. Therefore, to gain more money
may become raison d’être for a Turkish entrepreneur or an employee, in Europe. By these concepts,
sympathizers of Gülen movement try to change the mentality regarding to main society.
A Turkish small entrepreneur Kasım A. (age 46), community member who lives in Frankfurt-
Germany says: “We all came here (Germany) with an economic motive, to gain more money and
have a more comfortable life. Nobody can deny it.  But after 30 years, we became the members of
this society. We cannot continue to live in our small communal worlds. Fethullah Gülen advises us to
renew our intentions. That means we are not here just for a more comfortable life, but also be a
good example for our entourage and work for the good of this country.”  Despite the “politically
correct” aspect of this declaration, it indicates a discursive change regarding the host society.
The Gülen disciples in Europe advise to followers to renew their intentions (tashih-i niyet). The term
“tashih-i niyet” is partially inspired by the idea of “hegira”504. With referring to the compulsive
immigration of the prophet Mohammed from Mecca to Medina, the Islamic preachers in 20th century
created a universal doctrine of “hegira”, by urging the Muslims to immigrate to non-Muslim countries
in order to make Islamic proselytism in these societies.505 According to Bassam Tibi, this doctrine
largely forms the worldviews of the preachers of Muslim Diaspora in Europe. If we return to our case,

502 Fethullah Gülen, “Hoşgörü ve Medya.” Available at: http://www.m-fGülen.org/eser/article.php?id-442. Accessed 18
July 2003. Cited in Hasan Kösebalaban, “The Making of Enemy and Friend: Fethullah Gülen’s National-Security Identity »
in “Turkish Islam and the Secular State The Gülen Movement by M Hakan Yavuz and John L Esposito (ed), Syracuse
University Press, 2003, New York
503  Nuriye Akman, “Hoca’nın hedefi Amerika ve Almanya” (Hodja targets USA and Germany) ,Turkish newspaper Sabah,
28.01.1995, http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/7853/74/
504 “Hegira” is an important notion in the Muslim tradition.  The prophet Mohammed ordered his followers to make
“hegira” i.e. to immigrate and disperse to the different regions of the world in order to propagate the Muslim faith.
505 Bassam Tibi, “Europeanizing Islam or Islamization of Europe” in Timothy Brynes, Peter Katzenstein, “Religion in
Expanding Europe”, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2006, op.cit 210

--- Sayfa 367 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

365
the reference to the « hegira » doctrine is obvious in conceptualisation of “tashih-i niyet”. But it does
not contain a proselyte or missionary connotation. This concept occurs as a resource of motivation for
the community members to present a “good example” in their entourage.
Consequently, the term “dar al hizmet”, by eliminating the contrast between the dar Al harb and dar
Al Islam, allows especially the immigration-originated youth to express their will to be recognized
individually and collectively in the host society, not only as a diasporic -passive subjects, but also as
“veritable subjects”506, “who are searching a constructive role in the host society, as the autonomous
authors of their trajectory and as the producers of their own existence.” 507

B. Collective Destigmatization Strategies
A. THE LEARNING CENTRES: QUEST FOR NORMALISATION?
Different to the worldwide settlement strategy of the movement, the followers of Gülen in Europe
encounter some difficulties with the establishment procedure of private schools. It’s not only because
of the difficult administrative procedure; but also the prejudices against Muslim immigrants and the
rise of Xenophobia- Islamophobia in the old continent. The Gülen movement in Central Asia or in
Balkans etc. always searched a direct contact with the host society. Differently to the other regions,
the followers of Gülen in Europe meet with a sizeable Turkish population; a population who has
became an object of negative characterizations and stigmatizations. Therefore, the Gülen community
implements a new immigrant-oriented strategy to gain legitimacy in the host societies.
According to Goffman, stigmatised persons adopt five principal strategies to correct their stigma:508
1.
To try to correct the essence of the stigma or to dissimulate the stigma signs and to deny its
influence: search for assimilation
2.
To show that one’s difference from “normal” persons doesn’t prevent him/her to be
successful in society; try to excel in the society (at school, work etc.) to achieve which is
difficult even for the “normal” persons
3.
To perform the personality who is bound to his social, cultural or ethnic identity, as a
reaction to the disreputation of normal ones.
4.
Cash in on from a person’s stigma; seek to instrumentalize his/her stigma;
5.
To redefine your difference as reason of pride and advantage on the “normal ones”,
(assertion of the negritude: i.e. Black is beautiful etc.)
The first and third strategies go through with a process of “self-devalorisation”, while the second,
fourth and fifth strategies are experienced by a process of “self-valorisation”. All the strategies -except

506 For a larger explicaiton of the term “veritable subject” see: Alaine Touraine, “Pourrons-nous vivre ensemble ? Égaux et
différents”,  Fayard Editions, 1997
507 Dounia Bouzar, « L’islam entre mythe et religion : le nouveau discours religieux dans les associa-tions socio-culturelles
musulmanes », Les Cahiers de la sécurité intérieure, n°54, 2003,pg. 174, www.islamlaicite.org/article235.html.
508 We borrow Lorcerie’s simplified model of the stigma correction strategy classement. See at: Lorcerie  Françoise.,
« L’Ecole et le défi ethnique : Education et intégration », Paris, ESF &INRP, 2003, op.cit., 34

--- Sayfa 368 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

366
the last one- can be lead to a collective action. Moreover, the first, second and fourth strategies can be
perceived as manoeuvres by the “normal” persons. We can observe the practice of all these stigma
correction strategies by the Turkish immigrant youth. But in our case, the young students who
participate in the educational activities of the Gülen movement adapt the second strategy. They try to
excel in the host society via educational success and differentiate from their friends, other stigma
carriers.
It’s the same case for the Gülen movement. The administrative staff of the Gülen inspired institutions,
frequently complain about the host society’s perception of the learning centres as an “Islamic
association”, a “communitarian association”, or an “ethnic association” etc. During an interview with
a responsible of the movement in France noted:
We did not come to Europe merely for the Turkish immigrants. We want to serve
to the French society. But when we talk about our private school project with the
local administrative responsible or politicians, they maintain a sceptical attitude
to this idea because of the negative image of the Turkish community in France.
They evoke the poor situation of Turkish students at the school. It is really very
saddening! So, firstly we will focus on the educational problems of our children. If
we achieve to break this negative image, we will have a chance to start a dialogue
between equals and we can realise our private school project. 509
The community members think that they are victims of a “racialisation” as a result of juxtaposition of
the Turkish community in France and Turkey-originated movement. In spite of the fact that the
Gülen-inspired associations which we observed are largely dominated by Turkish origin volunteers,
they complain frequently of their “Turkish association” image. For the director of Paris EtudePlus
learning centre director, these associations do not target merely the Turkish population, but the whole
Parisians. The faith-based movement try to break this accentuated ethnic-racial image of the
movement by organising intercultural activities. But because of the particular problems of the Turkish
population, the followers of Gülen privilege the problems of Turkish population in Europe. The
reintegration of immigrant students to the educational system of the host societies is defined as a
“first” goal. So, we observe a double strategy of normalisation: On the one hand, the immigrant youth
appropriates the communitarian values of Gülen community which legitimates the second correction
strategy. On the other hand, the administrative staff who is disturbed by “stigmatisation” by host
society is in a search of success and excellence in their occupation i.e. the educational activities. The
movement also adapts the second correction strategy during the settlement process in Europe.

b. The invisible religion: Towards secularisation in public sphere
During our observation period at the learning centres in France and in Germany, we did not observe
any religious propaganda or a visible proselytism in these establishments. This secular education
policy in Europe is a by product of the worldwide strategy of the Gülen movement. According to
Bayram Balcı who performed a survey at the Gülen-led schools in Central Asia, the school curricula
are prepared in accordance with the instructions of the national education of each country and they

509 Interview at the coulisses of Etude Plus learning center in Paris, 12.04.2007.

--- Sayfa 369 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

367
are totally secular and scientific. Even the Muslim students, who demand a place to practice their
prayers in the school, are not authorized to do it. 510Elizabeth Özdalga notes that:
The main objective [of the education provided in these schools] is to give the
students a good education, without prompting any specific ideological
orientation. One basic idea of Gülen's followers is that ethical values are not
transmitted openly through persuasion and lessons but through providing good
examples in daily conduct.511
The total absence of the religious discourse in these educational establishments constitutes the most
interesting and paradoxical point of this movement. By borrowing the concept of Pierre Bourdieu, we
suggest that the religious manner constitutes the “doxic” experience of the movement. Doxa is the
fundamental and unthought beliefs that inform an agent’s actions and thoughts within a particular
field.512 A doxic experience is one in which members of a society share a common perspective that is
transmitted by a series of implicit assumptions and values that appear as a matter of fact, us a
truth.513  Through the concept of “Hizmet”514, Gülen sacralise the secular education. What is essential
in this “faith-based social movement” exists implicitly in the body of the community.515
Despite the relatively weak religious visibility of Gülen inspired activities, the followers of Gülen in
Europe do not encounter a big difficulty to multiply their members due to their conceptualisation of
hizmet (service).  Gülen disseminates knowledge to his community as the most effective way to serve
the religious cause ensuring the highest religious recompensation.516 For instance, we observed that
some student parents in Strasbourg influenced by the idea of “hizmet” and believing the secular
education in Gülen-led establishments will help their children to be successful not only in life but also
in thereafter. Hizmet promotes the appropriation of individual piety and Islamic ethic (adab) values
in private sphere and a militant participation to the modern secularised world in the public sphere.
Apparently, this softened religious image of the Gülen-inspired institutions facilitates the emergence
and expansion of the movement in the public sphere. However, as a consequence of these strategies,
the movement voluntarily or “involuntarily” revalorises a secularisation process amongst the
members. They offer a new communitarian identity to the Turkish community by appropriating the
secular codes in public sphere and appropriating the religious codes in the private sphere.
Consequently, we suggest that the followers and sympathizers of the movement develop a syncretic

510 Bayram Balcı, Missionnaires de l'Islam en Asie centrale : Les écoles turques de Fethullah Gülen, Maisonneuve & Larose,
2003
511 Elisabeth Özdalga. "Entrepreneurs with a Mission: Turkish Islamists Building Schools along the Silk Road, " Paper
delivered at the Annual Conference of the North American Middle East Studies Association, Washington, D. C., November
19-22, 1999. Published in Turkish: “İslamcılığın Türkiye Seyri”, İstanbul, İletişim Yayınları, 2007
512 Pierre Bourdieu. Les Meditations Pascaliennes, Paris, Folio Editions, 2003, pg. 22
513 Pierre Bourdieu and Passeron, Jean Claude, La reproduction: Elements pour une theorie du systeme d’enseignement,
Paris, 1970 cited in Nilüfer Göle, “Islamic visibilities and public sphere” in Islam in Public: Turkey, Iran and Europe,
Istanbul, 2006, Bilgi University Press
514 Movement members use the term ‘hizmet’ to refer to all educational, social, civil engagements of the Gülen community.
From an essentialist point of view, Hizmet can be described as any volunteer service or work done for the community.
515 Uğur Kömeçoğlu, “A Sociologically Interpretative Approach to the Fethullah Gülen Community Movement”
Unpublished thesis, Directed by Nilüfer Göle, Bogazici University, 1997
516 Bekim Agai, “The discoursive and organizational strategies of the Gülen movement” Paper submitted in Rice University,
USA, 12-13 November 2005

--- Sayfa 370 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

368
attitude towards the modern-secularised world in the public sphere. By adopting an attitude as we call
“religio-secular” (an expression of Martin E. Marty), they “blur, mesh, meld, and muddle together
elements of the secular and the religious, the worldly and the otherworldly”. 517
But the Gülen movement must not forget that Islam for the European Muslims was largely considered
as a “clannish”518 reinvestment.519  As a characteristic of the Diasporic Islam, “Religion and ethnicity
march hand in hand in Europe because they construct the compensatory refoundation of an “us” lost
in the difficulties and reversals of immigration.”520  The associative institutionalisation of Islam in
Europe fulfils many complementary functions such as a wish for identity, a community-centred life
and fidelity to the ethnic group. Therefore, Islam in Europe is “more culture (than faith) and more
tradition than belief.”521 Although there is an accentuation of Turkish identity and patriotism in Gülen
movement, Fethullah Gülen’s conception of Islam is more close to the Universalist orientation of
Islam more than this “culturalised” form of Islam. The movement in France and in Germany, “seeks to
find a “middle way” between the cultural devastation implied by assimilation and the
“ghettoization” of a minority group living apart from the host society culture”522 But in this search of
a “middle way”, the community confronts a risk to lose the “fine balance” between the Diaspora’s
community-oriented conception of Islam and the movement’s more universalist Islam and its
integrationist stance. This balance is menaced by two main factors:
a.
In spite of its relative success in expansion, Gülen movement’s relatively liberal interpretation of
Islam causes some criticisms from its members. For instance, Director of Le Dialogue Learning
Centre Nihat Sarıer tells that parents of secondary school students severely object to mixed
education in the learning centre: “When I talk about the importance and necessity of mixed
education at class, the parents says (No, This is a Turkish association. We don’t want a mixed
education here)” 523Another example, the visit of Plateforme de Paris, Gülen inspired
intercultural dialogue association in Paris, to a catholic church evoked the critics of some
community members. 524 These micro-level tensions within the Gülen community reflect rightly
the inner confrontation between the members who interiorised the “culturalised” and
“universalist” conception of Islam. During our observation in Strasbourg, we noted that the
transposition of community values and “know-how” of the movement realises through the
intermediary of Turkey-originated graduate students. These students whom have already an
experience in the associations and schools of the movement in Turkey play a vertical role at the
expansion of the movement. We observed –in our particular research area- that these students’

517 Martin E. Marty, “Our religio-secular world”, Daedalus( Special issue on secularism and religion), June 2003
518 “Clannish” is the approximative translation for the French adjective “communautariste” which refers to a society whose
organization tends to consider the affiliation to a specific community (such as religion, foreign origin etc.) as important as
the affiliation to the French nation or the “European citizenship” etc.
519 Jocelyne Cesari, Etre musulman en France aujourd’hui, Hachette, 1997, Paris, pg. 26
520 Albert Bastenier, “L’incidence du facteur religieux dans la conscience ethnique des immigres marocains en Belgique”,
Social Compass, 45 (2), 1998, pg. 197
521 Abdessamad Dialmy, “Belonging and Institution in Islam”, Social Compass, 54 (1),2007, pg. 70-71
522 Jill Irvine, pg. 56
523 Interview with Nihat Sarıer, Director of Le Dialogue Learning Center, 12.05.2007
524 Erkan Toguslu, “Le difficile équilibre dedans-dehors : les activités culturelles d'un centre musulman comme stratégie
d'intégration dans l'espace public et les critiques au projet au sein de leur communauté » Paper submitted in Colloquy « La
Religion de l’Autre » 5-6 February 2007, Paris

--- Sayfa 371 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

369
looks like more tolerant towards a fully secular mixed education or interfaith dialogue meetings
at churches etc. This tolerant/pluralistic attitude causes some tensions between them and the
immigrant members. (Especially with the members of elder generation) Turkey originated
students try to adopt a socio-cultural representation relating to the logic of the French/German
associational structure. The elder members of the movement follow an inward-looking life
strategy.
b.
Although a relative retrogression of the community-oriented Islamic movements such as
Suleymanci community or fundamentalist movements like Kaplanci community, a large variety
of Sunni Islamic associations constitutes a veritable “religious market” in Turkish Diaspora.
These associations which maintained their own clientalist networks criticise integrationist, less
community-oriented and liberal discourse of Gülen movement. For instance, The Milli Görüş
community harshly criticises the interfaith dialogue activities of the Gülen movement in Europe.
While the Alevi community and the nationalist groups such as Ulkucus strictly opposes to the
Gülen model of integration.

4. Concluding Remarks

Consequently, the socio-political problems and economic vulnerability of the Turkish Diaspora in
Europe transform the strategies of the Gülen movement. If we consider the schools in Central Asia, in
the Balkan countries or in Africa, we can assume that the settlement strategy of the movement is not
dependent on the Turkish immigration waves throughout the world. In different regions, the disciples
of the movement always seek to contact with the host societies. Differently to evolution of the
movement in Central Asia or Balkans etc., the movement does not focus on the host societies in Turk-
populated Western European countries. As a result of our qualitative research, we observed that the
members of the Gülen community acts in two different trajectories. On the one hand, as a neo-
communitarian religious community, they strive to have a larger share -more members- within the
religious market of Turkish Diaspora by producing a fresh religious discourse and new organisational
strategies, as they did in Turkey. The followers of Gülen inculcate Islamic values and norms in society
through sohbets (religious study circles). So, the clientalist perspective and the search for an ethno-
religious reference of the community members are not neglected by the Gülen movement. On the
other hand, by interiorising the modern-secular codes and by organising around the non-religious,
cultural and non-profit associations , they seek to gain legitimacy in the public space in Germany and
France in order to build an educational network in these countries, as they did in Central Asia or in
Balkan region. In these two different trajectories, the Turkish population appears both as a backing
population and as an obstacle. As a result of the synthesis of these trajectories; a reinvented and
reinvigorated community took place in Europe. Therefore, the “fine balance”, is procured by a
reciprocal compromise between the ethno-religious attachment of the Turkish Diaspora and
integrationist stance of the movement. This is why the Gülen community became a neo-
communitarian movement in Europe.
At individual level, the key opposition of the Gülen movement members to the Western life produces
in the private space. The member is motivated by a communitirian discourse which favors the
moralization of daily life and the active participation to the social life of the main society in order to
find his/her place among the "establisheds" of the main society while keeping his/her tribal stigmas.
The community members don’t create new ghettoisations, but rather encourages one to find a

--- Sayfa 372 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

370
solution to his/her problem of recognition of authenticity in the public sphere. The members
instrumentalize some Gülenian concepts such as “dar al-hizmet” and “renewal of intention” (tashih-i
niyet) to develop a fresh discourse for the elder members of the community. At the collective level,
Gülen inspired establishments are in a search of success and excellence in their occupation i.e. the
educational activities. Apparently, this softened religious image of the Gülen-inspired institutions
facilitates the emergence and expansion of the movement in the public sphere.

--- Sayfa 373 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

371

Anatolian Muslimness in Practice:
Gülen's Ideas in Western Context

PART
7

--- Sayfa 374 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

372

--- Sayfa 375 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

373
PEACEFUL MUSLIM–NON-MUSLIM CO-EXISTENCE IN A
SECULAR CONTEXT
FARHOD ALIMUHAMEDOV 525

Abstract
This paper is about the conditions of inter-ethnic, inter-religious and inter-class relations in
Gülen schools and looks into their operation in non-Turkish and non-Muslim settings. It aims to
examine the relations among young people coming from different groups. The initial and main
steps of the integration processes among different ethnic and religious entities are well observed
at school — we hupothesize that it is much easier to transfer knowledge and values to young
people with the same or closely similar identities. The field of research is in Russia because
Russian society offers an interesting context for the observation of inter-ethnic and inter-
religious relations. There we observe the strong ethnic identity arising after the collapse of the
Soviet Union with concomitant rise in social rivalry among different groups. The students at
Gülen schools are initially selected on academic merit, and the results then obtained by the
schools make their reputation. That reputation increases the attractiveness of the schools and the
best young people from different ethinic groups try to get places in them. However, the major
focus of my research is to check the level of social integration rather than of academic success
and to observe how Muslim-based schools can transmit values in non-Muslim context. The
example of these schools could be useful for ethnically changing societies like the French one.
French society should be reassured by the ‘republican school’ model, and should question the
academic and social effectiveness of its methods and approaches rather than the ethnic or
religious belifs of the young French students who attend such schools.

1. Introduction
The reason of my interest in Gülen schools lies on my educational background. I studied at the Uzbek
Turkish school in Tashkent which was opened in 1992 just after the first anniversary of the
independence of the Republic of Uzbekistan. (1st September 1991). I spent 4 years at that school
instead of 3 (we have to study at preparatory class first) in order to get the secondary level permitting
to apply to the university. Nevertheless, I do not regret much about it, even if at that time one extra
year seemed to be very important.
During these 4 years I had not learnt anything about Fethullah Gülen. Even after graduating the
school I never questioned about him. The first information about Gülen I found was in Russian
analytical paper named “Compass” in 1999 (in the same year all schools were closed in Uzbekistan)
which described him as the leader of the “Nurcular” movement, Islamic oriented powerful stream
with a strong financial and political support coming mainly from private funds in Turkey. Although

525 Currently in the fourth year of studies for his PhD in political sciences at Dauphine University of Paris, France. After
studying in the faculty of International Relations of the University of World Economy and Diplomacy in Tashkent, he
obtained in 2001 a scholarship to do graduate studies in geopolitics and international relations at the Institute of Political
Studies of Toulouse, France, where he was invited to continue his studies in following years.

--- Sayfa 376 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

374
that 10-page-article could not change my opinion about my 4-year-experience at school, it created a
sort of suspicion towards the schools because that paper was and remained the only information
about Fethullah Gülen and “his” schools for a long time.

2. Gülen and “His Schools”
I was informed lately that Gülen possesses no school by his own. He is not a businessman and he did
not inherit enough to open hundreds of schools. The difference is clear between Gülen and other
famous philanthropist like Soros, Ford or Gates who finance directly schools and education
programmes by their own. He was a preacher in Edirne (Turkey) where he received the degree and
later in Izmir city from 1966 to 1981526 years. The functions of imam being not limited to preaching,
but especially educating and writing (he has written about 60527 books) he describes himself as an
educator528. Modern education was not included at his early stages of activities, since at that time he
played an important role in educating religion of Islam in Turkey. Therefore the name “Hocaefendi”,
which comes for the role of religious title529 is often used to replace his name. The sector of
contemporary (modern) education is one of the domains of his group activities behind the others.
That field was actively taken into consideration after 1980530 by the opening of private schools and
became by the time the most discussed and publicly known sphere of activities. The schools which are
associated with his name follow his line and vision of modern education which is based on both “mind
and heart 531». He thinks that modern education is job oriented and lacks the spirituality whereas
madrasas532 (Qur’ranic schools of Ottoman Empire) did not follow modern evaluation. However, he
finds that Turkish secularism eliminates the religion from the public sphere and encourages the
development of violent religious movements. Therefore he proposes the schools both compatible with
and critical of modernity and Muslim traditions. Gülen does not see modernity and Islam as opposing
entities, but in contrary suggest the participation of Islam in modern Secular State533. Even if his
points of view are taken from Turkish experience, he tries not to establish one model to all schools
over the world.
There are some 250534 Gülen schools in Turkey and even more abroad. They are located in different
countries, but mainly in developing ones. In the countries closer to Turkey they are densely
implanted. For example, they exist in different forms in the majority of the post communist countries
bordering and closely located to Turkey. In some countries like Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan there are
even universities which are linked to the Gülen movement. The schools, however, cover a large

526 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fethullah_Gülen
527 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fethullah_Gülen
528 Thomas Michel, S.J. « Islamic Modernities: Fethullah Gülen and Contemporary Islam », p.1
529 ibid
530 Agai, B « Discursive and Organizational Strategies of Gülen Movement » p.3
531 Thomas Michel, S.J. « Islamic Modernities: Fethullah Gülen and Contemporary Islam », p.6
532 In fact, the word « madrasa » which is the same as “medersa”, “madrasah”, “medrese” literally means "a place where
learning/teaching is done". However, by the time this word lost its original meaning and stands for ancient schools which
existed before establishing republican regime in Turkey. Therefore, people refer directly to Qur’anic school once they use
the word “madrasa”.
533 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/2178/20/
534 http://www.turkokullari.net/

--- Sayfa 377 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

375
geographical area starting from Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Northern America and even in
Europe.
Gülen’s role is not so much a planning one, but rather visionary one, since in new regions locally
operating groups are better acquainted with needs and realities on the ground535. Therefore the forms
of the schools are multiple. There are schools recognized as “lyceums” or “gymnasium” which are
attached to the local schools. They share the building and interfere for the elder pupil. There are also
Language and Computer centres that are in developing countries where the need for the subject is
vital, but also in developed countries where difficulties to open the schools (mainly Europe) exist.
Beside Gülen “has” several International Schools which is open to local pupil and for the children of
diplomatic corpus residing at that country. However the main form is so called “Turkish” schools
which undergo through intergovernmental agreements.
These schools obtained certain recognition in many countries. Famous political leaders, even
presidents have claimed about them in public. For example, recently Afghan president Karzai
demanded Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs Gul in their meeting to multiply the numbers of Afghan
Turkish schools536. The director of Crimean-Turkish School in Ukraine Mehmet Sevketoglu has
received a medallion for his work by country president Youshenko537. The students of Turkish school
Horizon Japan International School) were received by Prime Minister Koizumi Junishiro, whereas the
mother of Georgian president Saakashvili, Dr. Giuli Alasania Saakashvili works at one of the Turkish
schools538.

3. The Missions of “Missionary Schools”
The success of Gülen schools is achieved almost everywhere they open. However, the question rises
about the main aim of these schools from Turkish side, as well as from hosting country side. Several
schools have been closed in Russia, and all schools in Uzbekistan. It is difficult to make parallel
between these accidents, but in both cases the problems come from political and not from educational
drive. In order to avoid all suspicion the schools keep a very strong control over the look of their
students. The common characteristics of students are being well-bred, well-dressed and not having an
ostentatious look. Traditional clothes are banned; students are obliged to have the uniform. The
uniform is composed of jacket, trousers for young men and skirt for girls. In spite of “modern” image,
the presence of these schools abroad was discussed in Turkey for several times as they were
considered to be the drive for pro Islamic, missionary education. Gülen stated the purposes of these
schools as follows: “Our schools are missionary like other missionary schools of Europeans and
Americans. Our purpose is to carry out missionary activities to prepare the suitable conditions for
creating Turkish lobby and to train bureaucrats”539.

535 Hermansen.M, « Understanding of Community within the Gülen Movement”, p.9
536 Zaman , 28-02-2007
537 http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=84&Itemid=42
538 Zaman, 22-09-2006
539 Cennet Engin Demir, Ayse Balci, Fusun Akkok « The rôle of Turkish schools in the educational system and social
transformations of Central Asian countries: the case of Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan », Central Asian Survey (2000), 19
(1), p.151

--- Sayfa 378 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

376
In fact, making parallel between missionary schools and Gülen schools is somehow interesting. The
presence of Christian missionary schools in Muslim countries is a fact, why it would be difficult to
accept the vice versa? From other hand, it remains very difficult to understand the notion of
“islamization” of Muslim societies. Central Asian societies have been Muslim societies for the
centuries; even Turkey itself is composed of more than 90% of the population of Muslims. How it is
possible “islamize” already Muslims? There is, undoubtedly rising ethnic and religious identity
formation which is replacing more and more left/right or communist/capitalist identities. Therefore
there is a need for schools giving religious education after the “revival” of the religion in post
communist countries. There is a need for sharing the history of Turkic nations those were in the same
geopolitical area before being annexed by Russia. Schools are by their composition and acts may be
considered as the promoters of the modern and needed education. They offer in fact, what lacks to
that society in academic and moral terms. Michel says that given the lack of integration between
scientific knowledge and spiritual values, Gülen and his companions introduced a new style of
education which reconciles the two540.
I think, by his comparison Gülen does not want to oppose his schools to missionary schools. On
contrary, he takes them partly for example which has a role to play in contemporary political and
social conflicting situation among the religions. Islam is considered as an “enemy” for some especially
after that theory was officially promoted by Huntington. Therefore he favours inter religious dialogue
in order to avoid the clash, whether than discussing sticky points among the religions. Gülen
advocates acceptance and dialogue with the non-Muslim community. To advocate this notion of
tolerance, Gülen met important Christian and Jewish religious leaders including the Pope, Chief
Rabbi of Israel and the Patriarch of the Greek Orthodox Church to promote inter-religious dialogue541.
If his role was to “islamize” or “re-islamize” he would better limit to Muslim societies, if his role was
the revival of Panturkism he would better fix only on Central Asian countries. Therefore he favours
opening the schools in non Muslim countries like Russia, Ukraine, Moldova, Brazil, Mexico, etc.
which establishes another image of Muslims as educators and not as the “bombers” in a very crucial
period called “post September 11th”. That lets non Muslims and non Turks get known abroad by the
best image as he told above.
If there are similarities in the methods of education between Gülen schools and missionary schools, in
the purpose they remain different. In fact, there is a “cliché” of missionary schools applied to Gülen
schools. In methodology Gülen schools accent on family-like study which strengthen ties among the
students. The schools are prevailing general level, in spite of individual which make an almost equal
level of all the students. They have a strong discipline, strict control and very good information over
each pupil. The parents are permanently enrolled in education processes and pupil stay at the
dormitory during the week. By the functioning they may resemble to Christian “missionary” schools
acting nowadays.
The purpose of “missionary” Gülen School is far from converting to Islam. In fact, it is impossible to
convert somebody to Islam (we see the use of the terms to other context again) as according to Islam
everybody is a Muslim by the birth. The parents make Muslims, Christians, Jews, Buddhists from
them, that means if somebody decides to be Muslim, he would have “come back” to Islam. From that,

540 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/2009/22/
541 http://www.isn.ethz.ch/news/sw/details.cfm?ID=17551

--- Sayfa 379 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

377
we can say that, being different from Christianity where the “conversion”542 is the purpose, in
missionary schools, it would be incorrect from religious point of view to suppose Gülen schools
“convert” pupil to Islam. Briefly, we can't use terms “islamization” or “conversion” as the purpose of
these schools.Another divergence is based on the notion of Land. The missionary schools come from
so called “Christian Land” to another “non Christian Land” that is located in between “10/40”
window543 (which points on territorial aspect). In contrary, Gülen points on society and schools act
within the society and not on territorial basis. They knowledge should serve for the people and for the
necessity of the nation544, therefore one can find several schools in one small territory, and no school
in large territories in spite of religious or ethnic proximity. The purpose of the missionary schools is to
use the pupil in Christian drive once they obtain important leadership career545, whereas Gülen
School believes that the pupil would work for the sake of his/her society and be the good person whilst
having an important role in the government. Gülen considers that the majority should obtain the
knowledge and thinks that danger comes when only minority possess it546. Therefore “his” schools do
not have a “target group” and open to everybody, whereas Christian missionary schools are active
among the vulnerable groups like orphans547, minorities, etc.
The purpose, aim is more important than the method, because it effects to a long term result,
whereas, the method effects to a short term result. Hereby, I would like to look through the activities
of Gülen schools in Russian Federation.

4. Case study: Schools in contemporary Russia
The secondary education remains one of the high priorities of Russian education system. The country
achieved almost 100 per cent of alphabetisation even before 1990s. Therefore, basic and general level
of education was high in the country.
At the beginning of the 1990s many specialists spoke about the decline in educational sphere in
almost all countries of former Soviet Union. It was linked to the decline of the salaries of all
employees depending from the state budget. In fact, it would be true talking about the
“transformation of the education” in general, with new priorities and new approaches. New education
sector would shape a new face of the Russian society. In terms of society, Russia was no more
cosmopolitan, but extremely nationalistic in its internal policy at the first stages of its independence.
In terms of economy, country accepted market economy to state regulation which affected to all
budget sectors. In terms of politics, the leaders established power based on multi class society, rather
than on workers or agricultures as it was in Soviet time. The division into the classes was very quick
after a long single class society. In sum, the country transformed its system from egalitarian to market
oriented education even in primary levels and increasing in higher steps. Initially, authorities could
not provide necessary basis to accomplish such education therefore they were open to accept foreign
specialist who proposed their study systems.

542 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_(Christian)
543 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_(Christian)
544 http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/1887/6/
545 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_(Christian)
546 http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/1887/6/
547 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_(Christian)

--- Sayfa 380 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

378
Gülen schools entered Russia as to other ex communist countries from a very beginning of the
independence as an actor partly linked to Turkey and less to Turkish education system. In fact, they
were aware of that, Turkish education system did not achieve much success until the recent years. The
country is still placed among the highest among OECD countries having attained only primary
education level (64,2%)548. The part of those who continue in tertiary and advanced research
programmes is lower than in Russian Federation (9,1% to 20,8%)549. Only in this year (2007) the best
Turkish universities entered among 500 leading universities list. In terms of yearly expenditure for
each student in secondary level both Russian Federation and Turkey have the same expenses550.
Briefly, Turkey itself cannot represent a better model of secondary or higher level education and lesser
“export” it to other countries. Therefore, schools had to prove much in Russia.
In fact, Gülen’s schools represent elitist schools even in Turkey. The students are selected under the
selective basis. They compose the best students and increase eventually better reputation of the
school. As mentioned above, the schools have a relatively short experience even in Turkey. The
possibility of acting abroad represents a double challenge for them. The results would have affected
not only to Turkeys representation abroad, but also strengthening role of the schools inside the
Turkey. Their ambassadorial role functioned with the best, young specialists who went to exercise
teacher’s functions abroad, with a small experience in pedagogy, in general.
Russia has given a green light to promote “lyceums” or “gymnasiums” or other types of schools that
distinguished by better level from other “ordinary” schools. The interest for learning foreign
languages, especially English and Computer Sciences became important points of attractiveness. The
country aimed to have not only national, but more and more internationally oriented youth accepting
the importance of English which have a lesser use in Soviet political zone.
The change from equal level to stratified level of secondary education is very important in the Russian
system where the entrance to higher education is done through the examinations. The competition on
the secondary education based in two areas. If the first is national and partly international Olympiads,
the second and most important is university entrance results.
Gülen schools have a different methodology in teaching at secondary level. They should adapt to each
national education system which varies from one another even at post communist countries. In
general, they try to keep the control over the teaching of natural sciences in English and leave social
sciences teaching to local teachers. School programme is based on obligatory study (between 35-38
academic hours) and working hours (about 10-12 hours) controlled by educators in the evening time.
5. Academic results
These schools have spoken of them very quickly in Russia. Of course, their importance was not as
strong as in Central Asia where they possessed unequal reputation based on domination in all sorts of
competitions. However, with the small number of establishment, the schools achieved academic
success in different fields, even though the education programme was not the same with the general
secondary programme. For example, in 2007, Ms Katya Bikova, pupil of International Moscow
Lyceum 56, obtained the second place in Russian national Ecology Olympiad551. M Vasili Raska who

548 www.oecd.org/edu/eag2006
549 www.uis.unesco.org/publications:wei2006
550 www.uis.unesco.org/publications:wei2006
551 http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=153&Itemid=2

--- Sayfa 381 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

379
studies at the same school obtained the first place with his project on the bio indicators. In sum, 8
pupil from that school participated successfully in 29th Lomonosov Olympiad organized by Moscow
State University552. The list of success is long and it is permanent each year. For example, only Tatar
Turkish Girls School obtained 52 winning places within 10 years553, which makes that each year they
obtain more than 5 winning places in Olympiads.
University entrance statistics of Schools are also high. More than 90% of pupil enter the university
from the first tentative, the data that is extremely high in comparison to national level.

6. Human Relationship
The force of the schools resides not only in academic, but especially humanistic aspects. In fact, it is
still difficult for Russian families to release the education of their children to foreigners. Especially,
when this foreigners come from developing country which was considered for the centuries as an
enemy. The image of Turkey as the centre of education remains unwilling because for the Russians it
represented during Soviet Union Islam and Pan Turkism vis-à-vis the conquered Central Asia.
Surprisingly, the relations between teachers and students remain in the very good basis. Although, the
age scale which is admitted to schools remains the most difficult (12-17), and the fact that the
difference of age is considered to be low between educators and students (5-15) the authority of the
teacher is very strong. The respect of the teacher is gained very quickly, in spite of cultural, religious
differences. The assimilation with the local people, studying the local languages and traditions let the
young teachers get rapidly the respect and trust of the parents and authorities. Even though the fact
the cadres are very young (between 20 and 30) and composed of majority from the male (in Russia
school teachers are composed of mainly women)554.
M Kuznetsov555 says that the teachers are selected ones in Turkey. He notes that the relations between
teachers and parents are in excellent stage which is the result of active relationships of teachers with
parents. Things go even much farer by the example of the marriages of teachers with local women. For
example, M Mustafa Boder (teacher of Turkish at Tuva Turkish College) married the daughter of
president of Tuva M Serigo-ool Oorjak - Anyeta556.
Teacher selection for Gülen schools is not based only in academic criteria. Yet, before being teacher,
young people try to understand the teachings of Gülen and the aim of educating. Gülen writes that
“those who want to reform the world should reform themselves before…”557 Therefore, teachers are
firstly well educated and thereafter competent ones. That puts into the first plan the character of the
school staff which is neglected actually in contemporary education system, based only on
competences558. The school offer not only academic success, but also transfer good moral education.
The schools give a parallel education and apprehension which is not offered by any other school in the

552 http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=119&Itemid=2
553 http://www.nabchelny.ru/school80/nash_dosug/2005-02-27/nashi_dostizheniia
554http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=93&Itemid=2
555 Hurriyet 19.01.1998
556 www.zaman.com.tr (08/01/2007)
557 Fethullah Gülen « The Necessity of Interfaith dialogue : A Muslim Approach », p.30
558 Nelson, C « Fethullah Gülen, A Vision of Transcendent Education”, p. 4

--- Sayfa 382 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

380
region559. Ali Bayramoglu notes that, schools do not rely on religious (Islam) teaching, but to make
moral education for the youth560.
In his article “Changing values: Russian youth in transition”, Mikhail F.Chernys, speaks about the
rapid changing of post-soviet Russian youth. He indicates that so called rise of consumption needs
among the younger people. They start to drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes, etc. much younger than
previous generation561. He notes that, a sharp change within the several years create a great
antagonism between two generations living together. Many parents in Russia noted that the choice of
sending their children to Turkish schools was linked to the moral education. Some parents openly say
that they prefer these school for their English and non smoking education. Hulusi Turgut562 notes
that, many pupils stopped drinking alcohol and smoking cigarettes after commencing studying.
Another aspect of the schools lay under the resolving multi ethnic or multicultural problems within
the society. Gülen schools are attractive by having several ethic groups. Kuznetsov noted that Moscow
school has pupil from 12 different origins563. In Tatarstan Muslim and non Muslim pupil continue
studying together. In spite of rising ethnic view all over the Russia, the schools keep attracting diverse
ethnic groups. The schools have almost the same prestige in the big cities or in the smaller ones and
even in the central cities like Moscow or Saint Petersburg though the ethnic portrait is completely
different. These cities are the centres of competing educational institutions; therefore it remains very
difficult to get known. It is notably that ethnic Russians from these cities choose Gülen schools in
spite of the large choice of different international schools.

7. Conclusion: The Movement in Europe
Gülen schools exist also in developed countries like Japan, England, USA, etc. The role of these
schools is determinant in putting into practice a new system of teaching as they make prior the
teacher’s education.
Gülen movement in Europe has other priorities actually. They concerned with moral education and
academic support to local citizens of Turkish origin. Turkish Diaspora is one of the biggest in Europe,
therefore they have much activities to do. I suppose that the movement is aiming to multiply the
number of schools in Europe because there is an increasing need for them.
The need is coming from the gap left by the society in the formation of the individuals. The role of
human upbringing has much changed and therefore the institutions which play role in it have
different power actually. The society is getting lesser role in human upbringing. Its role is reduced by
non recognition as an institution like school, university or kindergarten. Therefore its share is partly
taken by primary and secondary schools which make an important role in human development in
European context. Parents leave all the responsibility to school which should play today the double
role. If the task of the modern school is centred on knowledge transmission, the educating aspects are
becoming more and more important. The schools are facing this problem in many European countries

559 Ali Unal « Fethullah Gülen : Bir Portre Denemesi », p. 272
560 ibid
561 Values and Post-Soviet Youth. The Problems of Transition, p. 166
562 Sabah, 22.01.1998
563 http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=93&Itemid=2

--- Sayfa 383 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

381
and this is clearly seen especially in immigrant families who are coming from the different context
where society is still have a word to say in human upbringing.
For example, the French education system is very known by being republican, egalitarian. The state
controls majority of primary, secondary schools and higher education institutions. The “égalité” is
written in French constitution which is guaranteed in France by the equal conditions of education.
But French sociologist Bourdieu has already shown that “egalitarian machine” was not working well
throughout the years. The sector of education is the main factor of social stratification in the country.
Recent studies show that primary and especially secondary education results very much from one part
of the city to another. The so called “creation of ghetto schools” within the “ghetto districts” resulted
in a very low degree of the pupil studying there. The school is reflecting social problems which are
based on class, ethnic and religious tensions.
Actually, many critics come towards the school and education institutions in general as they are giving
no chance to change the social status. Besides, the school is becoming the area of the conflict based on
religious or ethic means. These conflicts show the different perceptions of the role of the school by
diverse groups and the incapacity of the “republican school” to satisfy the needs of the new
generation.
In actual French education system, there is an increasing need for education oriented schools. Parents
leaving their children to the sake of society do not easily perceive its absence. Children have
“individually” organized study programmes which are based under the stronger parental academic
control. When it comes to immigrants or parents with low degree studies who can't transmit
necessary knowledge and control, it becomes clear that children are going towards fiasco. Therefore,
parents are surprised to see their kids having not being necessarily educated, nor academically fit in
spite of studying for several years at school.
It is no more surprising when we find some Muslim parents sending their children to Catholic schools
in the search of the better education and qualification. The purpose is to avoid the risks and giving
their children good moral education. However, Catholic schools are also known well for their
academic success that means parents prefer them not for being religious but effective. One can go to
Christian University of Paris to search for Christianity, but he/she find that the majority of the
students are there not for Christianity, but the quality of higher education. Parents trust these schools,
whereas the trust to “republican school” is diminishing especially in certain districts.
Today's France is a multicultural, multi ethnic and multi religious society. Although major political
drive tries to keep ancient identity vision, they are aware of the need of reforms in very transforming
society. The best reforms go through the education, as it is better and easier to educate the younger
than the older one. France and Russia resemble much in their vision of society, central governance
and actually more and more multi ethnic society. The experience of Gülen schools in Russia may be
tempting for French educators in search of rapid reforms in nowadays.

--- Sayfa 384 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

382

--- Sayfa 385 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

383
SEARCHING FOR A NEW UNITY OF THOUGHT (FİKİR
BİRLİĞİ) AMONG PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT RELIGIOUS
AFFILIATIONS: VOICES FROM CENTRAL EUROPE
GABRIEL PIRICKÝ 564

Abstract
Generally, the more windows are opened the more light enters our space. Fethullah Gülen is one
of those charismatic Muslims of our time who try to ‘open windows’ of true dialogue and to
overcome the image of furor Islamicus commmunicated by the European media. In his effort to
engage in inter-religious tolerance Gülen condemned the use of term kafir to describe people of
other faiths and he also called on Turks to build mosques next to Alevi assembly centres
(cemevleri) in order to set an example to the outside world. This paper investigate the
possibilities of peaceful coexistence of all humankind as seen from Central European perspective.
Current techno-scientific civilization is systematically obscuring our connection with the
metaphysical world, and serious reflection is often replaced by cynical polemics, such as the
debate about ‘who came first’. The paper focuses on the ideas and attitudes of the Czech Catholic
priest Tomáš Halík and Slovak Catholic missionaries in Azerbaijan. Both groups represent people
who are engaged in dialogue with the Muslim world, on the one hand in everyday life in
predominantly Shi`a Azerbaijan, on the other hand in scholarly circles and the Czech intellectual
milieu. By surveying their beliefs and opinions it is possible to throw some light on perspectives
of inter-religious dialogue in fast-changing conditions. People of Muslim faith who in the
broadest sense stand close to the ideals of Fethullah Gülen, but do not necessarily form an
organizational backup as his supporters, are sometimes termed as those who create with him the
‘unity of thought’ (fikir birliği). The present contribution would like to point out that similar
“unity of basic principles” should bring about those who urge the necessity of dialogue and
sharing of values.
Judaism, Christianity and Islam have lived since time immemorial at close quarters, and
they are likewise so closely related in a structural sense as religions of revelation, that
tensions and petty rivalries have been common.
(Hans Küng 1987: 6)
As a Muslim, I accept all Prophets and Books sent to different peoples throughout history,
and regard belief in them as an essential principle of being Muslim.
(M. Fethullah Gülen 2000: 4)

564 Research fellow at the Institute of Oriental Studies of the Slovak Academy of Sciences in Bratislava, and currently vice-
chair of the Slovak Oriental Society. (Graduate of Charles University, Prague and SOAS, University of London.) Main
interests: Islamic, Arabic and Turkish studies, with special emphasis on Islam, nationalism and secularism in modern
Turkey. He has published and lectured extensively at various universities both in Slovakia and the Czech Republic, his
monographs include Turkey – A Short History (2006, in Czech) and Islam in Turkey (2004, in Slovak). Gabriel Pirický also
worked as a diplomat, secretary of the Slovak section of the Association of European Journalists, and as managing editor of
the scientific journal Asian and African Studies.

--- Sayfa 386 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

384
1. Introduction
A few years ago, on the eve of the Christmas holiday and New Year’s Day, Czech Roman-Catholic
Archbishop Miroslav Vlk has sent his congratulations to Karol Sidon, the Jewish rabbi of Prague. “But
his Christmas is not a holiday for me,” reacted the rabbi, he himself equally of Czech nationality, and
further explained his position at length: “I also do not send him congratulations to our New Year.
Cardinal Vlk means well, and I am pleased, but at the same time under such a display I perceive a
certain meticulously calculated Christian attitude that counts on all of us becoming one day
Christians”.
The afore mentioned minor example reminds us of the fact that mutual perception and interfaith
relations cannot be seen in isolation from their historical, doctrinal, societal or political context.
Likewise, people of different religious, ideological or ethnic background would often like whole-
heartedly to engage in a dialogue, but each would prefer to carry it on a little bit differently. Some are
prepared for self-criticism, indeed even self-irony, acting friendly, while other people may be more
reserved or trying to approach partners with an enormous ego. There are those who have no mutual
reminiscences of a conflictual past, but someone else’s mind may be full of unpleasant memories that
influence dialogue and interaction until the present day. For Muslims too, dialogue can be understood
as reflective thinking and exchange of inner experiences, whereas others may approach dialogue as
dacwa (in Turkish davet), a term that is translated mostly as ‘appeal’, ‘call’ to believe in Islam,
‘invitation’ to share the same faith, sometimes ‘challenge’, but also ‘mission’ or ‘propaganda’.565 Be it
as it may, secular-minded or agnostic Westerners in particular could feel that such a dialogue is
unattractive, although it may be reflecting mutually acceptable boundaries of dialogue for Christians
who are engaged in missionary activities. The best response to such ‘problems of definition’ could be
in intercultural dialogue that is not based on or rooted in any particular philosophical, religious or
semantic system, but this may seem almost unattainable, indeed at best illusory, especially when
participants have their own religious convictions.
In the age of radical pluralism and massive contact between various faiths, however, the necessity of
sharing certain basic values is an area of considerable importance if humans are to behave as humans,
and not as Rambo-style super-humans. Dialogue then, in spite of its many shortcomings, may be the
only practical way of empathic approximation to the Truth, and the way to put ourselves in somebody
else’s place. When debating issues of inter-religious dialogue, the matter in question is always much
more than just theology, aspects of a political and economic character are involved almost by
definition and conflicting claims often cause discord rather than harmony.

2. Delusive History?
History, especially in a ‘mythopoetic’ garment, is a pet topic for evaluation too, although almost never
on purely academic grounds. Historical events ressemble deep sediments in human relations and not
even the majority of them are presented, let alone acknowledged, in unison. If one only thinks of the
loss of Constantinople as witnessed by the Christians, and the loss of Granada, or possibly Jerusalem,
as perceived by the Muslims, it becomes clear how much historical events influence and deeply hurt
the mental ecology of those who are concerned.

565 See the headword ‘dacwa’ in EI2 (1960-2003) Encyclopaedia of Islam (New Edition, Leiden, E.J.Brill); also Mendel, M.
(1995) The Concept of “ad-Dacwa al-Islāmīya”. Archív Orientální, 63, 286 – 304.

--- Sayfa 387 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

385
What is more unfortunate, however, is that serious debates are often replaced with ‘peripheral
historical consciousness’ and polemics, such as the one that deals with the ‘who came first’ issue. On
the one side, for example, the argument sometimes goes as follows: it was only in 863 AD that
Byzantine missionaries Constantine and Methodius were invited to Moravia Magna (on the territory
of present-day Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Hungary), and only in 988 AD that Prince Vladimir
of Russia accepted Christianity, almost three centuries after the arrival of Islam to al-Andalus (in 711
AD) and long after Islam established itself in the Volga region, southeast of Moscow. In this context,
Muhammad Abbas, editor-in-chief of the Czech webpage Muslimské listy (the Muslim Journal),
observes that Islam arrived in Andalusia about two hundred years before Christianity reached Central
Europe, the argument which apparently wants to indicate that Muslims are justified in feeling at
home in Europe at least to the degree Christians do (Revue Prostor 2006: 145).566 As an illustration of
how zealously these matters can be treated one need only mention the argument of the imam of one of
Moscow’s four mosques who points out that the word ‘minority’ should not be used in connection
with Muslims living within the territory of the Russian Federation, because Islam “emerged on
Russia’s territory far earlier than Christianity did”.567
Arguments of primordiality on the Muslim side are countered by similar undertakings on the
Christian side. Here the notion of Spanish reconquista is instrumental, as if those who have lost the
lion’s share of the Iberian peninsula to the Muslim armies, namely the Visigoths, were culturally,
religiously or ethnically identical to those who ‘re-captured’ Spain several centuries later, namely
Castilians, Basques, Catalans, Portuguese and others. In his famous saying, Spanish philosopher José
Ortega y Gasset once asked to his great astonishment how is it possible to call something that lasted
for eight centuries a ‘reconquest’?568 To name but one additional example, the Christian Crusades
were also partly driven by pursuit of the ‘primordial state of affairs’ and ‘legitimate’ claims, whilst
these were further supported by genuine anti-Muslim philippics.
Perhaps even more insidiously, because more in evidence for the present generations, the Muslims of
Bosnia were recently depicted by some non-Muslims as aliens and late-comers in the Balkans, as
those who arrived with the Ottomans roughly six hundred years after the Slavs, and consequently
those who should ‘go home to Turkey’. Strangely enough, the same argument, reduced to absurdity
and slightly altered in accents, could be used even against the Turkish Muslims by claiming that the
apostles disseminated the message of Christ in Turkey (or as contemporaries would put it, in Galatia,
Antiochia, Cilicia or Pamphylia) well before the arrival of Islam to Anatolia. Against this background,
we may be tempted to ask then, how many years of residence does one need under any given
conditions to be considered indigenous?569
As this brief sketch shows, the irrepressible power of history and the natural human passion for
polemics are hard nuts to crack. That is why it is not by coincidence that Catholic theology since the
Second Vatican Council urges everyone to forget the past. The first step in establishing dialogue, as
understood by the prominent and charismatic Turkish Muslim thinker, religious reformer
(müceddid,mujaddid) and activist Fethullah Gülen too, is “forgetting the past” (Gülen 2000: 5). No

566 Author’s frequent attempt to avoid country’s present name, Spain, in favour of al-Andalus is deliberate and significant,
if not abusive in itself, as if somebody referred to Turkey constantly as Byzantium.
567 See ‘A benign growth’, The Economist, 4 April 2007.
568 In Spanish original: “cómo se puede llamar Reconquista a una cosa que duró ocho siglos” ?
569 Pinson, M. Ed. (1996) The Muslims of Bosnia-Herzegovina (Harvard University Press, Cambridge), p. x – xi.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

386
matter how deep are differences among human beings, in our world that is marked by various
aberrations, argues Fethullah Gülen, it is important to remove distances in understanding through
‘unity of thought’ and to work for the sake of coming together (bir vahdet teşkiline çalışmak). The oft-
repeated assertion about forgetting the past should certainly not invalidate history as a scholarly and
academic discipline, neither should it promote and encourage historical amnesia. It is only a symbolic
Ausdruck that aims at challenging our self-confidence, whereas for obvious reasons we should still
make efforts to understand better our separate conflictual histories.

3. Tomáš Halík and the Idea of a Link between the Secular West and Islam
When we look at the possibilities of finding interlocutors for Gülen’s peace initiatives on the Central
European scene, the name of professor and priest Tomáš Halík comes to my mind. No doubt,
nowadays only a handful Christian thinkers are similarly open to atheists as well as to non-Christians
in the Czech Republic. Before 1989 a clandestine student of theology in communist Czechoslovakia,
Halík was active in underground church and samizdat publishing work that developed around Czech
dissident circles embodied later by ex-President Václav Havel. After the fall of communism he became
the President of the Czech Christian Academy and promoted Czech-German reconciliation and
ecumenical dialogue.
Having been influenced deeply by current sociological concepts, well versed in the religious science,
Halík is a prolific writer, widely known for his extensive publication activities and media
presentations (noisy tele-evangelism is not his niche, however), scientific and popular as well, both at
home and abroad. Since the mid-1990s he has been internationally involved in promoting dialogue
and inter-religious understanding in India, Japan, the USA, Israel, Thailand, Nepal, Great Britain as
well as two Muslim countries, Egypt’s Al-Azhar University in Cairo and Jordan. As is usually the case,
there are also those who are discomforted by Halík’s openess. One critical voice, for example,
described him as “the opposite of an apologist”, and eo ipso a person who is not defending his faith,
but “recontextualizing it.”570
Since Halík understands politics as a spiritual duty, it came as no surprise, that he was even
considered to stand for the president of the Czech Republic in 2002. Similarly as in the case of M. F.
Gülen, to attain political position is generally outside and sometimes even contrary to Halík’s primary
objectives, but there are nevertheless elements of a political project in his activities anyway, though he
never formulates political or ideological slogans. Drawing from ideas of Fethullah Gülen we could say
that if a man who tries to avoid politics per se engages in bringing up a new enlightened “golden
generation” (altın nesil), he as an individual, by means of a silent and conciliatory evolution rather
than a noisy and bloody revolution, also posseses a societal and political project to transform and re-
shape the future administrative, entrepreneurial, decision-making and ruling structure of the state,
figuratively speaking one prepares the ground for an alternative state (“alternatif devlet”).

570 Other critics also drew attention to the fact that Halík “treats more traditional Catholic thinking with contempt and
labels it dogmatic” or, more straightforwardly, that “he does not feel intellectually at home in a priestly environment.” See
Fuchs, J. (1998) Tomáš Halík – “Ptal jsem se cest.” Distance, 1/4 (retrieved in August 2007 from
http://www.distance.cz/ieindex2.htm). Furthermore, we could legitimately ask whether Halík’s pluralism would also
translate into readiness to become internally Muslim in order to experience the deepest avenues of Islam, as some
‘progressive’ Christians propose.

--- Sayfa 389 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

387
From the strictly Christian point of view it may seem a bit discomforting when Halík states that
“secular Western society is neither the end of Christianity and religion, nor an enemy of Christianity,
but a form of Christianity”  (Halík 2004: 61).571 To put it more precisely, however, it is important to
say that Halík understands Catholicism as one of the historical ‘isms’ that no longer shape our lifes
today. Being the dominating principle in Europe roughly until the 19th century, Catholicism has lost
its monopoly of religion as religio and is today in the period of decline. Since religion, and later also
science, have ceased to be the religio of Western societies, claims Halík, the medias have taken their
place. Reflecting our deep-seated aesthetic and visual dispositions, they are today’s “religio of the
West”, new altars of the times incarnated in television and PC screens. Europe of the present is not
less religious than before, reassures Halík nevertheless, she only picked the media as a new
“functional equivalent of the previous religious systems” that frames our existence into the “culture of
image” (Halík 2004: 40).
Meanwhile, he differentiates between religion as religio, confessio and pietas. Whereas religio
integrates the society as a whole and has been distinctive in Europe during the pre-modern era,
confessio, based on doctine and institution, links together certain groups as gemeinschafts. Finally,
assures Halík, pietas, understood as spirituality and personal choice, governs our present time of
Catholicity. Instead of Catholicism Halík proposes the non-hegemonic concept of Catholicity.
For Halík, secular society is in its essence a victory of “faith over religion”, more exactly of Catholicity
over Catholicism, because unlike in the era of Catholicism, today it is possible to think responsibly
about the faith we confess. Boundless secularism should be avoided though, especially in its extreme
form: secular fundamentalism that he denounces as “late Jacobinism” which breaches the principles
of laic society. As he does not wish to exclude spirituality from social and political life, Halík (Halík
2004: 117, 126-128) backs those who think that we should revise the ‘paradigm of secularization’.572 In
general, it is possible to argue that his ideas on secularism as a non-hegemonic principle that refrains
from incursions into individuals’ private lives are akin to the reasoning included in the final
declaration of the Abant platform, a regular forum of distinct voices on Turkey’s pressing societal
issues, as well as to the ideas of Fethullah Gülen, who is not construing secularism as a non-Muslim
phenomenon either. Summarizing their argument that secularism should be defined primarily as

571 The Czech Republic is usually mentioned among the most atheist countries in the world where believers in God
represent only a minority. Partly due to historical legacy, Czechs view ‘church Christianity’ and institutionalized religion in
their majority with deep suspicion, and this fact is reflected also by Halík. According to the Czech Ministry of the Interior’s
recent report, in 2005 there were some 11 thousand Muslims living in the Czech Republic (out of 10.3m inhabitants), about
63% of them are classified as originating from the Sunni Turkic ‘sub-civilization’, mostly immigrants from Russia,
Kazakhstan, ex-Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Turkey. The two big congregational mosques in the Czech Republic are situated in
Prague and Brno. Halík has supported the construction of the first mosque in the Czech Republic after the fall of
communism. See Topinka, D. Ed. (2007) Integrační proces muslimů v České republice – pilotní projekt (Praha,
VeryVision)
572  He refers to the article “Secularization, R.I.P.” by Stark, R. – Finke, R. (2000) Acts of Faith (Berkeley and Los Angeles).

--- Sayfa 390 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

388
a legal and not as a politico-ideological, philosophical, ecclesiastical or behavioural issue, Gülen and
his supporters take stand against the notion of a boundless secularism too.573
Let us now limit our discussion on Halík’s ideas to those aspects that cover the area of interfaith
relations and understanding. In his essays Halík lays specifically considerable emphasis on the idea
that Christianity could serve as a link between the secular West and the Muslim world. Christianity, as
is clear from what he says, has a unique and so far unused chance to communicate, so to speak, to
both sides. On the one hand, having had many common characteristics with Islam and Judaism,
Christianity stands close to its sister monotheistic religions that originated in the Middle East. On the
other hand, it is in contact with the “laicist humanism” of the West, because secularism in fact has its
roots in the heart of Christianity (Halík 2004: 286). Shortly and aptly, he proposes to hold out “both
hands to both sides” in order to create a “hermeneutics of trust” and “methodological sympathy”. At
the core of Halík’s idiom lies his idea of the ‘third path’ between Catholic triumphalism and militant
secularism. Faithful to his commitments, he considers it necessary to reject both religious and secular
fundamentalism. We may notice that in the writings of Fethullah Gülen similar ‘antifundamentalist
paradigm’ with reference to the extremist religio-political or militant Islamism is convincingly defined
as a clear enemy of humankind as humanum. Gülen’s claims that politicizing of Islam represents one
of the biggest insults toward religion (“dini politize edenler dine büyük kötülük etmiş olurlar”) stands
very close to the famous statement of the outspoken Egyptian Sheikh Muhammad Sacid al-cAshmawi,
namely that “God intended Islam to be a religion, but men have attempted to turn it into politics”
(Ashmawy 1994). Likewise, Gülen warns that ‘politicizing religion will harm religion before it harms
any particular government’ (Ünal – Williams 2000: 36).

4. Abrahamic Religions: Coexistence, Tolerance and Dialogue
The most concrete achievement so far of the Christian-Muslim dialogue, indeed of the trialogue
between Muslims, Christians and Jews, can be summarized as the acknowledgement of the common
Abrahamic heritage that both faiths share with Judaism. Meanwhile, Halík warns all sides not to fall
into the temptation to “expropriate Abraham only for self-satisfaction” in order to show him as a

573 The platform that is organized by the associates of Fethullah Gülen near the Anatolian city of Bolu deals annually with
various issues, the one on secularism has summarized its conclusions in the 1998 Final Declaration (Abant Sonuç
Bildirgesi). The state is here understood as a “human institution that does not possess sanctity… [it] removes all obstacles
from religions… [and] guarantees everyone freedom of religion…[so that] secularism is essentially an attitude of the state,
and a secular state cannot define religion or pursue a religious policy” (Yavuz – Esposito 2003: 251-253; compare also Ünal
– Williams 2000: 152). Contrary to these proposals were the statements made by the former Turkish President Ahmet
Necdet Sezer (2000 – 2001) that verged on secular fundamentalism. As an illustration let us mention only two cases in
point. During his opening speech at the 21st World Congress of Philosophy in August 2003 in Istanbul President Sezer
proclaimed that “philosophy must be modern and secular”. In September 2004 during a symposium on religion organized
by the state Diyanet he declared that “secularism is a way of life, which should be adopted by an individual”. Fethullah
Gülen, in contrast, is inspired by the idea that “a state is secular because secularism is a legal issue” and as a consequence he
stands against the ideological secularism (or laicism) promoted by the Turkish Kemalist hard-liners, a unique model of
militant wordliness that is better to call secularity or ‘laicisness’ (in Turkish labeled lâikçilik instead of the official term
lâiklik) – find more details in Türköne, M. (2006) Türk Modernleşmesi (İstanbul, Lotus). p. 120-123 and 267-410. In
general terms, the American-style (ethos of) secularism which is well-known for its respect for a wide range of religious
liberties strengthened by clear constitutional guarantees represents an example that the mainstream of Turkish Muslim
elites considers worthy of imitation. Because of the historical legacy, the issue of legal pluralism is also often raised by some
Muslim circles (e.g. Ali Bulaç), but this idea is opposed by the lâik judiciary.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

389
“Christian before Christianity” or a “Muslim prior to Islam”, in other words he urges us to take pains
to prevent any sort of domestication or particularization of Abraham (Halík, 2004: 296). On All Saints
Day Halík encourages his co-religionists to think also of those men and women who remember their
own saints worshiping at “all the other Christian churches, but also in synagogues and mosques”
(Halík 2004: 199). Furthermore, he feels that in adressing sainthood Christians should not start with
St. Benedict, but with “Saint Abraham” (Halík 2004: 199). Proceeding from the assumption that there
can be no talk or attempt at assertion of shared superiority over other non-monotheistic religions, the
idea of strengthening the ‘Abrahamic ecumenae’ is closely linked, in his opinion at least, with efforts
to search for points of continuity with secular Western society (Halík 2004: 73).
As an important participant in interfaith dialogue, he warns us not to give way to a cheap politeness
that is without true interest (Halík 2002: 81) Ideally, second-hand dealers with dialogue are truly
unwelcome. Hence dialogue, underlines Halík, should not have a missionary character, the
missionary work in consequence should not be regarded as identical with proselytism. As he sees a
disjunction between dialogue and mission, he opposes winning people of other religions over to ‘our’
side (Halík 2002: 87). Being aware of the difficulties that impede dialogue, Halík reflects on the
strategies for coming closer to Muslims without destroying the bridges connecting Christians with the
West (Halík 2004: 298) To get to know other religions has to do with serious mental work which
should be done by ‘inspecting’ religious life in its own home conditions (Halík 2002: 78).
In spite of having been blamed from time to time for using bons mots and wisecracks, he makes
a wide use of turns of phrases. His favourite quote concerning the three revealed religions and atheists
is the one borrowed from Nicolas Lashe who emphasizes that “Jews, Christians, Muslims and atheists
are at one with each other in that they do not believe in gods.” It seems to me that a similar spirit must
have led Fethullah Gülen to say that “…one cannot be a Muslim unless one believes in the pre-Islamic
prophets.”574
Halík finds special liking for contemplation and common prayer in order to overcome the “fear of
contact” with believers of other religions, the fact that he expresses in the following way:
 Allahu akbar, It is God who is magnificent, sounds several times a day in so many parts of
the world from mouths of a billion of our Muslim brothers and sisters; ‘There is no God
except Him’ starts their confession, ‘There is no God except Him’. It is necessary to
pronounce loudly these words to all corners of the world (Revue Prostor 2006: 282).
He turns against those who would intend to adopt a bellicose definition of the term ecclesia militans
and transform their spiritual struggle into the fight against others “from our midst and outside”. This
he compares to the externalization of the term ‘jihad’ which, according to his apprehension, equally
transforms the spiritual struggle with our own sins into a fight under the “this worldly” logic (Halík
2004: 200-201). Yet, what is missing here is a closer clarification that would explain in greater detail
the semantics of the word jihad in its Arabic original, meaning in principle ‘striving on the path of
God’. This would be appropriate in order to make distinction between ‘jihad’ and ‘qital’ (killing, war).
Moreover it is always necessary to elucidate to most European readers that numerous Muslim
thinkers, including Gülen, differentiate between a greater and lesser jihad. Greater jihad is
understood by Gülen as a fight against evil desires, convictions and superstitions or as an internal
struggle with one’s self. Lesser jihad means a material fight, but as I understand it, always in the sense

574 Saritoprak, Z. (2005) Introduction. The Muslim World, 95, p. 326.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

390
of iustum bellum, not bellum sacrum that is more often than not translated as ‘the holy war’ (qtd. in
Yavuz – Esposito 2003: 178). In addition, argues Gülen, the fight with unbelievers or non-Muslims is
always to be comprehended only as a lesser jihad. Apart from that, failure in a greater jihad cannot
lead to any success in a lesser jihad.575
Halík’s irenic approach becomes more palpable when he writes that for him it is unacceptable to join
those who demonize Islam after September 11, 2001, whilst he simultaneously rejects Western
fundamentalists’ call for “rearming the West ideologically”, an idea that reminds him of the rule of a
strong hand.576 At the same time Halík, however, refuses to negotiate with terrorists and he gives
preference to those peaceful people who try to understand the Islamic world and the “circumstances
that produce deviant offshoots of Islam”. A rapid reaction to confront terrorism as a ‘diabolic method’
came within only one day after the destruction of the Twin Towers in New York from Fethullah Gülen
as well. In an open letter he wrote among other things that “[J]ust as Islam is not a religion of
terrorism, any Muslim who correctly understands Islam cannot be thought of as a terrorist”.577
Viewed from yet another angle, it may be useful to go back to the idea of tolerance and moderation
which represents a common ground in both Gülen’s and Halík’s writings. As has been indicated
elsewhere, Gülen attributes the quality of moderation and “middle way” to Islam itself, more exactly
to the idea which can be found in the Holy Qur’an as expressed by the well-known verse 143 in the
Sūrat al-baqara (“and so we made you the community of the middle way”, in Arabic ‘wa-kadhālika
jacalnākum ’ummatan wasatan’). The balance between materialism and spiritualism, modernity and
tradition, or asceticism and worldliness is then de facto an expression of the Muslim concept of the
‘straight path’ (Kuru 2003: 117-118). Furthermore, Gülen based his conception of tolerance on ideas of
charity and love. In his effort to engage in inter-religious tolerance and coexistence Gülen condemned
the use of term kâfir to describe people of other faiths and he stimulated believers of various faiths
and urged all those who go to mosques, churches and synagogues to shake hands with each other.
Similarly, on the intra-religious Muslim-to-Muslim level he called on Sunni Turks to build mosques
next to Alevi assembly centres (cemevleri) in order to give example to the outside world, moreover he
openly expressed sympathy for both practicing and non-practicing Muslims. Nevertheless, according
to some observers, Gülen’s tolerance in a plural society - Turkish as well as Western - is still not all-
encompassing and his attitudes towards the Iranian Twelver Shi’is, women, individual rights,
communists or ethnic Kurds – let alone members of the Church of Scientology or gay people – are
insufficiently clarified, leaving thus space for speculations as far as the honesty of his endeavour is
concerned. For example, Gülen’s harsh criticism, suspicion and deep mistrust towards the Iranians
(mainly Persians) and in a lesser extent also towards the Arabs indicate that quite a lot of innovative
work remains to be done on both sides in order to broaden the scope of intra-religious understanding.

575 http://www.mfethullahGülen.net/questions (retrieved in Spring 2001) or see Pirický, G. (2004) Islám v Turecku:
Fethullah Gülen a Nurcuovia (Trnava, UCM). p. 102-103.
576 http://www.halik.cz/ja/before.php (retrieved in August 2007). It is also noteworthy in this context that as early as in
2003 Halík condemned the USA for her war against Iraq with the argument that it is impossible to use military intervention
in order to “implant” Western style democracy (Halík 2003: 193 – 194). In contrast, he supported the intervention of NATO
forces against Serbia in favour of the Kosovo Albanians in 1998.
577 Quoted in Michel, T. (2002) Turkish Experience for Muslim-Christian Dialogue: A Thinker: B. Z. Nursi & An Activist: M.
F. Gülen. Paper presented at the Conference held in Australian Sydney: Peace and Dialogue in a Plural Society: Common
Values and Responsibilities, p. 5.

--- Sayfa 393 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

391
On the religious level, needless to say, it is Catholicity that Halík situates in the middle from where he
extends moderation and tolerance to both non-Christian believers and atheists. Since man is an
“incurably religious being” according to his opinion, the ‘middle way’ serves to bring closer to the
Catholic spirituality all those “urban agnostics” who feel interested. If Halík’s principal aim is to
extend “both hands to both sides” in various lifetime situations, then his intermediary position in the
middle dictates a pragmatic, but judicious and spiritual, ‘middle way’ that is nevertheless not just an
adjustment, but a dignified way of arguing. Yet, apart from following Halík’s endeavours with
admiration, concerning his strategy and practice vis-à-vis the Czech atheist majority one is also
tempted to ask doubtingly whether it is not ‘refreshingly naïve’ to await something more than
marginal results that go outside of the general public. Also, further obstacles are based on the fact that
Halík’s activities are not supported by such a powerful and influential dialogue and entrepreneurial
foundations, school networks and media outlets as in the case of the Gülen community (e.g.
Gazeteciler ve Yazarlar Vakfı, İş Hayatı Dayanışma Derneği, Akyazılı Vakfı or Feza Gazetecilik).

5. The Empowerment of School Manuals
One of the issues raised by Fethullah Gülen has to do with a proposal to set up a new type of
education, where science is combined with personal character under the formula ‘religion plus
knowledge’, yet the religious commitment is inculcated through personal example, interaction and
service (in Turkish hizmet) rather than teaching. The theoretical aspects of his understanding of the
‘middle way’ are put in practice through the upbringing and education of the young generation.
Complementary in this regard is Gülen’s emphasis on the future of every individual that “is closely
related to the impressions and influences experienced during childhood and youth. If children and
young people are brought up in a climate where their enthusiasm is stimulated with higher feelings,
they will have vigorous minds and display good morals and virtues” (Gülen 2005: 39). Consequently,
in their early stages, children are best adjusted to stimulate their feelings of coexistence, dialogue and
cooperation, and to become committed to them.
Education is also highly valued by Tomáš Halík and in his estimation we will not manage European
integration without reform of national and confessional history, therefore a certain rewriting of our
national histories is needed, because “the art of reading our own history also from the perspective of
others” is a necessary dimension of European coming together (Halík 2004: 153-155). Pessimists
would say that religions belong to their differing histories and segregated interpretations,
characterized by specific ‘historical matrixes’, and so – to use Kenneth Cragg’s terms – it is best to
never venture “to translate their own ethos into the idiom of another” (Cragg 1999: 2). Furthermore, it
must be borne in mind that reading one’s own history from the perspective of others is also delicate,
because it may hit self-confidence (Halík 2004: 154).
From my personal perspective, in order to coexist and cooperate in harmony and to promote a certain
‘unity of thought’, the role of school manuals and teaching materials, to say nothing about the visual
media, has to be considered very seriously. As the French scholar Etienne Copeaux emphasizes in his
monograph, school manuals dealing with history and religion have a rare quality in comparison to
other books and publications: they hardly ever cross state boundaries and are therefore hidden from
a broader audience (Copeaux 1997: 21). Foreign scholars and observers are usually unaware of the
content of curricula taught at primary or secondary schools in various countries. More significantly
though, for the majority of young people, school manuals – which are usually meticulously prepared

--- Sayfa 394 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

392
and overseen by the state authorities – represent the only source of information on alien cultures and
religions in a lifetime. Thanks to the fact that these publications influence human beings in their
formative period, it is probably right to say that school manuals brand us for our whole lives.578 What
is even more important, they considerably form our identity and collective memory, and above all,
contribute to consensus building within different societies (Copeaux 1997: 22). Consequently, when
writing about the historical and religious developments of ‘rival’ cultures, the general outline,
especially in school manuals, should always be presented in a way recognizable to the other side, with
winners’ and losers’ points of view next to each other.
Because of the often conflicting views on history and religion, wholesale acknowledgement or
adoption of rivals’ renderings of the past cannot be intended here, yet certain comparative perspective
on the level of school manuals for pupils could perfectly help to transform mutual exclusiveness into
inclusiveness at an age when minors form their ideas about the ‘Gestalt’ of this world. Acquiring this
‘dialogue literacy’ is supposedly a long-term process, but if the aim is to build more stable and
harmonious society, educational reform has to start with school manuals as well and assure an honest
two-way traffic of information on religions and cultures.

6. The Salesians of Don Bosco in Azerbaijan
My second case in point is an example of dialogue through mission as being witnessed by the Slovak
Salesian missionaries in predominantly Shi’a Azerbaijan, who had no previous experiences of massive
interaction with Muslims.579 Although dialogue has often been understood as antithetical to mission,
“believing that one compromises the other” (Zebiri 1997: 37), interfaith dialogue is nevertheless
sometimes, be that as it may, closely connected with interfaith competition. But in practice, apart
from Catholics there are many other educational and missionary centres in present-day Azerbaijan,
among them high schools and educational centres run by the Turkish Sunni Muslim associates of
Fethullah Gülen.580

To put these two groups side by side as partners in dialogue in Azerbaijan is more accidental than it is
genuine, of course. And sure enough, various Christian circles and scholars of Turkish religious
communities have already compared the followers of Fethullah Gülen to other organizations, such as

578 For further information see e.g. Ferro, M. (2004) Comment on raconte l’histoire aux enfants à travers le monde (Paris,
Payot) or Burckhardt, J. (2007) Judgements on History and Historians (London, Routledge).
579 The society of Salesians, made up of both clerics and laymen, was founded in Italy by St John Bosco in 1855 and named
after St Francis de Sales. As far as Muslims in Slovakia are concerned, the following may be said in brief: with its clear
Catholic majority and Protestant minority, Slovakia has only some 5 thousand Muslims according to the unofficial reports
(we do not have authentic statistics), mostly immigrants, out of 5.3m inhabitants. The Slovak authorities have not allowed
the erection of a single congregational mosque up to now. According to the new and also more strict legislation adopted in
2007, registration of religious communities and churches requires at least 20 thousand signatures of citizens with
permanent residency in Slovakia. The new laws are considered discriminatory by the Muslims living in the country.
580 The late Turkish Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit once said that ‘Gülen’s schools’ in Azerbaijan had saved the country from
falling under Iranian influence.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

393
the Catholic Opus Dei or the Jesuits.581 While the Prelature of the Holy Cross and Opus Dei (“Work of
God”), an organization dedicated to missionary activities, has developed from the Spanish national
movement to a worldwide net of members and supporters who dedicate their talents to the service of
God, the Jesuits (Societas Iesu) are among the largest and most influential religious orders of the
Roman Catholic church. As far as Protestantism is concerned, points of convergence were stressed by
some researchers who likened the enterpreneurial mentality or even the reformist agenda of Gülen’s
followers to the allegedly similar phenomenon initiated earlier in the Protestant world.582
Educational activities and the engagement of lay people, side by side with their missionary role,
represent the bulk of the activities of the Salesians of Don Bosco. Although certainly not representing
scholar-missionaries, the Salesians are recognized by the Catholic Church as an institute of pontifical
right “dedicated to apostolic work”. They promote Christian education of the young and help to erect
hostels and houses for young people in difficulties and build retreat houses. Being educators of the
faith for the ordinary people, they usually proceed by means of social communication. For the
Salesians, “the Christian perfection of its associates is obtained by the exercise of spiritual and
corporal works of charity towards the young, especially the poor, and the education of boys for the
priesthood”. If Halík’s critics reproach him for trying to leave out more traditional Christians, even for
being a pluralist with much airing among agnostics or atheists; Salesians are firmly integrated into
mainstream Catholicism and adopt an inclusivist approach to non-Christians that is in accord with
the Vatican’s line today.
In Azerbaijan, the work of Salesian missionaries concentrates on the revival of the Catholic Church in
the country.583 Due to the harsh conditions under the Soviet rule, the Catholic Church in Azerbaijan,
albeit small in numbers, has been scraping a living for seventy years without a church or a priest. It
was only in 2007, more than seventeen years after the fall of the totalitarian communist regime and
seven decades after the destruction of the original church building in Baku by the Bolsheviks (1931),
that the first Catholic church on Azeri territory was re-established by the Slovak Salesian missionaries

581 17 For example, two leading scholars working on the Gülen movement, Hakan Yavuz and Bayram Balcı, expressed these
views in an interview for the Prague-based Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty; available at
http://www.rferl.org/features/features Article.aspx?m=06&y=2004&d=A6393817-E7D9-4C2C-951A-EDBC2131DE25
(on 7 June 2004). According to Yavuz, both members of Opus Dei and associates of Gülen represent elitist missionary
religious movements that are characterized by the lack of formal structure, secrecy and participation in networking
activities “seeking to influence Turkey’s polity by networking with decision-makers”. In this context I refer also to
Introvigne, M. (2006) Turkish Religious Market(s), in: M. H. Yavuz (Ed) The Emergence of a New Turkey: Democracy an
the AK Party (Salt Lake City, The University of Utah Press). p. 42. See also ‘A Bridge to Inter-religious Cooperation: The
Gülen-Jesuit Educational Nexus’ (forthcoming), paper that is planned to be presented and published at the international
conference Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement, London 25-27 October 2007. In author’s
view the Jesuits and the ‘Fethullahcıs’ share similar approaches to education and both movements aim at educating new
generations holistically in science and ethics as well. Besides, other common aspect is to be found in the importance they
give to the lay leadership.
582 See Pirický, G. (1999) Some Observations on New Departures in Modernist Interpretations of Islam in Contemporary
Turkey: Fethullah Gülen Cemaati. Asian and African Studies, 8, 90.
583 Some 350 Christians are living nowadays in Azerbaijan, 150 locals and 200 foreigners, further information at
http://www.saleziani.sk/azerbajdzan-dar-polskeho-prezidenta-katolikom-azerbajdzanu.html

--- Sayfa 396 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

394
and consecrated.584 This has been made possible thanks to the positive, though uneasy, steps of the
Azeri government and its Muslim community. The donors of the new church have included the Azeri
sheikh of Islam Allahşükür Paşazade. Apart from that, Azeri Muslims have been praised by Christians
for artistically creative work they have done on some of the interior parts of the new Catholic church:
windowpanes, font or ceramic composition of the main altar.585The church is dominated by a five
meters high statue of the Virgin Mary – the work of local artist Hüseyn. The statue is said to be the
symbol of unity of both Orthodox and Catholic churches as well as Muslims, since for all of them Mary
represents the mother of Jesus, and the value of this connecting aspect is complemented by a firmly
established common-held belief that Jesus will return.
On the whole then, here we are witnessing an example of those Catholics who see a genuine link
between dialogue and mission in its more classical sense, similarly to a great many Muslims who
perceive dialogue to be an intrinsic part of dacwa. Their preaching is combined with ‘service’, one is
even tempted to use the Turkish word hizmet, yet on closer examination, it is probably right to say
that the first represents a smaller proportion of Salesians’ missionary activity. Doing good deeds for
the needy may serve as a point of intersection with numerous believers of different faiths. For
Salesians, it seems, dialogue is a “means of becoming better acquainted with what the ‘other’ actually
believes in order to facilitate the communication of the message to them in an appropriate form”
(Zebiri 1997: 38), or an umbrella term that can serve at least to reduce political conflict. Surely, those
who consider dialogue as a cover for proselytism on the Muslim side remain afraid and unconvinced
as far as the motives for the revival of Catholicism in Azerbaijan are concerned. It only remains for us
to hope that dialogue will be led not in order to persuade, but in the interest of accommodating each
other.

7. Towards Unity of Basic Principles
People of Muslim faith who in the broadest sense stand close to the ideals of Fethullah Gülen, but do
not necessarily form an organizational backup as his supporters, are sometimes termed as those who
create with him the ‘unity of thought’ (fikir birliği) that translates into a certain ‘mind linkage’ (fikir
bağlantı). The present essay would also like to point out that similar ‘unity of basic principles’ should
bring together those who urge the necessity of dialogue and sharing of values, in brief, who side with
the ‘jihad for tolerance and cooperation’.
As I tried to insinuate, excessive passion for ‘hegemonic’ history may be more a contributing cause to
present problems, as well as an impediment on the way to a true and genuine dialogue, because
history as a human science is subject to human errors and distortions. It is more history in
conversation and comparison that could make intelligible our different human destinies, but here too
“it means being truly ready for the questions and not being too ready with the answers as if they were
all foreordained” (Cragg 1999: 11). Forms of evaluation of our respective traditions must be coupled
wherever and whenever possible with the irreducible dictum: be critical but not negative. As has been

584 See their own webpages at http://www.catholic.az and http://www.misie.sdb.sk, Slovak missionaries include Jozef
Daniel Pravda (2000 - 2003), Martin Bonkalo, Ján Čapla (senior head of mission), Peter Červeň, Marián Kališ, Štefan
Kormančík and Jozef Marek. In the course of his ninety-sixth pontifical journey to Azerbaijan (22 – 23 May 2002), the late
Pope John Paul II praised both former Azeri President Heydar Aliyev, the sheikh al-islām of Transcaucasia Allahşükür
Paşazade and the Salesians for their contributions leading to the rebirth of Catholicism in the country.
585 In addition, certain Muslim businessman met all expenses for the altar.

--- Sayfa 397 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

395
emphasized, it is unsufficient to read other religious systems in the light of the assumptions of one’s
own , thus producing a picture which is not recognized by members of the tradition which is under
scrutiny.
Although on the whole we are nowadays experiencing numerous downs in the relations between the
major monotheistic religions, and even in better times we will certainly never achieve a complete
harmony in Christian-Muslim encounters, the basic need for understanding remains. Indifference is
not the right track because it was only in the times of the Roman Empire that territories outside the
imperial domain could be described in terms of ‘hic sunt leones’, today, however, we need to get to
know and understand the inner experiences of all previously unknown and distant religious and
cultural systems in order to survive. Accommodation between Christians and Jews has been reached
in course of the twentieth century not so much on a theological basis, but rather on historical and
societal platform. Similarly, Muslims and Christians could expand distinctive paths towards
accommodation and dialogue by drawing inspiration from their specific interests and conditions.
Encouraging examples are not so rare as it seems on the surface. Recently, for instance, Czech
Christians, Jews and Muslims, irrespective of their Abrahamic roots, have banded together against
the proposal of a legal norm that would make euthanasia unpunishable. A distinguished Czech
religionist Jaroslav Krejčí speaks of the ‘ethos of symbiosis’, an ethical principle which asks for
stretching a point towards all religions or social theories that are willing to respect the Western
conception of human rights (qtd. in Müller 2005: 123). In order to reduce the distance between
various religious denominations, Fethullah Gülen, by the same token, proposed to open a theological
faculty in Urfa (Harran), a major town in south-eastern Anatolia that is considered to be the birth-
place of Abraham, where scholars and teachers of the three monotheist religions would teach
together. The call for Muslim-Christian cooperation and dialogue as a fulcrum in human relations is
to be found equally in the writings of Bediüzzaman Said Nursi, a Turkish religious leader and author
of the Epistles of Light, a seminal contribution to the interpretations of Islam in the fast changing
conditions of the twentieth century. The re-opening of the Catholic Church in Baku is an encouraging
example in Muslim-Christian relations, as is similarly inspiring the ‘intelligent interest’ of Tomáš
Halík in Christian-Muslim dialogue. If dialogue today is to reach wider segments of the population, it
cannot be limited to the elites, but  has to be spread properly. Further possible steps in the area of
education have been humbly suggested in this essay, too.
“No one is fully a believer until he wishes for his brother what he wishes for himself,” says
one of the numerous Muslim hadiths. It could be taken as an example, an invitation indeed,
to throw out all past and present misunderstandings and failures in communication. And
last but not least, paraphrasing somewhat one could also make a suggestion: let us hope that
the ‘fundamentalists of tolerance and responsibility’ will expand their ranks.586

Acknowledgement.
I am indebted to Ivan Horáček and Viktor Krupa for their intellectual and emotional help and support
while working on this paper.

586 The Gülen community was once described by Milliyet newspaper, that has a nation-wide circulation in Turkey, as
“Fundamentalists of Tolerance”. See Oğuz, Ş.: ‘Kökten höşgörücüler’,  Milliyet, 30 April 1997.

--- Sayfa 398 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

396

--- Sayfa 399 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

397
HARMONIC LEARNING: THE CONGRUENT EDUCATION
MODELS OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN AND JAMES MOFFETT
TOM GAGE 587

Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to introduce to the Gülen community a kindred spirit, whose work
and career complement the innovative achievements in non-denominational education of
Fethullah Gülen. The late James Moffett influenced teaching in the English-speaking world by
inspiring educators to teach what they knew to be successful but whose efforts were impinged
upon by a calcified curriculum that limited development of the whole individual. Moffett’s
pedagogy is effective with teachers and students of any language for improving student writing
and reading. I compare the seminal ideas of Gülen and Moffett in their efforts to engage students
with the domain of knowledge inclusive and beyond the cognitive. The hypothesis underlying the
paper is that Moffett’s work in improving reading and writing is congruent with and
complementary to Gülen’s mission to foster, enhance, and develop students’ tolerance, attitudes
of inclusivity and mutual good will. Moffett shared with Gülen a grave concern that both
sectarian education and non-denominational education were failing to provide students an
opportunity to develop as fulfilled human beings. The paper enumerates particular methods,
devised by Moffett, for teaching reading and writing that improve student learning in every
discipline. Though he often taught at leading universities, Moffett never represented any
particular school or governmental institution but inspired educators at elementary, secondary,
and tertiary levels through his speeches, workshops, and extensive publications. His ideas are
congruent with those of Fethuallah Gülen, who also sought an education that developed the
whole individual. Ironically, Moffett’s ideas were seminal for the US Federally funded National
Writing Project, and, additionally, for California’s Statewide testing program, which he judged
fraudulent and refused to accept any financial benefits. Rather, like Gülen’s, the influence of
Moffett was driven by educators (not administrators), who experienced in their classrooms the
heuristic effectiveness of Moffett’s methods of teaching reading and writing.

587 Professor Emeritus, Humboldt State University, Tom Gage earned all his degrees at the University of California,
Berkeley. As a student in the 1950s, he hitchhiked from California to Damascus; subsequently, he has journeyed to the
Eastern Mediterranean two dozen times. A senior Fulbright lecturer at Aleppo, Syria, 1983–1984, Gage has taught widely,
including in China, Greece, and Turkey; he has delivered many papers in conferences in the United States, recently at the
2007 Conference on Exploring Models for Peace, University of Texas. He has been resident lecturer on comparative
education in China. Gage was a principal in creating Humboldt’s International Studies department, the architect of the
English department’s master’s degree in Teaching Writing, and founder of Humboldt’s Redwood Writing Project. Presently
working with Fatima Mernisi, co-recipient of the 2004 Erasmus Award, Gage is advancing opportunities for dialogue
among secondary students in both Morocco and California. He has been an officer of the National Council of Teachers of
English and is a member of the Board of the Consultants for Global Programs, with student exchanges in China, Cyprus,
Mexico, and South Africa. Gage has published articles on travel writing, co-authored anthologies of literature in translation,
and a book on steel.

--- Sayfa 400 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

398
Over a century ago H. G. Wells asserted that the planet is in a race between education and oblivion.
Yet in Education and Political Development, published in 1965, James S. Coleman and his
contributors found that schooling around the world that prepared students essentially in science and
law for jobs in bureaucracies would likely add, rather than mitigate, global problems, the main
educational goal being to prepare future citizens for a materialistic reality. As predicted, the
educational policies of these states during the Cold War led to swelling governmental bureaucracies,
funded by foreign loans, which were obtained by playing off the US and the USSR, while discouraging
free enterprise that promised jobs to the unemployed. One grave outcome of the negative influence of
education was that such schooling transformed populations of illiterate, unemployed, and starving
masses into populations of literate, unemployed, and starving masses, a literate population of
individuals seething with resentment and devoid of adequately developed spirituality to offset their
desire for material acquisition.
During the last half-century, mobility and technology have exacerbated world problems, as
environmental, social, and political changes have integrated people economically and socially, a
process resulting in individuals struggling with conflicting identities. Kofi Anann, the past General
Secretary of the United Nations, recently said, “Many people, particularly in the developing world
have come to fear the global village as cultural onslaught and economic drain on their way of life.”
World terrorism is but one manifestation.
As eloquently stated in one of the aims of this colloquy, all right-minded people need to respond
creatively, to re-double their efforts, to sustain the hope for peaceful co-existence in a world of
accelerating change. Fethullah Gülen cogently identified a solution: “Now that we live in a global
village, education is the best way to serve humanity and to establish dialogue with other civilizations”
(Gülen 2004: 19). Mr. Gülen’s idea of education differs from the ubiquitous factory model of the last
century, which has failed to avert much of today’s violence, perpetrated by either individuals or states.
He further says,
. . . each person is a creature made up of feelings that cannot be satisfied by the mind . . . ; it
is through the spirit that we acquire our essential human identity. Each individual is a
combination of all of these factors. When a person around whom all systems and efforts
revolve is considered and evaluated, as a creature with all these aspects and when all needs
are fulfilled then this person is able to attain true happiness. At this point, true human
progress and evolution in relation to our essential being is possible only through education
(Gülen 2004: 194).
The nondenominational schools around the world inspired by Mr. Gülen augur hope that informed
education can secure Wells’ victory over chaos.
The curricula of nearly all secular states lack, at this point, the goal of broadening the mind while
enriching the spirit, the latter which includes attributes of love, dialogue, forgiveness, and tolerance.
As Mr. Gülen states, “Humans are creatures composed not only of a body and a mind, or feelings and
a spirit; rather, we are harmonious compositions of all these elements” (Gülen 2004a: 194). The late
James Moffett concurred: “Thought that is not spiritual is intellectually inferior because it is too
partial” (Moffett 1994:43). The two philsophers coincided by implying that education that addresses
one without the other is fractional and unfinished.
In many nations the idea of educating the whole person threatens to dissolve the division of religion
and state, a division that has hence resulted in ignoring the need to address spirituality. Many years

--- Sayfa 401 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

399
ago while working for the state of California, I participated in an evaluation of a Catholic high school.
In one class I witnessed how the nun commenced first period class by asking her students to
participate in audible prayer. Volunteering, one student with head bowed caused the class to chortle
when she asked God to stop her brother from drinking up all the orange juice every day before she
reached the breakfast table. Another sobered all with a prayer to give succor and strength to her
mother facing breast cancer surgery.
Throughout my career I have remembered how remarkable this spiritual exercise was in bonding
students into a caring community, one that allowed any alert teacher to become aware of what
students were bringing to class. Having taught for five years in inner city public schools, I realized
how useful this spiritual exercise could be when angry, ghetto pupils entered a class to discuss a
character in a 19th Century British novel. A shared prayer could enable a teacher to bridge with
personal accounts the universal issues in Dickens’ Great Expectations. But this Catholic lesson plan is
impossible in California’s secular schools.
Today those who subscribe to the rhetoric of the Clash of Civilization as the source of terrorism and
discontent blame religions. Yet, according to Richard W. Bulliet in The Case for Islamo-Christian
Civilization, nearly all the fanatical terrorists, like the engineer bin Ladin and the doctor al-Zawahiri,
or for that matter the half dozen medical workers in England and Scotland who failed in their recent
attempts to bomb innocent citizens, received their education in secular, state-funded universities, not
in religious schools or medressehs (Bulliet 2004:159). Instead, those in the media blaming Islam as
the source of criminal behavior should make accountable secular education that has developed the
mind at the expense of spirit.
By raising moral and spiritual awareness through dialogue, the Gülen movement is in the forefront by
emphasizing a common ground among Muslim and non-Muslims. Such a common ground fosters
through dialogue inclusion and centripetal integration rather than exclusion and centrifugal
fragmentation that leads to alienation and violence. Dialoguing with the Other increases the identify
of both, or as the Moffett said, “As we know, so we identify. If we know as we identify, then the more
broadly we identify, the more we know.” (Moffett 1992: 32). On writing or speaking of dialogue,
Moffett further elaborated: “I gradually disengage myself from my sole point of view and learn to
speak about myself, first, as if I were another person (objectification), then about others as if they
were
myself
(identification),
and
finally
about
others
without
reference
to
myself
(transpersonalization). Put another way, I evolve from passion to compassion to dispassion” (Moffett
& McElheny 1995: 593). The pedagogical implication of dialogue assure a kind of distancing that
results in an interim cessation of egoistic aspects of one’s identity in order to afford openness to
negotiation and reconciliation.
Moffett’s ideas and pedagogy could benefit the work of the nondenominational schools inspired by
Mr. Gülen, as the two philosophies of education are interestingly congruent. Further, students in
these schools could use electronic dialogue to expand the knowledge of each other by sharing cultural
expressions.
Author of theory, research, and pedagogy, Moffett heralded a holistic education for elementary,
secondary and tertiary institutions. His work influenced curriculum in many English-speaking
nations through the auspices of the classroom-teacher initiated, educational reform movement known
in the United States as the National Writing Project, a project that extended in-service teacher
training throughout every state in the US and abroad in such nations as Germany, Indonesia, and

--- Sayfa 402 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

400
Sweden. In 1984 while a senior Fulbright lecturer in Syria at the University of Aleppo, I used Moffett’s
pedagogy in a four-day writing workshop in Athens for sixty teachers in schools from Morocco to
Bangladesh
One of Moffett’s unique insights, central to the Writing Project, was that writing through dialogue was
another means for learning. Previously, the purpose of having students write was for them to report
on what they learned. Writing, like dialoguing, witnessing, attuning, and collaborating, often results
in new learning, as I will later explain. As important as Moffett’s ideas were to teaching writing and
reading in secular schools, he advanced the need for public schools to include spirituality to better
foster and develop reason, a central message in his two publications Harmonic Learning: Keynoting
School Reform and The Universal Schoolhouse: Spiritual Awakening Through Education.
Let me share an episode from Moffett's career that exemplifies his dedication to dialogue and
spirituality. In 1974 the Board of Education for Kanawha County, West Virginia, approved adoption
for students in elementary and secondary schools a number of series of textbooks including Moffett's
Interaction series, published by Houghton-Mifflin. But some conservative members in the county
objected to literary selections from the series that they judged to be excessively negative,
blasphemous, and Un-American. This clash of values resulted in violence. Publishers asked authors to
go to West Virginia to address the Board in defense of the books. Authors attending the board
meeting, made up of a selected audience that excluded representatives from the religious community,
were all surprised when Moffett scolded the board for excluding those who had objections. He felt that
what is needed in modern times is dialogue and coexistence of diverse opinions, not segregation and
exclusion, particularly parents whose children were to be assigned to read material they deemed
offensive to the families’ values and identities. Moffett was not criticizing the Houghton-Mifflin
materials but rather was faulting the Kanawha Country Board failure to organize an authentic
dialogue. Against his economic interests, he pleaded for a plurality of consciousnesses in decision-
making. Although it had come under attack, Moffett’s work was frankly the best material available for
teachers to teach writing and reading.
As a measure of its timelessness and worth, Robert Romano, a graduate student in my seminar on the
Development of Writing Abilities in the late 1990s, created a series of CDs, utilizing Moffett’s 1968
curriculum. In 2000, the nation-wide Association for Curriculum and Development awarded
Romano’s CD series The Best of the Best Educational Software for that year. The CD series was also
one of five finalists for the annual Cody Award for the best software in any field for that same year. At
present, the CDs are distributed by Riverdeep International.
Central to the educational recommendations of both Moffett and Mr. Gülen is teacher in-service
education, identified as one of the factors behind the remarkable achievements of the
nondenominational schools (Aslandoğan and Çetin 2006:49). These schools would do well to
implement another teacher in-service using Moffett's pedagogy in teaching writing and reading, a
pedagogy that could complement the outstanding curricula in mathematics and science. From my
reading in print and website about Gülen-inspired schools, I am impressed with the achievements of
the Putnam Science Academy in New Haven, Connecticut, and the Amity School in Brooklyn, New
York, the latter enrolling pupils from pre-school through high school. In Brooklyn this year twenty-
eight students from Amity won medals in New York City’s competition for the Science Olympiad. But
I do not see evidence of success in teaching writing and reading nor about how students learn to use
the language arts for dialogue among the student populations.

--- Sayfa 403 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

401
In the US the phrase “the English language arts” is ambiguous; I suspect that the phrase for other
languages, such as the Turkish language arts, is equally ambiguous. When describing language arts for
either private or public schools, one usually hears clichés like “the basics,” “the fundamentals,”
“skills,” etc. But these abstractions lack agreed upon specifics. You can count on the heads in any
audience nodding affirmatively when hearing of the need to teach the ''basics'', but what does ''basics''
mean? Moffett wrestled with these ambiguities until at the 1968 Anglo American conference on
English education at Dartmouth University he stunned those present with the clarity of his
explanation. Rather than the triad of language, composition and literature, which dominates US
elementary and secondary curricula, Moffett's concept of language arts is based upon authentic
language use in social contexts. He criticized as being out of balance the non-parallel, three-legged
stool of language, composition and literature. Literature and language are subjects dealing with
empirical data; they are about substantial things like the novel Don Quixote, nouns and parts of
speech, or punctuation in sentences. But composition in contrast is an activity, not a substantial body
of empirical data. In effect, Moffett answered the question “What is English language arts?” by
pointing out that the language is a symbolic system about “X” for “Y”; X being any subject of discourse
delivered to Y, an audience (Moffett 1968: 3-10).
Unlike literature or language as content, composition is a process of negotiating meanings while the
speaker and the listener are dialoging. The novel Mehmet, My Hawk is a product. Student writers do
not write Mehmet, My Hawk; rather they discourse about Mehmet, My Hawk. Moffett's English
curriculum is not grounded in the study of literature, though the literature of a culture or nation often
is the X, the subject under discussion with another. In dialogue students use language to
communicate with living audiences (“Y”) about subjects (“X”), ranging from the Piri Reis 16th Century
map of the New World to the poetry of Rumi. The subject of writing for another implies social
contexts.
To paraphrase Mr. Gülen, dialogue is a means of discussion of certain issues by the coming together of
two or more people, a process that forms a transcultural bond. As just one method to achieve such a
bond, I am proposing, to heighten cross-cultural fluency, a series of online, dialogic exercises between
students from two schools in diverse social contexts. Cross-cultural fluency is defined as more than
the symbolic system of language; it entails non-linguistic codes of geography, of history, and of
business; codes of art, music, and food; codes of time and space, interpreted differently in various
parts of the world; codes of play, entertainment and different educational practices; and class codes
within every society - - all signifying cultural expressions.
The following two aspects of Moffett’s work will enable teachers to engage students in electronic
dialoguing that actualizes levels of thinking under Theory: Orders of Knowledge and a Practicum:
Electronic Dialoguing.
First, Moffett Identified his orders of knowledge as four levels of discourse, sustained over a range of
utterances from a simple phrase to a book length monologue.
1. What is Happening,
2. What Happened,
3. What Happens, and
4. What (should/should not) Happen.

--- Sayfa 404 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

402
In my elementary Turkish, I conjugated the following forms of the verb ''olmak'':
Oluyor = What is Happening
Oldu = What Happened
Olmak =  What Happens
Olmalı/olmalı değil = What (should/should not) Happen
In the English language, modals or verb tense mark shifts in Moffett’s four orders of thinking: the
present progressive as indicated by “ing,” (as in “leading” in the sentence, “With seven minutes of
play, Fenerbahce is leading Samsun.” This is the discourse of the traffic reporter on radio in a
helicopter at mid commute. The past tense is indicated by “ed,” (as in, “Yesterday, Samsun defeated
Fenerbahce by one score.” The gnostic present tense - - the tense of generalization - - is indicated by
“s” at the end of the verb (as in the second verb of the sentence, “Harvey discovered that blood
circulates”). And the assertive utterance of theorizing or exhorting is signaled by a modal preceding
the verb - - the language of law and theology (as in, “Thou shall honor thy father and mother” or
“Thou shall not kill”).
Those of you in the audience or reading this essay who speak languages other than English or Turkish
might formulate the four levels of knowledge in your own language to see how universal Moffett's
schemata is. It works perfectly in Spanish and Japanese. In the 2006 fall semester, I taught what I am
sharing with you to fifteen Spanish-speaking university professors from Quito, Ecuador. One of my
former students from Humboldt, Charlie Robertson, is today teaching in Japanese these very ideas to
his students in Kochi, Japan.
In every language, utterances beyond sentence length are only predominantly either What is
Happening, What Happened, What Happens, or What (modal) Happen. In such lengthy discourse the
writer shuttles temporarily from the chosen or predominant order to another level - - at once
illustrating by using the past, or by tallying up to report, or by inferring from one incident what
happens with plural incidences, or by interjecting a caveat with a modal (as in English “ought,”
“must,” “shall,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “can,” “could,” and their respective negative forms).
One might detect that these orders appear to be nothing more than the traditional modes of
description, narration, exposition, and argumentation. Moffett did not simply reinvent a wheel by
reformulating these established modes of discourse. The four modes only address the X in Moffett’s
formula, that is, what the subject of writing is about. For Moffett the element Y is crucial to his
definition of language arts and to dialogue, as he complemented each of the orders of knowledge with
audiences, recipients for what is uttered. And here, again, is where Moffett concurs with Mr. Gülen,
for dialogic context must be at the heart of lessons (Moffett 1968:72-83).
Let’s look at Moffett’s orders from a literary angle. In dialogue, a speaker of Turkish describing
"oluyor" or “What is Happening?” is always recording unfinished actions; the outcome of the Samsun-
Fenerbahce game is yet to be. Like audible symbols on sheet music or the words of Shakespeare on
pages of some play, a performer or actor needs to put life into this simulated reality. At any moment
during a performance of The Sultans of Dance, the observer is in doubt about how the Prometheus
figure will be revealed in the performance’s last moments. In literature, this is the genre of drama.

--- Sayfa 405 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

403
In the case of "Oldu" or “What Happened?”, sustained discourse of any length is about action
completed. A speaker is reporting an account, not recording an experience existentially. In literature,
past action is typically the tense of the genre of the novel or of the short story like an öykü by Saray
Şahiner.
In the case of "Olmak" or What Happens, sustained discourse of any length is the order of scientific
generalizations or hypotheses. “Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” When
developing this thesis, the author may exemplify by digressing to What Happened to illustrate an
incident that subordinates the generalization. In literature, present active is the predominant tense of
the genre of the essay.
And in the case of "olmalı or olmalı değil " “What (should/should not) Happen?”, sustained discourse
of any length is persuasion, argumentation or exhortation, the phrasing of debate or advanced critical
theory or moral imperatives. In belles letters or sacred texts, imperatives are the markers of rhetorical
summation, divine injunction or discursive, moral proposition.
Another major contribution to language theory that Moffett posited is that in these orders of
knowledge or levels of thinking, at least in English, there is no structural difference between non
fiction, the discourse about fact, and fiction, the simulation of factual discourse.
Moffett required that the audience of discourse be authentic.
Sociality is probably the best learning device of all time—and the one least used in public
schools. A single authoritarian adult per isolated classroom gives it little chance to work.
Commercial materials have been substitutes for human relations. Twenty to forty people is a
lot in one room, but in the interest of control and standardization this tremendous human
resource is wasted. Students have been forbidden to interact . . .. (Moffett1994: 49).
By embedding writing and speaking as dialogue in social contexts, Moffett contributed a stunning
heuristic to the theory of discourse in any language. An educator who views traditionally the four
modes of discourse without regard to audience deals with four unrelated categories or boxes.
Audience is a needed component in every writing prompt, but audience in dialogues imply that
participants are on equal though perhaps different footing; one is not measuring or assessing the
other. When a teacher is the only audience, the assignment fails to be what Mr. Gülen refers to as
bonded partners in dialogue. But, an assignment, with teachers and remote students as audiences, can
be an academic bond to foster much more lasting and important learning.
Let me illustrate the difference. I have written this paper for you, an international audience that
presumably knows little or nothing about James Moffett or how his ideas relate to the work of
Fethullah Gülen nor how Moffett’s pedagogy might benefit the curriculum in the nondenominational
schools. Clearly, at this stage I know more about my topic than you do about what I am discussing.
Some months ago while writing a draft, I enumerated what I believed you need to know of Moffett’s
ideas. Should I have written this essay to fellow English educators at a convention, much of what I’ve
written would have been unnecessary, for that audience, like a choir, is already in tune with my
subject. But now imagine how writing for an author differs when the audience is an authority on the
subject, a professor let’s say. Imagine how a graduate student might write about this same essay, not
for you as audience, but to me in a class in the graduate program at Humboldt State University.  That
student would favor generalities, assuming that to elaborate would insult my intelligence, since much
of what he knows came from me. In such school exercises, the student is condemned to write on a

--- Sayfa 406 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

404
subject about which his teacher knows more than the student does. Now, I must ask you, when in life,
after leaving school, do you ever write to an audience who knows more about your subject than you
do? Never! Nearly all writing in school is writing in which students address the teacher; nearly all
writing in the real world is typified by the writer informing an audience on matters about which the
audience knows little to nothing. When teachers craft writing prompts that enable students to inform
the uninformed, these teachers develop in their charges a whole host of skills and strategies
previously unaddressed when taught as independent units of study of grammar, usage, diction,
spelling, and composition.
Now that I have outlined Moffett's four orders of knowledge, I would like to propose a pedagogy of
cross-cultural fluency with which your students in Astana, Kazakhstan, can dialogue with students in
Tokat, Turkey; or your students in Samarqand, Uzbekistan, can dialogue with students in Urumqi,
China; or your students in Ankara can dialogue with students in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan; or your
students in Tashkent can dialogue with students in Rotterdam.
 Remember Mr. Gülen’s wise observation:
Different beliefs, races, customs and traditions will continue to cohabit in this [global]
village. Each individual is like a unique realm unto themselves; therefore the desire for all
humanity to be similar to one another is nothing more than wishing for the impossible. For
this reason, the peace of this (global) village lies in respecting all these differences,
considering these differences to be part of our nature and in ensuring that people appreciate
these differences [Gülen 2004:249-250].
With such guidance, students fluent in English in Istanbul, in Baku, in Zamboanga in the Philippines,
can dialogue with students in the US to engage in Moffett’s four orders of knowledge. Sensitive
teachers could easily fashion appropriate linkages, void of political nuances, to afford students rich
opportunities to develop their language skills while fostering multiculturalism in the increasingly
global world. These opportunities are made possible through electronic media in the context of
secular modernity. Incidentally, with the assistance of the author Fatema Mernissi, the co-recipient of
Europe’s 2004 Erasmus Award, I have been working with just such an exchange involving students at
Six Rivers High School in California and with students in Rabat, Morocco.
The aim of these exercises in cross-cultural fluency is to provide global dialogues. According to
Moffett, the elements of dialogue - -  witnessing, attuning, imitating, helping, collaborating, and
interacting - - “occur so spontaneously, just as part of living, that we seldom think of these six basic
learning activities as education” (Moffett 1992: 161). From Moffett’s pedagogy of reciprocal discourse,
students, teachers, and schools can reassemble the pieces of Mr. Gülen’s metaphor, the common
ground of a universal mosaic of communication, by engaging youth of different faith traditions in
Internet exercises to improve North–South and East–West relations. The mosaic entails both
dimensions of time and space: students, annihilating space, dialogue across the world using the
genres of E-mailings, Blogs, and Wikis; and students, fusing the past, broadcast on CDs and DVDs,
how cultural achievements have contributed to modernity. What could better refute inherent
assumptions about the clash of cultures than such sharings among students of Izmir and Iowa City or
Berkeley and Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.
In each of these electronic spaces, students will dialogue according to an appropriate order of
knowledge. Blogs, E-mail, Wikis, and Pod casts on CDs, or DVDs, require students to record non-
consciously What is Happening, or to report non-consciously about What Happened, or to generalize

--- Sayfa 407 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

405
non-consciously on What Happens, or to theorize non-consciously about What (Should, Should Not)
Happen.
1.
A Blog is a website lexia for chronologically documenting “Breaking News.” It is a private,
password protected, Internet screen for only two populations by which students dialogue
electronically in a forum. Students in different classrooms around the world record
simultaneously what is happening within the realm of some assigned subject, like a football game
or reading a poem. It might be a joint Blog on which school students from dramatically different
parts of the world can document evidence of how global warming is affecting their respective
locales. Those dialoguing on a Blog can post in near simultaneity what is happening.
Pedagogically, such writing fosters chronological skills of recording and reporting. Recording is
simultaneous elaborating; reporting is chronological outcomes of such elaborations. Each
requires precision of diction and shifts in verb tense, from present progressive to past, and back,
as student writers record simultaneously or report completed action. Students describing a
terrible snowstorm will use the progressive tense, a tense that in other modes of writing, like
exposition, would not be as necessary. When the students in one school report What Happened
after a storm, they favor the past tense, since the chronology of completed action is not
happening but has happened. Students learn the subtleties of how to include detail without
unnecessary verbiage, for their audiences, in addition to their teachers, will correct them. The
educational goals of this exercise include developing vocabulary, diction, and tempo in phrasing,
goals attended to with chronological skills of recording and of reporting.
2.
In pen pal dialogue, students intuitively use different orders of knowledge than are used in Blogs,
with less frequent inclusion of recording What is Happening but more reporting of What
Happened and sometimes creating hypotheses of What Happens. Because time lapses between
the reception and the response, the writers mix what has partaken over a week's period and
speculates as generalities or hypotheses about upcoming events or moralizes about what should
have or should not happen. Unlike postal correspondence, electronic discourse allows for near
immediate response. Instant feedback gratifies and motivates students, especially when hearing
from real world audiences.
3.
A Wiki is like a Blog but with expository themes agreed upon by the participating schools. In the
tradition of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia, Wikis are about What Happens or What
(should/should not) Happen.  Individual students produce and edit what they have researched of
some assigned theme. The purpose of the theme as well as the representation is to have students
produce meaningful and correct information in clear language of what they survey, tally, and
categorize. They collaboratively generalize and theorize about common themes like the festivals
in their cultures, such as Thanksgiving in the American tradition or the Eid in Islamic cultures, or
about the local events like the Kinetic Sculpture Race at the Humboldt Bay or the Jump Dance on
the Hoopa Native American Reservation. Students from Izmir might describe the annual Turkish
wrestling competitions every June.  Through Wikis, students learn to develop the following
educational goals: to develop expository and argumentative skills, to research, to demonstrate
resourcefulness, to acquire many conventions of documentation, to share values in building
civility and citizenship, and to understand the benefits of democracy in different social contexts.
4.
Pod casting, produced either as audio or video programs, actualizes What Happens/What
Happened/What (Should/Shouldn't) Happen. This pedagogy insures comprehending how image,
text, and sound mix rhetorically to heighten message and representation, and it develops

--- Sayfa 408 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

406
exposition, narratization, and living drama, as we all witness today on television. Learning can be
made permanent in CDs or DVDs that become documents preserving the students' education
over years.
As I alluded earlier, these exercises necessitate acquiring Moffett’s orders of knowledge naturally and
non-consciously. When the teacher elicits from students an explicit explanations of their non-
conscious reasoning (what Vygotsky referred to as scientific concepts), the most lasting learning takes
place.
Some schools undoubtedly face economic limitations associated with computer availability and online
hookups. Not all schools are as electronically fortified as Sabanci University in Tuzla, where I lectured
in 2001. The electronic facilities at Sabanci humble those at Humboldt State. In answer to those
worried about there being no computers online at local schools, there are internet cafes in nearly
every village in the world, cafes which will charge little for usages by groups under teacher
supervision. Presently, we are investigating how students in California can link with their
counterparts in Rabat.
In addition to students crossing global space to communicate electronically, I also alluded to
broadcasting that fuses time into tiles in Mr. Gülen’s universal mosaic, portions of knowledge of what
the East has contributed to the modernity of West, South, and North. I have in mind still another
aspect of Mr. Gülen’s vision: how the cultural influences of the Ottomans and of Islam in general
influenced the present. Student CDs and DVDs can reveal much about which the West is frankly
ignorant.
Let me conclude by sharing with a few examples of what I mean. Students working on a history Wiki
dealing with their state share with those in North Africa how Morocco in 1781 was the first country
among the world's nations to recognize the US as an independent nation or that many of Humboldt
County's Portuguese citizens are from the Azores Islands, which are historically linked to the republic
of Sale in Morocco. And in Morocco, students inform their American counterparts that in the tenth
century in nearby Fez, the medresseh/university al Qaraouiyine educated a student named Gilbert
d'Aurillac, who, at the turn of the second millennium, was to become Silvester II, Pope of the Roman
Catholic Church. When I teach classes at Humboldt, I often point out to my students that much of
their daily life derives in large measure from Islam in ways that they are totally unaware. First, their
university derives from Islam, for Silvester II studied in a Moroccan university a full century before
the first European university opened in Bologna, Italy. Secondly, Founders Hall, the building that
dominates the Humboldt campus, which houses many of their very classrooms, is a replica of the
Umayyad mosque in Damascus. Next, the Balabanus Quad at the base of the long stairway leading up
to Founders is named after the Nestor of the Humboldt faculty, a man born in Turkey. And, finally,
the name of their state, California, derives from two words: the Arabic word for successor, ''Caliph,”
and from a word shared in Turkish ''firin.” In short, California means ''the Caliph's oven.”
By wedding Moffett’s educational theory to electronic pedagogy, Gülen-inspired nondenominational
schools can increase cross-cultural fluency among Muslim and non-Muslim communities, insuring,
thereby, the secular co-existence of these populations. As I have indicated, students in such
communities engage across space and time in electronic dialogue that would reassemble the pieces of
a universal mosaic into a composite that binds all together in much greater commonality than that
envisioned by those short-sighted polemicists that believe in the inevitable clash between East and
West.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

407
THE VISION OF EDUCATION WITHIN PLURALISTIC
SOCIETIES IN THE THOUGHT OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN:
THE CONTRIBUTION OF NON-DENOMINATIONAL
EDUCATION TOWARDS INTER-RELIGIOUS AND
COMMUNAL UNDERSTANDING, PEACE AND IDENTITY. A
STUDY OF CONTRASTS IN THE UK, TURKEY AND THE USA
IAN G. WILLIAMS 588

Abstract
'But in the provinces, where Islam is strong, there would be trouble ... The Syrian army is as
fanatical as the hordes of the Mahdi. The Senussi have taken a hand in the game. The Persian
Moslems are threatening trouble. There is a dry wind blowing through the East and the parched
grasses wait the spark. And the wind is blowing towards the Indian border...' 'It looks as if Islam
had a bigger hand in the thing that we thought', I said 'I fancy religion is the only thing to knit up
such a scattered empire'.

In his novel, Greenmantle, published in 1916, John Buchan speculated on the possiblity of a
mass-mobilisation of Islamic sentiment directed against Britain, France and Russia, which would
assist Germany and Austria to defeat the Allied forces. The generalisations of Islam made by the
characters in Greenmantle, as cited above, reduce Muslims to an undifferentiated whole that
strides across fundamental clefts in political, social and religious terrain. Dialogue between
people of faiths and with those of no faith is a condition for communal global survival.  This
paper examines the contribution of Fethullah Gülen in his writings and their outworking in
schools, their curricula and universities associated with his name towards global peace and
understanding.  It is based upon field work in the UK, Turkey, the USA, the Caucasus, and Africa.

1. Introduction
This paper examines the contribution of Fethullah Gülen in his writings and their outworking in
schools, their curricula and universities associated with his name towards global peace and
understanding. It is based upon field work in the UK, Turkey, the USA, the Caucasus, and Africa.

588 Ian G. Williams: Before coming to the Birmingham City University, Ian lectured in Religious Studies at the Universities
of Chester, and Derby UK.  He has taught and researched in the Middle East and India.  Research interests focus upon the
Fethullah Gülen Movement in Turkish Islam, Martyrdom in contemporary Islam, and Sufi movements in the UK,
Publications include: Modern Movements in Islam and Zoroastrianism’ in Dictionary of Contemporary Religion in the
Western World (IVP: Leicester, 2003). ‘Fundamentalist Movements amongst British Muslims’ in Fundamentalisms:
Studies in Contemporary Religious Radicalism (Exeter: Paternoster, 2000). Modern Movements in Islam and
Zoroastrianism. (2003), in ‘Dictionary of Contemporary Religion in the Western World’, IVP, Leicester.  Sufism in British
Islam. (2003), in ‘Contemporary Mysticism’, Paternoster, Exeter.  Relics and Reliquaries: Signs and Semiotics in
contemporary UK Islam (2004]), London, Ashgate.

--- Sayfa 410 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

408
Gülen is against the categorisation of Muslim and non-Muslim, East and West. Each must be a part of
the future inclusive civilisation to achieve balance in the world and universal peace. This is a
noteworthy vision drawing upon Qur’anic ideals, Western empirical science, and respect for the
Semitic faiths in particular. Binding the strands of the movement in its polymorphic engagements
with the contemporary world is an Anatolian Sufi influenced Islam redolent of Buchan’s character
Richard Hannay and his words, ‘I fancy religion is the only thing to knit up such a scattered empire'

2. The Context: Europe
One of the most striking features of religious life in contemporary Europe is the evident mismatch
between different measurements of religiousness. There exists, first of all, a set of indicators which
measure firm commitments to the institutional life of a faith tradition and knowledge of the creedal
statements of religion. For the majority of Europeans this still entails awareness of Christian
professions of belief formed by Judaeo-Christian monotheism and the Decalogue, Greek and
therefore Enlightenment Rationalism, and Roman organisation in the polity [O’Connell 1991].
Awareness of the first criterion shows a marked reduction in Europe as a whole, but most of all in the
national states of northern Europe. Thus, countries such as Denmark and Sweden are regarded as
profoundly secular. These indicators are, of course, closely related to each other in so far as
institutional commitment [in the form of religious membership or regular practice of worship] both
reflects and confirms religious belief in its orthodox forms. The believing Christian attends church to
express his or her belief and to receive affirmation that this is the right and necessary thing to do. At
the same time, repeated exposure to the institution and its teaching necessarily informs, not to say
disciplines, belief and its expressions in propositional statements and thence into behaviour.
In the European Values Survey [1981 – 2004] respondents in Great Britain were questioned:
Do you belong to religious denomination?
BASE=1000
Weight [with split ups]
Frequency
Percent
Cumulative
Percent
Valid
percent
Cumulative
valid percent
Yes
823
82,3
82,3
83,4
83,4
No
164
16,4
98,7
16,6
100,0
Don´t know
13
1,3
100,0

Total
1000
1000
(100%)

987 (100%)

--- Sayfa 411 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

409
And: How often do you attend religious services?
BASE=1000
Weight [with split ups]
Total
Male
Female
More than once a week
5,8
6,1
5,5
Once a week
8,6
5,4
11,7
Once a month
4,5
4,3
4,7
Only on special holy days/Christmas/Easter
days
7,7
6,9
8,4
Other specific holy days
2,9
2,0
3,8
Once a year
5,4
5,7
5,0
Less often
9,4
8,4
10,4
Never practically never
55,7
61,3
50,4
Total
988 (100%)
484 (100%)
504 (100

And: Do you pray to God outside of religious services?
BASE=1000
Weight [with split ups]
Total
Male
Female
Every day
16,9
12,1
21,6
More than once a week
7,0
5,0
8,9
Once a week
5,0
5,3
4,7
At least once a month
4,7
5,3
4,2
Several times a year
6,2
4,5
7,8
Less often
12,0
12,9
11,1
Never
48,3
55,0
41,7
Total
932 (100%)
462 (100%)
470 (100%

--- Sayfa 412 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

410
The disparity in “belonging”, “attending” and “personal spirituality” was significant.  There was value
evidently placed upon identification with a religious tradition but active participation in both public
and personal ritual practice was placed on a low premium.
Two trajectories are running consequently and simultaneously in the religious life of northern Europe.
The fact that they have occurred at the same time is partly a coincidence; each however encourages
the other. On the one hand, the historic churches, despite their continuing presence are losing their
capacity to form the religious thinking of large sections of the population especially amongst the
young. At the same time, the range of choice widens all the time as new forms of religion come into
Europe from outside, largely as the result of the movement of people. Populations that have arrived in
Europe primarily for economic or political reasons bring with them different ways of being religious
some of which are Christian and some not; conversely European people travel the world, experiencing
amongst other things considerable religious diversity. In this sense a genuine religious marketplace is
emerging in most parts of the continent.
The crucial question lies, however, not in the existence of the marketplace in itself but in the
capacities of Europeans to make use of this phenomenon. Hence, in my view, the significance of an
increasingly observable trend which is taking place both inside and outside the historic churches,
from an understanding of religion as a form of responsibility to an increasing emphasis on utilization.
What until moderately recently was simply imposed with all the negative connotations of this word, or
inherited becomes instead a matter of personal choice.  I go to a place of worship because I want to,
maybe for a short period or maybe for longer; to fulfil a particular rather than a general need in my
life. This is where I will continue my attachment so long as it provides what I want, but I have no
obligation either to attend in the first place or to continue if I do not wish to do so. In essence there is
a move towards “designer” or “preference religion” where “religion” becomes commodified.
A further ingredient in the religious life of northern Europe is the growing diversity in its faith
traditions not least with the arrival of significant Muslim communities.  A private Islam makes no
sense; indeed it is almost an oxymoron. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Europe’s Muslim
communities make increasing claims on public space in European societies to the discomfort, in many
cases, of their host societies particularly those whose dominant mode of religious life has been to
believe but not to belong [Davie 1994]. Islam, in other words, disturbs Christian nominalism (i.e. the
increasingly privatized forms of inherited religion).  It disturbs very much less those Christians who
have chosen to belong to their churches.  Indeed the latter are beginning to see in Islam a positive role
model, despite the disquiet amongst those of them whose theology embodies exclusive forms of
Christianity. The role model argument proceeds as follows:  if small and newly arrived Muslim
communities can make claims on public space in Europe, so too can Christians – in for example the
complex moral debates of modern societies and in the competition for adequate institutional
provision for all those in European societies who take religious practice and faith seriously. .
The latter point can be exemplified in any number of ways; it concerns amongst many other things the
political sphere, educational provision and access to the media. The pressure to include a question
about religion in the 2001 UK Census was a case in point. The Muslim community provoked the
debate by wanting to be counted as Muslims (rather than in national or ethnic categories).  But if
Muslims made such a claim, why should not Christians, or at least certain kinds of Christians who
wished precisely to stand up and be counted? Numbers, after all, can be used to support initiatives
elsewhere in society, not least in terms of education and the media. The size of the community

--- Sayfa 413 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

411
becomes a bargaining point in the on-going negotiations between different societal groups and a
national government.
It is an unfounded scheme therefore to predict the demise of either the European churches or of
religious practice or of the latent support that is given to religious traditions and communities by
significant sections in the population.  Already innovative forms of religion have begun to emerge,
both inside and outside the traditional churches and amongst the now settled faith expressions that
have migrated to northern Europe since 1945. Such groups may be numerically small but they will, I
suggest be capable of sustaining forms of religion that become one crucial variable among others in
the competing claims of Europeans in their public as well as their private lives. This gradual and on-
going metamorphosis is arguably incorrectly described by the term ‘privatization’. With this mind,
Casanova’s analysis of public religion in the modern world can be applied as much in northern Europe
as it can in the rest of the world [Casanova 1994. In essence Europe proffers an intriguing diversity of
religious practice both wary of radical appearances of religious fervour and yet responsive to the
ineffable.  It is into this paradoxical shared discourse that such a movement as that engendered from
the writings and teachings of Fethullah Gülen enters the wider European stage.

3. A Counter Movement
Originating in Turkey but becoming increasingly transnational, the movement represents novel
approaches to the relationship between faith and reason, peaceful coexistence in liberal democracies
with religious diversity, education and spirituality. [Aslandogan, 2007: vii].  Hendrick [2007: 12–3,
30-1] concludes that the Gülen Movement is “the Turkish-based, globally expansive ‘service
movement’ [and] …a civil/cosmopolitan mobilization” that “strives to present itself as exemplary in
regard to ways in which Islamic morality and ethics might fuse with, rather than combat, the financial
and political institutions of neo-liberal globalization”.
As Melucci [1999: 177] argues, such an understanding brings to the surface most notably the right to
be different. In terms of political action, this requires opening up new channels of representation and
granting access to so far excluded themes, projects and services. Rather than in contentious, political
or direct action, the Gülen Movement has exerted itself in constructive efforts to form the public space
and to consolidate and revitalize education, inter-religious dialogue and democratization. This is an
expression of Qur’anic altruism as a counter movement.
Gülen’s understanding of duty, to serve humanity especially in the field of education, “permits no
expectation of material or political gain. Sincerity and purity of intention should never be harmed or
contaminated” [Ünal and Williams, 2000: 22].  Woodhall [2005: 2, 14] maintains:
It must be remembered, however, that his philosophy of education is not utilitarian, nor a social and
political activity which can be divorced from the rest of his philosophy or faith, but a firmly integrated
and well-developed component of his world view. ...He indicates that the means must be as valid as
the end, apparent or material success is not the only measure...
In the same vein, Tekalan [2005: 3, 7–8] describes the purpose of the movement: The basic purpose
is to ensure respect for objective and universal human values, to never have ulterior motives to seek
material interests nor to impose any ideology or to seize power through politics in any country.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

412
This understanding of service is geared primarily to ‘offering’ in Turkey and abroad. Simply, this
mobilization presents alternative models which state systems cannot replicate. Hence, it has attracted
broad attention, in favour and against, within a short period of time [Ünal and Williams, 2000: 22).
Melucci 1999: 359] argues that such action, such “offering”, represents another breakdown in the
rules of the game, for it is a symbolic challenge against the dominant cultural codes and the customary
basis of strategic and instrumental logic in complex societies. He adds that the unilateral power of
giving and thus generating and providing cultural models, constantly result in a movement’s
predominance in societies, as the autonomous and gratuitous production of cultural models are not
governed by cost-benefit calculations.
The business, educational and interfaith organizations operating across the borders of economic,
political and cultural spheres adopt a common rationality based on knowledge, skills and shared
ethical values (Fountain, 2002: 5). This educational mobilization addresses time, space, personal
relations, and individual selfhood, and the affective deep structure of individual behaviour. Therefore,
the rationality of the Gülen Movement does not exhibit change, whether in Turkey or anywhere else
These successful trans-national and joint projects yield significant recognition, cooperation and
acknowledgement from foreign entities and organizations [Stephenson, 2006: 30 –1; Aslandogan and
Çetin, 2006: 45–8; Irvine, 2006: 55–74; Hendrick, 2006: 29, Ates, et al., 2005: 14].  Gülen especially
encourages people to serve humanity through education, intercultural and interfaith activities and
institutions, in order to lessen the gaps between peoples and to establish bridges for the common
good and peace. These initiatives to cooperate with other faiths and cultures bring acknowledgement
of the non-violent and peace-making vision of the Gülen Movement (Özdalga in Akman 2003; Weller,
2006: 86–8). Gülen (2004a: 259) stresses this frequently in his articles, now compiled as a book,
Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance:
Now that we live in a global village, Gülen extends this idea to contend that the best way to serve
humanity is to establish dialogue with other civilizations, to come together on some common ground,
with mutual understanding and respect, and thus to work for peace, the cooperation of diverse
peoples, and the prevention of the predicted clash of civilizations.
Taking the image of the global village, Gülen extends this idea to contend that the best way to serve
humanity is to establish dialogue with other civilizations, to come together on some common ground,
with mutual understanding and respect, and thus to work for peace, the cooperation of diverse
peoples, and the prevention of the predicted clash of civilizations. He argues that education is the
most effective vehicle, regardless of whether it is in Turkey or abroad, and whether or not people have
systems working or failing, as every problem in human life ultimately depends on human beings
themselves [Ünal and Williams 2000: 305–31; the site http://en.fGülen.com/, and Aslandogan and
Çetin  2006: 31ff; Yildirim 2005: 120].

4. “And the wind is blowing”
Key facets of the Gülen Movement’s culture accordingly include its Qur’anic ethic, the ideal of the
insan i-kamil, flexibility, altruism, adaptability and reliability [Keles 2007]. These are invaluable
resources in accommodating to new situations, whereas more rigid and exclusive cultures would have
experienced greater difficulties in coping with true uncertainty. Simultaneously, destructuring has
been accompanied by restructuring or the revival of collective energies through the experience,

--- Sayfa 415 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

413
credibility and heritage which the service-networks had already established and from which it has
benefited because the collective actor of the Gülen Movement has not sunk into a total subjugation or
a sort of collective psychosis at the cultural and group or service network levels. (Melucci, 1996: 375)
Also, a number of explanations can be given for the capacity of the Gülen Movement to respond to
such a situation positively and peacefully, instead of retreating into passivity, as in Melucci’s
argument (1996: 376–7). The first is the reliability and legitimacy of the authority that Gülen and his
readers already enjoyed. The second is the density and vigour of the formal and informal networks of
belonging, and the entire heritage present in the Gülen Movement, and the ability to restructure,
redirect, and reshape them in new situations. The third is the ability to listen to society at various
levels.
The Gülen Movement’s activities flourish most amidst political systems that are marked by
confinement and authoritarian rule. Its adherents for example as teachers do not aim to maximize the
advantages of the actor in political decisions. No matter how their worldview or services might
empirically affect the political system, they do not threaten or infringe on the system of rules of a state
nor extend to alter its institutional boundaries. The services given by the community are not a contest
among adversaries for the distribution of control over the allocation of social production and the
creation of imbalances of power among social positions. Thus, all the efforts of the Gülen Movement
need to be analysed as collective social altruism, using analytical categories other than political ones.
Özdalga [2000: 89–90; 2003: 61–2; Akman 2003] attempts to explain this use of Weber’s notion of
‘worldly asceticism’.
In social movement theory ends or goals are a central term which often synonymously includes and
relates to plans, schemes, projects and strategies. Researchers vary in their conceptualizations and the
diversity tempts them to choose or ignore one or a few elements relating to different or other variables
(Lofland, 1996: 257, 259).
Rather than advancing political ambitions, his [Gülen’s] objective is to foster an ethic that comes very
close to what Max Weber described as ‘worldly asceticism,’ an activist pietism with a tendency toward
the rationalization of social relationships. To intolerant reactions, which imply that he is after political
gains or seeking a new political formation in the Turkish or any context Gülen responds:
I have absolutely no political aspirations and expectations. I have never been involved in any political
effort or activity. …But I see myself as a genuine member of this nation, as one of the threads in the
lace of this culture. So as long as I live, if I have an opinion about an issue related to it, I won’t hesitate
to express it.’ [Ünal and Williams, 2000: 177]
The Gülen model of active non-political engagement with a host society contrasts with northern
European experiences where denominational or faith sector education is ineluctably involved with the
political process and lobbying.  As indicated by the EVS evidence [EVS 2006] there is considerable
disparity between belief and practice of religious values in European societies and most certainly in
the UK context.  As I have already indicated it is oxymoronic to suggest that in Muslim observance
there is a divide between public ethic, social construction and observance, and personal devotion.
Consequently, the debate surrounding the provision of faith sector schools in the UK has consistently
embraced a public and political colour.  Education Acts from 1870, to 1944, to 1988 and subsequent
legislation have secured the place of Christian and Jewish denominational education. Since 1997 and
2001 the UK government has reinforced this commitment to its provision of faith based educational

--- Sayfa 416 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

414
environments for Muslim, Sikh and other faith groups present in British society [Open Society 2005.
124-125].
The atmosphere of the deliberations and policies is one characterised by conflict, contentiousness,
protectionism and misunderstanding.  Esposito [1995] examines media coverage that portrays the
relationship between European / Western societies and Islam as one of antipathy.  Press reporting
focuses upon particular global events ranging from the 1979 Iranian Revolution and the current
antagonistic relationship between Iran and the USA, to the also contemporary combative activities in
Iraq and Afghanistan.   This ideological collision is in addition present in education [Halstead 1993]
both in the UK, France, Germany and the Netherlands with debate ensuing over the nature of state
funding, religious observance and education, and the wearing of the hijab by girls.  From finance to
the curriculum, from religious symbolism to wearing of a head scarf, the discussion concerns the
management and encouragement of religious pluralism, integration, diversity, unity and equality of
opportunity in education
The UK Islamic Human Rights Commission conducted research in 2004 on British Muslims’
expectations examining educational provision.  Of 1125 respondents 47.5% stated that they would
prefer to send their children to a Muslim school rather than a state school; 40% responded that
religious values were of the utmost concern for them in nurturing their children; 38.5% would opt for
the best school available; and only 8.5% would choose a mainstream state funded secular school
[Ameli & Merali 2004].
It is not simply the weak educational achievements of Muslim children in state schools that result in
such a low preference response for such schools but also the apprehension that Qur’anic ethics and
values are challenged in such environments.  There is no division between personal piety, religious
observance, morality and citizenship in Islam.  It is an oxymoronic perception.  Modood comments
that  “…the real; division of opinion is not between a conservative element in the Church of England
versus the rest of the country, but between those who think religion has a place in secular public
culture and those who think not.” [Modood 1994. 71]. In a similar mode Newbigin asserts “…in our
present situation in Britain, where Christians and Muslims share a common position as minority
faiths in a society dominated by the naturalistic ideology, we share a common duty to challenge this
ideology” [Newbigin et al 1998].  It may be added that it is a common duty to challenge not only
secularist ideologies but also the nominalism as evidenced in the European Values Surveys in
religious adherence, understanding, practice and understanding of beliefs.
Faith sector / denominational schools create “Christian”, “Jewish”, “Muslim” or whatever faith
“educational spaces” which are valued and sought after by parents.  These are “spaces” where respect
for particular faiths are respected, cultivated and accepted as integral for framing contemporary UK
society.  It is only by creating such “spaces” that the faith communities become normalised, visible,
incorporated and established in wider society.

5. Conclusion
Fethullah Gülen simultaneously embraces and represents several aspects of both traditional and also
innovative Islamic thought and practice.  This combination of characteristics, abilities and
qualifications, some of which have hitherto seemed mutually exclusive, marks him out from other
scholars and reformers and has provided him with a transformative edge [Keles 2007].

--- Sayfa 417 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

415
The Gülen synthesis is significant. It seeks to empower and enable people through education and
dialogue, which challenge cultural perceptions and religious dogmas [Keles 2007]. It seeks to mobilise
the individual and society towards achieving and becoming insan-i kamil which can only progress in a
free, fair and just society [Keles 2007]. Since Gülen’s goals and teachings are justified in traditional
Islamic sources, they should have no problem of legitimacy or authenticity. Just as Gülen’s and the
movements’ efforts have helped strengthen the influence of Muslim thought and active social
engagement from the periphery increasingly to the centre  in Turkey, my contention is that this is
being replicated both in the wider Muslim world and in non-Muslim societies [Keles 2007]. The pace
of this influence naturally depends on the movement’s wider presence.
It can be said that the Gülen Movement is most successful in the sight of communities globally when it
mobilises inactive, dormant, but innovative energies present in societies. It absorbs conflicting
pressures and eases tension within fragmented communities. It has transformed the potential for
coercion to induce changes in political systems into efforts to produce beneficial services. Also, it has
never shown any inclination whatsoever towards violence, despite provocations and ill-treatment.
[Aslandogan and Çetin, 2006: 43–4, 51–4].
The Gülen Movement has involved diverse people within a comparatively brief period of time over a
large geographical area to achieve educational and other projects. It appears to have established the
exact ratio, or the ideal balance, between risks and advantages, so that millions of people take part in
serving. By recognizing the outcomes of its actions and securing positive recognition from others, the
participants in the movement compare and perceive its consistency and continuity over time and
across borders.  The movement has formed a large number of organisations operating across borders
in economic, political and cultural spheres. It circulates and diffuses ideas, information, new patterns
of action and cultures. In this way, it is able to transfer latency into visibility through collective action
and services, which are then institutionalised. Through associational and relational service networks
and through the media the participants in the movement harmoniously integrate and liaise between
its many layers formally and informally when needed (Özdalga, 2005: 443). 76
Karaman and Aras (2000: 56) argue,
“Gülen represents the continuation of a long Sufi tradition of seeking to address the spiritual
needs of the people, to educate the masses, and to provide some stability in times of turmoil.
And, like many previous Sufi figures (including the towering thirteenth-century figure, Jalal
ad-Din Rumi), he is wrongly accused of seeking political power”.
The movement inspired and guided by Fethullah Gülen is offering Muslims a way to live out Islamic
values amidst the complex demands of modern societies and to engage in ongoing dialogue and
cooperation with people of other religions” [Michel, 2005 91]. As Thomas Michel also acknowledges,
Gülen [2004a: 250] deserves the last word:
The peace of this (global) village lies in respecting all these differences, in considering these
differences to be part of our nature, and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences.
Otherwise, it is unavoidable that the world will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes, fights, and
the bloodiest of wars, thus preparing the way for its own end.
This is a new wind that is blowing………for “religion is the only thing to knit up such a scattered
empire” of humanity.

--- Sayfa 418 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

416

--- Sayfa 419 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

417

Transforming the Muslim World: Gülen in
Re-Conceptualisation "the Muslim Citizen”

PART
8

--- Sayfa 420 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

418

--- Sayfa 421 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

419
FROM ‘NEW MAN’ TO ‘WORLD CITIZEN’: THE
REPLICATION OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN’S RENEWAL VISION
IN THE DUTCH CONTEXT
TINEKE PEPPINCK 589

Abstract
This research590 elaborates the question of what the vision of Fethullah Gülen is with regard to
renewal and modernization, what the historical context is for this vision and what relevance this
has for the Dutch context. First of all we note that modernization was a necessity in Turkey to
catch up with the Western world and avoid the risk of being exploited by ‘more civilized’ nations.
As a result of the reforms in the Turkish top-down modernization, the role of religion (Islam) in
the public domain was marginalized. In his vision Fethullah Gülen is challenging this
interpretation of modernization. He argues that in fact it is diminishing the role of historical and
religious values that leads to a weakening of the Turkish nation, because in this way it loses its
identity and is subjugated by materialism. As a solution he sees the hope of a renewal of the
nation through a ‘golden generation’ of young people who have secured their identity in line with
their history or belief but who are at the same time well educated, specially in modern sciences,
and so form a lead group willing to engage in sustained service to humanity. In this way they can
serve as an example function to the wider society of unity and common purpose around shared
values, which help that society to achieve the unity of common purpose and so be an example to
the world as a whole. In the Dutch context it seems that the people are mainly sympathetic to this
vision and opposed to the Dutch sub-categorization. The Gülen Movement’s members are
striving to put people with different backgrounds, who usually live alongside each other, in
dialogue and let them work together on shared goals. The Movement is socially very active in its
mission of serving humanity regardless of ethnicity, religion and culture, in the hope that this
will reflect on the Dutch society. Some of its members have even expressed their expectation that,
in this manner, the Netherlands, as a diverse but peaceful society, will become a role model for
other countries. In this respect the paper emphasizes the development and participation of the
Turkish community as a pioneer group in Dutch society and in the development of Dutch youth
into ‘world citizens’, tolerant towards other beliefs and cultures, a programme fully in line with
the vision of Fethullah Gülen and the Gülen Movement’s role models.

589 Trained as a of teacher of foreign living languages (OALT, Opleiding tot Leraar Allochtone Levende Talen) at the
Hogeschool Brabant in Breda. In 2001 she extended her study of Turkish at the department of Languages and Cultures of
the Middle East at the University of Leiden. She has been a teacher of Turkish at the Volksuniversiteit Amsterdam since
September 2004. In August 2007 she finished her study of Turkish. Her thesis — under the supervision of Professor Erik-
Jan Zürcher at the University of Leiden — is on ‘The Vision of Fethullah Gülen on Renewal as an Alternative to
Modernization, and its Reflection in the Dutch context’. Her interest in this subject came from the desire to deepen as a
Christian in her perception of and approach to the activities of Turkish Muslims in the Netherlands.
590 This paper is a result and recapitulation of author’s research conducted in the spring of 2007 under supervision of
professor Erik-Jan Zürcher at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

420
1. Introduction
Modernization, secularism, democracy: these are all important issues for us in the Western world, but
for sure in Turkey as well. Even more than in Europe, modernization in Turkey was already an
important issue and a necessity in the nineteenth century. Why? Turkey, then the Ottoman Empire,
found itself in a difficult position. For centuries the Ottoman state had been powerful and seemed
insuperable, but from the early 1800s the tide had begun to turn. After the industrial revolution in the
West, the Ottoman Empire was confronted with a renewed Europe that had leapt forward in the area
of science and technology.
In a modernizing world such renewal is a pre-condition for national survival without loss of
independence and domination by the so-called ‘civilized nations’. Modernization was also the
reference point in the ideology that was espoused in order to liberate Turkey from Western
domination — Kemalism — introduced through the leader of Turkey’s war of independence and
founder of the modern Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Kemalism is an enlightening ideology, with
the goal of raising a generation with free minds, freedom of conscience and freedom of knowledge.591
According to Atatürk, this attitude was the foundation of Western successes in the scientific arena and
would now prove to be the key for the success of Turkey as well. This success would guarantee it a
place among the family of ‘civilized nations’.

2. Turkey as Indivisible Unity
Religion was seen by the modernizing Kemalist elite as the great obstacle to that goal. The dogmas
embedded in religion were bound, according to Kemalism, to prevent people from critical, scientific
reasoning. Moreover, religion was bound to lead to divisions — during the later Ottoman era it had
already been demonstrated how its different constituent communities (called ‘millets’) could be
exploited to justify and enable foreign intervention.
Atatürk had concrete plans to take care of this threatening diversity stemming from religion. Under
the influence of the European model of the nation state, it was decided that Turkey should form an
indivisible unitary state identified with a territory and a people and with Turkish as its national
language.592 This ambition for unity was reflected in the establishment of a Directorate of Religious
Affairs that would decide what the correct explanation of Islam was and control all appointments to
religious office in the country. That is why, even now, all religious officials in Turkey are government
employees. That brings up the question of what the separation of church and state means in Turkey in
this case. It was clear for Atatürk that secularism means that the state implements the definition of
Islam as ‘the religion of understanding and reason of modern Turks’; all other dimensions of religious
belief and affiliation are matters for private conscience, excluded from public concern.

591 Sina Akşin, ‘The nature of the Kemalist revolution’ in David Shankland (ed.), The Turkish Republic at 75 Years
(Cambridge, 1999), 14–28 at 17.
592 Article 3 in the Constitution of Turkey: ‘Türkiye Devleti, ülkesi ve milletiyle bölünmez bir bütündür.’

--- Sayfa 423 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

421
3. Risale-i Nur
In the first years of the Republic when everything other than state-sanctioned expressions of religion
were kept out of the public domain, Risale-i Nur was written. This Qur’an commentary had the goal of
equipping all faithful Muslims and any doubting ones to hold onto Islam through the challenges of
modern times.
This commentary was written by Said Nursi, an Islamic thinker viewed as a dissident by the regime,
and who therefore spent the greater part of his life in prison or in exile. According to Nursi this
treatment was unjust, because he complied with the rules of the game — that religion should be
restricted to private conscience. He challenged the accusations laid against him by arguing that what
he aimed at was in fact individual, private conscience and nothing else; that his discourses were based
on inspiring and encouraging individual, personal consciences, as well as emphasizing that, in these
days, it is not sufficient to have faith through imitation (taklidî iman). In these days what is needed is
a faith through personal quest and individual research (tahkikî iman).593
That is why he tried to make people aware through his exposition of the Qur’an that science and
religion should be combined; that science should not be eschewed on the basis that revealed books
like the Qur’an and other revelations have already provided the answers to all questions. One should,
on the contrary, focus on science in order to gain insight through the ‘book of the universe’ into the
reality that scientifically established facts do not undermine religious insights; rather, they subtly
affirm and illustrate them.
Despite the obstacles put in the way of Said Nursi’s work, the number of people who smuggled his
writings and commentaries on the Qur’an out of prison, then made multiple copies of them in secret
and distributed them, increased. They were called the ‘Disciples of Light’ (Nur talebeleri).
The young Fethullah Gülen, who was studying Islamic theology in the provincial city of Erzurum
became acquainted with some of these ‘Disciples of Light’ and the work of Said Nursi, the Risale-i
Nur, in 1960, shortly before Nursi’s death. The Risale-i Nur must have made a big impression on him
because many elements of it can be found in the vision that he would develop in the following years.
As a teacher in a Qur’an school in the big city İzmir, in the years after his study, Gülen strove to
enliven the personal belief experience of young people.
As a preacher he knew how to touch people in such a way that they made funds available for summer
camps, for example, where young people could be guided in their studies, but where there was room
too for open discussions about religious and social subjects. He also encouraged his sympathizers to
rent houses where students could stay, the so called ‘Light Houses’ (Işık evleri), establish dormitories
and later — in the period between 1980 and 1995 when Turkish politics followed a liberal course — for
private educational institutions and schools.594

593 Hakan Yavuz, Islamic Political Identity in Turkey (Oxford, 2003), 157–60.
594 ‘1971–1979/1980–1988 Hayat Kronolojisi’ at http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/3500/5/ ;
http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/3499/5/.

--- Sayfa 424 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

422
4. Gülen-Inspired-Schools
With the fall of the Iron Curtain the group of people inspired by the vision of Fethullah Gülen (the
Gülen Movement) focused on Central Asia, which was a religious and ideological vacuum after the fall
of communism. In Central Asia and world-wide schools were set up that had the same curriculum as
the state schools and with a neutral, rather than any overtly religious or Islamic, character, the ‘Gülen
schools’.
Sources from 1998 mention 150 schools and 250 other institutions in Turkey, and 250 schools
including 7 universities, mainly in Central Asia and the Balkans, but also in the Philippines and in
Africa.595 Although there are conspiracy theories about how educational institutions on this scale are
financed, Fethullah Gülen has always made clear that these are an initiative and a result of generous
Turkish citizens and of the self-sacrifice of volunteers, like the teachers who are willing to work at (or
at less than) minimum wage. What then is this vision of Fethullah Gülen that appeals to so many
people and that leads to such results?
It turns out that, in certain respects, it is rather like Kemalism, in that it tries to deal with the
dilemma: How do we Turks hold our identity as Turks and secure our position in the world? In
Gülen’s way of dealing with it the word ‘Turks’ denotes mainly the Islamic community; and for him,
the term ‘identity’ refers not only to being ethnically or linguistically Turkish, but also (indeed,
mainly) to the Turks’ Islamic identity and the ethical values linked to it.596
The Islam that Fethullah Gülen preaches is in fact not necessarily a dogmatic Islam to which religious
rules are central.597 It is more of a mystical Islam, one that aims at personal development of the
individual, of a good human being who matures in the qualities esteemed by everyone— qualities like
loving one’s fellow human beings, courage, modesty and the willingness to do something altruistically,
for the benefit of others. Besides, Fethullah Gülen is known to many people as the face of tolerant and
liberal Islam. He is therefore presented as a champion of dialogue, with goodwill and tolerance
towards people of other cultures and beliefs. He visited the Pope in 1998, which was seen as a good
example of his practising the principles he preached.

5. A Threat to Democracy?
It was astonishing then that in 1999 tapes came in at the Turkish television broadcaster ATV, in which
this universally esteemed and respected teacher (‘Hoca Efendi’) seems to call his disciples to wait for
the right moment to seize power in Turkey. The public prosecutor opened a lawsuit to investigate
Fethullah Gülen on the basis of the charge of ‘founding an illegal organization aiming to change the
structure of the secular state, in order to found a state based on religious laws’.598

595 Unal Bilir, ‘Turkey Islam: Recipe for Success or Hindrance to the Integration of the Turkish Diaspora Community in
Germany’ in: Journal of Muslim Minority affairs, 24 (2004): 25983 at 264.
596 M. Hakan Yavuz, ‘The Gülen Movement’ in Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito (eds.) Turkish Islam and the Secular
State (New York, 2003), 21–47, at 24.
597 Ünal Bilir, ‘Turkey Islam’, 269
598 Nuh Mete Yüksel, Fethullah Gülen örgütu hakkında iddianame at
http://www.belgenet.com/dava/Gülendava_04.html#1)

--- Sayfa 425 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

423
Were these well-founded accusations, or were they an act of hostility on the part of the Turkish state?
There are arguments for the latter explanation, expressed by members of the Gülen community. In
regard to the accusations it is only proper to note that the state has always had the monopoly on the
definition of Islam, as well as of important concepts like democracy and secularism. Indeed, Hakan
Yavuz argues that one of the reasons for the hostility on the part of the Turkish state may have been
the establishment of the ‘Journalists and Writers Foundation’, which is traced back to the Gülen
community. This Foundation seemed to have the potential to win over the Turkish cultural and
commercial elite, through involvement in shared projects aiming at the formulation of a ‘social
contract’.599
The importance of the ideas that the state favours — democracy, secularism and modernization — is
recognized by Fethullah Gülen and he says he supports them. Why then is he being accused of being a
threat to those ideas, and even accused of striving for an Islamic state? In the so called ‘Abant
Declarations’ published by the Journalists and Writers Foundation subjects like ‘Islam and
secularism’ are clearly presented and not in any way that contradicts the meaning or content of
concepts like modernity, Islam and democracy, the definition of which the state monopolizes.
Now, Fethullah Gülen himself acknowledges the value of ideas like modernization, secularism and
democracy, but he tries also to discuss their content and to give them a provenance and meaning
different from that given by the ‘Kemalists’. Thus, for him ‘democracy’ is an idea, a value, that is
inherent to Islam. According to him the Turkish people need a higher type of democracy than the
present one; a democracy that offers more room to the spiritual (religious/Islamic) faculties, of which
in his view the people are in need. ‘Secularism’ envisages that the state will not interfere in the
religious experience of its citizens, so that it can ‘create a climate where everyone can sow his ideas
unhindered and harvest its crop’.600
Fethullah Gülen’s vision is, in itself, an alternative form of modernization. As we said earlier,
modernization seems to be a necessary condition for maintaining the right to sustain independent
existence in this world, without being oppressed or taken advantage of by the so-called ‘civilized
nations’, without having to relinquish one’s own identity in exchange for a ‘civilized culture’. It is
interesting that this is the starting point as much of the Kemalist vision as it is of that of Fethullah
Gülen. Both want to avoid dependency and being dominated, but at the same time their ideas about
how to achieve that differ strongly. Fethullah Gülen has sharp criticisms of the results of the type of
modernization that Atatürk strove for. He does not blame Atatürk for this, because according to him
Atatürk had the same opinion as himself, only he was understood in a wrong way and it was presented
to the people in a wrong way.601

599 Hakan Yavuz, ‘The Gülen Movement’, 42
600 Reha Muhtar’s interview with Fethullah Gülen,12-09-2001 at http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/222/5/ 06-03-2007).
601 Taha Akyol and Cengiz Çandar’s interview with Fethullah Gülen, 27-02-1998 for NTV, at
http://tr.fGülen.com/content/view/1464/74/.

--- Sayfa 426 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

424
6. Imitation of Western modernity
According to Fethullah Gülen, the example of the ideal is to be found in the situation that obtained in
the first centuries after the appearance of the Prophet, and again during the first centuries of the
Ottoman Empire. According to him, in those days the Islamic society was seen as the most ethical and
developed in the world. The Muslims were able to develop a tremendous governing body because they
were able to appreciate the value of (as he calls it) ‘the tripartite foundation of inspiration, rationality
and experience’.602 Their moral excellence and progressiveness, relatively to the time they lived in,
were due to the traditions and structures that made them stop and reflect on the transitoriness of the
earthly life and the reality of the eternal one. Accordingly, people were able to focus on the value of
immaterial goods like science, knowledge and the defence of law and justice.603 This was the reason
why they seemed destined to rule in the world. However, the moral and spiritual legacy that promised
them authority in the world was wasted in that they sacrificed their religious values in favour of the
hope of greater worldly prosperity. In point of fact the escape of imitating Western modernity made
the Turkish nation vulnerable, because that is how they lost their identity and became a slave and
puppet of the West: ‘We have made one of the most unforgivable mistakes of history— sacrificing our
religion in return for prosperity. We accepted a way of thinking in which this worldly life is regarded
as superior to religion. Since that moment on, we have been struggling to get out of the web of
impossibilities in which we have been trapped. Religion is long gone, but the expected worldly
prosperity has not been obtained.’604
The result, according to Gülen, is dependency, with Turkey obliged to seek to please the West at all
costs; moreover, the Turkish people find themselves in a miserable state because of their addiction to
materialism.
Although according to the Kemalist ideology a human can only be free if religion is deprived of
influence in the public sphere, Fethullah Gülen points out that the opposite is the case. Because of the
missing influence of religion, modern man becomes a slave to his greed and primitive drives, and to
other selfish fellow human beings who exploit him. The pursuit of ever greater worldly comfort
consumes ever more of a person’s energy, and takes away the peace and serenity that, according to
Gülen, finds its roots in a religious life. Nor does this make the person, from a scientific point of view,
more objective, because, being ruled by selfishness , he seeks and manipulates knowledge primarily in
order to serve material wants.605
What is the solution according to Gülen? The solution, like the problem, again resembles the goals of
Kemalism in many ways, but the content is completely different: his solution is to raise a new
generation of people who are truly free. Not freed from the influence of religion so as to think and act
in an unfettered, abandoned way, but free through the notion that they are servants of God, who are
bound to obey only His commands and who, therefore, need not bow before other kinds of power.
Free because they are aware of the reality that the core of belief is to strive for God’s approval, so they
are enabled to free themselves from worldly desires. And free to do scientific research in an honest
way because in their quest they are not manipulated by their own interests, so they can seek and apply

602 M. Fethullah Gülen, Ruhumuzun heykelini dikerken (The status of our souls; Ulm 2003),1–2.
603 M. Fethullah Gülen, Zamanın altın dilimi (The golden period of time; Ulm 2003), 55–58.
604 M. Fethullah Gülen, Ruhumuzun heykelini dikerken, 7.
605 Ibid, 20, 23.

--- Sayfa 427 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

425
knowledge for the good of the whole of humanity. Moreover, they take a broader view of science, a
holistic view, because in their scientific research, they consult, as well as the book of the universe, the
book of the religion also, and so they can obtain deeper insights. This new generation of people will be
active, dynamic — not in the pursuit of luxury — in the pursuit of the approval of God, which is
obtained through loving all creatures for the sake of the Creator, so that they become and remain
ever-conscious of their responsibilities towards their fellow human beings, the wider society and the
world.

7. The ‘New Man’
Just as the Kemalist elite sought to implement their own type of modernization in Turkey, so too do
Gülen and those who follow his way. He is convinced that the masses will not be able to implement
far-reaching changes in their present condition. For that to happen, people of insight are needed, who
will serve as pioneers. He expresses his expectations on this point as follows:
‘Out of the masses that are wandering behind people without the capability of reasoning and sound
thinking or following fantasies, as if they were sleepwalkers, a New Man will arise. This man will be
able to think in a modern and rational way, and he will put his trust not only in the mind but also in
his experiences and he believes as much in inspiration and conscience as in those two.’606
According to Gülen, the ‘New Man’ generation, as he calls them, are heroes, loyal to their own cultural
and religious values, but also developed in all fields and in harmony with the time in which they live.
These are people who, inside themselves, have realized a dialogue between elements that are
perceived as opposites by modernity: heart and mind, feeling and logic. They are people who focus on
the present world and at the same time keep their hearts and minds on the next.
The ‘New Man’ deploys himself using all these elements in order to become an enlightening example
to others in all walks of life, including the social, scientific and technological. He does this through
radiating ethical values and professionalism at the same time. Because the ‘New Man’ is a
‘peacemaker’, he also enters into dialogue with the rest of the society. His goal is to unite the diverse
components of society around shared values like virtuousness, decency, diligence and being helpful to
others. If the ‘New Man’ succeeds in this, a prosperous and peaceful society will emerge through
dialogue and through the persuasiveness of practical examples of service to others.
If such an effort succeeds in the case of the Turkish nation, this nation can become an example to the
rest of the world, and at the same time demonstrate that Islam offers solutions where merely political
or economic ideologies fail. Instead of being like the ignored child who is set to one side, the Turkish
people can become a pioneering nation able to unite the world around shared values, so that
eventually a peaceful world can come about — not through repression of the beliefs and cultural
traditions of others, but by winning hearts and minds through the influence of a good model of service
.
The emphasis that Gülen puts on the importance of education is completely in line with this general
mission. He says that an ideal community, society or world consists of ideal individuals. Ideal
individuals come to be through self-development, but especially through the example that they imbibe

606 M. Fethullah Gülen, Ruhumuzun heykelini dikerken Ibid, 17.

--- Sayfa 428 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

426
from a teacher, one who radiates knowledge and excellence and enables them to realize and fulfil their
potential to follow the same path.

8. Gülen’s Vision in the Dutch Context
What is the relevance of this vision of Fethullah Gülen in the Dutch context? Does it, can it, have any
application in the Netherlands? In summary, Gülen’s vision seems to envisage an alternative to the
type of modernization in Turkey that is geared to a rigorous secularism. The Netherlands (by contrast
with Kemalist Turkey) is a very liberal country, offering a lot of space to different beliefs. Let us not
forget that, as elsewhere, in the Netherlands this openness was not achieved without effort. The
influences of the French Revolution were felt for a long time in the Netherlands so that it too strove to
become a unitary nation-state, as illustrated by King Willem I commanding the Reformed Church to
nurture ‘love for King and Country’.607 This is quite comparable to the way the present Turkish
Directorate of Religious Affairs takes particular care to ensure that Islam serves national
consciousness.
In the Netherlands it was the so-called ‘separatists’ who were against this drive for unitary nationhood
and who were convinced that there is ‘a dependency on God, which makes [one] independent of the
state’.608
After that Abraham Kuyper was one of those who acted against measures to expel Christianity from
the public domain. He pleaded against uniformity in the public domain and on behalf of diversity,
arguing that ‘citizens would be more loyal to a government that would allow them to live according to
their own beliefs, than to a state that wanted to pour them into the same mould, and that therefore the
public domain should be open to every philosophy of life and not only the reasonable ones’.609 Ever
since, the Netherlands has been a composite society divided by different beliefs, each given the
opportunity to found its own schools, foundations, hospitals, help organizations etc.
During my research on the Gülen movement in the Netherlands, I was surprised to find that this
tendency to form and live in sub-groups, still very much present in the Netherlands because of its
particular historical background, was the very thing that the people that I interviewed found most
awkward.
Of course, some of the people that I spoke to in the Netherlands and who said they were inspired by
the vision of Fethullah Gülen, also stressed other problems that, in their view, Dutch society was
facing. One of their concerns was that the capitalist system, according to them, ignores the people’s
need for spiritual nourishment and education — something that is reflected in the growing number of
psychological problems among the Dutch people, the growing number of divorces, and the lack of
respect for the elderly because they are no longer economically productive. But the principal concern
was the lack of mutual openness and exchange between the various sub-groups. People in the

607 George Harinck, ‘Een leefbare oplossing, Katholieke en Protestantse tradities en de scheiding van kerk en staat’ in
Marcel ten Hooven and Theo de Wit (eds.), Ongewenste Goden. De publieke rol van religie in Nederland (Amsterdam,
2006), 106–30, at 107.
608 Ibid, 109.
609 Marcel ten Hooven, ‘Religie verdeelt Nederland’ in Marcel ten Hooven and Theo de Wit (eds.), Ongewenste Goden. De
publieke rol van religie in Nederland, 13–37, at 36.

--- Sayfa 429 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

427
Netherlands live alongside each other, isolated in their own world, so that there are many groups in a
splendid diversity — the Turkish community is one of these groups — but they live next to each other
without really living together with each other.

9. Tolerance and Dialogue
But how does this relate to the Gülen vision? Well, in the lack of tolerance that the different separate
groups show at times of crisis occurs (for example 9/11), there is an evident parallel with the situation
in Turkey. There are tensions between different groups (Kurds, Turkish Sunnis and Alawis,
Armenians) because the government has sought to impose a uniform identity on its citizens, as if it
meant to say: ‘You will be Turkish and speak Turkish and you shall never ever divide our country
because of divergent convictions’.
Gülen’s answer to this is, as we saw, an effort to be tolerant through the love of God, expressing love
and being of help to all creatures, to enter into dialogue in order to find out what is important for
everyone, so that collectively it can be striven for.
In the Dutch context everything appears to be sorted out: everyone has the right of freedom of speech,
and there is space made for every possible conviction, and yet this is not the ideal picture of
integration in the eyes of everyone. From the point of view of Gülen’s vision, a few people hold that
the fact that people experience their own identity in their own sub-group undermines mutual
tolerance and prevents dialogue about shared problems and prevents collaboration to achieve shared
goals, which would lead to unity while preserving different identities. Therefore, what they propose is
to know one’s own identity and encourage the exchange of the richness in that identity with the
different richness of other groups.610
How is this ideal to be practised in the Netherlands? Some of my interviewees said they were
convinced that self-development towards the ideal of a perfected human being (insan-i kâmil) is the
highest priority.611 This was especially the case for the Turkish and other communities of Muslims in
the Netherlands, who (according to the majority of my interviewees) were impeded by their poor level
of development relative to the main society.612 The ideal expressed by these interviewees is that
Muslims should understand the very first command of the Qur’an (iqra in Arabic, translated in
Turkish as ‘oku’, meaning not only ‘recite’ but also ‘read’ and ‘study’) as an imperative addressed to
themselves, namely: study and develop yourself through deepening in understanding of the book of
the universe and the book of the religion, to become a human being who has developed the heart,
head and hands.613 ‘Hands’ are included with the meaning of agency, of being active — because they
recognize the importance of their personal responsibility towards the wider (Dutch) society. They do
so through awareness of the transitoriness of this life and the reality of the eternal, through the
acceptance that a human being is not the outright owner of his qualities, skills and talents, but a
steward who is supposed to use those qualities for the benefit of humanity and not only to satisfy his

610 Author’s interview, 14-03-2007, with ‘Mahmut’ (pseud.).
611 Author’s interview, 17-04-2007 with Gürkan Çelik.
612 Author’s interviews, 26-02-2007, 13-03-2007, 16-04-2007 and 14-03-2007, with, respectively, Yusuf Alan, Alaattin
Erdal, Ahmet Taşkan and ‘Mahmut’(pseud.)
613 Author’s interviews, 26-02-2007, 13-03-2007 and 14-03-2007, with, respectively, Yusuf Alan, Alaattin Erdal and
‘Mahmut’(pseud.)

--- Sayfa 430 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

428
own material needs. 614 Full development and consciousness of this kind must surely lead the Turkish
and Muslim citizens of the Netherlands to be of more help and service to their fellow-citizens.
Thereafter, they will surely go on to send out their message, because playing a full part in society and
the possibility of influencing the world around you are closely related, indeed two sides of the same
coin.

10. Being a Good Example
Being a good example to others was understood as the means to reach the primary goals. Being a role
model is a constant theme in Gülen’s vision, which can be traced in the independent foundations set
up in the Netherlands by people who have let themselves be inspired by Gülen’s vision. You can find
role models and ‘mental trainers’ in the students association Cosmicus and in a few educational
centres in big cities in the Netherlands — ‘trainers’ who want to encourage Turkish young people to do
better, go higher. You can find role models in the Cosmicus College, which wants to encourage young
people to develop themselves as world citizens — as people who have the right qualities and who are
appreciated all over the world — altruistic people who are secure in their own identity, but who also
happen to be able to develop themselves so that they release that identity and their own story to the
rest of the world, to people of different culture and different belief.
You can find role models in the newspaper Zaman, that wants to improve the participation of Turkish
Dutch citizens in their society — by, on the one hand, making them aware of Dutch realities and, on
the other hand, by motivating them through presentation of appropriate role models — successful
female Turkish entrepreneurs, academics and students — to demonstrate what is possible.615
By being active in this way, it is possible for the people who are inspired by the vision of Fethullah
Gülen to join in everything that the Dutch society expects of its Turkish Muslim citizens. Let us take
the slogan of the new administration: ‘Work together, live together’. The efforts of these Gülen-
inspired people fits smoothly with that. Dialogue, tolerance, working together and participation are
ideals that are indeed universally valued. Then, those who join in so well have the room to add their
own content to these ideals, making it possible for others to come to understand them even as they
know and hold onto their own identity. They do this not only in order to have a way of existing in
Dutch society, but also, beyond that, in order to be an example, hopeful that this example may be
followed by their fellow-citizens so that they too can participate in a dialogue and no longer focus only
on their own interests, so that they too may become self-sacrificing servants of their fellow human
beings.
If as a result the different groups in Dutch society come, over time, to live peacefully with each other,
if it is proven that this concept works, then the Netherlands can be a role model for the whole world,
since the Netherlands, with all its diversity, is a reflection in miniature of the diversity of the world as
a whole. Then, if that example takes root in the wider world, we can make it into a place of peaceful
coexistence, free from suspicion, mistrust and conflict. 616 That high ideal can be sought after on the

614 Author’s e-mail correspondence, 31-03-2007, with Yusuf Alan about the article Kimim ben? at:
http://www.zamanhollanda.nl/haberdetay.asp?id=540.
615 Author’s interview, 13-03-2007, with Alaattin Erdal.
616 My interview, 12-04-2007, with ‘Cemal’ (pseud.).

--- Sayfa 431 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

429
basis of universal principles and values that, according to the Gülen Movement, find their origin in
Islam.

11. Concluding Remarks
What to make of all this? It very much depends on one’s personal beliefs.
As a Christian I recognize in this whole story many of the elements of my own faith. I also recognize
the influence of my ‘Abraham Kuyperian’ background in my way of thinking, because a uniform
society or world on the pattern of a unitary nation state is my greatest fear.
The Turkish and Dutch reality seem to have proven that the world and humanity are not ‘built’ to be
uniform; rather, they exist within the grace of diversity. A society where people are focused on
knowledge and spiritual values, instead of material things and personal interests, and one that is
based on appreciating one’s own identity, exchange and working together, seems to me much more
attractive. Loving, being mutually helpful, and working together are indeed universal values that are
more likely lead to peaceful coexistence than consumerism or national pride.
What I might be critical about in this vision is that the important principles in it that are supposed to
lead to peace lack the foundation that they have for me as a Christian. I cannot see Islam as the basic
origin of these principles because, for me, they find their ultimate fulfilment in Jesus. Consider, for
example, the ideal of service (hizmet), which makes you an example for others. It is a fact that the
influence that such service exerts is far stronger and more real than the effect of top-down power.
Jesus is for me the ultimate example of one who rejected earthly power and choose the way of serving
by choosing the cross for the sake of humanity; to make it possible for peace to enter between God and
man, so that people enter into dialogue not only with one another but also and especially with God
Himself. So that His Holy Spirit as ‘mental trainer’ can come to dwell in man, to make a ‘New Man’
out of him, serving others according to His example.617
For me it is difficult to understand how you can be an example to others of the love of God, if you have
not first seen for yourself what the example of love of God means for you. How can you sacrifice for
the interest of others if you have not first experienced how God shows His love by sacrificing Himself
for you?
However, I would counsel everyone, regardless of what belief they hold, and are concerned about the
growth of the influence of the Gülen movement, or of Islam or whatever conviction it may be, to study
the example of the Gülen movement. Instead of complaining, look into the mirror and ask yourself
what you have done by way of striving whole-heartedly for the well-being of your fellow human
beings. For sure they are more likely to be open to the influence of those who earn the right to have
such influence.
In some sense everyone’s particular view of life will determine the way a vision like that of Fethullah
Gülen is received and interpreted. Maybe that could be an interesting new topic for research.

617 Ephesians, 2:13–20.

--- Sayfa 432 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

430

--- Sayfa 433 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

431
NOW MORE THAN EVER: MAKING NON-VIOLENT CHANGE
IN A GLOBALISED WORLD
T. STEVE WRIGHT 618

Abstract
It is a dangerous thing telling truth to power. It is even more dangerous to live a life based on
non-violent values. Yet human bridges between truth and power are vital if we are to evolve our
collective human values to a higher level. An artificial split has been created between two
civilizations —essentially Christian versus Islamic — which reinforces false images of the other,
as other than human. Many biased commentators who reinforce emergent Islamophobia, are
largely ignorant of Islamic culture, or deliberately distort it to fit false stereotypes. Such
ignorance needs to be both challenged and exposed. The Gülen movement has started to redress
the balance, showing the world that Islam in action, is more about initiating peace and
reconciliation, than war. Quite different approaches to non-violence exist between East and
West, yet both can learn from each other. Conflicts are easier to start than avoid. Islam is the
world’s fastest growing faith, so there is much to learn from the Gülen emphasis on interfaith
sharing based on spiritual awareness rather than social, political or economic gain. But this very
role may be seen as a threat by others who do not share that humanitarian agenda. The paper
argues that in the midst of their spiritual and practical teaching, the Gülen community should
take inspiration from Western groups who apply peaceful non-violent action for social change in
the face of repression. This series of Gülen conferences, evidences a clear awareness that mutual
learning and self respect are essential if we are to move on together from these days. That
willingness to move across boundaries, to discuss important issues with similar members and
organizations of good will, is needed now more than ever.

1. Introduction
It is a dangerous thing to tell truth to power. It is even more dangerous attempting to live a life based
on non-violent values, especially in turbulent times. Yet without key groups of peace-minded people
willing to communicate their values, by living them out, we all risk losing our humanity.
An artificial split has been created of two civilisations: essentially Christian versus Islam, which is in
itself divisive, polarizing and ultimately destructive in reinforcing false images of the other as other
than human. Many commentators reinforcing emergent Islamophobia are largely ignorant of Islamic
culture and often deliberately distort it to fit false stereotypes. Such ignorance both within the West as

618 T. Steve Wright (PhD on ‘New Police Technologies and Sub-State Conflict Control’, Lancaster University): Senior
Lecturer in the School of Applied Global Ethics and an Associate Director of the Praxis Centre, Leeds Metropolitan
University. For almost thirty years, Dr Wright has lectured extensively across five continents on the social implications of
new internal security tactics and technologies. His most recent work covers new border control technologies and the climate
change crisis. Concerned that the US ‘War on Terror’ may be masking new and unsustainable global security agendas, his
ambition is to evolve human security programmes based on mutual respect which put the well-being of people first. This is
an updated version of the paper presented in the Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gulen Movement
Conference, House of Lords, SOAS and LSE, 25-27 October 2007.

--- Sayfa 434 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

432
well as within those who seek to pervert the teachings of the Qu’ran to justify terrorism, need to be
both challenged and exposed. In that regard, the Gülen movement has rather a unique place. it has a
community and a set of inspirational teachers and practices, which are transparent, firmly rooted in
Anatolian Islam, which can show the world that Islam in action, properly understood, is about
initiating peace and reconciliation rather than war.
Visionary peace researchers, such as Professor Johan Galtung have expressed profound concerns over
the way that the relationships between Christians and Muslims are developing. Galtung has
highlighted the fact that a largely Christian Europe could soon face an Islamic Union “stretching from
Casablanca to Mindanao” – and one which does not necessarily recognize the state borders defined by
previous Christian wars of aggression. Galtung is at pains to stress that this should be seen as an
opportunity for co-operative partnership and not a threat.(Galtung, 2005) In that regard, the Gülen
community offers a potentially vital bridge to such sharing, largely because of the transparency,
tolerance and  core values for future evolution of spiritual wellbeing advocated by Fethullah Gülen
himself. (Gülen 2006) This presentation seeks to explore some of those issues, together with the
wider context both of the challenges presented both by the geographical location of the Gülen
movement in Turkey, the political complications of Turkey being the neighbour of Iran and a future
Kurdistan and the military threats to all peace movements in the Middle East if America follows
through a game plan to launch an all out attack on Iran.
Different approaches to non-violence exist between the East and the West and both can learn from
each other. And yet conflict is easier to start than avoid especially given the social economic and
political contexts within which the Gülen movement and communities undertake their work. Given
that the Muslim community is the fastest growing faith on earth, there is much to learn from the
Gülen emphasis of interfaith sharing based on spiritual awareness rather than social political or
economic gain. And yet this very role may be seen as a threat by others who do not share that
humanitarian agenda. The paper argues that in the midst of their spiritual and practical teaching, the
Gülen community should be encouraged to learn more about the practical implementation of Western
peaceful non-violent action for social change, and vice versa. This conference and the others
organised by the Gülen community are evidence of the group’s awareness that mutual learning and
self respect are essential if we are to move on together from these days. That willingness to move
across boundaries to discuss important issues with similar members and organizations of good will, is
needed now more than ever.

2. Peace by Peace?
We are living in dangerous times. We can anticipate further polarization between Islam and the West,
as the official line becomes increasingly focused on achieving military solutions to what are essentially
political and cultural issues. The situation in regard to the Fethullah Gülen community is complicated
by both national and geo-politics. For example more than one publication called the July 22nd.
Elections , ‘the battle  for Turkey’s soul’.(Finkel, 2007) The military in Turkey are paranoid about a
perceived Islamist agenda and the associated rafts of constitutional issues which could flow from any
significant change from the status quo.
Dan Plesch and Martin Butcher in a recent report have made a comprehensive analysis of US plans to
attack Iraq as part of an ongoing war game plan after Iraq which includes Lebanon and Syria. They
provide the official scenarios using both conventional and nuclear strategies. If this came to pass, they

--- Sayfa 435 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

433
conclude that it would destabilize the middle east but conversely the impact of setting up an
autonomous Kurdish state on the border of Iran and Turkey would have impacts which would be
difficult to over estimate.(Plesch & Butcher,2007) Given these contexts, we should not be surprised if
our peace building and conflict reconciliation skills are required as people respond to changing
events, misconceptions and paranoia about the role of any peace organization, seeking peace by
peace,  including that of the Gülen movement. If I am right then I would anticipate that even the role,
function and activities of these recent Gülen conferences will have been misunderstood of spun out as
part of some hypothetical set of conspiracies, the more ridiculous, the better. Please let us discuss
some of the examples which are emerging….My presumption is that they reveal not truth but a smear
agenda which attempts to dis-empower the work of the Gülen movement….
So why have I decided focus on the role of non-violence in presenting this paper to such a timely
conference? Well, a short answer is that Fethullah Gülen is unusual in providing a distinctly Islamic
voice to the call for a non-violent approach to conflict resolution. But how well do Gülen’s teachings
on non-violence lead to peaceful transformation on the ground? Is his a static and passive approach
bounded by dogma, or are we witnessing an innovative, active and self aware spirit of transformation
which really can lead to a new way of defining Islam in action?
The presentation attempts to explore these questions via a comparison with Western writers such as
Johan Galtung and Paul Smoker who have deconstructed positive and negative peace and recognized
that structural violence is as important as direct violence, both of which need to be eliminated to
establish new cultures of peace. Is the teaching capable of being translated via techniques which can
action a non-violent belief in change and social justice, in the way that Gene Sharpe has used Gandhi’s
teaching to formulate an arsenal of non-violent tactics and strategies to challenge injustice and create
peaceful transformation? Are Fethullah Gülen’s teaching most appropriate for spiritual salvation in
the hereafter or are they sufficiently integrated to be used now in a similar way in which Sharp’s work
was utilized to create a non-violent peaceful revolutions in Romania and the Ukraine?619
For sure, Gülen’s approach is to work within an Islamic framework and apply the principles of the
Qur’an to create positive change based on mutual respect. How does this differ to more Western
approaches that share similar outcomes? It is important for this conference to hear something of past
voices that share the vision of peace through peace and their similar experiences in telling truth to
power. A key question is the extent to which these different approaches converge or diverge and the
extent to which learning can be mutual. This goal is particularly pertinent in a time of terror when
extant counter-insurgency models incorporating organized violence against innocents can easily
provoke responses used to justify even more violent repression. A crucial issue is whether or not
Fethullah Gülen’s teachings on non-violence, can inspire a new non- violent praxis towards peaceful
social change?
The notion of peace by peace has a rich western tradition from Tolstoy to Martin Luther King. In the
East, the non-violent tradition is much more ancient. Emperor Asoka, presiding over India  the Third

619 For a detailed discussion and resource pack on these strategies, see the writings and presentations contained in the
’Force More Powerful’  initiative: http://www.aforcemorepowerful.org/

--- Sayfa 436 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

434
century B.C. slaughtered more than a hundred thousand before experiencing a Buddhist conversion
which led him to proselytizing non-violence, from a distinctly spiritual  and pragmatic perspective.620
Middle Eastern spiritual leaders teaching non-violence have had an enormous significance in the
West, but it is a truism that there ahs been much less of a “connect” between spiritual theory and
earthly praxis. 2000 years of Christianity has not led to a reduction of violence, far from it since
Christians have slaughtered each other for much of that period and most other races as well. And yet
the diversity and complexity of the Christian community ,as one of the reviewers perceptively
highlighted, can not be so easily dismissed in terms of their differing dimensions of tradition, time
and space.
We know that many Christian communities, inspired by their faith have successfully attempted to
translate their spiritual ethics and a belief in non-violence into a practical set of transformative
actions. For example Pax Christie and the Quakers teach peace through service at community,
national and international levels. It is not an exaggeration to say for example in the UK, that nearly all
the most significant groupings for social change and epace have benefited from the funding of Quaker
groups like the Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust, without which a tremendous set of changes for the
good would simply not have happened. However, at a state level, despite the non-violent message of
their founder, the practical messages have been much more mixed
And this is my point: believability is the extent to which teaching and practice are one. This is what is
so attractive about the Gülen movement to external observers since even to an outsider the motivation
is to unify outward behaviour, with a spiritual credo. And then there is transparency of the Gülen
movement’s teaching which is absolutely essential
Peace is of course central to Islamic teaching, the Qu’ran refers to it being one of God’s names (59:23).
Islamic scholars have cogently argued that the sunnah or Prophet’s way, can be understood as a
deliberate choosing of the of the path of non-violence – a distinctly Islamic approach to non-violence
based on dawah  or peaceful struggle for the propagation of Islam.621
It is in his sense that Fethullah Gülen’s contribution might be best understood through the lens of
western practices of non-violent action for social change. This remains a slow process of recognition
since it is only in recent years that the larger peace research networks have begun to recognize and
assimilate the thoughts of Islamic scholars on non violence and that this form of non-violence is active
and transformative.622 Of course within Islam, Arab elders have used such principles for centuries to
resolve family and community disputes and there is a continuum of practice for scholars willing to
research it as such. (Abu-Nimmar M., 2003)
Historically, the East has provided us with some of our most inspirational teachers, translating their
spiritual beliefs into a philosophy of both peace cultures and peace through non-violent direct action.
All of us active in peace movements today will acknowledge their debt to Mahatma Gandhi. His quest

620 .  For an extensive elaboration, see Seneviratana, A.,  (ed.) (1994) King Asoka  and Buddhism – Historical and Literary
Studies, Buddhist publication Society, Kandy, Sri Lanka http://urbandharma.org/pdf/king_asoka.pdf(checked 29 June
2007)
621  Points made by Maulana Wahiduddin Khan inan undated paper on “Non-Violence and Islam”  presented at the
Symposium on Islam and Peace sponsored by Non-Violence International and The Mohammed Said Farsi Chair of Islamic
Peace at the American University Washington D.C.) See http://www.alrisala.org/Articles/papers/nonviolence.html
622 See for example Paige G.D, Satha-Anand, C., & Gilliat, S.  (2001)

--- Sayfa 437 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

435
was seen as a process of transformation, of tackling the violent injustices of the largest empire ever
assembled. He rejected violence as a tactic because in the long term it was counter productive. “I
object to violence because when it appears to do good, the good is only temporary; the evil it does is
permanent”623  For Gandhi, “Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is
momentary”624.
There are certain similarities between Gandhi’s deeply practical spiritual teaching and sayings and
those of Fethullah Gülen. For example Gandhi’s  persistent concern with the world of inner spiritual
responsibility, crystallized in his often quoted remark: 'As human beings our greatness lies not so
much in being able to remake the world ... as in being able to remake ourselves.625’ Yet for Western
peace activists, the power of Gandhi’s contribution is that it incorporates dimensions of technique
which can be replicated elsewhere. This is the framework that pioneer peace researcher Theodore
Lentz once called a “Science and Technology of Peace”626.
Both Gandhi and Gülen stress the importance of truthfulness and this is an important test for any
movement towards peaceful change, does it work in practice. The quest for “testing truth” occupied
not only the earliest philosophers but also the earliest scientists. The English 17th century natural
philosopher, Francis Bacon, once said, “Truth is so hard to tell, it sometimes needs fiction to make it
plausible”. But he went on to conceptualise a founding notion of scientific practice, namely that of
falsifiability. “Truth emerges more readily from error than from confusion627.” In other words, all
notions of truth should be open to question and testability.
This was an approach which put Copernicus and Galileo into conflict with the Church of Rome,
because their astronomical observations and resultant hypotheses contradicted biblical doctrine. The
result was a classic story of paradigm challenge and shift628. Bacon himself was aware of the dangers
of telling truth to power:” Truth is a good dog; but always beware of barking too close to the heels of
an error, lest you get your brains kicked out.”  And yet Francis Bacon’s abiding conclusion was that
“Truth is the daughter of time, not of authority.” Why is this relevant to any comparative discussion of
modern notions of “non-violence” especially in regard to Turkey?
Well Gülen’s approach to non-violence is totally rooted in Anatolian Islamic belief systems, which to
an outsider are based on the timeless wisdom of the Qur’an which is viewed as immutable holy writ. A
closer reading however reveals that Gülen sees the inspiration of his faith as a work in progress rather
than being ‘set in concrete’. He values interfaith dialogue and ongoing cultural exchange as evidenced
by his role as honorary chair of the ”Journalists and Writers Foundation.” But Gülen also emphasizes
inner peace, social harmony, truthfulness which are shared by many other spiritual belief systems. At
core, Gülen in his written works can be seen as a change agent based on ethics in action. He sets out

623 Gandhi, M (1925) YI, 21-5-1925, p. 178
624  Gandhi, M. (1919), 'Satyagraha Leaflet No. 13,May 19
625 Recently quoted for example when Leeds Metropolitan’s Great Hall was renamed the Gandhi Hall by the great Indian
actor, Amitabh Bachchan, in June 2007.
626 For a discussion of Lentz work on peace technology and peace action, see Eckhardt, W. (1971) Symbiosis between
Peace Research and Peace Action , Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 67-70
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3433(1971)8%3A1%3C67%3ASBPRAP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
627 Originally from Francis Bacon’s aphorisms in Novum Organum  (1620) Quoted in Ed. J. Spedding, R. L, Ellis, & D. D.
Heath (1896), The Works of Francis Bacon, (New York, p.210
628 Kuhn T., S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, University of Chicago Press.

--- Sayfa 438 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

436
an evolutionary antidote to the negative impacts of globalization in his book ‘Love and Tolerance,
(Gülen, 2004) which is essentially based on spiritual practice. In this work, Gülen specifically
addresses the issues of jihad, terrorism and human rights, asking: “How could a religion that
associates such a high importance upon human rights neglect the human rights of even one
person?”629 On Jihad, he is equally clear:
Even in an atmosphere in which two armies have fought against each other and blood has been
spilled, if the enemy forgoes fighting and want to make a treaty, then the Muslims are
commanded not to react emotionally, but to make a treaty, putting their trust in God. Thus a
universal principle regarding this subject has been established. Consequently, to talk about
fighting or conflict is completely contrary to the basic spirit of a religion that enjoins treaties and
reconciliation, not only in time of peace but even during wartime.630
Gülen concludes that real Muslims can not be terrorists and he strongly condemns both Al Qaeda and
Osama Bin Laden for creating a contaminated image of Islam which for Gülen might have been
prevented by education.631 The present author wonders about this and the way we define education
for there are many forms of learning. It may be possible to learn how to swim by reading a book on
swimming but it would be unusual, usually the process of experiential learning is heuristic and quite
literally in the case of swimming, demands immersion.
At the time of writing, such contradictions have been vividly illustrated by events in Burma.
Paradoxically both the 500,000 plus monks and the more than 500,000 plus soldiers are Buddhists.
And yet the army have killed, maimed, beaten and tortured monks despite the religious teaching.
Nevertheless, the monks have courageously told truth to power but their training in spiritual practice
is not the same as training to avoid coercive crowd control management. All the while, the Peace
Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, who has always advocated non-violence, remains under house
arrest whilst being blamed for the monk versus military showdown.
By contrast, alternative approaches to non-violence theory such as Gene Sharp’s tactics and theories
of civil disobedience632, or Brian Martin’s work on ‘backfire techniques’ are essentially heuristic. They
are about learning by doing and anticipate that violence by the authorities might be unjustly directed
against peace advocates, Sharp lists 198 methods of what are essentially techniques used as part of a
political rather than a spiritual process of non-violent direct action. These include (i) protest and
persuasion; (ii) social, economic and political non-cooperation as well as (iii) non-violent
intervention. (See Vol II)
Similarly, Brian Martin’s work is a study of the dynamics of state power in facing down resistance and
how certain tactic of non-violence can use Gene Sharp’s techniques as a form of political jui-jitsu
which has the power to make the weak stronger by making repressive policies of the authorities
“backfire”633. Does that mean that Gülen’s work on non-violence is ossified by comparison? No, on the

629  Gülen, 2004, p170.
630  Ibid. p. 176
631 Ibid page 90
632 Sharp, G. (1973) The Politics of Non-Violent Action, Sargent, Boston, Massachussetts, (Available in 3 paperback Vols
only: Power & Struggle, The Methods of Non-Violent Action and the Dynamics of Non-Violent Action).
633  For an online list of Brian Martin’s publications giving examples of the backfire process, see his website:
http://www.uow.edu.au/arts/sts/bmartin/pubs/backfire.html

--- Sayfa 439 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

437
contrary, he is open to the scientific process and sees science and religion as complimentary as long as
there is a social responsibility amongst the scientists.634
What it does mean is that there may be limits on the extent to which the different processes of non-
violence in action can cross fertilize. Is such a conclusion deterministic? Again the answer is no, since
at the core of Gülen’s teachings, is the importance of education. His perspectives on technological
innovation are instructive since Gülen emphasizes the importance of society understanding what else
is innovated when new technologies are constructed.635.
In coming to any conclusions about the relevance of such differing paradigms of non-violence in
practice and in faith, it is worth being humble. Most authors in this field have to admit to some level
of ignorance of one path, or the other or both. The current author is no exception. I am sure that I
have only a crude grasp of the writings of Fethullah Gülen, neither may I do justice to key nonviolence
theorists such as Gandhi or Sharp.
Nevertheless, I think the exercise of comparison is worthwhile. Western voices have stereotyped Islam
to a dangerous extent, as a violent, backward system of beliefs which breed a medieval approach to
justice and a terrorist approach to world politics. Gülen is aware of these stereotypes which he has
addressed in his typical thoughtful way. In the sense that he offers a powerful approach to spiritual
change in Turkey and the wider world which is based on a non-violent understanding of core Islamic
values, we should listen. However, there are lessons learned from Western non-violent peace activists
and theorists that have verisimilitude and their truth content should be shared.
In that humble spirit, the brief analysis of non-violence and peace cultures which follows is compared
with some of the teachings of Fethullah Gülen. My hope is that discussion at conference will enable us
to better understand the similarities, the differences and the limits that all such non-violent
approaches face, in making any difference in a time of terror.
Gülen has written widely on the Sufi notion of Safa (purity) and the challenge of ridding human hearts
from the things that contaminate it, jealousy, hatred, feelings of vengeance and suspicion.636 His
antidote from the Qu’ran is mercy, tolerance and forgiveness.637 Gülen’s philosophy is beginning to be
understood by non-Islamic scholars as offering a bridge between worlds. It is an inspirational
philosophy whose essence is education in action, teaching love, tolerance and mutual cultural
respect.638
In many senses the Gülen movement is a practical global networking effort for peace and
understanding. And yet paradoxically in Turkey is where its essence has been most widely understood
and misunderstood. On the one hand by all accounts the moral teaching in Gülen schools offers an
exemplary moral and practical training for young people. And yet there are sectors in the military who
distrust any pro-Islamic movement of whatever description because of the threat they perceive to
Turkeys avowed secular identity. Fethullah Gülen himself has made it abundantly clear that the

634 Gülen, F., (200£) Regretting Science  and Technology, Website http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1283/13/
635 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1218/49/
636 http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1809/33/
637 Ibid.
638 For an insight into how some scholars have responded and been deeply inspired by the to the Gülen community, see
Carol, J.

--- Sayfa 440 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

438
movement has no interest in seizing economic, political or cultural power either inside or outside of
the country. In an interview with Turkish newspaper Zaman he has reiterated his spiritual credo of
serving humankind by self-sacrifice:
As in the past, I am currently maintaining the same distance to all political parties. Even if
power, not only in Turkey, but that of the entire world, were to be presented to me as a gift, I
have been long determined to reject it with contempt.639
Although we might take this at face value, perceptions are often just or even more important than
realities. And this is possibly the missing link between our different cultural perspectives on non-
violence. It is not enough to simply withdraw from future political challenges to a spiritual movement
toward peace, even though that might be necessary, it is not sufficient.
Gülen’s expressed philosophy does not falter when it comes to characterizing the unacceptability of
terrorism. For him. terrorism is against the very fabric of Islam. On the absis of his erudite
understanding of the Qu’ran:No Muslim can be a terrorist, no terrorist a Muslim. Western
commentators lack the scholarly authority within Muslim communities that Gülen brings when he
concludes that suicide bombing, whatever, wherever, whenever is absolutely forbidden in Islam and
for those that commit such crimes, the logical prospect is eternal banishment. It is important that
such debates over interpretation are had within the Muslim community and that powerful voices are
heard that can with full knowledge declare can make an extremely articulate attack on those who
would attempt to use religious justification to commit atrocities. “Islam never approves of any kind of
terrorism.640”
There is no ambiguity there. And yet there is a need for caution. It is possible that a willingness to
clearly define position according to faith whilst absolutely necessary may still be insufficient. Those
building new communities in turbulent times also need to better understand the dynamics of non-
violent action in order to preserve their integrity, even in the face of those who seek to either
undermine or destroy it. My hope is that participants at this conference might consider this bridge
between different but complementary approaches to no-violent progress, one that is worth crossing.

3. Cultures of Peace
Under the auspices of the International Peace Research Association (IPRA), considerable analytical
work has been done on what constitutes a true culture of peace. It is worth reflecting on these
elements before moving to the specific question of comparative approaches to non-violence. One of
the foremost minds conceptualizing the nature of cultures of peace is former IPRA Director, Professor
Paul Smoker, who with his wife Dr Linda Groff, articulated the necessary steps to creating such
cultures.641
Smoker and Groff emphasize the micro and macro aspects of creating cultures of peace. They identify
a “tire” approach to the peace concept:

639 Quoted  in Dr Serif Ali Tekalan’ article “A Movement of Volunteers: http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/2139/31/
640 http://www.cam.net.uk/home/aaa315/peace/islam.htm
641 See http://www.gmu.edu/academic/pcs/smoker.htm , for a comprehensive explanation

--- Sayfa 441 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

439

4. Evolution of Tire Peace Concept—Especially in Western Peace Research: Six Stages
The approach of Smoker and Groff towards cultures of peace is unusual, comprehensive and apt since
they are explicitly identifying dimensions that Gülen’s identifies as important, namely relationships
with others, relationships with nature and relationships with God. Their view is holistic and assumes
an inner-outerworld relationship towards peace. They explore different levels of the evolution of the
peace concept in the west. These can be summarized as follows:
Peace as an absence of War
Many people and politicians still take this rather primitive view. Nevertheless, an absence of war has
to be a precursor for making progress on the other dimensions of non-violent pace building
Peace as Negative Peace (No War) and Positive Peace (No Structural Violence)
The Norwegian Peace Researcher, Professor Johan Galtung articulated the notion of structural
violence in his paper of 1969642. That is even when there is an absence of overt conflict, the system is
still structurally violent if people starve when there is food available, people don’t get medical
treatment when the society has hospitals to treat them, women and men of equal rank do not enjoy
promotion because of gender or ethnic prejudices and so on. Negative Peace is when there is still
structural violence: positive peace is the absence of both overt and structural violence. Such notions
may have particular bearing within an Islamic context if matters of faith preclude equal opportunities
Feminist Peace: Macro and Micro Levels of Peace
To quote Smoker and Groff (1994)

642 Galtung, Johan.(1969) "Violence, Peace and Peace Research" in Journal of Peace Research, No. 3.

--- Sayfa 442 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

440
During the 1970s and 80s, a fourth perspective was ushered in by feminist peace researchers,
who extended both negative peace and positive peace to include violence and structural violence
down to the individual level. The new definition of peace then included not only the abolition of
macro level organized violence, such as war, but also doing away with micro level unorganized
violence, such as rape in war or in the home. In addition, the concept of structural violence was
similarly expanded to include personal, micro and macro-level structures that harm or
discriminate against particular individuals or groups. This feminist peace model came to include
all types of violence, broadly defined, against people, from the individual to the global level,
arguing that this is a necessary condition for a peaceful planet.
Holistic Gaia-Peace: Peace With the Environment
Smoker and gruff compare non-western cultures emphasis on harmony with nature and the western
consumer approach that passes  certain economic costs on to the environment, endangering the
health of future generations and precipitating extinction events for some species. Smoker and Groff
conclude:
It would be a positive development in the environmental area if we could combine the Eastern
value of living in harmony with nature with the Western democratic value of taking responsibility
for one's own actions based on an internalized value of the need for all of us to be caretakers of
planet earth.
Holistic Inner and Outer Peace
Smoker and Groff emphasize the importance of this dimension. They argue that both outer peace
making (more emphasized in the West) has to be complemented by holistic inner peace (more
practiced in the East).
Either perspective alone makes it more difficult to achieve the other perspective. For example, if
one tries to achieve outer peace in the world only, but does not deal with inner peace, then one's
inner conflicts can be projected out onto the world, making it difficult to achieve outer peace--the
supposed goal. Likewise, if one tries to achieve inner peace only, but does not pay attention to
creating outer peace in the world, then the social injustices and structural violence in the world
will make it more difficult for most people experiencing those conditions to be able to find inner
peace--the supposed goal. Thus the achievement of either inner or outer peace helps create the
conditions necessary for the creation of the other type of peace.
This is a crucial part of Gülen’s teaching. Smoker and Groff suggest that multi-cultural visions of
peace are required and formally made such an analysis to the UN over a decade ago643. Conferences
such as this can begin to bring these different visions together.

643 Smoker, Paul, and Groff, Linda (1995). "Spirituality, Religion, and Peace: Exploring the Foundations for Inner-Outer
Peace in the 21st Century. " Conference Proceedings, Second UNESCO Conference on "Contributions of Religions to a
Culture of Peace," Barcelona, (Conference was Dec. 1994)

--- Sayfa 443 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

441
5. Sharp’s Tactics & Politics of Non-violence
Vision is one aspect, transformation is another. This author’s concern is about how different
approaches to Non-Violence can be operationalised at a rate that can make a difference and in a way
that is self-reflective, so that new more effective ways of non-violent change can evolve. Gandhi’s work
on civil disobedience has been a magisterial influence on what has so far emerged in the West and
probably the key exponent of tactics of non-violent action is the American Gene Sharp. In his first
volume on non violent action(Sharpe 1973) questions why there is such an inertia amongst
populations who put up with cultures of violence and repression when they could enjoy a vastly
different system if only they could collectively engage. It is worth quoting some extracts from Volume
1 Sharp’s views on why this is the case?
1.
Habit: In my opinion habit is the main reason people do not question the actions their
"superiors" expect of them. Habitual obedience is embedded in all cultures. After all,
isn't that what culture is—habitual behavior?
2.
Fear of sanctions: It is the fear of sanctions, rather than the sanctions themselves, that is
most effective in enforcing obedience.
3.
Moral obligation: This "inner constraining power" is the product of cultural
programming and deliberate indoctrination by the state, church and media.
4.
Self interest: The potential for financial gain and enhanced prestige can entice people to
obey.
5.
Psychological identification with the ruler: People may feel an emotional tie with the
leader or the system, experiencing its victories and defeats as their own. The most
common manifestations of this are patriotism and nationalism.
6.
Zones of indifference: People often obey commands without consciously questioning
their legitimacy.
7.
Absence of self-confidence: Some people prefer to hand control of their lives over to the
ruling class. They may feel inadequate to make their own decisions. (Sharpe 1973)
Some of these lessons are pertinent to the Gülen movement as are the lessons Sharpe elaborated on
why a non-violent approach has not been recognized in the mainstream as a legitimate means of
struggle for justice and a better world. Sharpe concluded that there is in fact an invisible history and
there are a number of reasons why such nonviolent philosophies have failed to enter the national
psyche:
•
Rarely have nonviolent actionists been romanticized as heroes. Rather, warriors and
terrorists and their dramatic acts of heroism are mythologized for future generations.
•
Historians have accepted the dominant culture's view that violence is the only legitimate
form of combat.
•
Historians conspire with the ruling class to keep the people ignorant of their own power.
•
Western civilization is "biased toward violence."
•
It requires a "new way of viewing the world." It is a paradigm whose time has not yet come.

--- Sayfa 444 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

442
•
Nonviolence has never been seen as a coherent conceptual system. Consequently, historical
examples of nonviolent action are viewed as isolated events rather than as different aspects
of the same technique of struggle.
•
Nonviolence is unfairly compared to violence. Nonviolence is often used when violence has
no chance of success. When nonviolence fails, the method is condemned. But when violence
fails, strategy or tactics are blamed—not violence as a method. Nonviolence successes are
written off as flukes. Partial successes are seen as total failures.

6. Brian Martin & The Dynamics of Backfire
In Volume 3 of Sharp’s first book, he examines the dynamics of non-violent action as a means of
understanding what works and why. Such analyses are crucial if non-violent processes are to become
living heuristic realities rather than dry scholastic or monastic theories. Sharp teaches how the power
imbalance between groups can be used to the advantage of the weak by a process of political jiu-jitsu
and how these tactics can succeed even in the face of quite brutal repression. This was one of the first
efforts to understand how non-violence can disperse power through communities, brining increased
self esteem and personal development – a phenomena also being reported in the emergent Gülen
communities. Such healing and empowering processes lie in sharp distinction to the use of violence,
which creates feelings of callousness and dehumanization which affects victims and victors alike.
The Australian researcher Professor Brian Martin, has taken some of these analyses and techniques
further in a theory which he calls backfire.(Martin, 2007) Typically, non-violent activists exposing
injustices by the authorities against a weaker group, can precipitate righteous indignation or outrage.
Martin examines the dynamics of these processes in order to empower those who would use non-
violent action but then face official retribution. He concludes that perpetrators typically use five main
methods to inhibit outrage and prevent backfires (Martin, 2007), namely: -
•
covering up the event;
•
devaluing the target;
•
reinterpreting what happened;
•
using official channels to give the appearance of justice; and
•
intimidating and bribing the people involved.
He also examines the propaganda and black or grey media operations which typically accompany any
official cover up. These have the aim of creating public outrage against the target of the operation, and
can be analysed using the same framework. To be effective, a black operation uses deception to foster
an interpretation that the victim was actually responsible. The (black) attack is not covered up - it has
to be open in order to backfire - but responsibility for it is hidden.
Martin provides invaluable information for countering such attacks, including
•
expose responsibility for the event;
•
validate the target of the operation (the falsely alleged perpetrator);

--- Sayfa 445 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

443
•
interpret the operation as unfair and underhanded;
•
avoid or discredit official investigations, at least when they seem likely to dampen public
outrage; and
•
resist intimidation and bribery.
Such behaviour has spontaneously evolved by many non-violent groups wishing to sustain behaviour
consistent with their beliefs. In fact I would argue that the behaviour of Bediuzzaman Said Nursi is a
case in point. Nursi used his spiritual insights to follow similar tactics albeit at a substantial personal
cost to his health. (Markham and Ozdemir, 2005)
Such response and counter responses can become quite complex. According to Martin and Gray) ,
In a conflict between a powerful and a weak side - for example between a group of police and a
single suspect, or between a government and a small group of opponents - the powerful side
holds many advantages. If the weak side mounts an attack, this can provide the pretext for the
powerful group to use its superior resources. The exception is when the powerful side is exposed
in a gross abuse, for example when police seriously assault a suspect or troops gun down
protesters and this abuse is exposed to a wide audience, leading to a change in public opinion.
These are instances of backfire, such as the beating of Rodney King by Los Angeles police and the
shooting of peaceful protesters in Dili, East Timor, by Indonesian troops, both in 1991. They are
white backfires, because the perpetrators made no attempt to attribute their own actions to their
opponents.
Given this dynamic, it is not surprising that powerful groups sometimes use black operations to
give themselves the benefit of public outrage. They want their own actions to be seen as an
outrage-generating attack by their opponents, as when police use agents provocateurs to
encourage protesters to be violent. These sorts of black operations involve promoting actions that
will backfire on their opponents, in what can be called black backfires. (Martin  & Gray, 2007)
Despite the fact that Fethullah Gülen has adopted an inspirational spiritual rather than a politically
instrumental approach toward implementing non-violent pathways to peace, many of these negative
techniques have been used against both him and his followers.644 So much so that Gülen now lives in
exile in the United States. In the sections which follow, the question is put, to what extent do the non-
violent philosophies of Gülen match with more Western Implementation and instrumentalist
strategies outlined above and can useful bridges be built between these two worlds?

7. Gülen’s Non-Violent Spiritual Paths & Practices
Attempting any reasoned comparison of Gülen’s non-violent philosophy with those of more western
practitioners is fraught with difficulties, not least because of the way that Gülen’s life and work has
been molded by the very specific cultural roots of Anatolian Islam and the specific writings of Said
Nursi, though it would be a mistake to think that Gülen’s approach is merely a next generation of
Nursi’s approaches. A more accurate description of the relationship would be that of mentor. And yet

644  That is not to say that Gülen’s followers have not taken an instrumental approach in structuring and expanding the
process of formal teaching. The point  here is that the focus of that work has been spiritual rather than political change.

--- Sayfa 446 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

444
there are, some interesting overlaps. Nursi used the tactic of silent withdrawal and non-co-operation
in many of his struggles towards resolving conflict without bloodshed. In many ways the
maltreatment and imprisonment of Nursi is a classic case of backfire since his repeated
representation of the evidence to different tribunals and his unjust punishment actually served as a
recruitment engine for his movement and brought about the exact opposite outcome of that desired
by the authorities.
The Gülen movement, from an outsider’s perspective, can be considered to have an explicit ambition
of eroding structural violence – for example through providing education and shelter to youngsters.
But any Western non-violence theorist, taking a purist approach, could find certain elements within
the organization that from a superficial perspective might not square with classic non-hierarchic
theories of peaceful cultures. Such criticisms could be seen as nonsense by the Gülen community.
From a Western point of view, the centralization of power via any hierarchy might be seen as evidence
of an unequal distribution of power. Then again, most large faith groups operate on some form of
hierarchy – the Quakers being some kind of exception but even then there is an elders structure,
which is interpreted as simply experienced sets of hands to mentor the process of listening. The buyuk
abiler could be considered by some in the Gülen movement to fulfil a similar role. The important
strength of the Gülen movement is its transparency – and those who manufacture conspiracy theories
around the Gülen movement might be less than forthcoming in being as transparent about their own
motives and connections.
Many of these confusions will be influenced by cultural differences especially in regard to the
traditional role of women in Turkish society and the central and unquestionable bedrock of the Qur’an
which cannot be questioned in any way, without attracting counter criticism. Western peace
movements adopting non-violent strategies regard them all as a work in progress and not very much
is so sacrosanct that it is beyond review.
There are also difficulties in wedding all the prescriptions of the Shari’a to a philosophy of complete
non-violence. This is a contradiction which is not unique to Islam – Christian and Judaic views on
punishment: turn the other cheek versus an eye for an eye, are cases in point. Even the great Emperor
Asoka, whose life’s work became the promulgation of Buddhist scripture, refused to revoke the death
penalty for reason of public order, despite this view being an outright contradiction of the teachings.
(Seneviratana, A., 1994).
In many senses, Gülen is following the holistic, spiritual and cultural approaches to peace identified
by Smoker and Groff above. It is now a global faith based movement with schools in more than one
hundred countries including Kazakhstan, Kenya, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Indonesia, Brazil and Bosnia.
We are informed that today there are more than 300 private high schools and seven universities
affiliated with the Gülen community, with over 150 schools in Turkey alone.645 It is a sign of the health
of the Gülen movement that today, that number is undoubtedly far greater.
Why should this matter? Well Gülen’s teaching instrumentalizes the teaching of the Qur’an towards
performing daily acts of service based peaceful social change. Such an approach in a time of terror can
make a difference through interfaith dialogue. To my mind, Gülen’s Abant platform for dialogue is
akin to the Pugwash movement when it first began it’s work to prevent nuclear war in the fifties.

645 Quoted from Gulay, 2007.

--- Sayfa 447 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

445
Pugwash allowed a backchannel for diplomats and scientists to keep talking even during the difficult
days of the cold war and led to the processes which not only ended the Vietnam War but the Cold war
too. One of the reviewers of this paper said the analogy was pregnant with possibilities.
Such inter-faith dialogue is more important now than ever. The Western stereotypes of Islam need to
be constructively challenged by Muslims as well as pundits in the West. Gülen’s active compassion for
peaceful change based on a precise reading of the Qur’an, can act as a powerful palliative to those who
would smear Islam with the label of terrorism. Such work can only be achieved through making a
critical mass of thinkers and doers who will engage in peace in the wider world and that characterises
the Fethullah Gülen movement today.

8. Conclusions
And yet it is wise to be cautious given the turbulent political changes occurring both within Turkey
and on its borders with Kurdistan; Iran; Bulgaria; Georgia; Greece; Armenia; Azerbaijan; Iraq and
Syria. It could be argued that the Gülen approach to peaceful change from a truly enlightened Islamic
perspective is necessary but not yet truly sufficient. It continues to be a work in progress
The very success of the Gülen movement could be misinterpreted by those with alternative agendas
and alliances in the Middle East, during this time of rapid change and potential instability. In some
senses this very conference is an act of wisdom by the Gülen community in taking the initiative to
broaden the worldwide base of associates who are sympathetic to the credos of the movement and
wish its work well. The challenge to us all is to find ways of future collaboration that do not
undermine our strengths and differences but complement the project and processes with which we
are broadly in tune with.
Some authors welcoming such kinetic Islam see the process of change wedding Islamic activism into a
process of “regulated improvisation.”646 The wisdom of this according to commentators like Hendrick,
is that it enables Islam to be wedded without contradiction to processes of modernity that do not
contradict any secular governmental line within Turkey. This process of regulated improvisation can
be further developed to anticipate and survive any future political turbulence but it will need deep
meditation and creativity, especially if the US Pentagon military globalisation is implemented with the
utter lack of cultural sensitivities that we have witnessed from this administration to-date.
Just as in previous times, wise authorities made provision for famine and flood when there were no
signs that these were inevitable so in this time, it is wise to think through future peaceful responses to
challenges which may or may not come. For example, the extent to which the Gülen movement can
once again respond to state repression using non-violent means may become the test of the integrity
of the movement. Many techniques evolved by non-violent activists elsewhere in the world could then
come to be of use and significance to the Gülen movement. This is especially important given the
emphasis on self-awareness and wisdom in perusing a pacifist approach without compromising
beliefs

646 Hendrick J.D, The Regulated potential of Kinetic Islam:Antitheses in Global Islamic Activism. In Hunt & Aslandogan
2007

--- Sayfa 448 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

446
The Gülen community is a proselytizing movement in the positive sense in that it is not keeping its
beliefs hidden but is actively engaged in widening the base of its activities and is actively engaged in
communications with more secular communities of which this conference is just one small but
important part.
Inevitably, any new and expanding faith-based movement will draw attention. I am sure that the
proceedings of these conferences will be widely reported and misreported in Turkey and beyond. The
conference organisers should expect critical flak if they have done their jobs well as I am sure they
have. This is especially so when that movement has the potential to influence other Muslims overseas,
as well as change the wider perception of what it is to implement the teachings of the Qur’an. In future
times such a role may require new notions of non-violence and civil disobedience within its heart. So
far, the movement has steered an intentional course away from confrontation with the authorities.
But this very success may bring about future confrontation as the popularity, educational, business
activities and economic independence of the movement grows. Fortunately, at its core is a leadership
who values ethics and wisdom and truthfulness above all.
I feel sure that the many teachers, thinkers and proponents encompassed by this movement will
already be meditating on how they should behave to ensure future progress towards new cultures of
peace on Earth. A central purpose of this conference is dialogue and a useful outcome of our
exchanges is to share all the organized knowledge that comes from all our communities to truly bring
about peaceful change, despite the current difficulties. We have compatible but different learning
visions and resources to share.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

447
PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS VALUES IN THE MUSLIM
WORLD: TOWARDS AN INCLUSIVE CIVILIZATION IN
GÜLEN’S THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 647
OZCAN KELES 648

Abstract
The premise of this paper is that human rights values are a persistent theme of Fethullah Gülen’s
thought and tajdid and expressed by the Gülen movement through example. That tajdid is
collectively constructed and communicated by allowing for adaptation and indigenisation in
flexible response to different socio-cultural contexts. What is more, Gülen’s views on democracy,
pluralism, human rights and freedom of belief directly promote human rights values and norms.
The paper argues that the Muslim world is very important to Gülen’s overall aspiration for an
inclusive civilisation and thus the movement is now active in most parts of that world. In time, as
in Turkey, Gülen’s ideas will enable and empower the periphery in Muslim societies to influence
the centre ground and open the way for wider enjoyment of freedom and human rights.
The paper is in three sections. The first looks at the underlying dynamics of Gülen’s influence and
the nature of his tajdid, to assess whether his influence is transferable elsewhere. The second
appraises the content of Gülen’s tajdid vis-à-vis human rights values and freedom of belief,
illustrating Gülen’s incremental ijtihad on temporal punishment for apostasy in Islamic law. The
third part traces the movement’s activities in the Muslim world, arguing that the movement has
now entered a phase of adolescence, and asks whether Gülen’s tajdid and discourse, through the
practice of the movement, can indeed promote human rights values in this world.

1. Introduction
The premise of this paper is that human rights values are a persistent theme of Fethullah Gülen’s
thought and tajdid and expressed by the Gülen movement through example. That tajdid is collectively
constructed and communicated by allowing for adaptation and indigenisation in flexible response to
different socio-cultural contexts. What is more, Gülen’s views on democracy, pluralism, human rights
and freedom of belief directly promote human rights values and norms. The paper argues that the
Muslim world is very important to Gülen’s overall aspiration for an inclusive civilisation and thus the
movement is now active in most parts of that world. In time, as in Turkey, Gülen’s ideas will enable
and empower the civil periphery in Muslim societies to influence the centre ground and open the way
for wider enjoyment of freedom and human rights.

647 This is a revised and shortened version of a paper presented at the ‘Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the
Gülen Movement’ conference in October 2007, London.
648 Ozcan Keles (member of the Honourable Society of Gray's Inn; Bar Course from Inns of Court School of Law, 2005;
LLM in Human Rights Law from SOAS, University of London, 2002; LLB, 2000): a barrister, studying for PhD on ‘Muslim
minorities in Europe – Human Rights in the Muslim world: Promoting Freedom of Belief and Harmonisation in
International Human Rights Law’ at the Human Rights Centre at the University of Essex, where he holds the Scholarship
Award of 2006. Research interests include: international human rights law, the European Court of Human Rights, freedom
of belief, and the Gülen movement.

--- Sayfa 450 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

448
I must stress at the beginning that although there is a growing body of literature and research
surrounding Gülen and the movement, there is extremely little, if any, so far concerning his influence
in the Muslim world. This is largely due to the fact that the movement has been less visible or active in
the Muslim world than elsewhere. More empirical research is required in this field. The challenge this
presents therefore is to first contextualise Gülen in the Muslim world, before moving on to look at
what influence, if any, he has in promoting human right values in this region.
Thus, the paper is in three sections. The first looks at the underlying dynamics of Gülen’s influence
and the nature of his tajdid. The purpose behind this is simple; in order to predict whether Gülen has
any meaningful scope of influence in the Muslim world it is imperative to first understand what
makes Gülen influential in the first place, how influential he is in Turkey and whether that influence is
transferable elsewhere. The second appraises the content of Gülen’s tajdid vis-à-vis human rights and
freedom of belief, illustrating Gülen’s incremental ijtihad on temporal punishment for apostasy in
Islamic law. The third traces the movement’s activities in the Muslim world, arguing that the
movement has now entered a phase of adolescence, and asks whether Gülen’s tajdid and discourse,
through the practice of the movement, can indeed promote human rights values in this world.
In assessing Gülen’s potential influence in the Muslim world, I will refer to Serif Mardin’s
Centre/Periphery model. I suggest that the current power struggle in Turkey, as manifested by the tip
of the iceberg political battle recently unfolding between the newly emerging, previously rural,
democratic yet conservative public as represented by the ruling Justice and Development (AK) Party
and the militant-secular status quo margins as represented by the Republican People’s Party (CHP), is
in fact a struggle between the periphery and centre, respectively.
In this paper, I argue that just as Gülen’s discourse and the Gülen movement were instrumental in
empowering the periphery in Turkey649, their presence will have a similar effect in the Muslim world.
Finally, any theological discussion in this paper is tangential to the main premise and argument. What
is significant for the purposes of this paper is that Gülen is perceived and considered to be working
within the traditional framework of Islamic jurisprudence and theology not that he actually is. The
argument that he is, helps explain the perception and influence he enjoys in Turkey and increasingly
abroad. Whether that is actually the case, is the subject of another study.

2. Gülen’s Influence and Tajdid
Gülen is many things at once and it is this combination of characteristics, abilities and qualifications,
some of which have hitherto seemed mutually exclusive, that marks him out from the rest and has
provided him with a transformative edge. Gülen is an Islamic scholar, peace activist, intellectual, civil-
faith-based movement leader, social reformist, mentor, poet and writer. He has motivated and
inspired a whole generation in Turkey and abroad numbering millions (not used lightly) into a multi-
ethnic (and even multi-religious) movement, which he calls a ‘Community of Volunteers’.
While there is a lot interesting about the Gülen persona and psyche, for the purposes of this paper, I
will look at the dynamics that enables him to enjoy an immense influence in Turkey.

649 Ozdalga 2005: 441

--- Sayfa 451 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

449
2.1. The Gülen Trio-Formula: Devout-Intellectual-Alim
I suggest that it is the combination of three particular characteristics that have enabled Gülen to
become immensely popular and influential in Turkey, namely being a Sufi-orientated spiritually-
devout Muslim, an intellectual in contemporary reading and thought and an acclaimed Islamic
scholar or alim.
Ali Bulac, a well-known independent Muslim scholar and columnist, was the first to emphasise
Gülen’s intellectual-alim credentials and its importance, stating that Gülen is the most recent reviver
of the Ulema tradition. Alim (singular for Ulema) is an Arabic title provided only to the most
knowledgeable Islamic scholars who have an impeccable command of the traditional Islamic sources,
sciences and methodologies. However, Bulac argues that being merely an alim renders one
insufficient, a mere conveyor. To be effective and relevant one has to be a janahayn (the dual wing),
in other words an intellectual versed in western sciences and thought as well.
Concerning Gülen, in this respect, Bulac states:
Of the very few contenders, Gülen is perhaps the foremost representative of
janahayn. His outlook has several key features: a profound understanding of
Islamic sciences; a deep knowledge of biography (ilm al-rijal) in Hadith
narration; and a thorough understanding of Islamic methodology (usul)… His
book, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism… is an extremely important work in
terms of thought and Sufi tradition. Gülen’s most important characteristic is that
he analyzes contemporary issues and brings forth solutions using the traditional
methodology of Islamic jurisprudence and Hadith.650
Gülen’s appreciation of Western philosophies, history, literature and science is evident from the
references he draws from these disciplines and interpretations he makes of contemporary issues. In
an interview with Eyup Can, Gülen lists Kant, Descartes, Sir James Jean, Shakespeare, Victor Hugo,
Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky and Puskin as some of Western intellectuals whose works he has read651. We
know from his memoirs that he studied Kant, Rousseau, Voltaire, Emile, Schiller and the works of
such existentialist philosophers such as Camus, Sartre and Marcuse during his military service in
1961652.
In his 14 cassette sermon series delivered in 1978 over several months to a mosque-congregation
regarding the existence of God (Tawheed), Gülen speaks in some detail about the 2nd law of thermo-
dynamics, the big bang, astrophysics, astronomy, probability, atomic physics and biology in
substantiating his arguments. Many other sermon-series, structured and methodological in
themselves, include this variety of discipline and content. There are legendary stories told among
Gülen’s followers of how unaccustomed listeners used to sleeping during sermons, or left-wing
intellectuals nudgingly persuaded to attend, wake up bemused and disoriented during the sermon to
Gülen speaking about protons, electrons and neutrons.
It is Gülen’s ability to draw his references from both Islamic and Western philosophies and interpret
one within the other that marks him out as a janahayn. This dual-wing, allows him to achieve two-

650 Bulac 2006: 101
651 Can 1996: Ref
652 Erdogan 1997: Ref

--- Sayfa 452 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

450
things, one draw sympathy and a gathering from those who draw their references from positive
sciences and sympathise with the Western Enlightenment thought and two, demonstrate to the
“Western-liberal” and “conservative-religious” that there is no inherent contradiction between Islam,
science and the necessities of modern age.
However, this duo characteristic is insufficient to explain Gülen’s influence. There is another wing
missing in Bulac’s description and that is Gülen’s Sufi orientated spiritual devotion and fervour often
manifested through intense emotion and dedication and poetic prose in his speech.
Gülen is perceived by the public as a deeply religious individual who has remained celibate from
devotion to God and cause and leads a deeply ascetic lifestyle, sleeping and eating very little and
spending most of his time, especially now, in solitary worship and study with his personal students.
His unusual religious fervour and zeal is clearly evident in his excitement when delivering sermons in
which he often ends up crying, in return causing the congregation to follow suit. Among the wider
Turkish public, Gülen is known as the “crying Hodja”.
Referring to Gülen’s religious upbringing, Lester Kurtz notes:
[Gülen] memorized the Qur’an at a young age and testifies that he “began praying
when I was 4 years old, and has never missed a prayer since.” He dedicated
himself early on to a simple lifestyle devoted to prayer, meditation, religious
writing and teaching. Eschewing family life, he chose an ascetic’s path, devoting
his life to prayer and religious pursuits and owning virtually no possessions.653
Or at least that is how Gülen is perceived and perception is extremely important. In fact, without this
reputation, Gülen’s intellectual-alim credentials would win him little influence. Simply put, the
common Muslim has become weary of so-called Islamic scholars in recent years, especially those who
have an appreciation of Western sciences. Trust is only inspired if scholarly credentials are
supplemented with devotion and practice and even then the question of orientation remains, i.e. Sufi,
Selefi, Shiate or secular.
Thus, an accurate understanding of who Gülen is is more important than what he says. The influential
Rand think-tank in the United States for example, wrongly identifies Gülen as a “modernist” and
states that although modernists are the most suited allies of the West in terms of their discourse and
beliefs, they lack the authenticity of the traditionalists and the service-outlets through which to
influence the public654. The overall observation concerning modernists are correct, categorising Gülen
as one is not. The consequence of this is misjudging Gülen’s influence. Had Gülen been a modernist as
such, he would never have enjoyed the kind of influence he does in Turkey, let alone have any
meaningful chance of doing so in the Muslim world. Hence the significance of getting this right.
The question of course is whether Gülen will be able to transfer his influence to the wider Muslim
world. The Muslim world is a vast geography made up of over 50 different countries. A crude reply,
leaving aside a detailed study of each countries idiosyncratic nature and its relevance vis-à-vis the
Gülen movement, is ‘yes’, since the underlying cultural dynamics and characteristics are similar. If
anything, religion is as important in most of the Muslim world as it is in Turkey. Gülen’s devotion to
faith and cause and fifty year proven track record will exchange as good currency in this part of the

653 Kurtz, 2005 p375
654 Benard 2003: 38-40

--- Sayfa 453 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

451
world. However, the main determining factor of Gülen’s influence in the Muslim world will be the
presence and effectives of the Gülen movement in this region.

2.2. Gülen movement: Collective Tajdid
Gülen’s spiritually-devout, intellectual-alim credentials comprises the first field of influence he enjoys
among the Turkish Muslims. These characteristics have helped him form a second field of influence,
the Gülen movement. Where Gülen’s personal reputation fails to reach, this wider movement goes. So
one can imagine two concentric circles one within the other. Gülen influences the movement, the
movement influences wider society. Since Gülen not only combines but preaches the unification of
spiritual devotion with scientific appreciation and religious knowledge, his followers also manifest
this trio-quality. An active volunteer of the movement will be a practising Muslim or believer of some
tradition, of moral character who seeks to abstain from worldly indulgences, usually at least of
graduate level degree, well read in Islamic theology and fairly informed of other religions, thereby
becoming a miniature-Gülen.655 Thus, the effective formula of influence replicated throughout the
movement to varying degrees.
This characteristic empowers the Gülen-follower with self-confidence and is highly effective in
influencing those who find themselves on one or the other side of the religious-secular spectrum.
So although Gülen is influential on an individual basis for the reasons given above, it is the faith based
movement he now inspires which allows him to put his views into practice, and which marks him out
as a candidate who can effectuate real change at the ground level. Without a mass following and wide
influence among the grass roots of society, Gülen would have remained a scholar of great depth but no
means of implementation. An elitist, an academic, a thinker who is waiting for the right masses to
develop to be heard. With Gülen, the masses are ready, waiting for him to speak.
It is for this reason that Yilmaz argues that Gülen is engaged in “tajdid by conduct”656. Tajdid means
to renew, revive and restore religion. It is an authentic Islamic mechanism prophesised by the
Prophet himself.657
Tajdid can only be undertaken by a mujaddid. A mujaddid in his effort to renew (tajdid) religion will
use a tool called ijtihad (reasoning) and in doing so also become a mujtahid. Ijtihad is a re-reading
and re-evaluation of religious text and sources to deduce and derive a re-understanding of its
teachings for contemporary times while keeping within its overall framework and spirit. It too is an
authentic mechanism and in accordance with Islamic orthodoxy. Ijtihad has its limits, rules and
conditions and should not be confused with reform which has neither. All mujaddid’s are also
mujtahid’s but not all mujtehid’s are mujaddid’s.
In relation to ijtihad, I coin Gülen’s efforts in this vein as incremental (tedriji)658 ijtihad, since (i) he
develops and communicates his ijtihad incrementally over many years and different mediums,

655 Active volunteers should not be confused with supporters and donors, who make up the backbone of the movement.
656 Yilmaz, 2003
657 Hadith (Ref)
658 In Islamic terminology, incrementalism usually refers to the revelation of the Qur’an over 23 years by the instigation of
certain events (sebebul nuzul). The prohibition of alcohol in the Qur’an in four steps is often given as an example of
incrementalism in Islam.

--- Sayfa 454 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

452
respectively, and (ii) he does not claim that he is engaged in ijtihad at all, thus further delaying the
recognition that he is. The relevance for this paper is that Gülen is currently engaged in incremental
ijtihad regarding the death penalty for apostasy in Islamic law as explored below.
In relation to Gülen’s tajdid, Yilmaz states that:
Gülen has reinterpreted Islamic understanding in tune with contemporary times
and has developed and put into practice a new Muslim discourse... on religion,
pluralism, jurisprudence, secularism, democracy, politics and international
relations.659
Yilmaz argues that Gülen is undertaking this tajdid through conduct, because his ideas are put into
immediate effect through the movement and affects the surrounding wider society in la longe
durée.660
I suggest that Gülen’s tajdid is collectively constructed by the movement’s conduct and Gülen’s views.
If Gülen’s tajdid is based on conduct, then the movement plays a significant role in the construction of
that tajdid. What is more, Gülen encourages the contribution of the active player here, namely the
movement. Thus, Gülen is aware that his general views and teachings will be locally received,
interpreted and adapted in the process of application.
I suggest that the movement’s contribution to Gülen’s tajdid is in the form of (i) its interpretation of
Gülen’s views on receipt, (ii) its reformulation of those views to meet local realities such as funding
and capability on application, (iii) its adaptation of those general views to meet local culture and
customs (indigenisation) (iv) new realities formed by local conduct and activities of the movement
pose new questions and challenges which Gülen responds to, and (v) the movement innovates new
forms of conduct itself which are put to Gülen, to which he replies and the above process renews itself.
Thus, there is continuous and interactive dialogue between the movement and Gülen, the net outcome
of which is a collective tajdid. Some may claim that the same process of interpretation and adaptation
is present in other (or all) forms of tajdid as well. While that may be true to some degree, since the
movement is active in over a hundred countries, the spectrum across which Gülen’s views are
received, adapted and localised is ever more great. What is more, the fact that the movement’s
volunteers are well educated, well read and very mobile means they are more critical, analytic and
innovative in their dialogue with Gülen. Also, Gülen promotes collectivism within the movement
through his emphasis on joint decision making and consultation (sura). As such, every venture and
project of the movement has its own committee responsible for making its own decisions. Locally and
collectively made decisions explain the movement’s success in vastly different socio-cultural and
economic markets across the world.
Thus, Gülen acts more like a chairperson in the construction of this tajdid. He sets the guidelines,
objectives and principles. But then how those principles and objectives are put into action depend
more on the movement than on Gülen. Simply put the movement’s dialogue efforts tell us much more
about Gülen’s tajdid on Islam and society than any of his essays or interviews on the topic.
The clarification of how Gülen’s tajdid is constructed and communicated is important since it
demonstrates that this tajdid is indigenised by the local people influenced by it. This does not mean

659 Yilmaz 2003: 209
660 Yilmaz 2003: 220

--- Sayfa 455 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

453
Gülen’s original thought is watered down; clearly it is not. But Gülen’s global discourse and teachings
are localised to best serve local conditions. The difference of the movement’s educational projects in
Turkmenistan with, let’s say, the United State or Germany helps illustrate this point.
The significance of this regarding the Muslim world (and elsewhere for that matter) is that Gülen’s
views and discourse demonstrates that it is adaptable, flexible, durable and practical. These are
essential qualities if Gülen’s ideas and tajdid are to influence the Muslim world. Otherwise, without
provision for indigenisation, the strong Arab culture would easily reject and react to this new
discourse. This is something that will be explored further below.

2.3. Gülen Movement’s Influence in Turkey
The Gülen movement is “one of the most influential revivalist movements in modern Turkey.”661 On
Gülen’s influence over his own the movement, Yavuz notes
A decade ago, this religious community was not even willing to allow their
daughters to go to secondary or high schools. They preferred to send female
students to the Qur’anic courses or strictly female Imam Hatip schools. For years,
Gülen publicly and privately encouraged the community to educate all their
children regardless of gender. Today, there are many all-female schools and many
of their graduates go onto universities.662
Bacik states that the relationship between the Muslim self and Islamic groups has undergone
significant change due to, inter alia, the Muslim self’s understanding of some important concepts
such as Europe and democracy and that members of the Islamic community are coming from better
educated backgrounds663. I argue, that Gülen’s contribution to this change is significant as stated by
Kosebabalan
Gülen’s pro-Western attitude has played a key role in the domestication and
softening of other Islamic groups’ anti-Europe and anti-U.S. positions. Although
many Islamists eventually came closer to embracing this idea, a majority of them
initially criticized Gülen for his pro-Europe views. He was one of the first Islamic
leaders to embrace the idea of EU membership and at a time when Islamists in
general regarded it as a threat to Turkish security and Islamic culture.664
On Gülen and the movement’s influence in Turkey, Kosebabalan notes
Fethullah Gülen and the movement he established and leads comprise two of he most
important actors in Turkish social and political life. His ideas, despite a number of
complications and contradictions in them, directly influence Turkish foreign policy and
certainly would bring some vivacity to that policy if put to practical application.665

661 Ozgalga 2005: 430
662 Yavuz 1999: 125
663 Bacik 2003: 31
664 Kosebabalan 2003: 176
665 Kosebabalan 2003: 170

--- Sayfa 456 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

454
Kosebabalan notes how some credit Gülen’s intellectual contributions that led to the EU-OIC summit
in Istanbul in 2002666. Supporting Kosebabalan, Yavuz states that ‘Gülen is the engine behind the
construction of a “new” Islam in Turkey’.667
On Gülen’s influence of thought, Yilmaz states
Preliminary observations indicate that Gülen not only is renewing Muslim discourses and
practices, but also transforming the public sphere, without claiming or boasting that he is
doing so. In this regard, the movement is evolving into a school of thought based on Gülen’s
discourse and with the potential to influence the whole Muslim world. This transformation
process is definitely a tajdid in the Turkish public sphere.668
On Gülen’s transformative discourse and evolving a new school of thought, Yavuz states
In the clashing visions of globalizations, Fethullah Gülen is a force in the development of the
Islamic discourse of globalized multicultural pluralism. As the impact of the educational
activities of those influenced by him attests, his vision bridges modern and postmodern,
global and local, and has a significant influence in the contemporary debates that shape the
visions of the future of  Muslims and non-Muslims alike.669
We have already studied the dynamics of this influence, whether it be the Gülen persona or the
movement. Through this influence, Gülen has helped strengthen the periphery in Turkey. The Gülen
movement’s education, media and business initiatives have empowered and enabled the working-
class silent-majority in Turkey who where hitherto unable to contest for the centre ground.
What is more, through this new school of thought, Gülen has helped remove the theological and
cultural dogmas, which until recently, prevented the periphery from positively engaging in society and
therefore from moving into the centre ground currently occupied by the militant secular margins.
The AK Party phenomena, which has its roots in the pro-Islamic National Outlook movement, owes
its evolutionary success in becoming a modern, inclusive and democratic Party, largely to Gülen’s
transformative discourse. In 1994, when Recep Tayip Erdogan was characterising democracy as a
means to an end, Gülen stood up at the Journalists and Writers Foundation and said ‘there is no
return from democracy; it’s not perfect, but is the best system we have’. Again, in the polarised Turkey
of the 1990’s Gülen was the first to speak of dialogue, tolerance, acceptance of each other and peaceful
coexistence. It was the Gülen movement’s conferences, interfaith fast-breaking dinners, peace awards
and so forth that brought together people of opposing ends of the political spectrum. Many expressed
pleasant-surprise, even shock, at how they could share the table with once considered arch-enemies.
However, at the time, many criticised Gülen on this, including some members of the current AK Party
government and the Religious Affairs Directorate. It is interesting to note that the Religious Affairs
Directorate now hosts several interfaith dialogue events itself and that the current government has
adopted Gülen’s approach of reconciliation.670

666 Kosebabalan 2003: 181
667 Yavuz 1999: 121
668 Yilmaz 2003: 237
669 Voll 2003: 247
670 Yilmaz 2005: 399-405

--- Sayfa 457 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

455
Gülen helped ease the ideological rift in Turkey and the resultant community tension. When the
Alevis where offended by the Sunnis he made a televised announcement as a Sunni imam, saying, ‘if
loving reverend Ali makes one an Alevi, then I am an Alevi for I love him dearly’. Regarding the
communists of the 1970’s and 80’s he is known to have said, ‘they love this country as much as you do.
You cannot question their patriotism.’ Even on secularism, Gülen’s announcements that he looks
favourably on a Anglo-Saxon-style open secularism (against a French-style militant laicism) has
helped ease tensions on this fault line as well.
The Abant meetings which brought together academics, writers, journalists and politicians (including
leading members of the current government) to discuss deeply dividing political issues in Turkey and
arrive at a consensus reflected in the Abant declarations are efforts in this vein.671
Gülen’s views on democracy, secularism, pluralism, human rights and modernity  have helped
empower Muslims in Turkey, who until recently fought to withstand the lure of  these values despite
their better judgment out of fear that giving in would run contrary to their faith. Muslims in Turkey
were now able to socially, politically and more importantly, sincerely and constructively, participate in
Turkey’s public life and contemporary debates. The fact that the AK Party government has done more
during its first term than any other in the past 40 years to achieve Turkey’s accession to the EU, is
proof of this point.

671 In 1998 the Abant platform discussed the relationship between Islam and secularism, in 1999 democracy and human
rights, in 2000 pluralism and reconciliation.
The 1998 Abant Declaration states that ‘revelation and reason do not conflict; democracy and secularism does not conflict
with Islam; the state should remain neutral towards every kind of ideology, belief and philosophical view; the state should
ensure basic human rights and freedom of belief, conscience and religion and should not seek to exclude nor deprive any
person of the right to public participation’. (Ref)
The 2001 Abant Declaration reads: ‘Civil and political freedoms, headed by the freedoms of belief, thought and expression,
education, and organization, are the prerequisites of pluralism’ (Journalists and Writers Foundation 2001: 316).

--- Sayfa 458 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

456
3. Human Rights Values in Gülen’s Thought
Having studied the nature of Gülen’s influence and tajdid, the next question is what that means so far
as as human rights values. The following therefore is an appraisal of human rights values in Gülen’s
discourse and tajdid.

3.1. Human Rights
Gülen looks at human rights from three perspectives: (i) the inherent value of freedom vis-à-vis
freedom of choice and willpower, (ii) the contingent value of freedom vis-à-vis personal and social
development and (iii) metaphysical human rights (kul hakki in Turkish).
Gülen views humans as the centre of the universe. For him, humans are the purpose of creation.
Following the Islamic tasawuf (roughly translated as meaning and spirit of Islam) concept of  ‘all
beauty and fairness require to see and be seen’, Gülen states that God is All-Beautiful and All-Fair and
that He wanted to see His beauty and wanted His beauty to be seen. It is for this reason that God
created humans. Humans have intellectual, emotional and bodily faculties to observe, enquire,
understand, admire, praise and love God. Thus, humans were created as intelligent and conscious
beings that can travel from the created to the Creator, marvel at the beauty and majesty of God’s art
and arrive at some estimation and understanding of His attributes, names and qualities. Like Nursi,
Gülen argues that all creation manifests God’s infinite names and attributes and that humans are
“intelligent mirrors” who can turn and look at what creation is manifesting and appreciate their
Creator.
However, there is an important ‘magical switch’  in humans which turns all of this on672 and
differentiates it from angels, who also marvel, worship and love God, and that is the element of
choice. This “choice” is what makes humans human. The fact that man chooses to recognise and
worship God changes everything. Gülen explains that with this choice, humans can surpass angels in
piety or fall lower than demons in barbarity. God wants humans to “choose” Him. Thus, choice was
bestowed on humans as a gift and, simultaneously, test from God.
Once the matter is approached from this perspective, preserving the freedom of choice bestowed upon
humans by God becomes an intrinsic, inherent and inalienable right of ones very humanness.
Being free and enjoying freedom are a significant depth of human willpower and a
mysterious door through which man may set forth into the secrets of the self. One unable to
set forth into that depth and unable to pass through that door can hardly be called human.673
Summarily put, the universe was created for humans; a human is defined by its ability to choose.
Choice is protected by freedom. Freedoms therefore allow humans to fulfil their purpose of creation.
Hence, for Gülen, human rights which protect freedom of choice have an inherent value and must be
promoted at all cost to preserve the balance of creation and purpose of existence.

672 Gülen 2005: 15
673 Ref

--- Sayfa 459 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

457
While this is not a new outlook, and many Islamic scholars have shared this view, the fact that Gülen
is willing to make the logical connection between this religious definition of “choice” and faith-neutral
doctrine of “human right norms and practices” is quite significant.
By visiting the State and many other European countries, I realized the virtues and the role
of religion in these societies. Islam flourished in Europe and America much better than in
many Muslim countries. This means freedom and the rule of law are necessary for personal
Islam.674
Gülen’s second consideration of freedom is as a contingent value in relation to personal and social
development675. Gülen states that a human must strive to become an insan-i kamil that is perfect
person. This perfection is one of belief, thought and practice. However, it does not solely relate to
“religious matters” in the conventional sense but includes perfection and piety (taqwa) in “worldly”
matters as well.676
Freedom, in this context, therefore is a prerequisite to allow for personal and social perfection and
development. Without freedom, the room and dynamic force for perfection and development is non
existent. The most pertinent form of freedom in this respect, is freedom of thought and expression:
True freedom is the freedom of the human mind from all shackles that hinder it from
making material and spiritual progress, as long as we do not fall into indifference and
heedlessness.677
Gülen considers free-thinking as a significant personal attribute of the “inheritors of the earth” or
Golden Generation as he refers to elsewhere. These are the new generation of Muslims who have a
balanced disposition, appreciation and awareness of this world and the next; who combine reason
with revelation; who have love towards humankind and burn with the sensation of altruistic cause and
action. For Gülen, this generation will contribute towards stability and eventual peace between not
only people and nations but also between faith and science, matter and metaphysics.
[W]e have to be more free-thinking and free-willed. We need those vast hearts who can
embrace impartial free-thinking, who are open to knowledge, sciences and scientific
research, and who can perceive the accord between the Qur’an and Sunnatullah [God’s
pattern of creation] in the vast spectrum from the universe to life.678
Free-thinking and freedom of thought is therefore an imperative climatic condition for personal
development. Without this freedom, development will stagnate on all fronts. Although Gülen is
against the categorisation of “this world” and “afterlife”, since he see the two as inextricably linked, it

674 Ref
675 Carroll 2007: 28-9
676 Gülen argues that God determined the laws of religion and the laws of nature and causality. Thus, a believer must follow
both. Failing to follow the laws of nature and causality means failing to obey God’s laws in achieving a desired result. Hence,
Gülen re-defines taqwa (piety) as including, living in accordance with God’s sunnutullah (Gods way, laws of nature). As
such, Gülen states that the West is more Muslim than Muslims in that they have achieved superiority by following God’s
laws of causality while the religious-Muslims have not.
677 Gülen 2006: 65
678 Ref

--- Sayfa 460 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

458
is clear that according to him, without this freedom, development regresses both in the worldly and in
the spiritual and religious sense.
For Gülen, to achieve social development, you must begin from the individual. A group of individuals
who have attained a certain awareness and concern for others can then come together to engage in
further altruistic works. This way, a virtuous cycle that feeds itself will be born and help strengthen
civil society and social infrastructure. Thus, for Gülen, freedom of thought has a direct link with
developing society as a whole through developing the individual.
That is what Gülen is trying to achieve through education:
“if you wish to keep masses under control, simply starve them in the area of knowledge.
They can escape such tyranny only through education. The road to social justice is paved
with adequate, universal education, for only this will give people sufficient understanding
and tolerance to respect the right of others”.679
In this respect, the hundreds of Gülen-schools that provide a broad and balanced curriculum and
instil values of tolerance and respect for differences are significant in putting Gülen’s views into
practice on free-thinking to the wider public. The very notion that education is worthy in itself,
regardless of its topic, whether mathematics, geometry or English, is a huge step forward in removing
the cultural shackles on freedom of thought in cultural Muslim thinking which in the past only valued
Qur’anic or religious teaching.
Secondly, education empowers people to think, reason, listen, research, extrapolate, relate, argue and
learn which is immensely important in enabling individuals to become independent “free-thinkers”.
Once the mindset of constantly challenging the modes and mediums of the present is fully
internalised, then perhaps the movement will have achieved what Gülen refers to as freeing oneself
from the shackles of thought:
[A]s we draw toward renewal, it is imperative that we should review the historical dynamics
of the last thousand years and question the changes and transformations of the last one
hundred and fifty years of our past. It is imperative because judgments and decisions are
nowadays made according to certain unquestioned taboos.680
Finally, metaphysical human rights. For Gülen, human rights include not only the enforceable rights
included in law, but also those rights that we hold regardless of enforceability in this world. In that
sense, a right is a right and is no less “real” simply because it cannot be enforced. For Gülen, there is
no categorical distinction between the right not to be tortured with the right not to be backbitten
(giybah). From a religious point of view, all transgressed rights will be accounted for on the day of
judgement. This is quite significant in Islam, since Muslims are taught that God does not permit
Himself to forgive the transgression of another, unless the transgressed forgives first. Thus, Gülen
lists su-i zan (negative thought about another), giybah, slander681 tax evasion and, even, non payment

679 Ref
680 Gülen 2005: 39
681 Gülen 1995: 277

--- Sayfa 461 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

459
of utility bills682, the charge of which will be picked up by others, as transgressions of human rights.
For Gülen, they are all one and the same, namely basic human rights.
Hence, Gülen extends the scope and depth of human rights to include the unenforceable as well. In
doing so, however, he also extends the scope of the unenforceable to include tax evasion and illegal
use of electricity and water.
What is more, I argue that while Gülen directly promotes human rights values in the form shown
above, his overall tajdid and the movement’s activities also promote such values by default since
Gülen’s discouse is (i) ‘person’ based and therefore contain an ever present underlying streak of
humanistic values, and (ii) help eradicate the cultural and religiously-couched objections towards
human rights values. This means that, given its normal course, human right values will spread with
the movement’s influence as a matter of default. Gülen’s well known views on Anatolian Muslimness,
political Islam, democracy and secularism help illustrate the point further, as shown in Keles 2007.

3.2. Incremental (tedriji) Ijtihad in the Making: Apostasy in Islam
Freedom of belief has been a tricky topic for the Muslim world. A quick survey of the debates
surrounding this freedom during the drafting of art 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
or International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights will prove this point. The exact difficulty
relates to the concept inherent in this freedom, namely the right to change religion. The question for
Muslim countries has been whether Islamic law allows for Muslims to convert out of Islam. The
conventional answer is that it does not and that one who does (murted) is punishable by death in
Islamic law.
Regarding freedom of belief, Gülen is unequivocal. He clearly states in a number of articles that faith
is a matter of choice and conscience and that no one can be coerced into believing or worshipping.683
In one article684 on the topic (a transcript of Gülen’s response dating back to the late 1970’s), Gülen
passingly refers to the issue of temporal punishment for apostasy. Whilst he reiterates the
conventional position as his own, he treats the matter as political rebellion towards the state and
equates it with high treason. This latter comment marks the beginning of an incremental ijtihad on
the topic which will eventually manifest itself as part of an evolving tajdid on dialogue, pluralism and
human rights in Islam.
I claim that Gülen is engaged in incremental ijtihad, since (i) he develops and communicates his
ijtihad incrementally over many years and different mediums, respectively, and (ii) he does not claim
that he is engaged in ijtihad at all, thus further delaying the recognition that he is. 685 His evolving
position on the death penalty for an apostate is an example of this incremental ijtihad.

682 Gülen 1995: 280
683 “If individuals cannot live by the principles of their religion freely because of certain obstacles put before them, this
means that they have been denied the freedom of belief and conscience.” (An Interview with Fethullah Gülen 2005: 448)
684 “Dinde Zorlama Yoktur” Ayetini Izah Eder misiniz?
(http://www.asringetirdigitereddutler.com/index.php/content/view/470/12/)
685 See Gülen 1995: 218 for a short discussion about the need to consider the socio-cultural conditions, perceptions and
customs of the time.

--- Sayfa 462 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

460
Since the aforementioned article, Gülen has not expounded on his position that apostasy is a political
act of high treason. Instead, it has been picked up by Dr Ahmet Kurucan, a personal student of Gülen
for many years and columnist of the Zaman Daily Newspaper on fiqih (Islamic jurisprudence) related
issues. Given his expertise, columns and affinity with Gülen, Kurucan is known as the movement’s
teacher on Islamic jurisprudence.
In 2006, I attended a Conference in Germany in which Kurucan gave a talk on apostasy and
punishment. He explained that the death penalty for apostasy was an ijtihad itself, not a definitive
commandment of Islam, and that therefore it could be superseded by another ijtijad today. He argued
that the time in which premodern jurists arrived at their decision, communities were deeply divided
over Islam and Muslims were under political and physical siege from a number of fronts. Thus, you
were either a Muslim defending Islam or a non-Muslim attacking it. For these jurists, apostasy at the
time meant rebelling against the State and joining forces against the Muslims. There are a number of
incidents at the time when apostates subsequently took arms against Muslims. According to Kurucan
therefore, apostasy was treated as high treason by the premodern jurists and their ijtihad of execution
is in relation to this, not to the mere renouncing of faith.
This is an important observation backed by other scholars today as well:
Many of the scholars and jurists define apostasy in terms of rebellion against the State,
where a Muslim-subject of the Islamic State after denouncing Islam joins with those who
take arms against the Islamic State and thus commits a political offence against the State.686
Kurucan’s PhD thesis (2006), entitled Freedom of Thought in Islam, substantiates this argument
further. In summary, it argues that the Qur’an makes no reference to temporal punishment for
apostasy, that to the contrary it states that there is no compulsion in religion687; that there are a
number of recorded incidents in the Prophet’s lifetime when an apostate went without punishment
whatsoever; that much of the justification for this ijtihad is based on incidents that occurred during
the reign of Abu Bakr when whole communities uprose against the central government and that
therefore these were political acts of rebellion against the State; that the Hanafi school of thought
states that a woman apostate is not punishable by death since she cannot take arms against Muslims,
which, coupled with the fact that Islam treats man and women equally in reward and punishment,
helps prove the overall point that in the premodern jurists’ mind, apostasy was equated with high
treason and political rebellion. Kurucan argues that since apostasy can no longer be charged with such
meaning today (as imminent physical attack by the apostate) and that times have changed, then this
ijtihad can be superseded by another.
Whether or not one agrees with Kurucan’s reasoning is irrelevant for the purposes of this paper, since
we are not engaged in a theological study. The point is that Gülen and the movement are using Islamic
tools of reinterpretation and renewal to reunderstand Islamic history and teachings. In doing so, they
are referring to traditional texts and methodologies and forming a new discourse and school of
thought.
Given the importance of the topic and its potential for controversy, it is unthinkable that Kurucan
would take such a stance without Gülen’s prior approval. Thus, the various incremental stages of this

686 Baderin 2003: 124
687 Qur’an: 2:256

--- Sayfa 463 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

461
ijtihad include Gülen’s article dating back to the late 1970’s, the overall dialogue works that became a
priority for Gülen in the mid 1990’s, the various meetings with minority religious leaders in Turkey in
same period, the repeated emphasis on freedom of belief and human rights in the Abant meetings in
the 2000’s and Kurucan’s academic work in 2006. All of these comprise a further reason and
justification in themselves towards a new position on the issue of change of religion in Islam.
Therefore, what we have here is an incremental development and communication of a hitherto minor
opinion through new arguments to change the conventional thinking and attitude towards freedom of
belief in general, apostasy in particular in traditional Islamic law. I expect that Gülen will publicly
endorse this position in the near future, completing the incremental process of this ijtihad’s
formation. This will then comprise a significant piece of the Gülen tajdid on dialogue, pluralism and
human rights. 688
It is true that Gülen does not criticise the punishment for apostasy in the article referred to above or
since. However, it should be noted that this was back in the 1970’s, that in the same article Gülen
hinted at the line of thought that would be later developed by Kurucan and that since then an
incremental change of position has taken place in conduct and word. What is more, this is perhaps
one of the most sensitive topics in Islamic law and given that Gülen is simultaneously lambasted by
some religious fanatical groups for allegedly pacifying religious sensitivity in Turkey order to
Christianise the Turks and ultra laicist militant groups on the grounds that he is seeking to establish
an Islamic State in Turkey and Islamisize the whole world, one can appreciate why Gülen would take a
cautious note on this issue.
A number of jurists and scholars have also held that apostasy is not a punishable offence. However,
the difference in Gülen’s case is that he has the influence to change the thought of a critical mass to
make a real difference. In doing so, Gülen and the movement are challenging a religiously-couched
cultural reaction to the ‘right to change religion’ in the Muslim world. Religion is a matter of
conscience and many Muslims believe that it is there duty to oppose the freedom to convert out of
Islam, because of Islam. It is this which Gülen is incrementally challenging.
This does not mean that opposition to change of religion will immediately crumble, especially in the
political circles. For them, controlling the right to change religion is a means to controlling opposition
and religious authority. After all, it is they who decide what amounts to apostasy. However, the likes
of Gülen’s efforts will undermine the religious, cultural and public support for such a stance and in
time will influence the thinking of the masses on freedom of belief in the wider Muslim world.

4. Gülen’s Influence in the Muslim World
What we have examined above are some of Gülen’s transformative views on frontline contemporary
debates in the Muslim world. The point is to now assess whether Gülen can influence the Muslim
world along the lines of the discourse espoused above.

688 Other Gülen incremental ijtihad’s incubating for the time being include “metaphysical democracy” and art in Islam.

--- Sayfa 464 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

462
4.1. Gülen on the Muslim World
Gülen’s goal of universal peace allows us to judge the importance he ascribes to the Muslim, and for
that matter, non-Muslim world. In his short English biography, often used as an introduction to most
of his translated books, it states:
Gülen envisions a twenty-first century in which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual
dynamic that will revitalize long-dormant moral values; an age of tolerance, understanding,
and international cooperation that will ultimately lead, through intercultural dialogue and
sharing of values, to a single, inclusive civilization (emphasis added).689
In one of his early writings, Gülen states that this inclusive civilisation will emerge from the
cooperation of the East and West and the respective values and strengths each represent:
Communities based on the cooperation of science and morality always have established true
civilizations. For this reason, Western civilization remains paralyzed because it is based
mainly on science, and Eastern (Asian) civilizations are not "true" because, in their present
conditions, they have no scientific background. The civilization of the future will have to be
established upon a combination of Western science and eastern faith and morality.690
In another of his writings, Gülen explains further what those values and strengths are;
The West cannot wipe out Islam or its territory, and Muslim armies can no longer march on
the West. Moreover, as this world is becoming even more global, both sides feel the need for
a give-and-take relationship. The West has scientific, technological, economic, and military
supremacy. However, Islam possesses more important and vital factors: Islam, as
represented by the Holy Book and the Sunna of the Prophet, has retained the freshness of its
beliefs, spiritual essence, good works, and morality as it has unfolded over the last fourteen
centuries. In addition, it has the potential to blow spirit and life into Muslims who have been
numbed for centuries, as well as into many other peoples drowned in the swamp of
materialism.691
Thus, for Gülen, universal peace and the will of God can only be achieved in an inclusive civilisation
that merges the values and strengths of the East and West.
That is how we should read Gülen’s request of his students to replace a map on his wall that solely
shows the Muslim world, with one that shows the entire world. That is also consonant with the
movement’s efforts that span four continents and more than one hundred countries.
Therefore, Gülen’s primary objective is religion-neutral and includes all people. To achieve this
however, the Muslim world must be willing to contribute. To do so, Gülen argues that they must
reform and revive themselves.692 As to the nature of that revival, Gülen explains elsewhere

689 Woodhall & Cetin 2005: viii
690 Gülen 2006: 56
691 Ünal and Williams 2000: 247
692 The Islamic world continues to squirm in the vicious grasp if error…[W]e must work within the Islamic world… which
will lead to a comprehensive renewal… The Islamic community needs to be revived… (Gülen 2003: 3)

--- Sayfa 465 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

463
With all sincerity, we support a renaissance that would consist of the rediscovery of lost
human values and the rapprochement of humanity with universal human morals. Again,
we support a renaissance that allows the questioning of dictatorship and the end of
dictators, and working towards a democratic society. A renaissance that fosters great
achievement in the fine arts and promotes a careful reading of the book of the universe,
which has been lost for a long time, is greatly applauded. We support a renaissance that
promotes a longing for research, a passion for knowledge, and the articulation of religion in
accordance with the understanding of our century in a new style and new manner.
(Emphasis added)693
From another perspective, it is clear from these essays that for Gülen, Turkey is socio-culturally,
historically, geographically and geopolitically very important. Indeed, if we are to judge Gülen’s
priority by the scale of the movement’s investment, then again -no doubt- Turkey tops the list. Unlike
Hakan Yavuz, who seeks to explain Gülen’s emphasis on Turkey, as nationalistic tendencies
originating from his dadas spirit or frontier experience694, I believe that this is due to Gülen’s
estimation of Turkey’s past and future potential to lead the Muslim world towards an inclusive
civilisation. Turkey is critically important to Gülen, because the future of Islam, the Muslim world and
universal peace are so inextricably linked in Gülen’s mind.
In his essay ‘The World We Long For’, Gülen speaks of ‘our nation may shortly realize a second or
third renaissance’ and his prayer to God to ‘[s]ow our people to the ways to revival in the
Muhammadi line’695. In this essay, Gülen is alluding to the leadership role of the Turks in reviving the
Muslim world
After long ages of crises and depressions, despite all odd, this nation is still capable of such
regeneration; it still has the potential to realize a new resurrection… Moreover, it has the
advantage of the subconscious acceptance by peoples which shared history, a leadership
which may possibly be of use again in the future.696
Thus, Turkey’s significance in Gülen’s estimation is due to the role it is yet to play in this Muslim
world.
Another clue on the topic is Gülen’s ongoing intellectual project since 1991; a compilation of essays
running into four volumes, entitled Key Concepts of Sufism. Here Gülen looks at key terminology and
values in the practice of Sufism by locating these concepts within the Qur’an, the sunnah and the
lifetime of the Prophet. Gülen oscillates between concepts such as ashq, jazba, tevazu, tevekul, vasil,
halvet, kurb-buud, and the Qur’an, Hadith and practice of great Sufi masters. Thus, in these essays,
Gülen is legitimising Sufi practice, thought and perception. He is meticulously threading a theological
and philosophical link between Sufism and the sharia. In doing so, Gülen is strengthening one of the
fundamental dynamics and underlying bedrock of Anatolian Muslimness, namely Sufi appreciation
and perception.

693 An Interview with Fethullah Gülen 2005: 458
694 Yavuz 2003: 22
695 Gülen 2005: 28
696 Gülen 2005: 25

--- Sayfa 466 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

464
These essays were clearly intended for Muslims. Its purpose is to spiritually reform. To do so, it
defines and contextualises Sufi concepts in Islamic sources. Turkish Muslims do not need to be
convinced of the legitimacy of Sufism in Islam. They accept this outright. I therefore argue that the
primary audience of these works are not Turks but the wider Muslim world which, according to
Gülen, desperately needs the Sufi touch. For Gülen, Sufism (or tassawuf to use a better word), is the
spirit of Islam and a practice void of this is didactic, rigid and conformist.
Thus, Gülen’s intellectual project spanning sixteen-years is, in part, geared towards the Muslim world.
Why then is the movement so much more active in the West than it is in Muslim countries? The
answer is practicality. The Gülen movement moved very quickly into Central Asia because it could,
and because Gülen wanted to pre-empt Saudi and Iranian influence in the region. As for Europe,
there was already an existing Turkish Diaspora there and the movement quickly flourished as a result
of this existing base. What is more, for Gülen, Turkey is the most important Muslim country in the
Muslim world, with its history, Anatolian Muslimness and ability to bridge the East and West and
therefore the movement has always been at the heart of the Muslim world from the very beginning.
Pakistan, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Egypt are some of the other Muslim countries where the
movement is also now active.
The main reason why the movement has not, until recently, been active in Saudi and Iran is to do with
these countries refusals. Saudi and Iran consider Turkey and Turkish-Islam as a threat to their
Wahhabi and Shiite practices, respectively. It is widely known that both countries spend millions of
dollars each year to convert Muslims to their Islamic outlooks through Islamic cultural centres,
mosques, bookshops, student sponsorships etc.
However, none of this should be taken to mean that Gülen is not concerned with the Muslim world.
My contention is that Gülen is seeking to mobilise and influence the Muslim and Arab world through
the example and credibility the movement gains in the West. Gülen needs this credibility, since he is
seeking to enter a resilient and, at times, hostile market
Q: What do you say about the attitude: "Forget about Europe, and become the leader of the
Muslim world in the East. You're not European anyhow."
A: We have one side in common with Europe and one side in common with the Muslim
world. Our integration with Europe will necessarily bring the other. (Emphasis added)697
The well-known Professor Akbar Ahmed states in the Forward of A Dialogue of Civilisations, “[t]he
size and effectiveness of the Gülen movement has grown exponentially over the past thirty years” and
adds:
While conducting a research project for the Brookings Institution entitled “Islam in the Age
of Globalization” during the spring of 2006, I travelled to nine Muslim countries, and my
research team and I were shown just how influential Fethullah Gülen has become. In an
attempt to understand the “mind” of Muslims throughout the Muslim world, we prepared a
questionnaire that asked direct personal questions to each participant. The questions posed
attempted to gauge reactions towards the West and globalization. We found that many
people are following those who seek to put barriers around Islam, and to exclude everything

697 Sevindi 1997: 189

--- Sayfa 467 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

465
else, especially Western influence. This idea is rapidly gaining popularity across the Muslim
world. In Turkey, however, we saw that the most popular contemporary role model was
Fethullah Gülen, indicating to us the importance of his intellectual movement and also its
potential as a countervailing force to ideas of exclusion that are gaining more traction within
the Muslim world.698
It is this potential influence of Gülen in the Muslim world that we now turn to appraise.

4.2. Gülen’s Influence in Muslim World
As noted at the very beginning, human rights values are an intrinsic them of Gülen’s discourse. For
Gülen, human rights values are an inalienable part of one’s humanness. Gülen’s ideas surrounding
tolerance, acceptance of one another, pluralism, democracy and the West are all connected with
human rights and human freedoms. Gülen’s Anatolian Muslimness, in particular, is a conveyor of Sufi
perception which is favourable to human rights discourse.
Thus, Gülen’s influence in the Muslim world on human rights will not be as distinct as some would
have thought at the beginning of this paper. Rather, it will part and parcel of the Gülen-package. In
fact, as seen above, Gülen will not claim to be changing or influencing anything. That is why he has a
greater chance of success. Instead, the movement will concentrate on schools, dialogue efforts, media
and intellectual gatherings. In time, the Gülen tajdid, ethos and principles will permeate the Muslim
world through the example of the movement.
This is in fact what is needed. The problem in the Muslim/Arab world is intricate, complex and deep
rooted and no progress can be made on any front unless the solution is encapsulating, incremental
and localised or locally driven. The problems that surround the practice of human rights in the
Muslim world are vast and complex and cannot be tackled on its own. A wider approach that deals
with the real underlying cultural, economic, social and political dimensions of the problem is needed.
An approach that is not reactive to the problems of the Muslim world, but is positive and proactive.
That is why the Gülen solution is significant. It seeks to empower and enable the common people
through education and dialogue which challenges cultural perceptions and overcomes dogmas. It
seeks to mobilise the individual and society towards achieving to become insan-i kamil which can
only progress in a free, fair and just society. Since Gülen’s goals and teachings are justified in
traditional Islamic sources, they have no problem of legitimacy or authenticity. Just as Gülen’s and
the movement’s efforts have helped strengthen the periphery in Turkey, my contention is that this will
be replicated in the wider Muslim world. The pace of this influence naturally depends on the
movement’s presence in this region.
Since 2005, the Gülen movement have begun a new initiative in the form of an Arabic magazine,
called Hira.699 The magazine is published quarterly and includes topics such as religion, theology,
culture, education, science and poetry and an editorial article by Gülen for each issue. The magazine is
based in Istanbul and Cairo and draws writers from both Turkey and the Arab world. Contributors
from the Arab world include very well known and respected writers and scholars. This is a new

698 Akbar 2007: Foreword
699 http://www.herkul.org/yazarlar/index.php?view=article&article_id=2727.

--- Sayfa 468 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

466
development; the only Gülen initiative that is exclusively dedicated to engage the Arab world. Clearly
this is a medium through which Gülen is seeking to introduce the underlying dynamics of Anatolian
Muslimness to the Arab world. The overall ethos of the magazine, reflect the Gülen emphasis and
thinking of religion and society. Although the magazine does not engage in politics, its discussion of
faith, religion and society will eventually help communicate Gülen’s views on these issues.  The
challenge for the magazine is to catch and maintain the interest of the Arab youth. It is too early to
assess whether it is achieving this.
The 12th Abant meeting, entitled ‘Islam, the West and modernization’, was held in Cairo over two days
in February 2007.700 Intellectuals, scholars and journalists from both countries took part in this two
day-long platform. This was the first time the Gülen movement organised a significant conference in
an Arab country. The event was co-organised by the prestigious Al Ashram centre for Political and
Strategic Studies think tank which publishes a daily newspaper with a circulation of one million. The
meeting in Cairo was entitled Turkey-Egypt Talk I, signalling that its mark the beginning of a series
of events to be organised by the Abant platform. The underlying objective of this meeting was to look
at modernisation in the Muslim world; how to overcome common problems among Muslim societies;
universal values such as human rights, democracy and rule of law and spreading these notions in the
Muslim world through Muslim interpretation. The second of these meetings will be held in February
2008 in Istanbul and it is expected that leading universities from Egypt such as Al-Ezher and Seem
University will take part.
Clearly it is very significant that this meeting was held in Cairo and can be taken as a further
indication that Gülen is starting to slowly engage the Arab world. The fact that both Hira and this
Abant meeting was based in Egypt is no coincidence. It is well known that both countries have good
relations and share a long history together. Unlike, Saudi Arabia and Iran, Gülen speaks favourably of
Egypt. Perhaps Egypt will serve as Gülen’s springboard to the rest of the Arab world. If Hira and
Abant are anything to go by, this certainly seems likely. Other than the meeting itself, the very topic is
also quite revealing: ‘Islam, the West and modernisation’.
Given that the Gülen schools are not centrally coordinated, there is no verifiable data as to the exact
number of schools in any given region. Recent estimates suggest six hundred schools in over a
hundred countries701. The website for the 5th Turkish Language Olympics organised in Istanbul by the
movement states that 550 contestants took part in the event in Istanbul from 100 different
countries702. It is well known that all of these contestants were service-recipients of the Gülen
movement in some capacity, often as a pupil in one of Gülen’s schools. This confirms previous
estimates regarding the number and span of Gülen schools.
The list of contestants from Muslim countries include: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bosnia-
Herzegovina, Algeria, Chad, Indonesia, Ethiopia, Morocco, Philippines, Ghana, India, Iraq, Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Kosovo, Maldives, Malaysia, Mali, Egypt, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Senegal, Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Jordan and Yemen.  Of the 57
member states of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, which includes all but a very few
countries of Muslim population, the Gülen movement is active in approximately 42 of these. What is

700 http://www.gyv.org.tr/bpi.asp?caid=336&cid=874
701 Ref
702 http://www.turkceolimpiyatlari.org/

--- Sayfa 469 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

467
more, we know that some of these countries have more than just one school, for example there are
seven each in Pakistan703 and Yemen704, six in Afghanistan705, and three in Northern Iraq. Some of
these we know about from the Internet706 others from word of mouth. So at the very least, the Gülen
movement is active in over forty Muslim countries; the more credible likelihood is that this activity
involves at least one school if not more.
Clearly therefore, there is a Gülen presence in the Muslim world. What is lacking is the Middle East.
Attentive readers will have noticed ‘Iran’ in the above-list of countries. During discussions with
volunteers of the movement who have worked in the region, I was told that there are student-
dormitories in Iran and in every major city of Saudi Arabia. Apparently, one purpose of these
dormitories and hostels are to serve pilgrims. This is very significant. Conventional research and
thinking on the movement has always maintained that the movement is non-existent in Iran and
Saudi. My research suggests otherwise. Whether the movement will set up schools in Iran707 and
Saudi is another question, but they are certainly active there.
What is important to note at this juncture is the pace at which these schools and the span of the
movement is growing. If we are to go by the Turkish Language Olympics, the number of countries
taking part is growing at a phenomenal speed. In 2006, the number of countries that took part was
87, in 2007 this number reached to 100. Clearly, this is not a definitive estimation of growth, since a
Gülen school may have chosen to only take part in 2007 despite being around in 2006. While this is
quite possible in theory, it is unlikely in practice, given the importance Gülen places on these
Olympics. In this respect, it would not be far off to suggest that the countries and schools that take
part in these Olympics reflects the approximate size and scope of the Gülen movement in general and
schools in particular.
Another indication of the Gülen movement’s pace of growth, for example, is in the media sector.  In
2006 the movement owned two international TV stations, Samanyolu and Mehtap TV. In 2007, three
more TV stations came on air: Samanyolu Haber, a 24 hour news channel; Ebru, an all-English TV
channel based and broadcast from the U.S and Yumurcak, a children’s TV channel. In 2007, Zaman,
the movement’s Turkish newspaper, became the highest circulating daily at an average of 650,000
copies. In 2006, the movement launched its first English daily newspaper, Today’s Zaman which is
already the highest selling English newspaper in Turkey.708
Gülen’s books translated into Arabic include, the Infinite Light, a topic based commentary on Prophet
Muhammad’s life (pbuh); Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism; The Statue of our Souls – Revival

703 http://www.pakturk.org/
704 http://www.tissenior.com/
705 Abdullah Gülen (the then Foreign Secretary), attended the opening ceremony of the Afghan Turkish Girls school with a
1500 student capacity, in Kabul in February 2007. It was later reported that Mr Gul informed Margaret Becket (the then
Foreign Secretary of Britain) of these schools and that she encouraged him to make these efforts known to the European
leaders: http://www.zaman.com.tr/webapp-tr/haber.do?haberno=522069
706 There are a few websites that list some links to Gülen schools, such as
http://www.turkokullari.net/index.php?option=com_weblinks&catid=14&Itemid=22
707 I was told that when the movement proposed opening a school in Iran, the Iranian authorities replied “give us the funds
and we will open it for you”.
708 http://www.TodaysZaman.com

--- Sayfa 470 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

468
in Islamic thought and action and ‘İrşad Ekseni’.709 Gülen’s official website is accessible in twenty
languages including Arabic, Persian and Urdu.

4.3. Movement’s Relief Charity: Phase of Adoloscence
The founding of an international relief and development charity in 2004, called “Kimse Yok mu?” (Is
There No One? (hereinafter “charity”)), which seeks to alleviate suffering and poverty in the world,
signals a new phase for the movement, a coming of adolescence. The ambit of this charity is not just
the Muslim world but poverty in the South and suffering all over. The charity website explains the
various national and international relief programmes and projects carried out by the charity. The
charity first undertook national relief programmes and ad hoc relief efforts to alleviate poverty and
help natural disaster victims (Agri 2004, Bingol 2005, Eastern Turkey 2007). From 2005 onwards,
the charity began relief programmes abroad. In January 2005, the charity appealed for donations for
the victims of the South Pacific earthquake. With funds collected, the charity provided water
sanitation machinery, clothes, food and medical help and support to victims of the Ace province in
Indonesia. In 2006710 and 2007711 the charity provided aid and support to Pakistan and Lebonan. The
local Gülen institutes help coordinate the aid and support in these countries.
The efforts of this charity vis-à-vis the Muslim world is important for two reasons: (i) the credibility it
will provide the movement in the Muslim world, and (ii) the wider implications of the movement
entering a phase of development. The charities efforts to date prove that the Muslim world is
important to Gülen and the movement, and is an excellent way to win the “hearts and minds” of the
Muslim people in the region. What is more, this is also an excellent means of raising the profile and
visibility of the local Gülen movement in the region and use of their local experience and knowledge.
Through such relief work, the Gülen movement is gaining the awareness, sympathy and support of
Muslims in the wider Muslim world, enhancing its prospects of success in this region.
The second point is that this relief charity demarcates very clearly a new phase in the development of
the Gülen movement.
Crudely put for the purposes of this paper, until recently, the main focus of the movement has always
been to build its own capability, credibility and capacity. In that sense, all works and projects were
geared towards winning over volunteers and support. These works in themselves were always
charitable but one unchanging dimension was the contingent gain for the movement. One example is
that all donations received would only go to a public cause organised directly by the movement itself.
In this sense, the movement was still in its early developmental stage.

709 Not translated into English
710 Following the 2006 eartquake in Asia, the charity built three tent-villages in Pakistan which accommodated
approximately 5000 victims. The charity provided these villages with food and support for six months. The charity also
presented the Pakistan authorities with a four million dollar cheque as relief aid to the victims of this earthquake. The
charity also built ten pre-fabricated schools, each with a capacity for 350 students, and provided school material and
equipment.
711 In 2007, the charity began a campaign entitled ‘Hand in hand with the Palestinian and Lebanon People’. This involved
sending food to Palestine (13 lorries) and Lebanon (14 lorries). The list of other international support programmes
undertaken by the charity continues.

--- Sayfa 471 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

469
What this relief charity does, is clearly mark out what was slowly emerging anyway; that the
movement has now entered a stage of adolescence where it undertakes more complex and
burdensome projects which do not necessarily benefit the movement itself. The fact that the relief
charity collects money from businessman in Turkey, often the same people who fund Gülen projects,
and then donates that money to earthquake victims in Pakistan, despite the movement needing that
money elsewhere, is a sign that the movement has now entered a new phase where it considers itself
capable of making such a donation. Put differently, the Gülen movement’s charitable works have
moved to a whole new altruistic level defined by “need of society” as opposed to “gain for the
movement.”
In the past the movement was criticised for remaining indifferent to wider public issues like poverty
and human right violations. It appears that Gülen and the movement were not so indifferent to these
issues after all, but building the mechanisms through which a meaningful attempt of contribution
towards a solution could be made.
I argue that this will mean a more active Gülen in the Muslim world and South. The movement will
not only spread as it first did in Turkey, but do so with more authority and greater speed. The relief
charity is a clear indication that the movement considers itself to be of sufficient maturity to attempt
bigger and more complex issues and that it has turned its energies towards the Muslim world.
In summary therefore, the Gülen movement is clearly present in most parts of the Muslim world. The
movement is obviously strongest in Turkey and the Turkic states. However, the movement has clearly
moved well beyond this and is now active in approximately 42 Muslim countries. The movement is
not so active in the Middle East for reasons more to do with these countries than to do with Gülen.
Gülen and the movement have demonstrated that they are now turning their resources to the Muslim
world. The Hira magazine, conference in Cairo and expanding schools in the Muslim world
demonstrates this and proves that this is not just a Turkish movement.
Gülen’s view concerning the Muslim world in general and the Middle East in particular has been that
much of the non-Arab Muslim world still approaches Turkey with affinity and as their natural leader
given the Ottoman past. This “subconscious affinity and acceptance” is significant for Gülen as shown
by his repetition of this. I contend that Gülen is now seeking to cash that subconscious credit in the
Muslim world. Given that the problems in the Muslim world are complex, deep rooted and intricate
and that there is –to some extent- an Arab and Iranian resistance to Turkey, the Turkish-model and
the Gülen movement, Gülen has sought to build leadership in the Turkic world and credibility in the
West before attempting to permeate the Middle East. That attempt is well underway and I predict a
growing number of schools, periodicals, newspapers and eventually TV channel in the Middle East in
the next 10 years.

5. Conclusion
This paper argues that Gülen’s infuence is transferable to the wider Muslim world, given its
underlying dynamics and nature. The scope and depth of this influence depends on the presence and
activity of the movement in this region. All research indicates that the movement is now investing
greater energy in the Muslim world, whether through Hira, book publications or a growing number of
schools.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

470
The movement introduces Gülen’s philosophy, views and tajdid to the Muslim world through
example. Gülen’s tajdid proves itself to be adaptable, flexible, durable and practical. Most
importantly, it is collectively constructed, based on action and conduct and spread among the grass
roots of society. In this way, it lends itself to localisation and indigenisation providing it with a greater
chance of success in the Muslim world. An ever-present underlying streak in Gülen’s tajdid and
discourse are human rights values. This is significant since it means Gülen’s views, of themselves,
promote human rights values by default. Gülen’s views are spread through the example of the
movement. This is best illustrated in the movement’s dialogue activities among Muslims. These
activities usher in Gülen’s dialogue theology and Anatolian Muslimness. Anatolian Muslimness is
Gülen’s perception of Islam, which gives prominence to Sufi perception, love, tolerance, forgiveness
and peace. Gülen would say that this is Islam in itself. I suggest that Gülen is promoting Anatolian
Muslimness among Muslims to fine-tune the rigid, conformist and literal Muslimness in practice in
some parts of the Muslim world today. This is significant for the development of human right values
in the Muslim world.
What is more, Gülen promotes human rights directly by internalising democracy, human rights,
freedom of belief, pluralism and Anglo-Saxon secularism. Democracy and pluralism are prerequisites
for the enjoyment of human rights. Where there is antagonism towards either, there can never be the
true enjoyment of the former. Furthermore, by de-politising Islam and replacing any support for an
Islamic state or theocratic governance with respect for rule of law, elections and other fundamental
principles as noted above, Gülen is directly promoting human rights through Islam, or because of
Islam. His incremental ijtihad –ongoing– on change of religion in Islam is significant in this respect.
The net effect of Gülen’s efforts has been to contribute to a new type of Muslim in Turkey, who while a
strong believer supports democracy, pluralism and human rights because of his faith not despite it.
This has helped strengthen the silent and significant periphery in Turkey, who are now constructively
participating in Turkey’s public life and contesting for the centre ground.
By tracing the movement’s presence and growth in the Muslim world, this paper suggests that a
similar effect will take place in this region as well. The movement’s relief charity proves that the
Muslim world is important to Gülen and that the movement has now entered a new phase of
adolescence where it is undertaking more complex social issues. One of these, I suggest, is enabling
the civil society of the Muslim world. The growing activity and schools in this region bolsters this
point further. This runs contrary to conventional thinking on the movement to date, which suggests
that the Muslim world is not significant to Gülen. I argue that the Muslim world has always been
central to Gülen’s vision of an inclusive civilisation but practicality as opposed to philosophy
prevented greater prominence to this region. What is more, the strong and resilient Arab culture
against a Turkish model could only be countered through significant credibility. I argue that the
movement now possesses that credibility through it works and activities elsewhere and is now seeking
use it in the Muslim world. Based on the movement’s projects so far and a long history of good
relations, it is very likely that Egypt will serve as the springboard to the movement’s wider activity in
the Middle East.
The fact that Turkey’s profile has been on a steady rise in the Muslim world in recent years will only
add pace to the movement’s efforts here. In time, and as in Turkey, that will lead to a change of
culture, perception and mood on points pertinent to human rights enjoyment and contribute to a
wider debate in the Muslim world on developing an internally meaningful and effective and externally
coherent and consistent set of human right norms.

--- Sayfa 473 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

471
THE RELEVANCE OF FETHULLAH GÜLEN’S THOUGHTS
FOR DEMOCRATIC REFORMS IN THE MUSLIM WORLD
LEONID R. SYKIAINEN 712

Abstract
Today political reforms are a central public concern in the Muslim world, where Islamic
traditions coexist with universally accepted standards and Western liberal values. In these
countries politics and the operations of state power make up a specific sphere of interaction
between Islamic principles and Western norms. Fethullah Gülen’s believes that the fundamentals
of Islam do not contradict political reform in the contemporary Muslim world; rather, they can
contribute to it. His thoughts about the political reform of the Muslim world are of particular
importance in the light of the necessary collaboration of different political and legal cultures.
Gülen pays special attention to the involvement of Islam in political life and to Islamic methods
of realizing political goals. While stressing the importance of law and order, he condemns
absolutely violent and coercive ways of attaining political ends. He does not see a contradiction
between genuine Islamic principles and democracy: he explains that the well-known principle of
consultation is extremely flexible and responsive to the needs of every era. Gülen is an advocate
of dialogue between different cultures and civilizations so as to benefit from each other’s
knowledge and views. in any case, he argues, people always need to learn from the experience of
the experienced. This position opens the way for the Muslim world to benefit from modern
democratic models of governance. Fethullah Gülen does not believe there is going to be a clash of
cultures or civilizations. Instead of this idea he puts forward the principle of dialogue. The first
step in establishing it is to forget the past, ignore polemics, and give precedence to the common
points that far outnumber differences.

1. Introduction
It was late in the 20th century that Islam developed into a major issue of contemporary world politics.
It left the realm of academic deliberations to be discussed by political scientists, publicists, and
journalists. They normally concentrate on several subjects inherited from the past like Islam’s attitude
towads international terrorism and political extremism as well as several recent ones, namely the
Muslim world's future in the context of political changes and the role of Islam in the process.
All these issues cannot be properly discussed outside the main trends of Islamic thoughts: ideas hold a
special place in the Muslim world, in which all deep-cutting changes and important projects of

712 Professor and Chair of Theory of Law and Comparative Law, Law Faculty, State University-Higher School of Economics,
Moscow, and (from 2000) Professor of Institute of Asian and African Countries, Moscow State University; Member of
Dissertation Scientific Councils in Institute of State and Law, Russian Academy of Sciences and State University-Higher
School of Economics; as Member of Scientific Consultative Council, Ministry of Interior, Russian Federation. Prof.
Sykiainen is the author of more than 160 learned works on Islamic law and comparative legal studies. One of his recent
publications is ‘Democracy and the Dialogue between Western and Islamic Legal Cultures’ in Robert A.Hunt and Yuksel A.
Aslandogan (eds.), Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Somerset, NJ: The
Light, Inc. & IID Press, 2006).

--- Sayfa 474 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

472
national dimension are scrutinized through the prism of Islamic principles. What is more, devoid of
an Islamic foundation they will never take off. This means that all positive solutions for the above-
mentioned issues should be sought within Islam. In other words, to discuss the prospects of political
transformation of the Muslim world today means first of all to interpret Islam in the light of
contemporary world realities. That is why Fethullah Gülen pays special attention to this problem
when evaluating the Muslim world’s political future.

2. “Today Islam is not understood properly”
In a number of his publications Fethullah Gülen analyses in a short but very deep manner the present
situation in the Muslim world. He agrees that during a long period of time the Muslim societies have
been witnessing a multidimensional political, social and cultural crisis. On one hand, this crisis
embraces the Islamic thought and education at the moment. But one the other hand, it is itself caused
by the decline of Islamic ideas and knowledge. That is why Fethullah Gülen’s teachings must be
estimated by their impact upon the development of the modern Islamic theory and by their
contribution into overcoming the crisis of the Muslim world.
The thinker points out a few main reasons of the present weakness of the modern Muslim countries.
In his view, the three ones deserve to be mentioned before others:
- prolonged and continuing political backwardness which manifests itself first of all in the absence of
genuine democratic institutions and processes coupled with domination of the authoritarian regimes;
- spiritual and moral crisis which consists in particular in the growing influence of imported - western
standards of life;
- unsatisfactory knowledge of Islam.
When touching leading roots of backwardness of the Muslim world the thinker underlines some key
problems of Islamic societies linked directly with the perspectives of their political reformation. He
especially stresses that Islamic societies entered the twentieth century as a world of the oppressed, the
wronged, and the colonized. After their liberation and creation of independent states political
authorities worked for the well-being of the dynasties of which they are members, rather than working
for the prosperity of their countries and trying to establish the unity of public and the power, and thus
these administrations have been degraded to the position of mere oppressors and are deserving of
loathing in the eyes of the public (Gülen 2004:239-240).
Values like democracy, basic human rights, the spread of knowledge and education across society,
economic prosperity, equality in production, the institutionalization of consumption and income in a
way that prevents class formation, the supremacy of law and justice, values which today are general
accepted throughout the world, have never been fully realized in Islamic societies (Gülen 2004:240).
Maybe more important than all of the above, the fact that religion, and the religious values,
spirituality and ethics that are connected to religion have been eroded away throughout the world
constitutes the most important source of major social problems that threaten humanity today. The
Muslim world is going through a spiritual crisis as all the essential supporting pillars of humanity
have collapsed and have been destroyed (Gülen 2004:241).

--- Sayfa 475 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

473
To sum up, Fethullah Gülen formulates the most important and bitter conclusion: today, in his
opinion, an Islamic world does not really exist. There are places where Muslims live. Islam has
become a way of living, a culture. It is not being followed as a faith. There are Muslims who have
restructured Islam in accordance with their thoughts. It doesn’t mean radical, extremist Muslims, but
ordinary Muslims who live Islam as it suits them. The prerequisite for Islam is that one should
“really” believe, and live accordingly. Muslims must assume the responsibilities inherent in Islam. It
cannot be said that any such societies with this concept and philosophy exist within Islamic
geography. There are no administrators having this vision. The Islamic world is pretty ignorant,
despite a measured enlightenment that is coming into being nowadays.
Today, there is an Islam of the individual. There are some Muslims in different places of the world.
One by one, all have been separated from one another. It’s difficult to see anyone who is a perfect
Muslim. If Muslims are not able to come into contact with one another and constitute a union, to
work together to solve common problems, to interpret the universe, to understand it well, to consider
the universe carefully according to the Qur’an, to interpret the future well, to generate projects for the
future, to determine their place in the future, then we can’t talk about an Islamic world. Since there is
no Islamic world, every one acts individually. It could even be said that there are some Muslims with
their own personal truths. It cannot be claimed that there is an Islamic understanding which has been
agreed upon, approved by qualified scholars, reliably based upon the Qur’an, and repeatedly tested. It
could be said that a Muslim culture is dominant, rather than Islamic culture. As a result we must
realize that no Islamic country, when considered from viewpoint of administrative, legal, and
economic matters, exists. Today Islam is not understood properly. At best we can say that Islam is not
known at all (Gülen 2004:184).

3. Regarding Islam as A Political Force and An Instrument for Terrorism
To prove this sound idea it’s enough to refer to Fethullah Gülen’s ideas on Islam attitude towards
politics and terrorism. First of all the thinker determines some principal theoretical approaches to this
issue pointing out that if we want to analyze religion, democracy, or any other system or philosophy
accurately, we should focus on humanity and human life. In this light Islam cannot be compared on
the same basis with democracy or any other political, social, or economic system for it focuses
primarily on the immutable aspects of life and existence, whereas political, social, and economic
systems or ideologies concern only certain variable social aspects of our worldly life. The aspects of
life with which Islam is primarily concerned are as valid today as they were at the dawn of humanity
and will continue to be so in the future. Contrary to that, worldly systems change according to
circumstances and so can be evaluated only according to their times (Gülen 2004:219).
At the same time Fethullah Gülen refers to the historic facts stressing that beginning from the first
half of the century Islamic societies were engaged in wars of liberation and independence. During
decades Islam assumed the role of an important factor uniting people and spurring them to action. As
these wars were waged against what were seen as invaders, Islam, national independence, and
liberation came to mean the same thing. When national states were established in these parts of the
world, the states were not compatible with their public. Whereas the states should have instructed the
public in Islam with its true identity and nature, they acted in a way which disregarded the public, a
way contrary to the values and traditions of Islam. This made the latter a pillar, a refuge against the
administration in the eyes of the public. Consequently, it is regrettable to say, Islam has come to be

--- Sayfa 476 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

474
regarded as a traditional political ideology by many. And what is more some Muslims and policy-
makers consider and present it as a purely political, sociological, and economic ideology, rather than a
religion (Gülen 2004:219, 239).
In the light of this evolution of Islam as a political force Fethullah Gülen pays special attention to the
political process and the methods of ensuring political goals. In particular he never advocates the use
of violence to attain political ends. He absolutely condemns violent and coercive means and methods
and believes that the days of getting things done be brute force are over. Fethullah Gülen stresses on
the importance of law and order in society and does not believe that respect for others can be instilled
by force or that a modern world can be built by repression (Gülen 2004:246-247).
But the analysis of real circumstances makes him to recognise that in the countries Muslims live,
some religious leaders and immature Muslims have no other weapon to hand than their
fundamentalist interpretation of Islam. They use this to engage people in struggles that serve their
own purposes. In fact, Islam is a true faith, and it should be lived truly. A Muslim cannot say, “I will
kill a person and then go to Heaven.” God’s approval cannot be won by killing people. One of the most
important goals for a Muslim is to win the approval of God, another being making the name of
Almighty God known to the universe (Gülen 2004:185). This leads us to Fethullah Gülen’s thoughts
about relationships between Islam and terrorism.
To touch briefly this side of Fethullah Gülen’s intellectual contribution into proper understanding of
modern Islam it is enough to refer to his conclusion that it is hard for a person to remain a Muslim if
he becomes involved in terrorism. In true Islam, terror does not exist (Gülen 2004:184-185).
Fethullah Gülen believes that any terrorist activity is the greatest blow to peace, democracy, humanity
and religious values. Many Qur’anic verses are dealing with the concepts of justice and peace: “Deal
fairly, and do not let the hatred of others for you make you swerve to wrong and depart from justice.
Be just, for that is next to piety; and fear Allah” (Al-Ma’ida 5:8);” If the enemy inclines toward peace,
you (also) incline toward peace and trust in Al1ah, for He is the Al1-Hearing, Al1-Knowing “(Al-Anfal
8:61); and” O believers, enter into peace (Islam) wholeheartedly, and do not follow Satan's footsteps,
for he is your avowed enemy” (Al-Baqara 2:208).
At the same time Fethullah Gülen quotes the famous Hadith, stressing that the Prophet describes
Muslims as those people from whom others are secure from their tongues and hands. In other words,
those Muslims who are not known for their provision of security and trustworthiness to others must
reexamine their claim to be Muslim (Gülen 2002).
To sum up Fethullah Gülen underlines: “ Please let me reassure you that Islam does not approve of
terrorism in any form. Terrorism cannot be used to achieve any Islamic goal. No terrorist can be a
Muslim, and no real Muslim can be a terrorist. Islam demands peace, and the Qur’an demands that
every real Muslim be a symbol of peace and work to support the maintenance of basic human rights…
Even though at first sight terrorist acts seem to harm the target, all terrorist activities eventually do
more harm to the terrorists and their supporters” (Gülen 2004:261). Thus we can say with full
confidence that there is no terror in Islam. They are sharply different from each other, and terror
cannot approach Islam. In connection with the above logic, Muslims must be legitimate in their
intentions when it comes to their goals, thoughts, and actions, for only a straight and allowed way can
lead them to their exalted objective (Gülen 2002).

--- Sayfa 477 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

475
In other words, Fethullah Gülen believes that Islam couldn’t be an instrument for attaining political
goals. Rather it is a goal of political activity and that is why any political decisions must be enriched by
Islamic religious and ethical values. If any Muslims are joined to or associated with terrorism and
anarchy, it is because they do not understand Islam correctly and because the existing realities in their
countries to do not allow them to acquire a correct understanding. The thinker is convinced that this
situation could be prevented by education: “There is a remedy for this. The remedy is to teach the
truth directly” (Gülen 2004:190).
True understanding of Islam is closely connected with the political reforms which we are witnessing
today in the Muslim world.

4. Democracy and Islam: Are They Opponents or Allies?
Recently the problems of democracy and human rights have acquired a special importance for
forecasting the development of the Muslim world in the nearest future and in particular for evaluating
the perspectives of the promotion of political reforms including democratization. It is quite natural for
today most Muslim states are developing in .a rather contradictory way in the political and legal
sphere where Islamic traditions coexist with universally accepted standards and Western liberal
values. We should always bear in mind that politics and the principles of state power functioning form
a very specific sphere of interaction (cooperation and competition) between Islamic principles and
Western patterns. Islamic thought believes that the most specific feature of this sphere is created by
the fact that the traditional Muslim legal doctrine (fiqh) offers no detailed, exact, and unambiguous
answers to the vast majority of specific questions. It limits itself to identifying the most general
landmarks, such as consultation, fairness, and equality to be realized in different, including borrowed,
versions. When applied, these general principles may produce different results. The consultation
principle, for example, can be put into practice in the form of a consultative council accountable to the
head of state or as representative body with full legislative powers elected by universal suffrage.
Today, Muslim legal postulates are invoked to prove that Western experience of parliamentarism,
elections, political pluralism, the division of powers, and even human rights should be tapped. In
these spheres, however, the borrowing is limited to outward features, yet the very fact that Islamic
legal thought does not issue rigid instructions about the power system in general opens the road to the
widest possible reliance on the experience of political democracy.
What is more, today any modernization and democratization project has good prospects in most
Muslim states if realized within the Islamic political and legal tradition, or at least with due account of
it. The opposite is also true: no political reform stands a chance of survival if it is aimed at setting up
formally democratic institutions that go against the grain of Islamic thought. Objectively, the people
at the top and the public at large are interested in democratic developments if they are accompanied
by political stability and security. This can be done if democratization is realized within the Muslim
political and legal traditions, Islamic interpretation of all the changes included.
The strategy of political and legal reforms of the Muslim world should aim at incorporating it into the
globalization process together with its Islamic values (legal and political among other things) that are
compatible with the universal democratic principles and remolded to fit contemporary reality. This
can be achieved if the positive potential of Islamic political and legal thought is tapped in a very active

--- Sayfa 478 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

476
way and if the thinkers are encouraged to work on the problems connected with new realities and
Islam's role in the globalizing world.
We should bear in mind that the use of Islamic arguments is neither a trick nor empty talk. The
present state of mind in the Muslim world has made the attitude of the Muslim political and legal
doctrine toward the possibility of blending Islamic and Western principles extremely important. The
latest works of those Muslim thinkers who share a moderate and balanced attitude toward the Shari'a
admit, at least theoretically that this blend can be achieved
Different sides of the intellectual achievements of Fethullah Gülen are of special interest for
discussing the above mentioned issues. First of all it concerns the compatibility between the Western
liberal and the Islamic approaches to democracy and human rights.
Regarding this subject Fethullah Gülen stressed that when comparing Islam with democracy, we must
remember that on one hand democracy is a system that is being continually developed and revised. It
also varies according to the places and circumstances where it is practiced. On the other hand, religion
has established immutable principles related to faith, worship, and morality. Thus, only Islam’s
worldly aspects should be compared with democracy.
Estimating this point he argues that democracy -in spite of its shortcomings- is now the only viable
political system, and people should strive to modernize and consolidate democratic institutions in
order to build a society where individual rights and freedoms are respected and protected, where
equal opportunity for all is more than a dream. According to the thinker, mankind has not yet
designed a better governing system than democracy. Fethullah Gülen also maintains that as a political
and governing system, democracy is, at present, the only alternative left in the world (Yilmaz
2005c:396).
As for Islam, it is characterized by immutable religious and ethical values. But it does not propose a
certain unchangeable form of government or attempt to shape it. Instead, Islam establishes
fundamental principles that orient a government’s general character, leaving it to the people to choose
the type and form of government according to time and circumstances. If we approach the matter in
this light and compare Islam with the modern liberal democracy of today, we will be better able to
understand the position of Islam and democracy with respect to each other (Gülen 2004:220).
Along with this idea Fethullah Gülen refers to the following fundamental principles of Islamic form of
governement:
-
Power lies in truth, a repudiation of the common idea that truth relies upon power.
-
Justice and the rule of law are essential.
-
Freedom of belief and rights to life, personal property, reproduction, and health (both mental
and physical) cannot be violated.
-
The privacy and immunity of individual life must be maintained.
-
No one can be convicted of a crime without evidence, or accused and punished for someone else’s
crime.
-
An advisory system of administration is essential

--- Sayfa 479 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

477
Fethullah Gülen does not see a contradiction between these principles and democracy. The duties
entrusted to modern democratic systems are those that Islam refers to society and classifies as
absolutely necessary, relatively necessary, and commendable to carry out. People cooperate with one
another in sharing these duties and establishing the essential foundations necessary to perform them.
The government is composed of all of these foundations. Thus, Islam recommends a government
based on a social contract. People elect the administrators, and establish a council to debate common
issues. Also, the society as a whole participates in auditing the administration. In short, Islam
addresses the whole community and assigns it almost all the rights and duties entrusted to modern
democratic system.
It is necessary to stress that regarding establishment of Islamic form of state Fethullah Gülen is in
favor of a bottom-up approach and his desire is to transform individuals, an ideal that cannot be
fulfilled by force or from the top. Islam considers a society to be composed of conscious individuals
equipped with freewill and having responsibility toward both themselves and others. The Qur’an says:
“God will not change the state of a people unless they change themselves (with respect to their beliefs,
worldview, and lifestyle)” (Ar-Rad 13:11). In other words, Islamic society holds the reins of its fate in
its own hands. The prophetic wording emphasizes this revelation: “You will be ruled according to how
you are”. This is the basic character and spirit of democracy which does not conflict with any Islamic
principle (Gülen 2004:222). Answering a question wether can Islam live in democracy and vice versa
Fethullah Gülen said: “It’s wrong to see Islam and democracy as opposites” (Unal and Williams
2000:150).
In the light of these provisions Fethullah Gülen shows the main obstacle on the road leading to
establishing the just Islamic rule: today’s world presents a situation where regimes of oppression do
not have much chance to continue unchecked. Instead of these regimes the thinker proposes the
Islamic remedy – the famous Islamic principle of consultation.

5. Consultation and Human Rights as Key Directions of Political Reforms
Explaining the meaning of this principle for the modern Muslim world Fethullah Gülen states that for
the Muslims of today, consultation (shura) is a vital attribute and an essential rule, just as it was for
the first Islamic generations. According to the Qur'an, it is the clearest sign of a believing community.
The consultation is mentioned in the Qur'an together with salat (prescribed prayers) and infaq (giving
to maintain the religion and people for the sake of God): “...Those who hearken to their Lord, and
establish regular prayer, who conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, who spend out of what We
have bestowed upon them for sustenance” (Shura 42:38).
In this verse, we are reminded that consultation as a type of conduct is like prayer. That is why a
society which does not consider consultation important can hardly be considered to be a fully
believing one, and a community which does not apply consultation is not accepted as being Muslim in
the full and perfect sense.
In Islam, consultation is an absolute essential, which both the rulers and the ruled must obey. The
ruler is responsible for conducting consultation about political, governing, legislation and all affairs
related to society. The ruled are responsible for expressing and conveying their views and thoughts to
the ruler.

--- Sayfa 480 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

478
The important things which should be noted are: consultation is the first condition for the success of a
decision made on any issue. Even if a person has a superior nature and outstanding intellect, if he is
content with his own opinion and is not receptive and respectful to the opinions of others, then he is
more prone to make mistakes and errors than the average person. The most intelligent person is the
one who most appreciates and respects mutual consultation and deliberation (mashwarat), and who
benefits most from the ideas of others.
 Consultation is one of the prime dynamics which keep the Islamic order standing as a system. To
consultation belongs the most important mission and duty of resolving affairs concerning the
individual and the community, the people and the state, science and knowledge, and economics and
sociology. Even if the head of state or the leader is confirmed by God and nurtured by revelation and
inspiration, he is under obligation to conduct affairs by consultation.
This principle in the Qur'an is mentioned directly in two verses. The first of them was given above,
and the second one, which does not require any interpretation whatsoever, is: “Consult them in the
affairs (of moment)” (Al 'Imran 3: 159). Along with these commands the Messenger of God also saw
the salvation and progress of his community in mutual consultation: "Those who consult can never
lose”, “One who consults will not have cause to regret”, “One who consults will not come to harm”,
“One who consults is secure”, “There has been no community which used consultation but could not
reach the right result”.
After discussing the fundamentals of consultation Fethullah Gülen declares the final conclusion: both
of the revealed verses and the Prophet’s sayings related to the principle of consultation are extremely
flexible and responsive to the needs of every era. They have a breadth which surpasses all ages, such
that, no matter how much the world changes and no matter how the times alter, even if humans were
able to build cities in the sky, they would not feel the need to add new things to these decrees. In fact,
all the other rules and principles of Islam are open to similar flexibility and universality, and have
always retained, and will also retain in the future, their freshness, relevance and validity, despite the
passing of time (Gülen 2005).
Fethullah Gülen follows the similar approach when discussing human rights as an important side of
political reforms in the Muslim world. He is convinced that Islam is balanced, broad, and universal on
this subject. Except for those who strive to tear down the state or the legitimate administration, or
who have willingly taken someone’s life, the Qur’an teaches us: “Anyone who kills a person, unless it
be for murder or for causing dissension and spreading corruption in the land, it would be as if he
killed humankind all together; and if any one saves a life, it would be as if he saved the life of
humankind all together” (Al-Ma’ida 5:27-32). Pointing out the other side of the issue the Prophet
stated: “Whoever is killed while defending their property is a martyr. Whoever is killed while
defending their blood (life) is a martyr. Whoever is killed while defending their religion is a martyr.
Whoever is killed while defending their family is a martyr.” Ibn Abbas said that a murderer will stay in
Hell for eternity. This is the same punishment that is assigned to unbelievers. This means that a
murderer is subjected to the same punishment as an unbeliever (Unal and Williams 2000:133-134).
In short, in Islam, in terms of the punishment to be dealt on the Day of Judgment, a murderer will be
considered to be as low as someone who has rejected God and the Prophet (an atheist in other words).
If this is a fundamental principle of religion, then it should be taught in education (Gülen 2004:190).
Islam does not discriminate based on race, color, age, nationality, or physical traits. The Prophet
declares that all people are equal as the teeth of a comb. He also declares: “You are all from Adam,

--- Sayfa 481 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

479
and Adam is from earth. O servants of God, be brothers and sisters”. At the same time – Fethullah
Gülen is convinced - in Islam there are no minor or major rights. The right of the individual and the
right of society are equal. One cannot be sacrificed for the other, to the extent that it has been decreed:
“If a ship is carrying nine murderers and one innocent soul, that ship cannot be sunk to punish the
nine murderers” (Gülen 2004:220-221, 230-231, 237).
The thinker analyses different rights recognized in Islam like the freedom of religion and belief,
thought and expression, to own property and the sanctity of one’s home, to marry and have children,
to communicate and to travel, and the right to an unimpeded education. He underlines that the
principles of Islamic jurisprudence are based on these and other rights, all of which have now been
accepted by modern legal systems, such as the protection of life, religion, property, reproduction of
humanity, and intellect, as well as the basic understanding of the equality of people, which is based on
the fact that all people are human beings, and subsequently, the rejection of all racial, color, and
linguistic discriminations.
Fethullah Gülen draws our attention to the fact that all these values have been protected as separate
principles in modern legal systems which consider them as being “indispensable.” Islam approaches
human rights from the angle of these basic principles which will be – and should be – indispensable
in the new millennium (Gülen 2004:169-170, 231).

6. Diversity and Dialogue as Indispensable Prerequisites for Political Reforms and
Domination of Democracy
Compatibility between Islamic and modern democratic liberal values is not more than theoretical
ground to combine the both for success of political reforms in the Muslim world. It will be possible
only through the dialogue of different cultures and civilizations. In this respect Fethullah Gülen
underlines that for centuries the civilizations of the East and the West existed separately from each
other. This separation was based on the fact that the former retired from pursuits of intellect and
science, while the latter retired from spirituality, metaphysics, and eternal and invariable values. But
now the whole situation has changed. Modern means of communication and transportation have
transformed the world into a large global village. So, those who expect that any radical changes in a
country will be determined by that country alone and remain limited to it are unaware of current
realities. This time is a period of interactive relations. Nations and peoples are more in need of and
dependent on each other, a situation that causes closeness in mutual relations (Gülen 2004:230).
More precisely Fethullah Gülen srtesses that people must learn how to benefit from other people’s
knowledge and views, for these can be beneficial to their own system, thought and world. Espessially
they should always seek to benefit from the experiences of the experienced (Unal and Williams
2000:149). This position opens the way for the Muslim world to benefit from the modern Western
democratic patterns.
Regarding Huntington’s claim about the clash of civilizations, Fethullah Gülen considers that rather
than being realistic evaluations regarding the future, these types of claims seem to be determining
new goals in an attempt to influence public opinion. Actually, up until now, conflict is something that
is desired by certain power centers. The masses have been put on alarm against a frequently
conjectured and feared enemy. This enemy is more imaginary than real. It is in this manner that the
masses have been prepared for every kind of war.

--- Sayfa 482 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

480
On the contrary, Islam is strictly against disorder, treachery, conflict, and oppression. Islam means
peace, security, and well being. Thus, in a religion based on peace, security, and world harmony, war
and conflict are negative aspects. In exceptional cases there is a right to self-defense but this can be
done only according to certain principles. Islam has always breathed peace and goodness. Islam
considers war as a secondary event. Rules have been placed in order to balance and limit it. For
example, Islam takes justice and world peace as a basis: “Let not the hatred of others to you make you
swerve to wrong and depart from justice” (Al-Ma’ida 5:8). In this respect, Fethullah Gülen states that
tolerance and dialogue should be represented everywhere in the best possible way and should be an
example to the whole world. Such an example will encourage people to come together, to gather round
the same basic human values and, God willing, humankind will live one more spring before seeing the
end of the world (Gülen 2004:257). Coverung this issue from the other side Fethullah Gülen points
out: “I don’t believe there’s going to be a clash between cultures or civilizations. If some people are
planning such thing based on their current dreams and making claims on this subject, and if such a
wave has risen and is on its way, then before we suffer such a clash, let’s put a bigger wave in front of
it and break their wave” (Unal and Williams 2000:189).
At the same time Fethullah Gülen sees diversity and pluralism as a natural fact. Even though the
consideration of the world as a village becomes firmer and more prevalent over the course of time,
different beliefs, races, customs, and traditions will continue to cohabit in this village. Each individual
is like a unique realm unto themselves. Therefore the desire for all humanity to be similar to one
another is nothing more than wishing for the impossible. For this reason, the peace of this (global)
village lies in respecting all these differences, considering these differences to be part of our nature
and in ensuring that people appreciate these differences. Otherwise, it is unavoidable that the world
will devour itself in a web of conflicts, disputes, fights, and the bloodiest of wars, thus preparing the
way for its own end (Gülen 2004:250).
The thinker wants those differences to be admitted and professed explicitly. That is why he is an
adamant supporter and promoter of inter-faith dialogue. In his view, a believer must communicate
with any kind of thought and system. Fethullah Gülen points out that the dialogue has now expanded
to wide regions of the world. In general, the results – he believes – have been positive. At the same
time he is not optimistic about the present contribution of the Muslim world into this dialogue and
does not suppose that Muslims will be able contribute much to the balance of the world in the near
future. Till now they couldn’t solve the problems of the world. Perhaps it could be achieved in the
future (Gülen 2004:186). At the same time Fethullah Gülen puts forward the leading pronciples of
such dialogue which is a must today. The first step in establishing it is forgetting the past, ignoring
polemical arguments, and givig precedence to common points, which far outnumber polemical ones
(Unal and Williams 2000:244-245).

7. Conclusion
Today, the Muslim world is torn between two contradictory trends: advancing along the road toward
democratization and upsurges of radicalism. Modern Islam approaches these phenomena in quite a
different way. Until recent times, balanced Islamic thought did not manifest the necessary dynamism
when issues of democratization and political reforms or the possibility of the Muslim world joining
the globalization process came up for discussion. In other words, even some decades ago this
moderate trend of Islamic political and legal thought hadn’t proposed definite and convincing

--- Sayfa 483 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

481
solutions of the above mentioned problems based on the genuine Islamic mental traditon. We
couldn’t help but feel that, at the ideological level, Islam had so far been unable to meet the challenges
of our times. No wonder, in the absence of a clear Islamic strategy, most contemporary authors
remained reserved, or even pessimistic, about the future of the Islamic civilization. Those who would
like to detach it from the world came up with a much clearer message.
There is still a widely shared opinion outside countries with predominantly Muslim populations that
democracy and traditional Islamic values are incompatible. Islamic extremists share this view for
different reasons: they are convinced that the contemporary developments threaten Islam. The global
"Islamic project," or Islamization of mankind, is seen as the only adequate answer.
This leads to a question of fundamental importance: is Islamic ideological potential big enough to
finally arrive at a formula that would bring Islamic values and the latest achievements of
contemporary civilization together?
When trying to answer this question, we should take account of the fact that Islamic thought abounds
in various trends, three of which until recently were considered the main ones. One of them, the
traditional trend, justifies conservation of sorts of Muslim society's present state; another, the
fundamentalist trend, insists that the public and state structures should undergo radical changes and
return to the literally understood Shari 'a. The modernist approach uses the outwardly Islamic
interpretation in an attempt to justify liberal reforms patterned on the West.
Until recently, another of the many trends that interprets the contemporary world along Islamic lines
remained lost to the public, which has its attention riveted on the three prominent trends. We have in
mind the idea of tapping Islam's internal potential, which says that reality should be measured against
the Shari 'a cornerstones, values, and general principles rather than its petty rules related to minor
things and interpreted in a narrow-minded manner.
This is very close to what the Muslim reformers of the turn of the 20th century thought, even though
they never got beyond the calls to return to ijtihad and never tried to apply the other Shari'a principles
to put their purely Islamic idea of the changing world on firmer ground. It should be added here that
since the mid-20th century this position has been limited to the works of those scholars who preferred
to concentrate on the immutable principles of the Shari 'a as opposed to its particular, and never
consistent, solutions. Just recently, this theoretical construct had absolutely no influence on political
and legal practices.
Now the situation is obviously changing: the formerly ignored trend has come to the fore as the most
promising soil on which the strategy of contemporary Islam and the Muslim world will probably grow.
Fethullah Gülen together with the other prominent Muslim thinkers played the decisive role in this
evolution.
As it was shown, he has his own views on all above mentioned issues. In particular Fethullah Gülen
believes that the only prospects of the Muslim world’s political development and stability depend on
its democratic transformation.:
Democracy has developed over time. Just as it has gone through many different stages
in the past, it will continue to evolve and improve in the future. Along the way, it will
be shaped into a more humane and just system, one based on righteousness and
reality. If human beings are considered as a whole, without disregarding the spiritual
dimension of their existence and their spiritual needs, and without forgetting that

--- Sayfa 484 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

482
human life is not limited to this mortal life and that all people have a great craving for
eternity, democracy could reach the peak of perfection and bring even more happiness
to humanity. Islamic principles of equality, tolerance, and justice can help it do just
this (Gülen 2004:224).
It is obvious that Fethullah Gülen’s thoughts about the role Islam could play to respond to these key
questions are the most convincing ones. And what is more he has a movement which can implement
his ideas (Yilmaz 2003; Yilmaz 2005a; Yilmaz 2005b:174-179).

--- Sayfa 485 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

483
NECESSITY AND IMPORTANCE OF INTERCULTURAL-
INTERRELIGIOUS DIALOGUE AND INITIATIVES OF
FETHULLAH GÜLEN
NİYAZİ ÖKTEM 713

1. Introduction
Being belivers of different religions and different cultures, we should confess that religions, especially
monotheistic religions do not like ‘tolerence’very much. Most of the religions and sects, at the risk of
their own decline, prefere protecting the faithful against, so called deviation of the faith they uphold:
Heresies, schism, heterodoxy etc. , must be condemned. That was the logic and the mentality of the
religious wars during the history.
For the fanatic members of the religions, there is no mercy for the others.
In the Old Testament, the expression’chosen people’ for a fanatic jew means, the place of the members
of the other religions is lost in the univers;salvation is a privilage only for the Jews. In the other hand,
for a liberal jew, all the believers of one god might have the privilage of being chosen people.
For a fanatic christian, the members of the other religions ara anthe-christ’s children. But for a liberal,
rationalist chrisitan, Jesus Christ, who is the incarnation(in Coran Jesus Crist is Kelamullah or
Kelimetul Allah which meens logos), would embrace all the children of God.
Djihad is the word for self-defence in the Koran. But, for a fanatic muslim, according to this concept,
beliveres should kill all the pagans. He does not know the deeper meaning of the djihad which means
making war agains our desire and our ambitions.
If believers make an effort to learn and to understand the deeper meaning and the aim of their faith,
tolerance and peace can find a beter place in the social and political life. Ignorance is the main
obstacles of tolerance and peace for humankind. . Ordinary people dont know his own religion and a
fortiori others’s religions. Thus believers of the other religions, other sects and denomonations
become ennemy for them. Ignorance humiliates other beliefs and other toughts. Ignorance brings
nationalism and chauvinism, and consecequentially war and caos.
Only liberal and open minded religious leaders can break religious ignoranc and fanatic aproaches.
This kind of leaders, philosophers can open the way of the interreligious and intercultural dialogue
procesus which could be institutionolize with the support and the participation of the masses.
Institutionaly, the Second Vatican Concil (1958-1963-65), whit the great effort of Pope John the
Twenty Third interreligious dialogue started in our modern times. But of course, before that we
always can see, during the centuries philosophers, priest, Saints, İmams, Rabins who had worked
seriously for the interfaiths diologue. Among the others, names such as Saint François of Assisi, the
catholic;Maimonides, the Jew;Mawlana Djalaleddin Roumi the Muslim are some of the thinkers and
the activist of the dialogue.

713 Professor at Bilgi Univesity, Istanbul, Turkey.

--- Sayfa 486 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

484
In modern times in the Muslim Word, one of the Pioneer of interreligious dialogue is Mr. Fethullah
Gülen. Mr. Gülen is the first Turkish muslim religious leader who institutionalise intercultural and
interreligious dialogue worldwide.
He founded in 1994 The Journalists and Writers Foundation where he is now honorary president.
Coming from Said Noursi tradition, Mr. Gülen always had appaciated interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, but institutionaly the start took a run-up whit this foundation. His ‘master’Said Noursi
exerted his personal efforts at building reconciliation and friendship with Christians. Noursi, in 1950,
sent a collection of his studies to Pope Pius XII in Rome and recieved in reply a personal letter of
thank. In 1953, he went to visit the Ecumenical Patriarche Athenagoras in Fener-İstanbul to seek
cooperation between Muslims and Christians against to the face of aggressive atheism. But, first
intitutional start came up from Fetullah Gülen.

2. Intellectually, Who is Fetullah Gülen?
Born in 1938, in Erzurum. east part of Anatolia Fetullah Gülen, while child, started to learn soufi
interpetation of Islam from Sheikh Muhammed Lütfi. In his moral training, especially his mother, and
his Soufi teacher played formative roles. His unofficial Soufi education affected his ongoing
spiritualitiy. I think that Soufi formation is the main stream for him to realise the importance of the
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, because Soufism, mystical approches in religion could open
the concept of unification and equality among the human being. Soufism is humanism.
But on the other hand, he grew up whit the concept of nationalism, because Erzurum had lived the
reciprocal atrocities with Turcs and Armaniens. He has always been nationalist, but not chauvinist.
His moderated nasionalism focuses on loving his people and respecting all the other nations, religions
and etnicities. ’Co-existance pacifique’ in is his main aim to estabilish peace in the World. His
nationalism, maybe, opened the vison of founding schools in Central Asia and also worldwide.
The Gülen’s attitute of nationalism thus differentiates itself from other islamic and nationalist groups
is adopting the free market, modern education and liberal interpretation of Islam. This new ‘national
islam’ of Turkey marked by the logic of market economy and Otoman legacy which means to know
how to co-existe whit the other religions and etnicities in the different liberal social and political
states.
Gülen believes the virtue of democracy. He also thinks that Democracy and Islam are compatible.
Islam does not propose a certain unchangeable form of goverment. In the other hand democratization
is an irreversible process in Turkey. From this perspective, Fetullah Gülen fallows, like his master
Said Noursi, the path of islamic intellectuel movement Nahta(Islamic Renaissance of Mouhammed
Abdouh and Djamalettin Afgani).
According to the Nahta movement, tree main principles of Islam ara creed(iman), ritual
obligations(ibadet) and legal-economic affairs(muamelat). Interpetation’s principles in creed and
ritual obligations should be literally. But for muamelat, rulers, juges, that meens all the Muslims can
apply in jurisprudence sociological and theleological interpretations. That means, if there is an
inflation in the conjoncturel economical situation in a Muslim country, you can not apply the literally
the verset of Coran which says that interest is a sin. If you apply this principle, poor people, having
noting than a small amont of money, will loose more if he doesn’t accept a reasonable interest from

--- Sayfa 487 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

485
the bank. Justice is is one of the main principle of Islam. If that men looses his money with the
inflation, without having interest you avoid one of the main principles of Coran which is justice. As a
philosophical concept, justice can appear differently according to the socio-economical situations.
Appling Coran in muamelat needs a socio-economical and teleological approach. Teleos is the ultime
aim of our holly principles. So, we should always concern the aim of Islam which is creating ‘ city of
Justice’. So did Khalif Omar when a thief was expecting the sentance of cuting his hand he said: it is
famine, there is general scarcity of food. It is not fair if we cut the hand of this thief. Omar did not
apply the literally interpretation of the verset of Koran but he prefere the sociological and teleological
interpretation.
With this kind of approaches, Nahta’s principles are compatible with the principles of the modern
democracy. Turkish Muslim thinkers and modern Muslim businessmen are not far a way from
Nahta’s principles.
With the support of modern and moderated Muslim businessmen and his ordinary fallowers, Gülen’s
modern intellectuel vison of Islam and his activist nature gave him the chance of being honorary and
spirituel leader of many important activities in different fields. Media, schools, intellectuel
foundations, intellectuel platforms.
In my speech I’ll talk about intellectuel foundations and intellectuel platforms.
In dead, we can find and regroup in a concrete way his intellectuel aproaches’s is the activities of
Journalists and Writers’s Foundation.

3. Journalists and Writers Foundation
Journalists and Writers Foundation, which was founded in 1994, promote dialogue and toleranc
among all stratum of society. According to his president, Harun Tokak, the Foundation took as its
principle the performance of activities that develop and consolidate love, tolerance and dialogue, first
among journalist and writers, and than throughout Turkish society and humankind.
From this perspective above, Journalist and Writers Foundations created Abant Platform and
Intercultural Dialogue Platform.

3. 1. Abant Platform
In 1997, pioneered by the Journalists and Writers Foundation, a group of Turkish scholars and
intellectuels of different political tendencies decided to organise a thin-tank in order to discuss
regularly Turkey’s and Word’s social, intellectel, religious, political and philosophical problems.
On july 16-19 th, in a hotel, by the Lake of Abant hidding behinde Bolu mountains with its natural
beauties, a group of intellectuels from different places, of different opinions and stands took a ‘first
step’ fort the peace and dialogue. Most of them came togather fort he first time, most of them newly
meet. The initial timidity turned into friendship, distances into understanding, while hard looked,
frictions transformed into witty remarks, intellectuel bickerings;and diversities became a richness.
From 1998 to 2007.

--- Sayfa 488 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

486
Within a very short time, The Abant Meetings became a classic, a tradition. We call it’Abant Spirit’
which is pluralism, freedom, individualitiy, civil consciousness. search, courage, resistance to
impositions, persuation, tolerance to opposition, knowledge and critical intelelct, to search for a
common denominator, vision, respect, feeling outer worlds, dialogue and tolerance, complete
democracy.
Seen as having aweek choice, tried tone and being colourless and drained, for a period that coul be
considered a long one, The Turkish intellectuel has returned to life with the Abant Spirit.
Accomplishing that at atime when ideologies and dogmas besieged life and held living and thinking
spaces in mortage was a great move possessing the quality of a mental revolution, a reform
Regularly, trought the years, such issues have been discussed whit the collabarations of the different
national and international institutions:

Islam and Secularism. 1998. Abant-Turkey

Religion, State and Society. 1999. Abant-Turkey

Democratic Law State. 2000. Abant-Turkey

Pluralism and Social Reconciliation. 2001. Abant-Turkey

Globalisation. 2002. Abant-Turkey

War and Democracy. 2003. Abant-Turkey.

Islam, Democracy, Secularism and the Turkish Experience. 2004 Whashington DC. John
Hopkins University.

In the Process of Turkey’s Accession to the EU:Culture, Identity and Religion. 2004.
European Parliment. Brussels. Catholic University of Louvain.

On the Verge of New age :New Searches in Education. 2005. Erzurum-Turkey.

Paris I. April 2006. Maisons des Siences de L’Homme et Conseil International des Sciences
Sociales. Maubert-Mutualite. ’Republic, Cultural Diversties and Europe. ’

Paris-Istanbul II. April 2007. Palais de France-Istanbul. Fondation pour l’Innovation
Politique and Revue Esprit. ’Franc, European Union and Turkey’.

Alevilik. Historical, Culturl, Folkloric And Actuel Aspects of Anatolian Alevis. May 2007.
İstarbul Turkey.

3. 2. Intercultural Dialogue Platform
Intercultural Dialogue Platforme is also one of the important institution of the Journalists and
Writers Fondation. In that context, the Honorary Prisedent of the Fondation held talks whit many
religious leaders and institutions, such as Pope John Paul II(ın 1998), Greek Eucumenical Patriarch
Bartholomeos(in 1996), Sepharadic Chief Rabbi of Israel Eliyahu Bakshi Doron(in 1999) and others
religious leader of Turkey in many occations.

--- Sayfa 489 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

487
Beginning from 1997, men and leaders of the different religions living in Turkey took places, under
the umbrella of the Journalists and Writers Foundation, around the table of the Ramadan diner.
Among the academic meetings, Intercultural Dialog Platform have organised fallowing symposiums:
I. Intercivilisational Dialogue Symposum 6-7 June 1997 Istanbul.
II. The art of Living Togather. ’Tolerance700” 1999. Istanbul
III. The Globalisation and Intercivilisational Dialogue. 2004 Tbilisi. Georgia.
IV. From Terror to Universal Ethics:Religions and Peace Conference. 2005 Moscow. Russia.
V. Hunger and Poverety:Solutions Offers by Religions. 2006. İstanbul
VI. Harran Meetings.
It is known that the Abrahamic traditions holds an important place in Anatolia which is the
crossroads of ancient cultures. The fact that a part of Abraham’s life has passed in nordern
Mesapotamia. Abraham is the common father of tree monotheistic religon. Chiristians and Muslims
of different sects, who lived in this region, tried to keep Abrahamic tradition continuously alive.
In the context of interreligious diologue, Intercultrel Dialogue Platform organised two symposium in
two important cities of this area, where the Abrahamic tradition is practised.
a)
a)13-15 April 2000. First one took place in Şanlıurfa which is accepted as the birthplace of
Abraham and has a position of being the center of the Hararn region that has been housing a
rich scientific and cultural heritage since Babylon. Different religious leaders and scholars
from diffrent countries came to participate to the symposium. His Hollyness Bartholomeos
and Chief Rabbi of Turkey were among them. .
b)
b)13-16 May 2004. The second one took place in Mardin also in nordern Mesapotamia.
Among the participants I can mention the fallowin names:His Hollynesb Bartholomeos
;Abdulkadir Aksu, Minister of Internal Affairs, Mor Ignatius Iwas, Syriac Orthodox
Patriarch;Rav Izhak Haleva Chief Rabbi of Turkey, Mgr. Edmond Ferhad, Vatican
Ambasador. Also worldwide, differant scholars and religous leaders took place at the
symopsium.
V- Common Prayers for the Peace.
The intercultural Dialogue Platform has created a tradition for The Common Prayers for the Peace.
Religious leaders of the differents religions and sects living in Turkey have come togather each year
for a common prayer for the peace. First one was organised in January 15th 2004 in İstanbul. After
the prayers, a panel is always organised within the framework of issue that is on the spirituel agenda
of World an Turkey.
VI- Whit the participation of the different religious represantatives, Intercultural dialogue Platform
organise also panels on fallowing subjects:
-
-The concept of incarnation in the three monotheistic religion.
-The Concept of God in the three monotheistic religion
-The concept of ethics in the three monotheistic religion.

--- Sayfa 490 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

488
4. Conclusion
Like the other religions, Islam has different interpretations. It is undoubted fact that certain Islamic
traditions and interpretations and practices are might have conflict with the modern state and
modern society. In judisim and in chritianity, we can also see fundamentalist approaches. I think that,
like the other religions philosophicly, sociologically and theologically Islam is multudimensional and
has many aspects. I believe thet rationalist and mistical interpretations of faith are perfectly
consistent with international human progressiveness.
In respect of its historical, sociological and judicial heritage, Turkey and Islam in Turkey, whit Sunnite
and Alevit interpretations and sects is not clasical traditional Muslim society.
Our rich historical heritage gave us the opportunity of having liberal and humanistic interpretation of
Islam. Mr. Fethullah Gülen and the tradition that he fallows has opend to the Turkish society the
doors of the intercultural and interreligious dialogue activities.
Dialogue can only can give us a concrete way for the peace.

--- Sayfa 491 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

489
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aarons, M. and Loftus, J. (1994) The Secret War Against the Jews (Australia, Melbourne: William
Heinemann).
Abbas, T. (ed.) (2007) Islamic Political Radicalism: A European Perspective (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press).
Abramsky, S. (2007) “Defining the Indefinable West”, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 53, B6-B8.
Abu-Nimer, M. (2001) “Conflict Resolution, Culture, and Religion: Toward a Training Model of
Interreligious Peacebuilding”, Journal of Peace Research, 38:6, 685-704.
Abu-Nimer, M. (2003) Nonviolence and Peace Building in Islam: Theory and Practice (Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida).
Afsaruddin, A. (2007) “Striving in the Path of God: Fethullah Gülen’s Views on Jihad”, in Ihsan Yilmaz
et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 494-502.
Agai, B. (2005) “Discursive and Organizational Strategies of the Gülen Movement”, paper presented at
Islam in Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement, Rice University, Nov 12-13. At:
http://fethullahGülenconference.org/houston/proceedings/BAgai.pdf (last accessed December 11,
2005).
Agai, B. (2002) “Fethullah Gülen and His Movement’s Islamic Ethic of Education”, Critique: Critical
Middle Eastern Studies, 11:1, 27-47.
Agai, B. (2003) “The Gülen movement’s Islamic ethic of education”, in H. Yavuz and J. Esposito (eds)
Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement (Syracuse, New York: Syracuse
University Press).
Agai, B. (2004) “Zwischen Netzwerk und Diskurs, Das Bildungsnetzwerk um Fethullah Gülen: Die
flexible Umsetzung modernen islamischen Gedankenguts”, Bonner Islamstudien, 2, (Schenefeld:
EB-Verlag).
Ahmad, F. (1993) The Making of Modern Turkey (London, Routledge).
Akbar, M. J. (2003) The Shade of Swords: Jihad and the Conflict Between Islam and Christianity (New
York: Routledge).
Akman, N. (1995), Interview with M. F. Gülen, Sabah, 23-30 Ocak.
Akman, N. (2003) “Gülen Suggests Non-violent Options to Young Activists”, an Interview with Elisabeth
Özdalga, Zaman, June 10. At: www.zaman.com/default.php?kn=2656 (last accessed June 15, 2003).
Akram, R., Markova, S. et al. (2006) Stereotypes in theory. At:
http://www.jmk.su.se/global02/stereotypes/theory2.htm (last accessed August 22, 2006).
Aksin, S. (1999) “The nature of the Kemalist revolution”, in David Shankland, The Turkish Republic at
75 years (Cambridgeshire), 14-28.

--- Sayfa 492 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

490
Akyol, M. (2004) The White Path. At: www.thewhitepath.com/ (last accessed August 2, 2007).
Akyol, M. (2007) “What made the Gülen Movement Possible?”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 22-45.
 Alatas, S. F. (2006) “From Jāmi’ ah to University: Multiculturalism and Christian-Muslim Dialogue”,
Current Sociology, January, 54:1, 112-132.
Al-Banna, H. (1975) “Between Yesterday and Today”, in Charles Wendell (ed.) The Five Tracts of
Hassan al-Banna (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Al-Ghazali, M. (1993) l’ethique du musulman (Paris: Al Qalam).
Albayrak, I. (2006) “Islam and Terror: From the Perspective of Fethullah Gülen”, at: www.Gülen.org
(last accessed June 10, 2006).
Ali, A. H. (2005) “Islam and the EU's Identity Deficit”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, (Summer-
Fall), 12:1, 51-64.
Allen, C. and Nielsen, J. S. (2002) Summary Report on Islamophobia in the EU after 11 September
2001 (Vienna: European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia).
Allievi, S. (2003) “Sociology of a Newcomer: Muslim Migration to Italy - Religious Visibility, Cultural
and Political Reactions”, Immigrants & Minorities, (July-November) Vol.22, Issue 2&3.
Allievi, S. and Jørgen, S. N. (eds) (2003) Muslim Networks and transnational Communities in and
Across Europe (The Netherlands, Leiden: Brilla Academic Publishers).
Al-Jilani, H. A. Q. (1992) The Secret of Secrets (Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society).
AlSayyad, N. and Manuel, C. (eds) (2002) Muslim Europe or Euro-Islam, Politics, Culture and
Citizenship in the Age of Globlaization (New York: Lexington Books).
Altunoglu, E. (1999) Fethullah Gülen’s Perception of State and Society (Istanbul: Bogazici University).
Ameli, S. R and Merlai, A. (2004) Dual Citizenship: British, Islamic or Both? Obligations, Recognition,
Respect and Belonging (London: IHRC).
Ameli, S. R. (2004) “Glocal Spaces: Globalization And The Power Of Religion”, in Anthony O’Mahony,
Wulstan Peterburs and Mohammad Ali Shomali (eds) Catholics and Shia in Dialogue: Studies in
Theology and Spirituality (London: Melisende).
Andeweg, R. B. and Irwin, G. A. (2005) Governance and Politics of the Netherlands (New York:
Palgrave MacMillian).
Andrea, B. (2006) “Women and their rights: Fethullah Gülen’s gloss on Lady Montagu’s ‘Embassy’ to
the Ottoman Empire”. in Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement. Robert A. Hunt and Yüksel A. Aslandoğan (eds) (Somerset, NJ: The Light and IID
Press).
Andrea, B. (2007, forthcoming) Women and Islam in Early Modern English Literature (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press). At:

--- Sayfa 493 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

491
http://www.cambridge.org/us/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=0521867649 (last accessed August 10,
2007).
Andrea, B. (2008, forthcoming) “Upon them be peace: The Ottoman spirit, early modern models of
toleration, and contemporary debates over multiculturalism”, in Yetkin Yildirim (ed.) Diversity in
the Ottoman Empire (Austin, TX, University of Texas Press).
Andrews, A. (1994) “The Inter-Faith movement in the UK: towards religious pluralism”, The Indo-
British Review, 10:1, 123-30.
Annan, K. (2007) “Do as you would be done by”, Le Monde Diplomatique, Feb 16.
Antes, P. (1994) “Islam in Europe”, in S. Gill, G. D’Costa, and U. King (eds) Religion in Europe:
Contemporary Perspectives (Kampen: Kok Pharos), 46–67.
Anwar, M., Blaschke, J., Sander, A. et al. (2004) State Policies Towards Muslim Minorities: Sweden,
Great Britain and Germany (Berlin: Verlagsabteilung im Europäischen Migrationszentrum (EMZ)).
Anwar, M. (2005) “Muslims in Britain: Issues, Policy and Practice”, in T. Abbas (ed.) Muslim Britain:
Communities under Pressure (London: Zed Books).
Anzaldua, G. (1999) Borderlands/La Frontera: The new Mestiza (Aunt Lute Books: San Francisco).
Aras B. and Caha, O. (2003) “Fethullah Gülen and his Liberal 'Turkish Islam' ”, in Barry Rubin (ed.)
Revolutionaries and Reformers (Albany: State University of New York Press), 141-154.
Aras, B. and Caha, O (2000, December) “Fethullah Gülen and His Liberal ‘Turkish Islam’ Movement”,
Middle East Review of International Affairs Journal, 4:4.
Arberry, A. J. (trans.) (1993) Discourses of Rumi (London: Routledge Curzon).
Ariarajah, S. W. (1991) “Interfaith Dialogue”, in Nicholas Lossky et al. (ed.) Dictionary of the
Ecumenical Movement (Geneva: WCC Publications).
Arkoun, M. (1970) Contribution à l'étude de l'humanisme arabe au IV/Xe siècle (Contribution to the
Study of Arab Humanism in the 4th-10th Centuries) (Paris, Vrin).
Arberry, A. J. (1961) Discourse of Rumi (London: John Murray).
Asad, M. (1984) The Message of the Quran (English translation of Quran) (Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus).
Asad, T. (1993) Genealogies of Religion, Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and Islam
(Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press).
Ashmawy, M. S. (1994) Islam and the Political Order (Washington, The Council for Research in Values
and Philosophy).
Aslandogan, Y. and Cetin, M. (2006) “The educational philosophy of Gülen in Though and Practice”, in
R. Hunt and Y. Aslandoğan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the
Gülen Movement (Somerset: The Light).
Aslandogan, Y. A. (2007a) “A Sunni Muslim Scholar’s Humanitarian and Religious Rejection of violence
Against Civilians”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the
Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 315-33.

--- Sayfa 494 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

492
Aslandogan, Y. A. (2007b) “Present and Potential Impact of the Spiritual Tradition of Islam on
Contemporary Muslims: From Ghazali to Gülen”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in
Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press),
663-682.
Atabaki, T. and O’Kane, J. (2001) Post-Soviet Central Asia (London: IIAS).
Atalik, G. and Beeley, B. (1993) “What mass migration has meant for Turkey”, in R. King (ed.) Mass
Migration in Europe: The Legacy and Future (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Atay, R. (2007) “Reviving the Suffa Tradition”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition:
Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 459-472.
Ates, T., Ortayli, I. and Karakas, E. (eds) (2005) Baris Köprüleri: Dünyaya Açilan Türk Okullari (trans.
Bridges of Peace: Turkish Schools Opening to the Whole World) (Istanbul:Ufuk Kitaplari).
Aydin, M. (1994) “Turkey and Central Asia: challenges of change”, Central Asian Survey, 13:1.
Aydın, A. I. (2004) “Dynamiques religieuses et logiques éducatives : Les Centres d’éducation du
mouvement de Fethullah Gülen en France”, Unpublished thesis, (Strasbourg: Instıtut d’Etudes
Politiques de Strasbourg).
Ayoub, M. (2007) A Muslim View of Christianity: Essays on Dialogue, I.A. Omar (ed.) (Maryknoll, NY:
Orbis Books).
Babes, L. (1997) L'islam positif. La religion des jeunes musulmans de France (Paris: Editions de
l'Atelier)
Bagley, C. (1971a) Race Relations and Social Structure in the Netherlands and Britain (London:
Institute of Race Relations).
Bagley, C. (1971b) “Immigrant minorities in the Netherlands: integration and assimilation”,
International Migration Review, 5, 18-35.
Bagley, C. (n.d.), Community Relations in the Netherlands: A Model for Britain? (London: The Race
Relations Committee of the Society of Friends).
Bakar, O. (2005) “Gülen on Religion and Science: A Theological Perspective”, The Muslim World,
Special Issue, 95:3, 359-370.
Balci, B. (2003) “Fethullah Gülen's Missionary Schools in Central Asia and their role in spreading
Turkism and Islam”, Religion, State and Society, 2.
Balci, B. (2003) Missionnaires de l’Islam en Asie Centrale, Les ecoles turques de Fethullah Gülen
(Paris : Maisonnneuve Larose).
Barash, D. P. (2000) Approaches to Peace – A Reader in Peace Studies (Oxford University Press).
Barks, C. (1997) The Essential Rumi (Edison, NJ: Castle Books).
Barnstone, W. (ed.) (2005) The Book of Jubilees in The Other Bible: Ancient Scriptures (SanFrancisco:
Harper Collins Publishers).

--- Sayfa 495 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

493
Barry, M. (2006) We are Workers not Slaves: The Story of the GAMA struggle (Dublin: The Socialist
Party).
Barth, K. (1968) The Epistle to the Romans (Trans.) by Edwyn C. Hoskyns (London: Oxford University
Press).
Barton, G. (2007) “Preaching by Example ans Learning for Life: Understanding the Gülen Hizmet in the
Global Context of Religious Philanthropy and Civil Religion”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 650-662.
Bastenier, A. (1998) “L’incidence du facteur religieux dans la conscience ethnique des immigres
marocains en Belgique”, Social Compass, 45:2.
Basyurt, E. (2004) “Gerçekleşmesi Zor Bir Hayal: Euro–İslam”, Aksiyon, (09/2004).
Bayat, A. (2002) “Piety, Privilege and Egyptian Youths”, ISIM Newsletter10, July.
Bayram, B. (2003) Fethullah Gülen’s Missionary Schools, New York.
Beck, U. (1992) Risk society: Towards a new modernity (Sage: London).
Becka, J. and Mendel, M. (1998) Islám a české země (Praha: Votobia).
Benn, T. (1989) “An end to blasphemy”, The Guardian, (9.4.89).
Benneker, B. (2007, 11 January) “Inburgering: 6,000 Euro per allochtoon”, Elsevier, 20.
Berger, P. L. (1999) The Desecularization of the World, Resurgent Religion in World Politics
(Washington, Ethics and Public Policy Center).
Berger, A. A. (2005) Media Analysis Techniques (California: Sage Publications).
Beus, J. de. (1998) De cultus van vermijding. Visies op migrantenpolitiek in Nederland (Utrecht:
FORUM).
Bilici, A. (ed.) (2006) Neden Türkiye? (Why Turkey?) (Istanbul: Zaman Books).
Bilici, M. (2006) “The Fethullah Gülen Movement and Its Politics of Representation in Turkey”, The
Muslim World, 96:1, 19.
Bilir, U. (2004) “ ‘Turkey-Islam’: Recipe for Success or Hindrance to the Integration of the Turkish
Diaspora Community in Germany?”, Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 24:2, 259-283.
Bird, S. E. (1996) “Not my fantasy: The persistence of Indian imagery in Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman”,
in S.E. Bird (ed.) Dressing in feathers: The construction of the Indian in American popular culture
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press), 245-261.
Bird, S. E. (2003) The audience in everyday life: Living in a media world (New York: Routledge).
Bobo, J. (1989) “Sifting Through the Controversy: Reading ‘The Color Purple’ ”, Callaloo: A Journal of
African-American and African Arts and Letters, 12 :2, 332-342.
Bobo, J. (1995) Black women as cultural readers (New York: Columbia University Press).

--- Sayfa 496 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

494
Boffetti, J. (2001, September) “Why Catholic Schools Deserve a Public Break.” Crisis Web site. At:
http://www.crisismagazine.com/september2001/feature4.htm. (last accessed August 10, 2007).
Bogle, E. C. (1998) Islam: Origin and Belief (Texas: Austin University of Texas).
Bolkestein, F. (1997) “Moslim in de polder”, Frits Bolkestein in gesprek met Nederlandse moslims,
(Amsterdam: Contact).
Bolt, C. de (2005) “Dialogue: Greek foundations and the though of Fethullah Gülen and Jürgen
Habermas”. Conference Proceedings, Islam in the contemporary world: The Fethullah Gülen
Movement in Thought and Practice (Texas: Rice University Houston).
Bonner, A. (2004) “An Islamic Reformation in Turkey”, Middle East Policy, 11:1, 84-97.
Borton, G. (2005) Progressive Islamic thought, civil society and the Gülen movement in the national
context: parallels with Indonesia. At: www.Gülen.org (last accessed July 2, 2005).
Bourdieu, P. (1980) Le Sens Pratique (Paris : Minuit).
Bourdieu, P. (2003) Les Méditations Pascaliennes (Paris : Folio Editions).
Bouzar, D. (2003) “L’islam entre mythe et religion : le nouveau discours religieux dans les associations
socio-culturelles musulmanes”, Les Cahiers de la sécurité intérieure, n°54.
Boyd, T. W. (2006, November) “Secularism in America and Turkey and Fethullah Gülen’s Response”,
paper presented at Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought
and Practice (Norman, OK.).
Bradley, H. (2005) “İlgisizlik ve Dışlanma”, Londra Gazete, (February 17, 2005).
British Council of Churches’ Working Party on Britain as a Multi-Racial Society (1976) The New Black
Presence in Britain: A Christian Scrutiny (London: Community and Race Relations Unit of the
British Council of Churches).
Bruckmayr, P. (2007) “Phnom Penh’s Fethullah Gülen School as an Alternative to Prevalent forms of
Education for Cambodia’s Muslim Minority”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in
Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press),
347-361.
Brown, P. (1984) “Late Antiquity and Islam: Parallels and Contrasts”, in B. D. Metcalf (ed.) Moral
Conduct and Authority: the place of “adab” in South Asian Islam (Berkeley: University of California
Press), 23-37.
Bruquetas-Callejo, M. et al. (2006) “Policymaking related to immigration and integration. The Dutch
Case”, Country Report on the Netherlands, Working Paper No. 15 (Amsterdam: IMISCOE–Cluster
9).
Bruter, M. (2005, November 12) Political Identity and European Elections. At:
http:/www.afsp.mshparis.fr/activitte/diversafsp/collegspegae104/bruter.pdf
Buchan, J. (1957) Greenmantle (London : Hodder and Stoughton).

--- Sayfa 497 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

495
Buchanan, C. (1994) Cut the Connection: Disestablishment and the Church of England (London:
Darton, Longman and Todd).
Bulac, A. (2006) “The Most Recent Reviver in the Ulema Tradition: The Intellectual Alim, Fethullah
Gülen”, in R.A. Hunt and Y.A. Aslandogan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World (New
Jersey: The Light, Inc & IID Press), 89-106.
Bulliet, R. W. (2004) The Case for Islamo-Christian Civilization (New York, Columbia University
Press).
Bullock, A. (1993) Hitler and Stalin: Parellel Lives (London: Fontana Press).
Bulut, F. (1998) Kim Bu Fethullah Gülen : Dünü, Bugünü, Hedefi (Who is Fethullah Gülen ? His Past,
Today and Target) (Istanbul: Ozan Yayıncılık).
Burns, J. H. (ed.) (1991) The Cambridge History of Political Thought 1450-1700 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
Byman, D. (1997) “Explaining ethnic peace in Morocco”, Harvard Middle Eastern and Islamic Review,
4, 1-29.
Callamard, A. (2006, June) “Freedom of speech and offence: why blasphemy laws are not the
appropriate response”, Equal Voices, 18, 10-11.
Campbell, C. P. (1995) Race, Myth and the News (London: Sage Publications).
Can, E. (1998) Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi ile Ufuk Turu (Istanbul: AD Yayıncılık).
Can, S. (2004) Fundamentals of Rumi’s Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective (Somerset, NJ: The Light).
Can, S. (2005) Fundamentals of Rumi's Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective (New Jersey: The Light
Inc.).
Cantori, L. J. (2007) “Fethullah Gülen: Kemalist and Islamic Republicanism and the Turkish Democatic
Future”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 77-103.
Capan, E. (ed.) (2005) Terror and Suicide Attacks. An Islamic Perspective (NJ: The Light, Inc.).
Capes, D. B. (2007) “Tolerance in the Theolgoy and Thougths of A.J. Conyers and Fethullah Gülen”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 428-429.
Carle, R. (2006) “The Demise of Dutch Multiculturalism”, Society, 42:3, 68-74.
Carroll, J. (2007) A Dialogue of Civilizations. Gülen’s Islamic Ideals and Humanistic Discourse (NJ:
The Light, Inc.).
Casanova, J. (1994) Public Religions in the Modern World (Chicago: Chicago University Press).
Castles, S. and Miller, M. J. (2003) The Age of Migration: International Population Movements in the
Modern World (New York: Palgrave Macmillan).
Castles, S. et al. (1987) Here For Good: Western Europe’s New Ethnic Minorities (London: Pluto Press).

--- Sayfa 498 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

496
Caymaz, B. (2002) Les mouvements Islamiques Turcs à Paris (Paris: l’Harmattan).
Cederman, L. E. (2001) “Political Boundaries and Identity Trade Offs”, in Lars-Erik Cederman (ed.)
Constructing Europe’s Identity: the External Dimension, Lynne Reinner.
Celik, G. and Alan, Y. (2003) Hizmetkar Liderlik (Servant Leadership) (Rotterdam: Libertas Media).
Celik, G. et al. (eds) (2005) Voorlopers in de Vrede (Forerunners for peace) (Damon: Budel).
Celik, G. (2007). Van Mevlana naar Fethullah Gülen [Frontrunners in inner peace], Zaman Nederland,
Juni 2007, Nummer 20, pp. 10-11, Rotterrdam; also as paper presented at a series conferences
regarding the UNESCO Rumi Jear, held on 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 May 2007 in various cities in the
Netherlands.
Celik, G. and Alan, Y. (2007) “Fethullah Gülen as a Servant Leader”, International Journal of Servant-
Leadership, 3:1, (WA: Gonzaga University).
Celik, G. and Valkenberg, P. (2007) “Gülen’s approach to dialogue and peace. Its theoretical background
and some practical perspectives”, International Journal of Diversity in organisations, communities
and nations, 7(1): pp.29-37.
Celik, G. and Celik, S. (2007) “De rol van educatie ten behoeven van dialoog”, De Cascade, 2, (Utrecht:
Cosmicus).
Celik, G., Kirk, K. and Alan, Y. (2007) “Modern Ideals and Muslim Identity: Harmony or Contradiction?
A Text Linguistic Analysis of the Gülen Teaching and Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 246-267.
Cesari, J. (1997) Etre musulman en France aujourd’hui (Paris: Hachette).
Cesari, J. (2002) “Islam in France: The Shaping of A Religious Minority”, in Yvonne Yazbeck Haddad
(ed.) Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to Citizens (New York: Oxford University Press).
Cesari, J. (2004) When Islam and Democracy Meet: Muslims in Europe and in the United States (New
York: Palgrave MacMillan).
Cetin, M. (2005) “About the author”, in The Statue of Our Souls: Revival in Islamic Thought and
Activism, by M. Fethullah Gülen, (trans.) Muhammad Cetin (Somerset, NJ: The Light), vii-xii.
Cetin, M. (2007) “The Gülen Movement: Its Nature and Identity”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 377-390.
Cetinkaya, H. (2004) Fethullah Gülen’in Kırk Yıllık Serüveni (The 40 years adventure of Fethullah
Gülen) (Istanbul: Günizi Yayıncılık).
Chinn, J. and Truex, L. A. (1996, January) “The Question of Citizenship in the Baltic’s”, Journal of
Democracy, 7:1, 133-147.
Chittick, W. (1983) The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press).

--- Sayfa 499 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

497
Chittick, W. (1989) The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn ‘Arabi’s Metaphysics of Imagination (Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press).
Chittick, W. (1999) “Sufism: Name and Reality”, in In Rob Baker and Gray Henry (eds) Merton &
Sufism: The Untold Story (Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae).
Chittick, W. (2004) Me and Rumi, The Autobiography of Shams-I Tabriz (Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae).
Churchill, W. S. (1948) The Gathering Storm (London: The Reprint Society).
Clack, B. R. (1999) Wittgenstein, Frazer and Religion (London: Macmillan press).
Clement, V. (2007) “Turkmenistan’s New Challenges: Can Stability Co-Exist With Reform? A Study of
Gülen Schools in Central Asia, 1997-2007”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition:
Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 572-584.
Cooper, A. and Brackman, H. (2006) “Punishing religious defamation and Holocaust denial: Is there is a
double standard?”, Equal Voices, 18, 23-24.
Copeaux, E. (1997) Espaces et temps de la nation turque. Analyse d’une historiographie nationaliste
1931-1993 (Paris : CNRS Editions).
Cornell, R. E. (ed. and trans.) (1999) Early Sufi Women: Shikr an-niswa al-muta `abbidat as sufiyyat,
by Abu `Ab ar-Rahman as-Sulami (Louisville, KY, Fons Vitae).
Courtine, J. J. and Vigarello, G. (1987) “La physionomie de l homme impudique. Bienséances et
impudeur : les physiognomonies au XVIe et au XVIIe siècle”, Communications, vol. 46, Paris.
Coward, H. and Smith, G. S. (eds) (2003) Religion and Peacebuilding (Albany, NY: SUNY Press).
Cracknell, K. (1986) We Talking About Us: The Implications of the Ending of Religious Isolationism
(London: Unitarian Publications).
Cragg, K. (1999) Muhammad and the Christian (Oxford: Oneworld).
Dagevos, J., Gijsberts, M. and Praag, C. van (eds) (2003) “Rapportage minderheden 2003”, Onderwijs,
arbeid en sociaal-culturle integratie, (The Hague: Social and Cultural Planning Office of the
Netherlands (SCP)).
Darsh, S. M. (1980) Islam in Europe (London: Ta-Ha Publishers).
Davenport, F. G. (ed.) (1917) European Treaties bearing on the History of the United States and its
Dependencies to 1648 (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington). At:
http://www.kwabs.com/romanus_pontifex_bull.html (last accessed August 20, 2007).
Davie, G. (1994) Religion in Britain since 1945. Believing without Belonging (Oxford: Blackwell).
Davie, G. (2000) Religion in Modern Europe: A Memory Mutates (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Delanty, G. (1995) Inventing Europe: Idea, Identity, Reality (Macmillan: Basingstoke and London).
Demir, C. et al. (2000) “The role of Turkish schools in the educational system and social
transformations of Central Asian countries: the case of Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan”, Central
Asian Survey, 19:1.

--- Sayfa 500 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

498
Demir, E. (2007) “The Emergence of a neo-communitarian Movement in the Turkish Diaspora in
Eurooe: The Strategies of Settlement and Competition of Gülen Movement in France and Germany”,
in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 214-229.
Denton, M. (1985) Evolution: a theory in crisis (London: Burnett).
Denzin, N. K. and Giardina, M. (eds) (2007) Contesting Empire, Globalizing Dissent: Cultural Studies
After 9/11 (Boulder-London: Paradigm Publishers).
Desai, M. (2007) Rethinking Islamism: The Ideology of The New Terror (London/NY: I.B. Tauris).
Dialmy, A. (2007) “Belonging and Institution in Islam”, Social Compass, 54:1.
Dijk, T. A. van (2000) “New(s) Racism: A Discourse Analytical Approach”, in S. Cottle (ed.) Ethnic
minorities in the media (Buckingham: Open University Press).
Dirks, J. (1998) “Discourse, Politics and Policy: The Dutch Parliamentary Debate about Voting Rights
for Foreigners”, International Migration Review, 32:2, 350-375.
Dobbelaere, K. (1988) “Secularisation, pillarisation, religious involvement and religious change in the
Low Countries”, in T. Gannon (ed.) World Catholicism in Transition (New York: Macmillan),
80-115.
Doomernik, J. (1995) “State politics and Islamic instiutions: Turks in the Netherlands and Germany”, in
S. Taji-Farouki (ed.) Muslim communities in the Netherlands and Germany (Durham: Centre for
Middle Eastern).
Doornernick, J. (2005) “The State of Multiculturalism in the Netherlands”, Canadian Diversity, Winter,
4:1, 32-35.
D'Oyen, F. M. (2000) “Personal hygiene in Islam”, in The Miracle of Life - A Guide on Islamic Family
Life and Sexual Health Education for Young People (The Islamic Foundation) At:
http://www.geocities.com/mutmainaa/food/personal_hygeine.html (last accessed July 25, 2007).
Ebaugh, H. R. and Koc, D. (2007) “Funding Gülen-Inspired Good Works: Demonstrating and
Generating Commintment tot the Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in
Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press),
163-175.
Eldridge, B. (2007) “The Place of the Gülen Movement in the Intellectual History of Islam, Particularly
in Relation to Islam’s Confrontation with Postmodernism”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 539-551.
El Sakkakini, W. (1982) First Among Sufis: The Life and Thought of Rabia al-Adawiyya (trans.) Nabil
Safwat (London: The Octagon Press).
Elias, N. (1978) The History of Manners (Oxford: Blackwell).

--- Sayfa 501 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

499
Elsas, E. (1991) “Turkish Islamic Ideals of Education: Their Possible Function for Islamic Identity and
Integration in Europe”, in W. Shadid and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) The Integration of Islam and
Hinduism in Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House).
Endless Jihad, The Truth about Islam and Violence. At:
http://www.catholic.com/library/endless_jihad.asp (last access August 31, 2007).
Entzinger, H. (1975) “Nederland immigratieland?”, Beleid en Maatschappij, 2/12, 326-336.
Entzinger, H. (2006) “Stageplicht inburgeringstoets onzinning”, NRC Handelsblad, p. 7. (October 11,
2006).
Entzinger, H. (2007) “The parallel decline of multiculturalism and the welfare state in the Netherlands”,
in Banting and Kimlyka (eds) Multiculturalism and the Welfare State: Recognition and
Redistribution in Contemporary Democracies (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Erdogan, L. (1995) Fethullah Gülen Hocaefendi- Küçük Dünyam (Istanbul: AD Yayıncılık).
Ergener, R.and Ergener, R. (2002) About Turkey: Geography, Economy, Politics, Religion, and Culture
(Boulder, CO: Pilgrims’ Process, Inc.).
Eris, S. (2006) “A Religiological Comparison of the Sufi Thought of Said Nursi and Fethullah Gülen”,
MA Thesis, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
Ernst, C. W. (1996) “Preface”, in M. Sells. Early Islamic Mysticism (New York: Paulist Press).
Ernst, C. W. (1997) The Shambhala Guide to Sufism (Shambhala, 1st edition).
Esposito, J. L. (1995) The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality? (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Esposito, J. L. and Voll, J. (1996) Islam and Democracy (Oxford; Oxford University Press).
Esposito, J. L. (1998) Islam: the Straight Path (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Esposito, J. L. and Voll, J. O. (2001) Makers of contemporary Islam (New York: Oxford University
Press).
Esposito, J. L. (2003) “Modernising Islam and Re-Islamisation in Global Perspective”, in John L.
Esposito and François Burgat (eds) Modernising Islam: Religion in The Public Sphere in the Middle
East and Europe (London: Hurst & Company).
Esposito, J. L. (2005) Islam: The Straight Path (New York, Oxford University Press, 3rd ed.).
Essed, P. (1991) Understanding everyday racism (Newbury Park, CA: Sage).
Etzioni, A. (2003) Amitai Etzioni Web site. At: http://amitaietzioni.org/index.shtml. (last accessed
August 1, 2007).
Eustis, C. B. (2006, March 4-5) “The cry of the nightingale’: Fethullah Gülen — A modern-day Rumi?”,
in Conference Proceedings, Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in
Thought and Practice, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas. 111-24.
Evans, C. A. (2003) “Covenant in the Qumran Literature in Porter”, in E. Stanley and J. C. R. de Roo
(eds) The Concept of the Covenant in the Second Temple Period (Leiden, Brill).

--- Sayfa 502 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

500
Fakhry, M. (1994) Ethical Theories in Islam (Leiden: Brill).
Fanning, B. (2002) Racism and social change in the Republic of Ireland (Manchester: Manchester
University Press).
Favrot, L. (2004) Tariq Ramadan dévoilé (France: Lyon Mag).
Feirabend, J. and Rath, J. (1996) “Making a place for Islam in politics: local authorities dealing with
Islamic associations”, in W. Shadid and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) Muslims in the Margin: Political
Responses to the Presence of Islam in Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos), 243-58.
Fermin, A. (1997) Nederlandse politieke partijen over minderhedenbeleid 1977-1995 (Proefschrift
Rijsuniversiteit Utrecht, Amsterdam: Thesis Publishers).
Fermin, A. (1999) “Inburgeringsbeleid en burgerschap”, Migrantenstudies, 15:2, 96-112.
Fetzer, J. S. and Soper, J. C. (eds) (2004) Muslims and the State in Britain, France, and Germany
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Filber, Y. (1993) The Star of Light: Studies in the Teachings of Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook
(Jerusalem: The Institute for the Study of Rabbi Kook's Teachings).
Finkel, A. (2007) “the Many Battles for Turkey’s Soul”, Le Monde Diplomatique, (23 September).
Fitzgerald, M. (2006) “Ireland’s Muslims forging an identity”, The Irish Times. At: www.Ireland.com
(last accessed October 13, 2006).
Flood, G. (1996) An Introduction to Hinduism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Flynn, K. (2006) “Understanding Islam in Ireland”, Islam and Christian –Muslim Relations, 17:2, 223-
238.
Fossum, E. J. (2005, November 12) “Identity-politics in the European Union”, RENA Working Papers,
WP 01/17. At: http://www.arena.uio.no/publications/wp01_17.htm
Foucault, M. (1984) Histoire de la Sexualité, 3 volumes, (Paris : Gallimard).
Foucault, M. (1997) “Technologies of the Self”, in Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth (London: Allan lane),
225-251.
Fourest, C. (2004) Frère Tariq: discours stratégie et méthode de Tariq Ramadan (Paris, Grasset).
Fraser, N. (1992) “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing
Democracy”, in Craig Calhoun (ed.) Habermas and the Public Sphere (Cambridge, MA: MIT Pres),
109-142.
Fritz, J.P. (2006) Free Media. At:
http://www.freemedia.at/cms/ipi/statements_detail.html?ctxid=CH0055&docid=CMS1144224514
940&year=2006 (last accessed August 10, 2006).
Fry, I. (2000) Trouble in the Triangle: Christians, Jews and Muslims in Conflict (Book 2) (Fitzroy,
Compton Arch).

--- Sayfa 503 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

501
Gaborieau, M. and Zeghal, M. (2004) “Autorités religieuses en islam”, in Archives de sciences sociales
des religions, vol 49, No. 25.
Gaiduk, I. V. (2003) The great Confrontation: Europe and Islam Thought the centuries (Chicago: Ivan
R Dee Publishers).
Galtung, J. (1969) "Violence, Peace and Peace Research", Journal of Peace Research, 3.”
Galtung, J. (2005) “Galtung’s Lists Tel Aviv”, Israel, June.
http://www.bigpicture.tv/videos/watch/6c4b761a2
Gandhi, L. (1998) Postcolonial theory: a critical introduction (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press).
Garner, S. (2004) Racism in the Irish Experience (London: Pluto Press).
Geertz, C. (1971) Islam Observed. Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia, University of
Chicago Press.
Gelman, Y. (1985) “The Aesthetics in the Philosophy of Rabbi Kook”, in B. Ish-Shalom and S. Rosenberg
(eds) A Jubilee of Lights (Jerusalem: Alinar Library and the Department of Religious Culture and
Education in the Diaspors), 159-169.
Gerber, R. (2005) The Enlightenment Revolution- the Spiritual Way of Rabbi Avraham Isaac Haohen
Kook (Jerusalem: Biyalik Institute).
Gerbner, G. and Gross, L. (1976) “Living with television: The violence profile”, Journal of
Communication, 26:2, 99-172.
Gershoni, I. and Jankowski, J. (1999) “Print Culture, Social Change, and the Process of Redefining
Imagined Communities in Egypt”, International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, 31:1, 81-93.
Ghorashi, H. (2005, 29 Juni) “Benauwd door de Verlichting; de witheid van de huidige debatten over
emancipatie”, [Suffocated by the Enlightenment; the whiteness of the current debate about
emancipation]. At: http://www.sammas.nl/documenten/Inleiding-H.%20Ghorashi.pdf (last
accessed October 18, 2006).
Gibson, C. (1996) Signs and Symbols (New York: Barnes & Noble Books).
Gill, R. (1975) The Social Context of Theology: A Methodological Enquiry (Blackwell: London).
Glasius, M., Lewis, D. and Sekinelgin, H. (eds) (2004) Exploring Civil Society: Political and Cultural
Contexts (London: Rutledge).
Goffman, E. (1963) Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity (New York: Touchstone
Books).
Gogolin, I. and Reich, H. (2001) “Immigrant Languages in Federal Germany”, in G. Extra and G. Durk
(eds) The Other Languages of Europe: Demographic, Sociolinguistic and Educational Perspectives
(Great Britain: Cromwell Press).
Gokcek, M. (2005) “Gülen and Sufism”, paper delivered at the conference Islam in the Contemporary
world: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and Practice, Rice University, 12-13 November,
2005.

--- Sayfa 504 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

502
Gokcek, M. (2006) “Gülen and sufism: a historical perspective”, in Robert A. Hunt and Yüksel A.
Aslandoğan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement.
(Somerset, NJ, The Light & IID Press), 155-64.
Goldman, E. (1985) “Rabbi Kook's relation to European thought”, in B. Ish-Shalom and S. Rosenberg
(eds) A Jubilee of Lights (Jerusalem: Alinar Library and the Department of Religious Culture and
Education in the Diaspors), 115-123.
Gole, N. (1995) “l’émergence du sujet islamique”, in F. Dubet and M. Wieviorka (eds) Penser le Sujet,
Autour d’Alain Touraine (Paris: Fayard).
Gole, N. (2000) “Snapshots of Islamic modernities”, Daedalus, 129:1.
Gole, N. (2005) Interpénétrations. L'Islam et l'Europe (Paris: Galaade Editions)
Gole, N. and Ammann, L. (2006) Islam in Public: Turkey, Iran and Europe (Istanbul: Bilgi University
Press).
Gopin, M. (1997) "Religion, Violence, and Conflict Resolution", Peace & Change, 22:1, 1-31.
Gopin, M. (2001) "Forgiveness as an Element of Conflict Resolution in Religious Cultures: Walking the
Tightrope of Reconciliation and Justice", in Mohammed Abu-Nimer (ed.) Reconciliation,
Coexistence, and Justice in Interethnic Conflicts: Theory and Practice (Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books).
Gopin, M. (2002) “What Do I Need to Know About Religion and Conflict”, in John Paul Lederach (ed.)
Handbook of Conflict Resolution (Jossey-Bass).
Gordon, C. H. (1987) Eblaitica: Essays on the Ebla archives and Eblaite language (Eisenbrauns).
Goudsblom, J. (1967) Dutch Society (New York: Random House).
Gowricharn, R. and Mungra, B. (1996) “The politics of integration in the Netherlands”, in W. Shadid and
P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) Muslims in the Margin: Political Responses to the Presence of Islam in
Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos), 114-29.
Grabbe, L. L. (2003) “Did all Jews Think Alike? 'Covenant' in Philo and Josephus in the Context of
Second Temple Judaic Religion”, in Stanley E. Porter and Jacqueline C. R. de Roo (eds) The Concept
of the Covenant in the Second Temple Period (Leiden, Brill), 251-268.
Graskemper, M. D. (2007) “A Bridge to Inter-Religious Cooperation: The Gülen-Jesuits Educational
Nexus”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 622-631.
Gray, J. (1971) “The Book of Exodus in Laymon”, in M. Charles (ed.) The Interpreter's One-Volume
Commentary on the Bible (Nashville: Abingdon Press), 33-67.
Gray, J. (1997) “Jim Moffett: 1929-1996: An Appreciation”, The Quarterly, 19:1.
Gross, J. A. (1998) “Islamic Central Asia: approaches to religiosity and community”, Religious Studies
Review, 24: 4.

--- Sayfa 505 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

503
Guelke, A. (2006) Terrorism and Global Disorder: Political Violence in the Contemporary World
(London: I B Tauris).
Guerrina, R. (2003) Europe: History, Ideas and Ideologies (A Hodder Arnold Publication).
Gulay, E. N. (2007) “The Gülen Phenomenon: A Neo Sufi Challenge to Turkey’s rival Elite?”, Critique:
Critical Middle Eastern Studies, Spring, 16:1, 37-61.
Gülen, M. F. (1977) “Altin Nesil (The Golden Generation)”, Conference CDs, (Istanbul: Nil).
Gülen, M. F. (1980) “Ahlaki Mülahazalar”, His typed series of sermons, vols. 1-14, (Istanbul: Nil).
Gülen, M. F. (1993) Gunler Bahari soluklarken (Izmir: Nil Yayinevi).
Gülen, M. F. (1993) Towards the Lost Paradise (London: Truestar).
Gülen, M. F. (1995) Fasildan Fasila 1 (Izmir: Nil Yayinevi).
Gülen, M. F. (1996a) Understanding and Belief (Rutherford N.J.: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (1996b) Fasıldan Fasıla 3 (Izmir: Nil Yayınları).
Gülen, M. F. (1996c) Prizma, vol. 1 (Izmir: Nil Yayınları).
Gülen, M. F. (1996d) İnancın Gölgesinde (Izmir: Nil Yayınları).
Gülen, M. F. (1998a) Questions this modern age puts to Islam, part 1 (Izmir: Kaynak, 3rd edition).
Gülen, M. F. (1998b) Cihad veya I’la-yi Kelimetullah (Izmir: Nil).
Gülen, M. F. (1998c) Varlığın Metafizik Boyutu (İstanbul: Feza Yayinevi).
Gülen, M. F. (1998d.) Interview, The Turkish Daily News and Milliyet, July 21 1998.
Gülen, M. F. (1998e) Prophet Muhammad as Commander (Konak-Izmir: Kaynak).
Gülen, M. F. (1998f) Prophet Muhammad The Infinite Light, 2 (Izmir: Kaynak).
Gülen, M. F. (1999) Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism (Fairfax, VA.: The Fountain).
Gülen, M. F. (2000a) “Forgiveness”, The Fountain, 3, (April-June).
Gülen, M. F. (2000b) Pearls of Wisdom (Fairfax, VA: The Fountain).
Gülen, M. F. (2000c) “Question and Answers About Faith”, The Fountain, vol. 1, (Fairfax, VA: The
Fountain).
Gülen, M. F. (2000d) “The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue: A Muslim Perspective”, The Fountain, 3:31.
Gülen, M. F. (2000e) Advocate of Dialogue, compiled by Ali Unal and Alphonse Williams (Fairfax, VA:
Fountain Publications).
Gülen, M. F. (2000f) Prophet Muhammad: Aspects of his life (Virginia: The Fountain).
Gülen, M. F. (2000g) The Resurrection and the Afterlife, compiled by Ali Unal (Fairfax, VA: The
Fountain).

--- Sayfa 506 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

504
Gülen, M. F. (2000h) “At the Threshold of a New Millennium”, The Fountain, 3:29.
Gülen, M. F. (2001) “A Comparative Approach to Islam and Democracy”, SAIS Review, vol. XXI, No: 2,
(Summer-Fall), pp.133-138.
Gülen, M. F. (2001a) Asrin Getirdigi Tereddutler (Nil Yayinlari).
Gülen, M. F. (2001b) Kalbin zümrüt tepelerinde (Izmir: Nil Yayinlari).
Gülen, M. F. (2002a) “A comparative approach to Islam and Democracy”. Retrieved
September 25,
2007, from http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1027/49/.
Gülen, M. F. (2002b) “The necessity of interfaith dialogue”. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1053/49/ (last accessed September 25, 2007).
Gülen, M. F. (2002c) Yitirilmiş Cennete Doğru (Çağ ve Nesil 3) (Izmir: Nil Yayınları).
Gülen, M. F. (2002d) Essays, Perspectives, Opinions (Rutherford, NJ: The Fountain).
Gülen, M. F. (2002e) “Terror from an Islamic Prospect”, The Fountain, July-September, Issue 39.
Gülen, M. F. (2003a) Ruhumuzun heykelini dikerken (The statue of our souls), Nil yayinlari.
Gülen, M. F. (2003b) Zamanın altın dilimi (The golden period of time), Nil yayinlari.
Gülen, M. F. (2003c) Kırık Testi, (Istanbul: The Publications of the Journalists and Writers
Foundation).
Gülen, M. F. (2004a) “Tolerance in the life of the individual and society”. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1800/33/ (last accessed September 25, 2007).
Gülen, M. F. (2004b) “The two roses of the emerald hills: Tolerance and dialogue”. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1806/33/. (last accessed September 25, 2007).
Gülen, M. F. (2004c) “Dialogue in the Muhammadan spirit and meaning”. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1811/33/ (last accessed September 25, 2007).
Gülen, M. F. (2004d) Love and the Essence of Being Human, (trans.) Mehmet Ünal and Nilüfer
Korkmaz, (Istanbul: Journalist and Writers Foundation Publications).
Gülen, M. F. (2004e) The Necessity of Interfaith Dialog: a muslim perpective in the series Windows
onto the faith (Somerset, NJ: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2004f) Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, M. Enes Ergene (ed.),
(Somerset, NJ: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2004g) Love and The Essence of Being Human (Istanbul: Da Publication).
Gülen, M. F. (2004h) “In True Islam Terror Does not Exist”, An Islamic Perspective: Terror and Suicide
Attacks (New Jersey: Light Publications).
Gülen, M. F. (2004i) Key Concepts in the practice of Sufism: Emerald hills of the heart, vol. 1, (New
Jersey: The Light).

--- Sayfa 507 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

505
Gülen, M. F. (2004j) Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism: Emerald Hills of the Heart, (trans.) Ali
Ünal, vol. 2 (Somerset, NJ: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2004k) Essays, Perspectives, Opinions, compiled by The Light (Somerset, NJ: The Light,
Inc.).
Gülen, M. F. (2004l) “Education from cradle to grave”, in Essays- Perspectives- Opinions (rev. ed.),
(Somerset, NJ: The Light), 67-90.
Gülen, M. F. (2004m) “Foreword: Mevlana Jalal al-Din Rumi”, in Şefik Can, Fundamentals of Rumi’s
Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective (Somerset, NJ, The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2005a) An analyses of the Prophet’s life (The Messenger of God Muhammad)
(Rutherford, N.J.: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2005b) Questions and answers about Islam, vol. 2, (New Jersey: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2005c) The Essentials of the Islamic Faith (New Jersey: The Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2005d) Pearls of Wisdom (New Jersey: Light).
Gülen, M. F. (2005e) The Statue of Our Souls: Revival in Islamic Thought and Activism (Somerset, NJ:
The Light, Inc.).
Gülen, M. F. (2005f) The Messenger of God: Mohammad. An Analysis of the Prophet’s Life (NJ: The
Light, Inc).
Gülen, M. F. (2005g) Işığın Göründüğü Ufuk, Mefkure İnsanı (Izmir: Nil Yayınları).

Gülen, M. F. (2005h) Consultation. Electronic document. At: http://www.fGülen.com (last accessed
July 7, 2005).
Gülen, M. F. (2006a) Essays – Perspectives – Opinions (New Jersey: The Light, Inc.).
Gülen, M. F. (2006b) Towards a Global Civilisaion of Love and Tolerance (New Jersey: The Light,
Inc.).
Gülen, M. F. (2006c) İkindi Yağmurları (Istanbul: Gazeteciler ve Yazarlar Vakfı yayınları).
Gülen, M. F. (2006d) “Cartoon spite and our attitude”. October 2. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/2179/3/ (last accessed July 25, 2007).
Gulerce, H. (2004) “Gülen’s message to European Union”. At: www.en.fGülen.com
Gundem, M. (2005), Interview with M. F. Gülen, Milliyet, 27 Ocak.
Gurbuz, M. (2007) “Performing Moral Opposition: Musings on the Strategy and Identity in the Gülen
Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al.. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 104-117.
Haddad, Y. (1991) “The Challenge of Muslim Minorityness: The American Experience”, in W. Shadid
and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) The Integration of Islam and Hinduism in Western Europe
(Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House).

--- Sayfa 508 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

506
Halbertal, M. and Margalit, A. (1996) Idolotry (Cambridge, Mass. and London).
Halik, T. (2002) Co je bez chvění, není pevné (Praha: Lidové noviny).
Halik, T. (2003) Oslovit Zachea (Praha: Lidové noviny).
Halik, T. (2004) Vzýván i nevzýván (Praha: Lidové noviny).
Hall, S. (1982) “The rediscovery of ‘ideology’: return of the repressed in media studies”, in M. Guvrevitch
et al. (eds) Culture, society and the media (London: Metheun & Co, Ltd.).
Hall, S. (1997) “The spectacle of the ‘other’ ”, in S. Hall (ed.) Representation: Cultural representations
and signifying practices (London: Sage Publications), 223-290.
Halliday, F. (1995) Islam and the myth of confrontation. Religion and politics in the Middle East (New
York: I.B. Tauris Publishers).
Halstead, M. (1993) “Educating Muslim Minorities: Some Western European Approaches”, in W.
Tulaisiewicz and Cho, To (eds) World Religions and Educational Practices (London, Cassell).
Hammar, T. (1990) Democracy and the Nation State. Aliens, Denizens and Citizens in a World of
International Migration (Aldershot: Ashgate).
Handbook for Today’s Catholic: Beliefs, Practices, Prayers (1991) (Liguori, MO: Liguori Publications).
Harinck, G. (2006) “Een leefbare oplossing, Katholieke en Protestantse tradities en de scheiding van
kerk en staat”, in Marcel ten Hooven en Theo de Wit (red.), Ongewenste Goden. De publieke rol van
religie in Nederland (Amsterdam), 106-130.
Hart, B. de (2005) “Het probleem van dubbele nationaliteit: Politieke en mediadebatten na de moord op
Theo van Gogh”, Migrantenstudies, Jaargang, 21:4, 224-239.
Hartmans, R. (2007) “Jonathan Isreal: Alle moderne warden komen van Spinoza”, De Groene
Amsterdammer, (08-06-07), pp 23-25.
Hashemi, M. (2006) Modern Religious Thinkers, (in Farsi) (Tehran, Kavir Publication).
Hayek, F. A. (1944) The Road to Serfdom (New York: Routledge Classics).
Hebidge, D. (1979) Subculture : The Meaning of Style (Oxford: Routledge).
Heck, P. L. (2007) “Turkish in the Language of the Qur’an: Hira”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 643-649.
Helminski, C. and K. (1999) Rumi Daylight, A Daybook of Spiritual Guidance (Boston and London:
Shambala).
Helminski, K. (2000) The Rumi Collection (Boston and London: Shambala).
Helminski, C. A. (2003) Women of Sufism: A Hidden Treasure, Writings and Stories of Mystic Poets,
Scholars, and Saints (Boston, Shambhala).

--- Sayfa 509 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

507
Helms, B. L. (1994) “Rabi`ah as mystic, Muslim and woman”, in Arvind Sharma and Katherine K. Young
(ed.) The Annual Review of Women in World Religions, vol. 3, (Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press).
Helwys, T. (1998) A Short Declaration of the Mystery of Iniquity (1611-1612), R.Groves, (ed.) (Macon:
Mercer University Press).
Hendrick. J. (2006) Global Islam and the Secular Modern World: Transnational Muslim Social
Movements and the Movement of Fethullah Gülen, A Comparative Approach
http://fethullahGülenconference.org/dallas/proceedings/JDHendrick.pdf
Hendrick. J. D. (2007) “The Regulated Potential of Kinetic Islam: Antithesis in Global Islamic Activism”,
in A. R. Hunt and Y. A. Aslandogan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of
the Gülen Movement (Somerset, New Jersey: IID Press & The Light Inc.).
Henkel, H. (2004) “Rethinking the dar al-harb: social change and changing perceptions of the West in
Turkish Islam”, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies.
Hermansen, M. (2007) “The Cultivation of Memory in the Gülen Community”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al.
(eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 60-76.
Hervieu Leger, D. (1999) Le pèlerin et le converti. La religion en mouvement, Flammarion, coll.
“Essais”, Paris.
Herzl, T. (1946) The Jewish State, (trans.) Sylvia D’Avigdor, (New York: The American Zionist
Emergency Council).
Heschel, A. J. (1996) Moral Grandeur and Spiritual Audacity, in Susannah Heschel (ed.), New York.
Hettiarachchi, S. (2007) “Turkish Muslims and Islamic Turkey: Perspectives for a new European Islamic
Identity”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 198-213.
Hick, J. (1973) God and the Universe of Faiths (London: Macmillan).
Hodgson, M. G. S. (2000) The Venture of Islam, vol. 2: Expansion of Islam in the Middle Period
(Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press).
Hoffman, B. (2006) Inside Terrorism (New York: Columbia University Press).
Hooven, M. ten (2006) “Religie verdeelt Nederland”, in Ongewenste Goden. De publieke rol van religie
in Nederland, 13-37.
Hourani, A. (1962) Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age (London: Oxford University Press).
Houtum, H. van, Rossi, U. and Uitermark, J.(2005) “Reinventing Multiculturalism: Urban Citizenship
and the Negotiation of Ethnic Diversity in Amsterdam”, International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research, 29:3., 622-40.
Hudson, L. E. (2003) Islamic mysticism and gender identity. At:
http://www.logoslibrary.eu/pls/wordtc/new_wordtheque.w6_start.doc?code=58840&lang=EN
(last accessed August 13, 2007).

--- Sayfa 510 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

508
Hunt, R. A. and Aslandogan, Y. A. (eds) (2006) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions
of the Gülen Movement (New Jersey: The Light Inc.).
Hunt, R. A. and Aslandogan, Y. A. (eds) (2007) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions
of the Gülen Movement (Somerset, New Jersey: IID Press & The Light Inc.).
Hunter, S. T. (eds) (2002) Islam, Europe’s Second Religion: The New Social, Cultural and Political
Landscape (Westport, CT: Praeger).
Huntington, S. P. (1993) “The clash of civilizations?”, Foreign Affairs, 72:3, 22-49.
Huntington, S. P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York:
Simon & Schuster).
Huntington, S. P. (1998) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York:
Touchstone).
Huntington, S. P. (2004) Who are we? The challenges to America’s National Identity (New York:
Simon and Schuster).
Husain, E. (2007) The Islamist: Why I Joined Radical Islam in Britain, What I Saw Inside and Why I
Left (London: Penguin).
Hussain, A. (2007) “Combating Terrorism in Britain: Gülen’s Ideas”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim
World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University
Press), 298-314.
Hyatt, J. P. (1971) “The Compiling of Israel's Story in Laymon”, in Charles M. (ed.) The Interpreter's
One-Volume Commentary on the Bible (Nashville: Abingdon Press).
Ihsanoglu, E. (2006, 28 January) (Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic Conference)
Statement on the incident of publication of caricatures of Prophet Muhammad(PBUH) in Danish
and Norwegian newspapers. At: http://www.oic-
oci.org/press/english/2006/January%202006/denemark-3.htm (last accessed August 10, 2007).
Inge, M. T. (1990) Comics as Culture (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi).
Inglis, T. (1998) Moral Monopoly: The Rise and Fall of the Catholic Church in Modern Ireland (Dublin:
Gill and Macmillan).
Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies Web site. At: http://www.gwu.edu/~icps/index.html. (last
accessed August 3, 2007).
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 U.N. GAOR Supp (No.
16) at 52, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966), 999 U.N.T.S. 171, entered into force Mar. 23, 1976.
International Crisis Group Report on Islam and Identity in Germany (2007, March 30) At:
http://www.crisisgroup.org/home/index.cfm?id=4693&l=1
International Studies Review: Special issue (2000), “Continuity and Change in the Westphalian Order”,
2:2.

--- Sayfa 511 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

509
Ireland, P. (2004) Becoming Europe, Immigration, Integration, and the Welfare State (Pittsburgh, Pa.:
University of Pittsburgh Press).
Irvine, J. (2006) “The Gülen Movement and Turkish Integration in Germany”.
http://fethullahGülenconference.org/oklahoma/proceedings/JIrvine.pdf
Irvine, J. (2007) “The Gülen Movement and Turkish Integration in Germany”, in R.A. Hunt and Y.A.
Aslandoğan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(New Jersey: The Light).
Irwin, W. A. (1944) “The Significance of Julius Wellhausen”, Journal of the American Academy of
Religion, XII:3, 160-173.
Isaacs , R. H. and Olitzky, K. M. (eds) (1995) Critical Documents of Jewish History (Northvale: Jason
Aronson Inc).
Ishay, M. R. (2004) The History of Human Rights: From Ancient Times to the Globalization Era
(University of California Press).
Islamic toilet etiquette (2007, 21 July) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islamic_toilet_etiquette>, last
accessed July 25, 2007.
Isreal, J. (2001) Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the making of Modernity 1650- 1750 (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).
Jahanbakhsh, F. (2004) Islam, Democracy, And Religious Revival in Iran (1963-2000) form Bazargan
to Soroush, (trans.) Parvin Jalil (in farsi) (Tehran: Gam-E-Nou).
Jasanoff, S. (ed.) (1995) Handbook of science and technology studies: published in cooperation with the
Society for Social Studies of Science (Sage: Thousand Oaks).
Jhally, S. and Lewis, J. (1992) Enlightened racism: The Cosby show, audiences, and the myth of the
American dream (Boulder, CO: Westview Press).
Joinville, J. de. (1908) Memoir of the Crusades, (trans.) Frank Marzials (London: J. M. Dent).
Joly, D. (1988) “Making A Place for Islam in British Society: Muslims in Birmingham”, in T. Gerholm
and Yngve George Lithman (eds) (London and New York: Mansell).
Joppke, C. (2007, January) “Beyond National Models: Civic Integration Policies for Immigrants in
Western Europe”, West European Politics, 30:1, 1-22.
Jund, A., Dumont, P. and Tapia, S. de (1995) Enjeux de l’immigration Turque en Europe (Paris:
Harmattan).
Kalyoncu, M. (2006, November) “Gülen Movement: Diffusion, Popularity, and Social Mobilization in
Turkey.” Visual presentation at Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement
in Thought and Practice (Norman: OK).
Kalyoncu, M. (2007) “Building Civil Society in Ethno-Religiously Fractured Communities: The Case of
the Gülen Movement in Turkey and Abroad”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in
Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press),
597-607.

--- Sayfa 512 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

510
Kant, I. (1956) Critique of Practical Reason, (trans.) Lewis White Beck (New York: Macmillan, Library
of Liberal Arts).
Kant, I. (1965) Critique of Pure Reason, (trans.) Norman Kemp Smith (New York: St. Martin’s Press).
Kant, I. (1987) Critique of Judgment, (trans.) Werner S. Pluhar (Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett
Publishing Company).
Karaman, M. L. and Aras, B. (2000) “The Crisis of Civil Society in Turkey”, Journal of Economic and
Social Research, 2:2, 39–61. At: http://jesr.journal.fatih.edu.tr/TheCrisisofCivilSocietyinTurkey.pdf
(last accessed September 25, 2002).
Katz, J. (1979) “Jewish Nationalism: Essays and Studies”, (Jerusalem: The World Zionist Organization).
Kaya, A. and Kentel, F. (2005) “Euro-Turks: A Bridge or a Breach between Turkey and the European
Union? A Comparative Study of French-Turks and German-Turks”, CEPS EU-Turkey Working
Papers, No. 14, 1 January.
Kaya, A. (2007) Euro-Turks: Dwelling in a Space of Their Own. At:
http://www.aicgs.org/analysis/c/kayaapr07.aspx (last accessed September 20, 2007).
Kayaoglu, T. (2007) “Preachers of Dialogue: International Relations and Interfaith Theology”, in Ihsan
Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds:
Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 511-525.
Keane, J. (1988) Civil Society and the State (London: Verso).
Keles, I. (2007a) “The Contributions of the Sebat International Education Institutes to Kyrgyzstan”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 362-376.
Keles, O. (2007b) “Promoting Human Rights Values in the Muslim World: The Case of the Gülen
Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 683-708.
Kelman, H. C. (1982) “Creating the conditions for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations”, Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 1, 39-76.
Kelman, H. C. (1997a) “Nationalism, patriotism, and national identity: Social-psychological dimensions”
in D. Bar-Tal and E. Staub (eds), Patriotism in the Lives of
Individuals and Nations (Chicago:
Nelson-Hall), 165-189.
Kelman, H. C. (1997b) “Negotiating national identity and self-determination in ethnic conflicts: The
choice between pluralism and ethnic cleansing”, Negotiation Journal, 13, 327-340.
Kelman, H. C. (2001) “The role of national identity in conflict resolution”, in R. D. Ashmore, L. Jussim,
and D. Wilder (eds) Social identity, intergroup conflict, and conflict reduction (Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press), 187-212.
Kelman, H. C. (2002) “Interactive problem solving: Informal mediation by the scholar-practitioner”, in
J. Bercovitch (ed.) Studies in international mediation: Essays in
honor of Jeffrey Z. Rubin
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan), 167-193.

--- Sayfa 513 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

511
Kelman, H. C. (2004) “Reconciliation as identity change: A social-psychological perspective”, in Y. Bar-
Siman-Tov (ed.) From conflict resolution to reconciliation (Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press), 111-124.
Kettani, M. A. (1979) The Muslim Minorities (Leicester: The Islamic Foundation).
Khalid, A. (1998) The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: Jadidism in Central Asia (Berkley:
University of California Press).
Khalid, A. (2007) Islam after Communism (Berkley: University of California Press).
Khan, H. I. (1999) The Heart of Sufism (Boston: Shambala Publications Inc.).
Khosrokhavar, F. (1997) Islam des Jeunes (Paris: Flammarion).
Khuri, R. (1998) Freedom, Modernity, and Islam: Toward a Creative Synthesis (Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press).
Kielwasser, A. P. and Wolf, M. A. (1992) “Mainstream television, adolescent homosexuality, and
significant silence”, Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 9:4, 350-73.
Kilic, R. (2007) “The Patterns of Interaction Between Islam and Liberalism; The Case of the Gülen
Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 118-139.
Kim, H., (2005) “F. Gülen and Sufism: A Contemporary Manifestation of Sufism”, paper delivered at the
conference Islam in the Contemporary world: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and
Practice, Rice University, 12-13 November 2005.
Kirazli, S. (2003) “Changes in Islamic Hermeneutics and Social Evolution: A Comparative Study of
Turkey and Algeria”, MA Thesis, (Pittsburg, PA: Duquesne University).
Klausen, J. (2006, March) “A Danish drama”, Prospect Magazine, issue 120. At: www.prospect-
magazine.co.uk/pdfarticle.php?id=7363 (last accessed April 11, 2006).
Komecoglu, U. (1997)), “A Sociologically Interpretative Approach to the Fethullah Gülen Community”,
Unpublished thesis, directed by Nilüfer Göle (Istanbul: Boğaziçi University).
Koningsveld, P.S. van and Shadid., W. (2002) “The Negative Image of Islam and Muslims in the West:
Causes and Solution”, in W. Shadid and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) Religious Freedom and the
Neutrality of the State: The Position of Islam in the European Union (Leuven, Belgium), 174-196.
Kook, A. Y. H. (1900) Lights of Torah (Jerusalem: Jerusalem Publishing).
Kook, A. Y. H. (1935) Light of Repentance (Jerusalem: Jerusalem Publishing).
Kook, A.Y. H. (1961) Letters of Rabbi Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook (Jerusalem, HaRav Kook
Institute).
Kook, A.Y. H. (1963) Lights (Jerusalem: HaRav Kook Insitute).
Kook, A. Y. H. (1971) Thy Father's Instruction (Jerusalem: HaRav Kook Institute).
Kook, A. Y. H. (1979) Lights of Prayer (Jerusalem: Lavi Publishing).

--- Sayfa 514 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

512
Kosebalaban, H. (2003) “The Making of Enemy and Friend: Fethullah Gülen’s National-Security
Identity”, in M. H. Yavuz, and J. L. Esposito (eds) Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen
Movement (New York: Syracuse University Press).
Kose, A. (1999) “East Is East, and West Is West: Remarks on Muslim Perspectives on Europe and
Christianity”, in G. Seufert and J. Waardenburg (eds) Turkish Islam and Europe (Istanbul:
Kommission Bei Franz-Steiner-Verlag).
Krause, W. (2007) “Civility in Islamic Activism: Towards a Better Understanding of Shared Values for
Civil Society Development”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions
of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 163-175.
Krejci, J. (1993) The Human Predicament. Its Changing Image. Study in Comparative Religion and
History (London, Basingstoke).
Kristianasen, W. (1997) “New Faces of Islam”, Le Monde Diplomatique (English Edition). At:
http://mondediplo.com/1997/07/turkey (last accessed July 28, 1997).
Kucukcan, T. (1999) Politics of Ethnicity, Identity and Religion: Turkish Muslims in Britain (Aldershot:
Ashgate Publishing).
Kucukcan, T. (2004) “The Making of Turkish-Muslim Diaspora in Britai: Religiosu Collective Identity in
a Mulcticultural Public Sphere”, Journal of Minority Affairs, 24:2.
Kucukcan, T. (2007) “Social and Spiritual Capital of the Gülen Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 187-197.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Kung, H. (1987) Christianity and the World Religions: Path of Dialogue with Islam, Hinduism and
Buddhism (London: Fount Paperbacks).
Kung, H. and Ess, J. van (1994) Christentum und Weltreligionen: Islam (Munchen-Zurich: Piper).
Kurtz, L. R. (2005) Gülen's Paradox: Combining Commitment and Tolerance. The Muslim World, 95: 3,
373-384.
Kuru, A. T. (2003) “Fethullah Gülen’s Search for a Middle Way Between Modernity and Muslim
Tradition”, in M. H. Yavuz, and J. L. Esposito (Eds) Turkish Islam and the Secular State. The Gülen
Movement (New York, Syracuse University Press) 115-130.
Kuru, A. and Yukleyen, A. (2007a) Avrupa’da İslam, Demokrasi ve Laiklik: Fransa, Almanya ve
Hollanda örnekleri (Islam, Democracy, and Secularism in Europe: France, Germany, and the
Netherlands) (Istanbul: TESEV Yayınları).
Kuru, A. T. (2007b) “Changing Perspectives on Islamism and Secularims in Turkey: The Gülen
Movement and The AK Party”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition:
Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 140-151.
Kurzman, C. (1998) Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook (New York, Oxford University Press).
Kuschel, K. J. (1997) Spor o Abrahama (Praha: Vyšehrad).

--- Sayfa 515 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

513
Laan, C. van der (2007, 14-07) “Help de Islam zich te wortelen in Nederland”. Trow. At:
http://www.trouw.nl/deverdieping/overigeartikelen/article750192.ece/Help_de_islam_zich_te_w
ortelen_in_Nederland#readmore (last accessed August 15, 2007).
Lacey, J. (2007) “Reflecting on the Gülen Movement’s Interfaith Dialogue Work Throught the Activities
of NITECA, A Gülen-Inspired Society Based in Northern Ireland”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 608-621.
Lahn, B. T. (2005) “Could Interbreeding Between Humans and Neanderthals Have Led to an Enhanced
Human Brain?”, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Online Research News (11-06-07)
Lamine, A. S. (2004) La coexistence des Dieux, Pluralité religieuse et laïcité (Paris: Puf).
Landau, J. (1996) “Diaspora and Language”, in; John Hutchinson and Anthony, D. Smith (eds)
Ethnicity (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Lapidus, I. M. (2002) A History of Islamic Societies (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Larsson, G. (2005) “The Impact of Global Conflicts on Local Contexts: Muslims in Sweden after 9/11-the
Rise of Islamophobia or New Possibilities?”, Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations, 16, 29-42.
 Laurence, J. and Justin, V. (2006) Integrating Islam, Political and Religious challenges in
Contemporary France (Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press).
Laymon, C. M. (ed.) (1971) The Interpreter's One-Volume Commentary on the Bible (Nashville:
Abingdon Press).
Leaman, O. (2007) “Towards an Understanding of Gülen’s Methodology”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 503-510.
Lentin, R. and McVeigh, R. (eds) (2002) Racism and Anti-Racism in Ireland (Belfast: Beyond Beyond
the Pale Publications).
Lentin, R. and McVeigh, R. (2006) After Optimism? Ireland, Racism and Globalisation (Dublin: Metro
Eireann Publications).
Lester, P. M. (2006) Visual Communication: Image with message (California: Thomson Wadsword).
Leveau, R. (1988) “The Islamic Presence in France”, in T. Gerholm and Yngve George Lithman (eds) The
New Islamic Presence in Western Europe (London and New York: Mansell).
LeVine, M. (2003) “ ‘Human Nationalisms’ Versus ‘Inhuman Globalisms’: Cultural Economies of
Globalisation and The Re-imagining of Muslim Identities in Europe and The Middle East”, in S.
Allievi and J. Nielsen (eds) Muslim Networks and Transnational Communities in and Across
Europe (Leiden and Boston: Brill).
Lewis, B. (2004) The Crisis Of Islam: Holy War and Unholy Terror (NY: Random House Trade
Paperbacks).
Lewis, F. D. (2000) Rumi: Past and Present, East and West - The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal
al-Din Rumi (Oxford: Oneworld).

--- Sayfa 516 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

514
Lifshitz, H. (1966) The Sacred and the Profane in the Teaching of Rabbi Avrahan Yitzchak HaCohen
Kook (Jerusalem: The Zionist Organization).
Lifshitz, H. (1975) The Seer of Light (Jerusalem: The Rabbi Kook Institute).
Lijphart, A. (1968) The Politics of Accommodation. Pluralism and Democracy in the Netherlands
(Berkeley: University of California Press).
Lijphart, A. (1977) Democracy in Plural Societies (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Lilienthal, A. M. (1953) What Price Israel? (Chicago, Henry Regnery Company).
Lilienthal, A. M. (1978) The Zionist Connection. What Price Peace? (New York, Middle East Perspective
Inc.).
Ling, T. (1968) A History of Religion East and West (London: Macmillan and Co Ltd.).
Lings, M. (1983) Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources (New York: George Allen &
Unwin).
Lipovsky, I. P. (1996) “Central Asia: in search of new political identity”, Middle East Journal, 50:2.
Lippmann, W. (1961) Public Opinion (New York: Macmillan).
Lofland, J. (1996) Social Movement Organizations: Guide to research on Insurgent realities (New
York: Aldine De Gruyter).
Looney, R. (2007) “The Arab World: Uncomfortable Experience with Globalization”, Middle East
Journal, 61, 341-345.
Lorcerie F. (2003) L’Ecole et le défi ethnique : Education et intégration (Paris: ESF &INRP).
Lunsing, W. (2003) “Islam versus Homosexuality? Some reflections on the Assassination of Pim
Fortuyn”, Anthropology Today, 19:2.
Ma’oz, A. (1978) “Islamic-Arabism versus pluralism: the failure of intergroup accommodation the
Middle East”, in N. Rhoodie (ed.) Intergroup Accommodation in Plural Societies (London:
Macmillan), 115-42.
MacEinri, P. and Walley, P. (2003) Labour migration into Ireland: study and recommendations on
employment permits, working conditions, family reunification and the integration of migrant
workers in Ireland (Dublin: Immigrant Council of Ireland).
Madeley, J. and Enyedi, Z. (eds) (2003) Church and State in Contemporary Europe: The Chimera of
Neutrality (London: Frank Cass).
Mahmood, S. (2005) Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject (Princeton:
Princeton University Press).
Maigre, M. (2006, February 17) “The Fethullaci, or the Project of an ‘Enlightened’ Turkey” Islam in
Business Web site. http://islaminbusiness.blogspot.com/. (last accessed September 26, 2007).
Malashenko, A. and Polonskaya, L. (1994) Islam in Central Asia (UK: Ithaka Press).

--- Sayfa 517 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

515
Máme se bát islámu? Západ a islám (2006, April) Revue Prostor, 69/70.
Manco, A. (2004) Turquie: vers de nouveaux horizons migratoires ? (Paris, Turin, Budapest,
L’Harmattan, Compétences interculturelles).
March, A. F. (2005) “The Demands of Citizenship: Translating Political Liberalism into the Language of
Islam”, Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 25:3, 317-344.
Mardin, S. (1989) Religion and Social Change in Modern Turkey: The Case of Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
(Albany: State University of New York).
Markham, I. and Ozdemir, O. (2005) Globalization, Ethics and Islam – the Case of Bediuzzaman Said
Nursi (UK: Ashgate, Aldershot).
Marks, J. H. (1971) “The Book of Genesis”, in Charles M. Laymon (ed.) The Interpreter's One-Volume
Commentary on the Bible (Nashville: Abingdon Press), 1-32.
Martin, B. (2007) Justice Ignited: The Dynamics of Backfire (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield).
Martin, B. and Gray, T. (2007) “Backfires: white, black and grey”, Journal of Information Warfare, 7:1,
7-16.
Marty, M. E. (2003) “Our religio-secular world”, Daedalus (Special issue on secularism and religion),
June.
Matthiae, P. (1981) Ebla: An Empire Rediscovered (New York: Doubleday).
McDonough, S. (1984) Muslim Ethics and Modernity, A Comparative Study of the Ethical Thought of
Sayyid Ahmad Khan and Mawlana Mawdudi (Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press).
McEvedy, C. and Jones, R. (1978) Atlas of World Population History (Harmondsworth: Penguin
Reference Books).
Melucci, A. (1999) Challenging Codes: Collective action in the information age (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Meselmany, M. (2006) Islam and Violence. At: www.muhammadanism.org/Islam/islam_violence.pdf
(last accessed Sept. 2, 2007).
Metcalf, B. D. (1984) Moral Conduct and Authority: the place of “adab” in South Asian Islam (Berkeley:
University of California Press).
Meyer, M. A. (1988) Response to Modernity: A History of the Reform Movement in Judaism (Detroit:
Wayne State University Press).
Mezran, K. (2001) “Negotiating national identity in North Africa”, International Negotiation, 2, 141-173.
Michel, T. (2001) Islamic Maternities: Fethullah Gülen and Contemporary Islam (Georgetown U
Press).
Michel, T. (2002) “Turkish Experience For Muslim-Christian Dialogue. A Thinker: B.S. Nursi; An
Activist: M.F. Gülen”, in Travelling Together Beyond Dialogue: Peace and Dialogue in a Plural
Society, Common Values and Responsibilities (Melbourne: Australian Intercultural Society).

--- Sayfa 518 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

516
Michel, T. (2002) 'Turkish Experience for Muslim-Christian Dialogue: A Thinker : B.S.Nursi and An
Activist: M.F.Gülen”. At: http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1074/23/ (last accessed October 3,
2007).
Michel, T. (2003) “Fethullah Gülen as Educator”, in H. Yavuz and J. Esposito (eds) Turkish Islam and
the Secular State: The Gülen Movement (Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press).
Michel, T. (2004) “Foreword”, in Fethullah Gülen, Towards a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance
(New Jersey: The Light Inc).
Michel, T. (2005) “Een analyse over de vrede”, in G. Celik, P. Cobben, J. van Dijk, P. Valkenberg (eds)
Voorlopers in de Vrede (Forerunners for peace) (Budel: Damon), 31-44.
Michel, T. (2005) Said Nursi’s Views on Muslim-Christian Understanding (Istanbul: Soz Basin Yayin
Ltd. Sti.).
Michel, T. (2005) “Two Frontrunners for Peace: John Paul II and Fethullah Gülen” Presented at the
Frontrunners of Peace symposia organized by the Cosmicus Foundation, Holland, at universities in
Tilburg, Erasmus, and Amsterdam, March 16–18, 2005. At:
http://en.fGülen.com/content/view/1944/13/ (last accessed September 1, 2007)
Michel, T. (2005) “Sufism and modernity in the thought of Fethullah Gülen”, The Muslim World, 95,
341-58.
Michel, T. (2007) “Fethullah Gülen: Following in the Footsteps of Rumi”. At:
http://www.okuf.no/pdfFiles/OsloGülenRumi-T.Michel.pdf. (last accessed June 5, 2007
Middleton, R. (1990) Studying popular music (Philadelphia: Open University Press).
Mignolo, W. D. (2000) Local histories-global designs: coloniality, subaltern knowledges, and border
thinking (Princeton University Press).
Minerbi, S. (1990) The Vatican and Zionism with quotation from Civilita Cattolica (1897) (New York:
Oxford University Press).
Modood, T. (2005) “Foreword”, in T. Abbas (ed.) Muslim Britain: Communities under Pressure
(London: Zed Books).
Modood, T. (2004) “Establishment, multiculturalism and British citizenship”, Political Quarterly, 65:1.
Moffett, J. And McElheny, K. R. (1995) Points of View: An Anthology of Short Stories (New York:
Mentor).
Moffett, J. (1968) Teaching the Universe of Discourse (New York: Houghton Mifflin).
Moffett, J. (1992) Harmonic Learning: Keynoting School Reform (Portsmouth: Heinemann).
Moffett, J. (1994) The Universal Schoolhouse: Spiritual Awakening Through Education (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass).
Mohamed, Y. (2007) “The Educational Theory of Fethullah Gülen and Its Practice in South Africa”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 552-571.

--- Sayfa 519 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

517
Motturi, A. (2003) Filosofi vid mörkrets hjärta: Wittgenstein, Frazer och vildarna. (Göteborg: Glänta
produktion).
Khan, Muqtedar M. A. (2003, December) “Liberal Islam, Radical Islam”, Current History, 102: 668,
417-421.
Muller, Z. (2005) Svaté války a civilizační tolerance (Praha, Academia).
Nasr, S. H. (1972) Sufi Essays (Albany, NY: State University of New York).
Nasr, S. H. (2001) Ideals and Realities of Islam (New York: ABC International Group).
Nasr, S. H. (2007) “Reflections on Islam and the West: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow”, in J.J.
Donohue and J.L. Esposito (eds) Islam in Transition: Muslim Perspectives (NY/Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Nasreddine, D. (2004) Turkish Communities in Europe: Societies Within Societies. At:
http://www.islamonline.net/English/artculture/2004/11/article05.shtml (last accessed January 10,
2005).
National Consultative Committee on Racism and Interculturalism (NCCRI) (2007) The Muslim
Community in Ireland: Challenging some of Myths and Information. At: www.nccri.ie
Nawab Osman, M. 2007) “Culen’s Contribution to a Moderate Islam in Southeast Asia”, in Ihsan Yilmaz
et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 334-346.
Neria, M. T. (1986) In the field of Rabbi Kook (Kfar HaRoeh: Kfar HaRoeh Publishing).
Newbigin, L., Sanneh, L. and Taylor, J. (eds) (1998) The Secular Myth (London: SPCK).
Nicholson, R. (1990) (ed.) Mathnawi of Rumi (1925-1940) (trans.) (London: Luzac).
Nielsen, J. S. (1991) “Muslim Organisations in Europe: Integration or Isolation?”, in W.A.R. Shadid and
P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) The Integration of Islam and Hinduism in Western Europe (Kampen:
Kok Pharos Publishing House).
Noble, K. (1994) The Sound of a Silver Horn: Reclaiming the Heroism in Contemporary Women’s Lives
(New York: Fawcett Columbine).
Nokel, S. (2002) Die Töchter der Gastarbeiter und der Islam.
Nuri, S. (1996a) Küçük Dünyam (Hatıraları)- 5. Zaman, 26 Kasım.
Nuri, S. (1996b) Küçük Dünyam (Hatıraları)- 3. Zaman, 27 Kasım.
Nuri, S. (1996c) Küçük Dünyam (Hatıraları)- 12. Zaman, 6 Aralık.
Nursi, B. S. (1991) A Guide for Youth (Istanbul: Sözler Publications).
Nursi, B. S. (1997) Fruits From the Tree of Light (Istanbul: Sözler Publications).
Nursi, B. S. (2001) Letters (1928-1932), The 2nd Volume of the Risale-i Nur Collection (Istanbul: Sözler
Publications).

--- Sayfa 520 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

518
Nursi, B. S. (2002) The Rays Collection, The 4th Volume of the Risale-i Nur Collection (Istanbul: Sözler
Publications).
Nursi, B. S. (2004) The Words: On the nature and purposes of Man, Life and all things, The 1st Volume
of the Risale-i Nur Collection, (Istanbul: Sözler Publications).
Nursi, B. S. (2004) The Flashes Collection, The 3rd Volume of the Risale-i Nur Collection (Istanbul:
Sözler Publications).
Nursi, B. S. (2005) The Words, The Reconstruction of Islamic Belief and Thought (NJ: The Light, Inc.)
O’Connell, J. (1991) “The Making of Modern Europe; Strengths, Constraints and Resolutions” Peace
Research Report, 26, (Bradford: University of Bradford).
O’Mahony, W. P., and. Shomali, M. A. (eds) (2004) Catholics and Shi’a in Dialogue: Studies In
Theology And Spirituality (London: Melisende).
O’Regan, M. (2007) “Leaders in tribute to Irish war dead”, The Irish Times (9/7/07)
O’Toole, F. (2003) After The Ball (Dublin: tasc).
Ocak, A. Y. (1999) Türkler, Türkiye ve İslam (İstanbul, İletişim).
Oezcan, V. (2004) “Germany: Immigration in Transition”, in Migration Information Source
(www.migrationinformation.org).
Open Society & EU Monitoring and Advocacy Program (2005) “Muslims in the UK: Policies for Engaged
Citizens” (Budapest: Open Society Institute).
Owen, U. (2006) “A free society needs free speech” Equal Voices, 17-18.
Ozdalga, E. (2000) “Worldly Asceticism in Islamic Casting: Fethullah Gülen's Inspired Piety and
Activism” Critique, 17, 83-104.
Ozdalga, E. (2003a) “Secularizing Trends in Fethullah Gülen’s Movement: Impasse or Opportunity for
Further Renewal?” Critique: Critical Middle Eastern Studies, 12:1, 61–73.
Ozdalga, E. (2003b) “Following in the Footsteps of Fethullah Gülen”, in Esposito and
Yavuz (eds) Turkish Islam and The Secular State, The Gülen Movement (New York:
 Syracuse University Press), 85-114.
Ozdalga, E. (2005) “Redeemer or Outsider? The Gülen Community in the Civilizing Process” The
Muslim World Special Issue, Islam in Contemporary Turkey: the Contributions of Gülen, Blackwell
Publishing, 95:3, 429–76.
Ozdalga, E. (2007a) İslamcılığın Türkiye Seyri (İstanbul: İletişim Yayınları).
Ozkan, E. (2007) The Development of Turkish Islam in Germany. This essay was written for the AICGS
Workshop on “Transatlantic Perspectives on Religion and Politics in Global Affairs” which was held
in Berlin on April 20, 2007. At: http://www.aicgs.org/adaview.aspx?pageid=1450 (last accessed
June 12, 2007).

--- Sayfa 521 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

519
Ozkok, E. (1995) Interview with Fethullah Gülen, Hurriyet, Istanbul, 23 January.
Paige, G. D., Satha-Anand, C., and Gilliat, S. (2001) Islam and Non-Violence, Centre For Global Non-
Violence.
Palmer, M. and Breuilly, E. (trans.) (2006) The Book of Chuang Tzu (Arkana) (London, New York,
Toronto, etc: Penguin Books).
Pamuk, O. (2004) Snow, (trans.) Maureen Freely, (New York: Alfred A. Knopf).
Panagiotopoulou, R. (1997) “Greeks in Europe: Antinomies in National Identities” Journal of Modern
Greek Studies, 15:2.
Pannenberg, W. (1985) Anthropology in Theological Perspective (The Westminster Press:
Philadelphia).
Parekh, B. (2006) “Europe, liberalism and the ‘Muslim question’ ”, in T. Modood, A. Triandafyllidou and
R. Zapata-Barrero (eds) Multiculturalism, Muslims and Citizenship: A European Approach (New
York: Routledge).
Park, B. (2007) “The Fethullah Gülen Movement as a transnational Phenomenon”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al.
(eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 46-59.
Pauly, R. J. (2004) Islam in Europe: Integration or Marginalization? (Burlington, VT Ashgate
Publishing).
Paya, A. (2007) “In Defence of Universal Ethical Values and Principles”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 473-493.
Peach, C. and Vertovec, S. (eds) (1997) Islam in Europe, The Politics of Religion and Community (New
York; St. Martin’s Press).
Pedersen, L. (1999) Newer Islamic Movements in Western Europe (Aldershot: Ashgate).
Peker, G. (1996) “Islam: Myth or Reality in Central Asia?”, Euroasian Studies, vol. 3.
Penaskovic, R. (2007) “M. Fethullah Gülen’s Response to the ‘Clash of Civilizations’ Thesis”, in Ihsan
Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds:
Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 407-418.
Peppinck, T. (2007) “Van ‘nieuwe mens’ tot ‘wereldburger’. De weerslag van Fethullah Gülen’s visie op
vernieuwing op het denken en handelen van de ‘Gouden Generatie’ in Nederland” [From ‘New Man’
to ‘World Citizen’: The repercussion of Fethullah Gülen’s vision on renewal as an alternative to
modernization, and its reflection on the ‘Golden Generation’ in the Netherlands], Master Thesis,
Leiden University, the Netherlands.
Petersson, B. and Hellstrom, A. (2003, September) “The Return of the Kings: Temporality in the
Construction of EU Identity” European Societies, 5:3, 235-252.
Pettigrew, T. F. and Meertens, R. W. (1996) “The Verzuiling Puzzle. Understanding Dutch intergroup
relations”, Current Psychology, 15:1, 3-14.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

520
Pettinato, G. (1981) The Archives of Ebla (Garden City, N.Y. : Doubleday).
Peuch, J. C. (2004) “Turkey: Fethullahci Schools – a Greenhouse Foe Central Asian Elites?”. At: http://
www.rferl.org/features/ 01/11/2006 (last accessed May 14, 2007).
Pham, P., Vinck, P. et al. (2005) “Forgotten voices: A population-based survey of attitudes about peace
and justice in Northern Uganda”. At: http://www.ictj.net/downloads/ForgottenVoices.pdf. (last
accessed September 25, 2007).
Plesch, D. and Butcher, M. (2007) “Considering a War with Iran- A discussion paper on WMD in the
Moddle East”. At: http://www.afterdowningstreet.org/?q=node/26199 (last accessed September 17,
2007).
Pollard, R. A. (1985) Economic security and the Origins of the Cold War 1945-1950 (New York:
Colombia University Press).
Pope John Paul II (2002, 1 January) “No peace without justice no justice without forgiveness” His
message for the Celebration of the World Day of Peace. The Vatican.
Pratt, D. (2005) The Challenge Of Islam: Encounters In Interfaith Dialogue (Hampshire, England:
Ashgate).
Pratt, D. (2007) “Islamic Prospects for Interreligious Dialogue: The Contribution of Fethullah Gülen”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 391-406.
Prins, B. (1997) “The Standpoint in Question: Situated Knowledges and the Dutch Minorities discourse”
PhD Thesis, Utrecht University.
Ramadan, T. (1999a) “Islam and Muslims in Europe: A Silent Revolution Toward Rediscovery”, in
Yvonne Yazbeck Haddad (ed.) Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to Citizens (New York: Oxford
University Press).
Ramadan, T. (1999b) To Be a European Muslim (Leicester: The Islamic Foundation).
Ramadan, T. (2004) Western Muslims and the Future of Islam (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Rasheed, S. A. (2005, July 3) Toilet paper. At:
http://qa.sunnipath.com/issue_view.asp?HD=3&ID=2802&CATE=394 (last accessed July 25,
2007).
Rath, J., Groenedijk, K., and Penninix, R. (1991) “The recognition and institutionalisation of Islam in
Belgium, Great Britain and The Netherlands”, New Community ,18, 101-11.
Riesman, D., Denney, R. and Glazer, N. (1950) The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American
Character (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Robb, J. (2007) Brave New War: The Next Stage Of Terrorism and The End of Globalization
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).
Robbers, G. (ed.) (1996) Church and State in the European Union (Baden-Baden: Nomos
Verlagsgesellschaft).

--- Sayfa 523 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

521
Roggerband, C. and Rens, V. (2007) “Divergent Framing: The Public Debate on Migration in the Dutch
Parliament and Media, 1995-2004” West European Politics, 30:3, 524-548.
Rosenfeld, M. (2003) "Spinoza's Dialectic and the Paradoxes of Tolerance: A Foundation for
Pluralism?", Cardozo Law School, Public Law Research Paper, No. 79. At:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=466360 (last accessed May 10, 2007).
Rosoux, V. B. (2001) “National identity in France and Germany: From mutual exclusion to negation”
International Negotiation, 2, 175-198.
Rostoványi, Z. (1998) Az iszlám a 21. század küszöbén (Budapest:Aula).
Rooy , A. van (2000) Civil Society and the Aid Industry (London: Earthscan).
Roy, O. (2003) “EuroIslam: the jihad within?”, The National Interest, No :71, Spring.
Roy, O. (2004) Globalized Islam, The Search for a New Ummah (New York: OSL).
Ruhs, M. (2005) Managing the Immigration and Employment of Non-EU Nationals in Ireland
(Dublin: The Policy Institute, Trinity College).
Ruiten, J. van (2003) “The Covenant of Noah in Jubilees”, in Porter, Stanley E. and Roo, J. C. R. de
(eds) The Concept of the Covenant in the Second Temple Period (Leiden: Brill),167-190.
Rushdie, S. (1988) The Satanic Verses (London: Viking Penguin).
Sagdeev, R. and Eisenhower, S. (eds) (2000) Islam and Central Asia: An Enduring Legacy or An
Evolving Threat (Washington, DC: Center for Political and Strategic Studies).
Said, E. (1979) Orientalism (Vintage Books Edition, October).
Said, E. (1997) Covering Islam: How the media and the Experts Determine How We See the Rest of the
World (London: Vintage).
Salamon, L. and Anheier, H. (1996) “Social origins of civil society: explaining in the non for profit sector
cross nationally”, Voluntas, 9:3.
Sander, A. (1991) “The Road from Musalla to Mosque: The Process of Integration and
Institutionalisation of Islam in Sweden” in W. Shadid and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) The
Integration of Islam and Hinduism in Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House).
Santos, S. L. (2006, November) “The Urgency of Educational Reform in the United States of America:
Lessons Learned from Fethullah Gülen.” Paper presented at Islam in the Contemporary World: The
Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and Practice (Norman, OK.).
Sardar, Z. (1989) Explorations in Islamic science, Islamic futures and policy studies (Mansell: London).
Sardar, Z. (2002) Introducing science (Cambridge: Icon Books).
Saritoprak, Z. (2003) “Fethullah Gülen: A Sufi in his own way”, in M. Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito
(eds) Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement (Syracuse, NY, Syracuse
University Press), 156-69.

--- Sayfa 524 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

522
Saritoprak, Z. and Unal, A. (trans.) (2005) “An Interview with Fethullah Gülen.” The Muslim World,
95:3, 447-467.
Saritoprak, Z., and Griffith, S.(2005) “Fethullah Gülen and the ‘people of the book’: A voice from Turkey
for interfaith dialogue” The Muslim World, 95, 329-40.
Saritoprak, Z. (2005a) “Introduction” Special Issue of The Muslim World on Islam in Contemporary
Turkey: The Contributions of Fethullah Gülen, 95, 325-27.
Saritoprak, Z. (2005b) “An Islamic approach to peace and nonviolence: A Turkish experience”, The
Muslim World, 95:3, 413–428.
Saritoprak, Z. (2007) “Gülen and His Global Contribution to Peace-Building”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al.
(eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 632-642.
Saufert, G. and Waardenburg, J. (eds) (1999) “Turkish Islam and Europe, Europe and Christianity as
reflected in Turkish Muslim Discourse and Turkish Muslim life in the Diaspora”, Stutgart.
Scheel, M. (2006, April 17) “The Wonder of Anatolia: Land of Ataturk and Gülen”. At:
http://www.gather.com/viewArticle.jsp?articleId=281474976745124
Scheffer, P. (2000, January 29) “Het multiculturele drama”. NRC Handelsblad. Opinion.
Schieder, R. (2006) “European Problems with Religious Plurality – the German Case” This essay was
written for the October 13, 2006 American Institute for Contemporary German Studies
"Transatlantic Dialogue on Religion and Politics: Religion and Politics in European Integration and
the Transatlantic Relationship" conference held in Brussels, Belgium/,
http://www.aicgs.org/analysis/c/schiederoct06.aspx.
Schimmel, A. M. (1978) The Mystical Dimension of Islam (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press).
Schimmel, A. (1993) The Triumphal Sun: a Study of the Works of Jalaladdin Rumi (Albany: State
University of New York Press).
Schimmel, A. (2001) As Through a Veil: Mystical Poetry in Islam (Oxford: Oneworld).
Schimmel, A. (2003) My Soul is a Woman: The Feminine in Islam (New York: Continuum).
Schluchter, W. (1989.) “Economy and Society: The End of A Myth”, in Rationalism, Religion and
Domination: A Weberian Perspective (Berkeley: University of California Press).
Schmitt, J. C., “La morale des gestes”, Parure, Pudeur, Etiquette, Revue
Communication (Paris : Editions de Seuil, no. 47).
Schnabel, P. (1997) De multiculturele illusie. Een pleidooi voor aanpassing en assimilatie (Utrecht:
Forum).
Scholten, P. and Snel, E. (2005) “Van Gastarbeiders tot het Multiulturele Drama; het integratiebelied als
hardnekkig beleidsprobleem”, in Arentsen and Trommel (eds) Hardnekkkige beleidsproblemen
(Amsterdam: Boom).

--- Sayfa 525 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

523
Scott, D. (1999) Refashioning Futures: Criticism after Postcoloniality. Princeton studies in culture-
power-history  (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Sells, M. (1996) Early Islamic Mysticism, Sufi, Qur'an, Miraj, Poetic and Theological Writings (New
York: Paulist Press).
Seneviratana, A. (ed.) (1994) King Asoka and Buddhism - Historical and Literary Studies (Kandy, Sri
Lanka: Buddhist publication Society).
Shadid, W. and Koningsveld, P.S. van (eds) (1991) The Integration of Islam and Hinduism in Western
Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House).
Shadid, W. and Koningsveld, P.S. van (1991) “Institutionalisation and Integration of Islam in the
Netherlands”, in W. Shadid and P.S. van Koningsveld (eds) The Integration of Islam and Hinduism
in Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos Publishing House)
Shadid, W. and Koningsveld, P.S. van (eds) (1996) Muslims in the Margin: Political Responses to the
Presence of Islam in Western Europe (Kampen: Kok Pharos).
Shadid, W. and Koningsveld, P.S. van (1996) “Islam in the Netherlands: Constitutional Law and Islamic
Organizations” Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 16:1, 111-118.
Shadid, W. and Koningsveld, P.S. van (eds) (2002) Religious Freedom and the Neutrality of the State:
The Position of Islam in the European Union (Leuven: Peeters).
Shahrur, M. (2007) “Islamic Culture in Danger”, in J.J. Donohue and J.L. Esposito (eds) Islam in
Transition: Muslim Perspectives (New York: Oxford UP).
Sharp, G. (1973) “The Politics of Non-Violent Action, Sargent, Boston, Massachussetts” (Available in 3
paperback Vols only: Vol.1 Power & Struggle, Vol 2 The Methods of Non-Violent Action and Vol. 3
The Dynamics of Non-Violent Action).
Sharp, G. (2005) Waging Non-Violent Struggle: 20th Century Practice and 21st Century Potential
(Boston: Extending Horizons Books).
Sill, G. G. (1975) A handbook of symbols in Christian art (New York: Collier Boks).
Smith, A. D. (1991) National Identity (London: Penguin).
Smith, M. (1994) Readings from the Mystics of Islam (Westport, CT: Pir Publications).
Smith, M. (1997) Rabi`a Basri: The Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints in Islam, Being the Life and
Teachings of Rabi`a Al-`Adawiyya Al-Qaysiyya of Basra (New Delhi, Kitab Bhavan).
Smith, W. C. (1981) Towards a World Theology: Faith and the Comparative History of Religions
(Basingstoke: Macmillan).
Smock, D. R. (ed.) (2002) Interfaith Dialogue and Peace Building (Washington, DC: US Institute of
Peace Press).
Smoker, P. and Groff, L. (1995) Creating Global-Local Cultures of Peace. At:
http://www.gmu.edu/academic/pcs/smoker.htm (last accessed October 20, 2002).
Soroush, A. (2001) Straight Path, (in Farsi) Fourth Edition (Tehran: Serat Publication).

--- Sayfa 526 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

524
Soysal, Y. N. (1997) “Changing Parameters of Citizenship and Claims-Making: Organized Islam in
European Public Spheres” Theory and Society, 26:4, Special Issue on Recasting Citizenship, 509-
527.
Star, J. (1997) Rumi, In the Arms of the Beloved (New York: Penguin Putnam Inc.).
Stedman, E. C. (1895) A Victorian anthology 1837-1895: selections illustrating the editor’s critical
review of British poetry in the reign of Victoria (Boston: Houghton & Mifflin).
Steenbergen, F. van and Uitermark, J. (2006) “Postmulticulturalisme and Stedelijk Burgerschap: Over
de neoliberale transformatie van het Amsterdamse integratiebeleid”, Sociologie, jaargang 2, 265-
287.
Stenberg, L. (1996) “The Islamization of science: four Muslim positions developing an Islamic
modernity” Lund studies in history of religions, 6 (Stockholm : Almqvist & Wiksell International).
Stephenson, A. J. (2006) “Leaving Footprints in Houston: Answers to Questions on Women and the
Gülen Movement”, presented at the second International Conference on Islam in the
Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and Practice, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas, Texas, March 4–5, 2006.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2002) Globalization And Its Discontents (NY/London: W.W).
Stourton, E. (1998) Absolute truth: The Catholic Church in the World Today (London: Viking, Penguin
Group).
Sunnemark, F. (2001) An inescapable network of mutuality: Discursivity and ideology in the rhetoric
of Martin Luther King (Jr., Acta universitatis Gothoburgensis).
Tedik, M. F. (2007) “Gülen Movement as a Integration Mechanism for the Europe’s and Muslim
Community: Potentials and Constraints”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition:
Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 230-245.
Tekalan, S. (2005) “A Movement of Volunteers”, presented at the conference Islam in the
Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and Practice, Rice University,
Houston; November 12–13, 2005.
Ter Wal, J. (2004) “De Islam in de publieke discussie. Inhoudsanalyse van de Volkskant 1998-2002”, in
K. Phalet and J. Ter Wal (eds) Moslim in Nederland (Den Haag/Utrecht: SCP/Ercomer-UU).
Tessler, M. (1994) A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press).
The Times (1939), “Weizmann to Chamberlain”, London (September 6, 1939).
Thangaraj, M. T. (1999) The Common Task: A Theology of Christian Mission (Nashville: Abingdon
Press).
Thoma-Venske, H. (1988) “The Religious Life of Muslims in Berlin”, in T. Gerholm and Yngve George
Lithman (eds) (London and New York: Mansell).

--- Sayfa 527 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

525
Tietze, N. (2004) “The Forms of Muslim Religiosity in France and in Germany”, in Poly-ethnic societies:
Problems of cultural distinctions (Russia: Institute of Oriental Studies of Academy of Russian
Federation), vol. 1, 143-151.
Tibi, B. (2006) “Europeanizing Islam or Islamization of Europe”, in Timothy Brynes and Peter
Katzenstein (eds) Religion in Expanding Europe (New York: Cambridge University Press).
Toguslu, E. (2007) “Le difficile équilibre dedans-dehors: les activités culturelles d'un centre musulman
comme stratégie d'intégration dans l'espace public et les critiques au projet au sein de leur
communauté”, paper submitted in Colloquy, La Religion de l’Autre, 5-6 February, Paris.
Toguslu, E. (2007) “Gülen’s Theory of Adab and Ethical Values of Gülen Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et
al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 445-458.
Toland, J. (1977) Adolf Hitler (New York, Ballantine books).
Tomasi, L. (1995) Values and Post-Soviet Youth. The Problem of Transition (Milano: Franco Angeli).
Touger, E. (ed.) (1987) Maimonides Mishneh Torah (New York: Moznaim Publishing Corporation).
Toulmin, S. (1990) Cosmopolis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Touraine, A. (1997) Pourrons-nous vivre ensemble ? Égaux et différents, Fayard Editions.
Tovey, H. and Share, P. (2003) A Sociology of Ireland (Dublin: Gill and Macmillan).
Toynbee, A. J. (1965) A Study of History (New York: Oxford University Press).
Tracy, D. (1987) Plurality and Ambiguity: Hermeneutics, Religion, Hope (San Francisco: Harper and
Row).
Tuchman, G., Daniels, A. K. and Benet, J. (eds) (1978) Hearth and Home: Images of women in the
mass media (New York: Oxford University Press), 25-67.
Turam, B. (2004) “A bargain between the secular stare and Turkish Islam: politics of ethnicity in Central
Asia”, Nation and Nationalism, 10, 353-374.
Turgut, H. (1997) “Nurculuk”, Sabah, January 23-31.
Turner, B. S. (1987) “The Rationalization of the body: reflections on modernity and disciplines”, in S.
Whimster and S. Lash (eds) Max Weber, Rationality and Modernity (London: Alien & Unwin), 222-
241
Ugur, E. (2004) “Intellectual roots of ‘Turkish Islam’ and Approaches to the ‘Turkish Model’ ”, Journal
of Minority Affairs, 24:2
Ugur, E. (2007) “Religion as a source of social capital? The Gülen Movement in the Public Sphere”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 152-162.
Unal, A., and Williams, A. (eds) (2000) Fethullah Gülen: Advocate of dialogue (Fairfax, VA: The
Fountain).

--- Sayfa 528 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

526
Unal, A. (2004) M. Fethullah Gülen Bir Portre Denemesi (Istanbul: Nil Yayınları).
Unal, A. (2006a) Islam addresses Contemporary Issues. (NJ: The Light, Inc.).
Unal, A. (2006b) The Qur’an. With annotated interpretation in modern English (NJ: The Light, Inc.).
Upton, C. (2003) Doorkeeper of the Heart: Versions of Rabi`a (New York: Pir Press).
USC-MSA Compendium of Muslim Texts. At:
http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/hadithsunnah/bukhari/023.sbt.html#002.023.445
(last accessed August 10, 2006).
Uygur, S. (2007) “Islamic Puritanism as a source of Economic Development: The case of the Gülen
Movement”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen
Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 176-186.
Vainovski-Mihai, I. (2007) “Giving Precedence to Common Points: The Limits of the otherness in
Fethullah Gülen’s Dialogue methodology for interfaith Encounters”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 419-427.
Valkenberg, P. (2005) Fethullah Gülen’s Contribution to Muslim-Christian Dialogue in the Context of
Abrahamic Cooperation. At: www.Gülen.org (last accessed June 11, 2007).
Vaner, S. (ed.) (2005) La Turquie (Paris : Fayard-Ceri).
Vermeij, L. (2006) What’s Cooking? Cultural boundaries among Dutch teenagers of different ethnic
origins in the context of school (Veenendaal, NL: Universal Press).
Vermeulen, H. and Rinus, P. (eds) (2000) Immigrant Integration: The Dutch Case (Amsterdam: Het
Spinhuis).
Vicini, F. (2007) “Gülen’s Rethinking of Islamic Pattern and Its Socio-Political Effects”, in Ihsan Yilmaz
et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds
Metropolitan University Press), 430-444.
Volkan, V. (1994) The Need to Have Enemies and Allies, From Clinical Practice to International
Relationships (Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson Publications).
Voll, J. O. “Renewal and Reform in Islamic History: Taıjdid and Islah”, in John L. Esposito (ed.) Voices
of Resurgent Islam (New York: Oxford University Press), 32-47.
Vygotsky, L. (1962) Language in Thought and Language (Cambridge: MIT).
Wala, M. (1993) The Marshall Plan. Allen W. Dulles(ed.) (Providence R.I.: Berg).
Watt, D. C. (ed.)(1969) Hitler's Mein Kampf (trans.) Ralph Manheim (London: Hutchinson).
Watt, D. C. (ed.) (1974) Hitler's Mein Kampf (London: Hutchinson).
Watt, W. M. (1971) Muslim Intellectual, A study of al-Ghazali (Edinburg: Edinburg University Press).
Watt, W. M. (1983) Islam and Christianity Today: A Contribution to Dialogue (London, Routledge).

--- Sayfa 529 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

527
Webb, L. E. (2004) Fethullah Gülen: It There More To Him Than Meet the Eye? (N.J.: Patterson).
Weber, B. (1995) “Immigration and Politics in Germany”, The Journal of the International Institute,
2:3. At: http://www.umich.edu/~iinet/journal/vol2no3/ozdemir.html (last accessed October 10,
1996).
Weber, M. (2004) Ethique Protestante et l’esprit du Capitalisme (Paris : Plon).
Weil, P. (1995) La France et ses étrangers (Folio).
Weller, P. (2002a) “Insiders or outsiders?: religions(s), state(s) and societies: propositions for Europe”,
The Baptist Quarterly, Part I, 39:5, 211-222.
Weller, P. (2002b) “Insiders or outsiders?: religions(s), state(s) and societies: propositions for Europe”,
The Baptist Quarterly, Part II, 39:6, 276-286.
Weller, P. (2002c) “Insiders or outsiders?: propositions for European religions, states and societies”, in
A. Race and I. Shafer (eds) Religions in Dialogue: From Theocracy to Democracy (Aldershot:
Ashgate), 93-208.
Weller, P. (2005a) Time for a Change: Reconfiguring Religion, State and Society (London: T&T Clark).
Weller, P. (2005b) “Religions and social capital: theses on religion(s), state(s) and society(ies): with
particular reference to the United Kingdom and the European Union”, The Journal of International
Migration and Integration, 9:2, 271-289.
Weller, P. (2006a) “Addressing religious discrimination and Islamophobia: Muslims and liberal
democracies. The case of the United Kingdom”, The Journal of Islamic Studies, 17: 3, 295-25.
Weller, P. (2006b) “‘Human rights’, ‘religion’ and the ‘secular’: variant configurations of religion(s),
state(s) and society(ies)”, Religion and Human Rights: An International Journal, 1:1, 17-39.
Weller, P. (2006c) “Fethullah Gülen, Religions, Globalization and Dialogue”, in R. Hunt and Y.
Aslandoğan (eds) Muslim Citizens of the Globalized World: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(The Light, Inc. & IID Press), 75-88.
Weller, P. (2007a) “ ‘Human Rights’, ‘Religion’ and the ‘Secular’: Variant Configurations of Religion(s),
State(s) and Society(ies)”, in N. Ghanea, A. Stephens, and R. Walden (eds) Does God Believe in
Human Rights: Essays on Religion and Human Rights (Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers), 147-
179.
Weller, P. (2007b) “Robustness and Civility: Themes from Fethullah Gülen as Resource and Challenge
for Government, Muslims and Civil Society in the United Kingdom”, in Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds)
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement (Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan
University Press), 268-284.
Wessels, A. (1995) Arab and Christian? Christians in the Middle East (Kampen: Kok Pharos).
Whitney, H. and Barnes, J. (2007) The Mormons. PBS television documentary produced for American
Experience/Frontline (WGBH,Boston).
Wikipedia, Fethullah Gülen. Wikipedia the free encyclopedia. At:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fethullah_Gülen#_note-11.(last accessed September 2, 2007)

--- Sayfa 530 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

528
Williams, I. (2005) “An Absent Influence? The Nurcu - Fetullah Gülen Movements in Turkish Islam and
their potential influence upon European Islam and global education” paper delivered at the
conference Islam in the Contemporary world: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and
Practice, Rice University, 12-13 November 2005.
Williams, I. (2007) “A Station Above that of Angels: The Vision of Islamic Education Within Pluralistic
Societies in the thought of Fethullah Gülen – A Study of Contrasts Between Turkey and The UK”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 585-596.
Winston, K. (2001, May 23) “Rumi: A passionate heart still beats”, The Dallas Morning News. At:
http://www.beliefnet.com/story/79/story_7968_1.html (last accessed August 5, 2007).
Wolper, E. S. (2003) Cities and Saints: Sufism and the Transformation of Urban Space in Medieval
Anatolia (Penn State University Press).
Woodhall, R. (2005) “Organizing the organization, educating the educators: An examination of
Fethullah Gülen’s teaching and the membership of the movement”. Presented at the conference
Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought and Practice,
November 12–13, 2005.
Wright, E. L. (2005) “Age of the Universe”, University of California Online. At:
http://www.astro.ucla.edu/~wright/age.html (last accesed February 20, 2006).
Wright, S. 2007) “The Work of Fethullah Gülen & The Role of Non-Violence in A Time of Terro”, in
Ihsan Yilmaz et al. (eds) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press), 285-297.
Wu, F. H. (2004) “Profiling in the Wake of September 11: The Precedent of the Japanese American
Internment”, in M.K.B. Darmer et al. (eds) Civil Liberties vs. National Security in A Post-9/11
World (New York: Prometheus Books).
Yagmur, K. (2004) “Language maintenance patterns of Turkish immigrant communities in Australia
and western Europe: the impact of majority attitudes on ethnolinguistic vitality perceptions”, The
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, vol. 35, 121-142.
Yaron, Zvi. (1979) The Philosophy of Rabbi Kook (Jerusalem: The World Zionist Organization).
Yavuz, H. (1999a) “Towards an Islamic Liberalism? The Nursi Movement and Fethullah Gülen”, The
Middle East Journal, vol. 4.
Yavuz, H. (1999b) “Search for a New Contract in Turkey: Fethullah Gülen, the Virtue Party and the
Kurds”, SAIS review, 19:1, 114-143.
Yavuz, H. (2003a) Islamic Political Identity in Turkey (London: Oxford University Press)
Yavuz, H. (2003b) “Turkey’s Puritans”, in H. Yavuz and J. L. Esposito, (eds) Turkish Islam and the
Secular State: The Gülen Movement (New York: Syracuse University Press), 19-47.
Yavuz, H. (2003c) “The Gülen Movement”, in Hakan Yavuz and John L. Esposito (eds) Turkish islam
and the secular state (New York: Syracuse University Press).

--- Sayfa 531 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

529
Yavuz, H. and Esposito, J. L. (eds) (2003d) Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement
(Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press).
Yavuz, H. and Esposito, J. L. (2003e) “Islam in Turkey: retreat from the secular path?”, in Hakan Yavuz
and John L. Esposito (eds)Turkish Islam and the Secular State: The Gülen Movement (Syracuse,
New York: Syracuse University Press), xiii-xxiii.
Yavuz, H. (2003f) “The case of Turkey”, Daedalus (special issue on secularism & religion), June.
Yavuz, H. (2004) “Is there a Turkish Islam? The Emergence of Convergence and Consensus”, Journal of
Muslim Minority Affairs, 24:2.
Yavuz, H. (2004, July 21), Interview, “The Gülen Movement: a modern expression of Turkish Islam”,
Religioscope.
Yazdi, M. (2001) “The History and resource of Religious Pluralism”, in H. Mohammadi (ed.)
Interpretation of Religion, (in Farsi) (Qom: Zafar Publication).
Yildirim, Y. (2005) “Debating Moderate Islam”, American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences, 22:3
(Book Reviews, review of M. F. Gülen, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance).
Yilmaz, I. (2000a) “Muslim legal pluralism in asr al-darura: Surfing on the inter-madhhab-net.”
Prsented at the III International conference on Islamic Legal Studies, Madhhab, Harvard
University Law School (4-7 May).
Yilmaz, Ihsan (2000b) “Changing Turkish-Muslim Discourses on Modernity, West and Dialogue”. Paper
presented at the Congress of the International Association of Middle East Studies, Berlin (October
5-7).
Yilmaz, I. (2001) “Renewing the religious thought and practice while transforming society: Fethullah
Gülen and Tajdid”. Presented at the Islamic Modernities Conference: Fethullah Gülen, the Man and
His Movement, Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding, Georgetown University, Washington
DC, (26-27 April).
Yilmaz, I. (2002) “Dynamic Legal Pluralism in England: The Challenge of Postmodern Muslim Legality
to Legal Modernity”. In: Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies.  Spring 2002. Vol. 28 No. 2.
Yilmaz, I. (2003) “Ijtihad and Tajdid by Conduct: the Gülen Movement”, in: H.Yavuz & J. Esposito
(Eds) Turkish Islam and the Secular State (New York, Syracuse University Press) 208-237.
Yilmaz, I. (2004) “Marriage Solemnization among Turks in Britain: The Emergence of a Hybrid Anglo-
Muslim Turkish Law” in Journal of Muslim Affairs, Vol. 24, No. 1, April 2004.
Yilmaz, I. (2005a) “Inter-Madhhab Surfing, Neo-Ijtihad, and Faith-Based Movement Leaders” in  The
Islamic School of Law, Evolution, Devolution and Progress (edited by Peri Bearman, R. Peters, F.E.
Vogel) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 191-206.
Yilmaz, I. (2005b) “State, Law, Civil Society and Islam in Contemporary Society”, The Muslim World,
385-412.
Yilmaz, I. (2005c) Muslim Laws, Politics and Society in Modern Nation States: Dynamic Legal
Pluralisms in England, Turkey and Pakistan. Aldershot: Ashgate.

--- Sayfa 532 ---
P E A C E F U L    C O E X I S T E N C E

 Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world

530
Yilmaz, I. (2006) “Panacea to Neo-Assassin Terror: Nursi's Discourse & Praxis”. Presented at the Islam
in Contemporary Turkey: Perspectives of Bediuzzaman Said Nursi Conference. John Carroll
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA (November 5 – 6).
Yilmaz, I. (2007a) “Abant Platform, Alevis and Diaspora”, Today’s Zaman,.23 March 2007.
Yilmaz, I. (2007b) “Rumi’s Renewed Social Innovation And Pluralist Activism Today”, Paper presented
at the International Mawlana Jalaluddin-i Rumi Conference, Tajikistan Academy of Sciences,
Dushanbe, Tajikistan. 5-7 September 2007.
Yilmaz, I. et al. (eds) (2007) Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(Leeds: Leeds Metropolitan University Press).
Yurdakul, G. (2006) “State, Polical Parties and Immigrant Elites: Turkish Immigrant Associations in
Berlin”, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 32:3, 435-453.
Yuksel, N. M.(2000) “Fethullah Gülen örgütu hakkında iddianame”. At:
http://www.belgenet.com/dava/Gülendava_04.html#1 (last accessed June 5, 2007).
Zaehner, R. C. (1977) “Zoroastrianism in Zaehner”, in R. C. Zaehner (ed.) The Concise Encyclopedia of
Living Faiths (London: Hutchinson).
Zaman, M. Q. (2002) The Ulama in Contemporary Islam: custodians of change (Princeton: Princeton
University Pres).
Zarembo, A. and Ismail, G. (2001, October 15) “A Merger of Mosque and State”, Newsweek, 16.
Retrieved August 19 2006, from Academic Search Premier database.
Zebiri, K. (1997) Muslims and Christians. Face to face (Oxford: One world).
Zizek, S. (2002) Welcome to the Desert of the Real!: Five Essays on September 11 and Related Dates
(London: Verso).
Zizek, S. (2004) Iraq: The Borrowed Kettle (London: Verso).
Zizek, S. (2006a) “Antinomies of tolerant reason: A blood-dimmed tide is loosed”. At:
http://www.lacan.com/zizantinomies.htm (last accessed July 30, 2007).
Zizek, S. (2006b) “A glance into the archives of Islam”. At: http://www.lacan.com/zizarchives.htm (last
accessed July 30, 2007).
Zizek, S. (2006c) “Defenders of the faith”, The New York Times, Editorial Desk, 12.
Zizek, S. (2007a) “Denying the facts, finding the truth”, The New York Times, Editorial Desk, 17.
Zizek, S. (2007b) “Knight of the living dead”, The New York Times, Editorial Desk, 13.
Zubaida, S. (1996) “Turkish Islam and National Identity”, Middle East Report, 10-15.

--- Sayfa 533 ---
The need for peaceful coexistence among the people of
various cultures has long been recognized. The much
publicized failures in relations in recent years, which are
both a cause and effect of the situation in many parts of
the world should spur all right-minded people to
redouble their efforts to sustain the hope for peaceful
coexistence.
Fethullah Gülen is an Islamic scholar and peace activist
whose ideas have inspired many people to undertake
charitable works, especially in education and dialogue.
They now constitute one of the most effective and
influential worldwide civic movements of the 21st
century. They work to construct a culture of harmony and
peace by founding non-denominational educational
institutions and so encourage intercultural dialogue and
understanding. Their work makes a practical
contribution to constructive, positive relations between
the West and the East, the North and the South, with
special focus on issues such as democracy,
multiculturalism, globalization, citizenship, and
intercultural dialogue in the context of secular
modernity.

By focussing on Gülen’s ideas and practice, the
Conference aims to explore the appeal and impact of the
Gülen movement’s worldwide initiatives to help people
respond creatively to the profound social changes that
are taking root everywhere.
Peaceful Coexistence
Fethullah Gülen's initiatives in the contemporary world
Editors
Dr Ihsan Yilmaz
London Centre for Social Studies, UK
Prof Khalid Abou El Fadl
University of California, USA
Mr M. Jean-Michel Cros
French National Center for Scientific Research,
France
Prof Eric Geoffroy
University Marc Bloch Strasbourg, France
Prof Andreas Kinneging
Leiden University, the Netherlands
Prof Johnston McMaster
Irish School of Ecumenics, Belfast, Ireland
Prof Thomas Michel
The Vatican
Prof Paolo Naso
La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy
Prof Ton Notten
Rotterdam University, the Netherlands
& Vrije University Brussel, Belgium
Prof Klaus Otte
Universities in Basel, Mainz and Frankfurt,
Germany
Prof Emilio Platti
Catholic Leuven University, Belgium
Prof Simon Robinson
Leeds Metropolitan University, UK
Prof Karel Steenbrink
Utrecht University, the Netherlands
Prof David Thomas
University of Birmingham, UK
Dr Pim Valkenberg
Radboud University, the Netherlands
& Loyola College Maryland, USA
Prof Paul Weller
University of Derby, UK
Prof Anton Wessels
Free University Amsterdam, the Netherlands
organisers:
Leeds Metropolitan
University, UK
9 7 8 0 9 5 5 5 0 1 7 7 7
ISBN 0-9555017-7-67