--- Sayfa 2 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 3 ---
POLITICAL GAME THEORY
Political Game Theory is a self-contained introduction to game theory and
its applications to political science. The book presents choice theory, social
choice theory, static and dynamic games of complete information, static
and dynamic games of incomplete information, repeated games, bargain-
ingtheory,mechanismdesign,andamathematicalappendixcoveringlogic,
real analysis, calculus, and probability theory. The methods employed have
many applications in various subdisciplines including comparative poli-
tics, international relations, and American politics. Political Game Theory
is tailored to students without extensive backgrounds in mathematics and
traditional economics; however, many special sections present technical
material appropriate for more advanced students. A large number of ex-
ercises are also provided for practice with the skills and techniques dis-
cussed.
Nolan McCarty is Associate Dean and Professor of Politics and Public
Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University. His re-
cent publications include Polarized America: The Dance of Ideology and
Unequal Riches (2006, with Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal) and The
Realignment of National Politics and the Income Distribution (1997, with
Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal), as well as many articles in periodicals
such as the American Political Science Review and the American Journal
of Political Science.
Adam Meirowitz is Associate Professor of Politics and Jonathan Dicken-
son Bicentennial Preceptor at Princeton University. He has published in
periodicals such as the American Political Science Review, the American
Journal of Political Science, Games and Economic Behavior, and Social
Choice and Welfare.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
ANALYTICAL METHODS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
Analytical Methods for Social Research presents texts on empirical and for-
mal methods for the social sciences. Volumes in the series address both the
theoretical underpinnings of analytical techniques and their application in
social research. Some series volumes are broad in scope, cutting across a
number of disciplines. Others focus mainly on methodological applications
within speciﬁc ﬁelds such as political science, sociology, demography, and
public health. The series serves a mix of students and researchers in the
social sciences and statistics.
Series Editors:
R. Michael Alvarez, California Institute of Technology
Nathaniel L. Beck, New York University
Lawrence L. Wu, New York University
Other Titles in the Series:
Event History Modeling: A Guide for Social Scientists, by Janet M.
Box-Steffensmeier and Bradford S. Jones
Ecological Inference: New Methodological Strategies, edited by Gary
King, Ori Rosen, and Martin A. Tanner
Spatial Models of Parliamentary Voting, by Keith T. Poole
Essential Mathematics for Political and Social Research, by Jeff Gill
Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models, by
Andrew Gelman and Jennifer Hill

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Political Game Theory
AN INTRODUCTION
NOLAN McCARTY
Princeton University
ADAM MEIROWITZ
Princeton University

--- Sayfa 8 ---
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13
978-0-521-84107-8
ISBN-13
978-0-511-26887-8
© Nolan McCarty and Adam Meirowitz 2007
2006
Information on this title: www.cambridg e.org /9780521841078
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
ISBN-10
0-511-26887-4
ISBN-10
0-521-84107-0
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
eBook (EBL)
eBook (EBL)
hardback

--- Sayfa 9 ---
To Moms and Dads, Liz, Janis, Lachlan, and Delaney

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Contents
Acknowledgments
page xiii
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.
Organization of the Book
3
2
The Theory of Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.
Finite Sets of Actions and Outcomes
7
2.
Continuous Choice Spaces∗
11
3.
Utility Theory
18
4.
Utility Representations on Continuous Choice Spaces∗
20
5.
Spatial Preferences
21
6.
Exercises
25
3
Choice Under Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
1.
The Finite Case
27
2.
Risk Preferences
38
3.
Learning
46
4.
Critiques of Expected Utility Theory
51
5.
Time Preferences
57
6.
Exercises
62
4
Social Choice Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
1.
The Open Search
66
2.
Preference Aggregation Rules
68
3.
Collective Choice
76
4.
Manipulation of Choice Functions
82
5.
Exercises
85
5
Games in the Normal Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
1.
The Normal Form
89
ix

--- Sayfa 12 ---
x
Contents
2.
Solutions to Normal Form Games
93
3.
Application: The Hotelling Model of Political Competition
101
4.
Existence of Nash Equilibria
107
5.
Dominance and Mixed Strategies
113
6.
Calculating Nash Equilibria
115
7.
Application: Interest Group Contributions
117
8.
Application: International Externalities
119
9.
Computing Equilibria with Constrained Optimization
121
10.
Proving the Existence of Nash Equilibria**
123
11.
Comparative Statics
126
12.
Reﬁning Nash Equilibria
138
13.
Application: Private Provision of Public Goods
140
14.
Exercises
145
6
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
1.
Formal Deﬁnitions
152
2.
Application: Trade Restrictions
154
3.
Application: Jury Voting
156
4.
Application: Jury Voting with a Continuum of Signals
159
5.
Application: Public Goods and Incomplete Information
161
6.
Application: Uncertainty About Candidate Preferences
164
7.
Application: Campaigns, Contests, and Auctions
166
8.
Existence of Bayesian Nash Equilibria
168
9.
Exercises
169
7
Extensive Form Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
1.
Backward Induction
175
2.
Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
177
3.
The Single-Deviation Principle
184
4.
A Digression on Subgame Perfection and Perfect Equilibria
185
5.
Application: Agenda Control
186
6.
Application: A Model of Power Transitions
192
7.
Application: A Model of Transitions to Democracy
193
8.
Application: A Model of Coalition Formation
197
9.
Exercises
201
8
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information . . . . . . . . . . . 204
1.
Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
208
2.
Signaling Games
214
3.
Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
219
4.
Application: Information and Legislative Organization
227
5.
Application: Informational Lobbying
232
6.
Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium*
236
7.
Exercises
248

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Contents
xi
9
Repeated Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
1.
The Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma
252
2.
The Grim Trigger Equilibrium
253
3.
Tit-for-Tat Strategies
256
4.
Intermediate Punishment Strategies
258
5.
The Folk Theorem
260
6.
Application: Interethnic Cooperation
263
7.
Application: Trade Wars
269
8.
Exercises
273
10
Bargaining Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
1.
The Nash Bargaining Solution
275
2.
Noncooperative Bargaining
281
3.
Majority-Rule Bargaining Under a Closed Rule
286
4.
The Baron-Ferejohn Model Under Open Rule
291
5.
Bargaining with Incomplete Information
294
6.
Application: Veto Bargaining
296
7.
Application: Crisis Bargaining
307
8.
Exercises
318
11
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
1.
An Example
321
2.
The Mechanism Design Problem
323
3.
Application: Polling
326
4.
Auction Theory
328
5.
Application: Electoral Contests and All-Pay Auctions*
334
6.
Incentive Compatibility and Individual Rationality
339
7.
Constrained Mechanism Design
342
8.
Mechanism Design and Signaling Games
361
9.
Exercises
366
12
Mathematical Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 369
1.
Mathematical Statements and Proofs
370
2.
Sets and Functions
372
3.
The Real Number System
376
4.
Points and Sets
378
5.
Continuity of Functions
380
6.
Correspondences**
383
7.
Calculus
384
8.
Probability Theory
404
Bibliography
417
Index
423

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Acknowledgments
The origin of this book is the utter inability of either of its authors to
write legibly on a blackboard (or any other surface, for that matter).
To save our students from what would have been the most severe form
of pedagogical torture, we were forced to commit our lecture notes to
an electronic format. Use of this medium also compensated for our
inability to spell without the aid of a spell checker.1 Ultimately we
decided that all of the late nights spent typesetting game theory notes
should not go in vain. So we undertook to turn them into this book,
which, of course, led to more late nights spent typing. We hope these
weren’t wasted either.
We are most grateful to our students at Columbia and Princeton,
on whom we inﬂicted early versions of our notes and manuscript.
Puzzled looks and panicked ofﬁce hours helped us learn how to
convey game theory to students of politics. We also beneﬁted from
early conversations with Chris Achen, Scott Ashworth, Larry Bar-
tels, Cathy Hafer, Keith Krehbiel, David Lewis, Kris Ramsay, and
Thomas Romer on what a book on political game theory ought to
look like. Along the way Stuart Jordan and Natasha Zharinova have
provided valuable assistance and feedback. We especially thank John
Londregan and Mark Fey for noting mistakes in earlier drafts. Finally,
our greatest debts are to those who taught us political game theory:
1 Our misspelling styles are quite distinctive, however. For a given word, McCarty uses
completely random spellings whereas Meirowitz consistently misspells the word in
exactly the same way.
xiii

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xiv
Acknowledgments
David Austen-Smith, Jeffrey Banks, David Baron, Bruce Bueno de
Mesquito, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal.
Nolan McCarty
Adam Meirowitz
Princeton, NJ

--- Sayfa 17 ---
1 Introduction
In a rather short period of time, game theory has become one of
the most powerful analytical tools in the study of politics. From their
earliest applications in electoral and legislative behavior, game theo-
retic models have proliferated in such diverse areas as international
security, ethnic cooperation, and democratization. Indeed all ﬁelds of
political science have beneﬁted from important contributions origi-
nating in game theoretic models. Rarely does an issue of the American
Political Science Review, the American Journal of Political Science, or
International Organization appear without at least one article formu-
lating a new game theoretic model of politics or one providing an
empirical test of existing models.
Nevertheless, applications of game theory have not developed as fast
in political science as they have in economics. One of the consequences
of this uneven development is that most political scientists who wish
to learn game theory are forced to rely on textbooks written by and
for economists. Although there are many excellent economic game
theory texts, their treatments of the subject are often not well suited to
the needs of political scientists. First and perhaps most important, the
applications and topics are generally those of interest to economists.
For example, it is not always obvious to novice political scientists what
duopoly or auction theory tells us about political phenomena. Second,
there are topics such as voting theory that are indispensable to political
game theorists but receive scant coverage in economics texts. Third,
many economics treatments presume some level of exposure to ideas
in classical price theory. Consequently, the entry barriers to political
scientists include not only mathematics but also knowledge of demand
curves, marginal rates of substitution, and the like.
1

--- Sayfa 18 ---
2
Introduction
Certainly, there have been a few texts by and for political scien-
tists such as those by Ordeshook (1986) and Morrow (1994). We feel,
however, that each is dated both in terms of the applications and in
terms of the needs of modern political science. Ordeshook remains an
outstanding treatment of social choice and spatial theory, yet it was
written well before the emergence of noncooperative theory as the
dominant paradigm in political game theory. Morrow provides an ac-
cessible introduction to the tools of noncooperative game theory, but
the analytical level falls short of the contemporary needs of students.
Further, it has been a decade since its publication – a decade in which
there have been hundreds of important articles and books deploying
the tools of game theory. In a more recent series of books, Austen-
Smith and Banks (1999 and 2005) address part of this need. The ﬁrst
book, Positive Political Theory I, provides a thorough treatment of so-
cial choice theory, a topic to which we devote only one chapter. The
second book, Positive Political Theory II, deals with strategy and insti-
tutions, but presumes a knowledge of game theory atypical of ﬁrst-year
students in political science. It is also organized by substantive topics
rather than game theoretic ones.
So we have several goals in writing this book. First, we want to write
a textbook on political game theory instead of a book on abstract or
economic game theory. Consequently, we focus on applications of in-
terest to political scientists and present topics unique to political anal-
ysis. Second, in writing a book for political scientists, we want to be
cognizant of the diversity of backgrounds and interests of young po-
litical scientists. We recognize that most doctoral students in political
science enter graduate school with limited mathematical and model-
ing backgrounds. We feel, however, that it does not serve even those
students to ignore the mathematical rigor and key theoretical concepts
on which contemporary political models are based. For students need-
ing more remediation, we include a detailed mathematical appendix
covering some necessary tools ranging from set theory and analysis to
basic optimization and probability theory. Some students enter gradu-
ate study in political science with stronger backgrounds in mathematics
and economics. We want our book to be useful to this audience as well.
Thus, we provide in-depth coverage of some of the more difﬁcult and
subtle concepts. We include a number of advanced sections (denoted
by * or **) that provide more detail about the analytical and mathe-
matical structure of the models we encounter. These sections can be

--- Sayfa 19 ---
1. Organization of the Book
3
safely skipped upon ﬁrst readings by those not quite ready for the more
technical material.
1. Organization of the Book
Organizationally, our book departs from standard treatments, because
it includes a number of topics that are either directly relevant for politi-
cal science or designed for remediation in areas in which students of po-
litical science have limited backgrounds. Chapter 2 is a self-contained
exposition of classical choice theory under conditions of certainty. In
this chapter, we introduce the basic ideas of preferences and utility
theory. We prove a few key results. Some of these proofs are quite
simple, and others appeal to more advanced mathematics and appear
in starred sections. The focus of this chapter, however, is on providing
the intuition and language of rational choice theory. We also include a
section on spatial or Euclidean preferences. This class of preferences
plays a central role in voting theory and its application to electoral and
legislative politics.
In Chapter 3, we describe how game theorists model choices under
uncertainty. The focus is the standard von Neumann-Morgenstern ex-
pected utility model, but we also consider some of the most serious
criticisms leveled against it. In addition to a standard treatment of risk
preferences, we discuss the special implications for risk when actors
have spatial preferences.
Chapter 4 provides a cursory review of social choice theory. The
chapter is not intended to be a replacement for full-length texts such
as those by Peter Ordeshook (1986) and David Austen-Smith and Jeff
Banks (1999). Instead it is primarily a reference for those ideas and
concepts that have become integral parts of formal political science.
These include Arrow’s impossibility theorem, the emptiness of the
majority core, and the role of single-peaked preferences. This chapter
also presents Gibbard-Sattherwaite’s theorem about the ubiquity of
strategic behavior in social decisions.
Chapter 5 begins our treatment of the heart of contemporary
formal political theory: noncooperative game theory. We examine
normal form games with complete information and present the most
fundamental solution concepts, dominance and Nash equilibrium. Our
theoretical development is fairly standard, but we include a number
of important political applications. We review the standard Downsian

--- Sayfa 20 ---
4
Introduction
model of electoral competition as well as the extensions developed by
Donald Wittman and Randy Calvert. We also present several mod-
els of private contributions to public goods based on the work of
Thomas Palfrey and Howard Rosenthal. In Chapter 6, we extend the
normal form model to cases where agents are uncertain about the pay-
offs associated with different strategy combinations. After presenting
solution concepts for such games, Bayesian Nash equilibria, we con-
sider incomplete information versions of many of the models reviewed
in Chapter 5. These comparisons aid understanding of the strategic im-
plications of uncertainty.
Chapter 7 considers dynamic, multistage games of complete
information and develops the notion of subgame perfection. Here we
focus on a number of applications from legislative politics, democratic
transitions, coalition formation, and international crisis bargaining. In
Chapter 8, we consider dynamic games in which some players are im-
perfectly informed about the payoffs of different strategic choices.
After explaining how these models are solved, we explore applica-
tions drawn from legislative politics, campaign ﬁnance, and interna-
tional bargaining. Signaling games, which have increasingly important
applications in political science, are the focus of much of this chapter.
Chapter 9 reviews the theory of repeated games and its application
to political science. The role of time discounting and the structure of
folk theorems in repeated games are the primary focus of the chapter.
Applications include interethnic cooperation and trade wars.
In Chapter 10 we consider applications of bargaining theory.
Beginning with the canonical models of Nash and Rubinstein, we fo-
cus on the majority-rule bargaining game developed by Baron and
Ferejohn. We then consider several examples of bargaining with in-
complete information.
In Chapter 11, we illustrate the mechanism design approach to
modeling institutions. Our focus is the selection of games that induce
equilibrium behavior that meets certain prespeciﬁed goals. After pre-
senting the revelation principle and incentive compatibility conditions,
we trace out a number of recent applications to electoral politics and
organizational design. Building on Chapter 8, we then draw connec-
tions between signaling games and mechanism design.
Finally, to keep the book as self-contained as possible, Chapter 12
provides a review of all of the mathematics used. Topics that are inte-
gral to the development of key theoretical results or tools for analyzing

--- Sayfa 21 ---
1. Organization of the Book
5
applications are drawn from the ﬁelds of set theory, real analysis, lin-
ear algebra, calculus, optimization, and probability theory. Indeed this
chapter may serve as a basis for review or self-study. Students inter-
ested in working at the frontier of political game theory are encouraged
to seek additional course work in order to gain comfort with the math-
ematical concepts summarized in this appendix.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
2 The Theory of Choice
Much of political game theory is predicated on the idea that people
rationally pursue goals subject to constraints imposed by physical re-
sources and the expected behavior of other actors. The assumption
of rationality is often controversial. Indeed one of the most lively de-
bates in the social sciences is the role of rationality and intentionality
as a predictor of behavior. Nevertheless, we omit the debate between
Homo economicus and Homo sociologicus and jump immediately into
the classical model of rational choice.
For almost all of our purposes, it is sufﬁcient to deﬁne rationality on
a basis of two simple ideas:
(1) Confronted with any two options, denoted x and y, a person can
determine whether he does not prefer option x to option y, does
not prefer y to x, or does not prefer either. When preferences
satisfy this property, they are complete.
(2) Confronted with three options x, y, and z, if a person does not
prefer y to x and does not prefer zto y, then she must not prefer
z to x. Preferences satisfying this property are transitive.
Roughly speaking, our working deﬁnition of rational behavior is be-
havior consistent with complete and transitive preferences. Sometimes
we call such behavior thinly rational, as properties 1 and 2 contain little
or no substantive content about human desires. Thin rationality con-
trasts with thick rationality whereby analysts specify concrete goals
such as wealth, status, or fame. The thin characterization of rationality
is consistent with a very large number of these substantive goals. In
principal, thinly rational agents could be motivated by any number of
factors including ideology, normative values, or even religion. As long
6

--- Sayfa 23 ---
1. Finite Sets of Actions and Outcomes
7
as these belief systems produce complete and transitive orderings over
personal and social outcomes, we can use the classical theory of choice
to model behavior.
Although it is appealing to avoid explicit assumptions about sub-
stantive goals, it is often necessary to make stronger assumptions about
preferences. For example, a model might assume that an interest group
wishes to maximize the wealth of its members or that a politician wishes
to maximize her reelection chances. In subsequent chapters, we explore
models that make such assumptions about agent preferences. But ra-
tional models may be just as useful in developing models of activists
who wish to minimize environmental degradation or the number of
abortions for principled, nonmaterial reasons.
In the following sections, we develop the classical theory of choice
under certainty. By certainty, we mean simply that each agent has suf-
ﬁcient information about her available set of actions that she can per-
fectlypredicttheconsequencesofeach.Laterweexaminechoiceunder
uncertainty – where the actor’s lack of information forces her to choose
among actions with uncertain consequences.
1. Finite Sets of Actions and Outcomes
We begin with the simplest description of a choice problem: an agent
chooses an action from a ﬁnite list. We denote these alternatives as
a set A= {a1, . . . , ak}. A leader involved in an international crisis
might face the following set of alternatives: A= {send troops, ne-
gotiate, do nothing}. An American voter might choose among A=
{vote Democrat, vote Republican, abstain}.
As mentioned, we assume, for now, that agents have complete
information – they are sufﬁciently knowledgeable that they perfectly
predict the consequences of each action. To formalize this idea, we
deﬁne outcome sets as X = {x1, . . . , xn}. In our crisis example, let
X = {win major concessions and lose troops, win minor concessions,
status quo}. The assumption of certainty implies that each action a ∈A
maps directly onto one and only one x ∈X. Formally, certainty im-
plies that there exists a function x : A→X that maps each action
into a speciﬁc outcome. For convenience, we also assume that all of
the outcomes listed in X are feasible – each outcome is the conse-
quence of at least one action. Thus, xi is feasible if there exists an
a ∈Asuch that x (a) = xi. With certainty and feasibility, it makes no
difference whether we speak of an agent’s preferences over actions or

--- Sayfa 24 ---
8
The Theory of Choice
his preferences over outcomes. Consequently, we concentrate on the
agent’s preferences over outcomes. In Chapter 3, the assumption of
uncertainty or incomplete information makes the distinction between
actions and outcomes relevant.
To generate predictions about choice behavior, we require a more
formal notion of preferences. Weak preference is captured by a binary
relation R where the notation xi Rxj means that outcome xj is not
preferred to policy xi. If xi Rxj, xi is “weakly” preferred to xj.1 By way
of analogy, note that R is similar to the binary relation ≥(greater than
or equal) that operates on real numbers.
Beyond the weak preference relation R, we deﬁne two other impor-
tant binary relations: strict preference and indifference.
DEFINITION 2.1 For any x, y ∈X, xPy (x is strictly preferred to y) if
and only if xRy and not yRx. Alternatively, xIy (x is indifferent to y) if
and only if xRy and yRx.
Accordingly, P denotes strict preference and I denotes indifference.
Returning to the analogy of ≥, the strict relation derived from ≥is
equivalent to the relation > and the indifference relation derived from
≥is equivalent to the relation =.
Although preferences expressed in the form of binary relations are
useful concepts, we are ultimately interested in behavior. Given a set
of preferences, an agent’s behavior is rational so long as she selects an
outcome that she values at least as much as any other. Consequently,
a rational agent chooses an x∗∈X (read x∗in X ) such that x∗Ry for
every y ∈X. Without adding more structure to preferences, however,
there is no guarantee that such an optimal outcome exists. We now turn
to the conditions on Xand Rto ensure that such a best choice is mean-
ingful and well deﬁned. We begin with the following formal deﬁnition.
DEFINITION 2.2 For a weak preference relation R on a choice set X,
the maximal set M(R, X) ⊂X is deﬁned as M(R, X) = {x ∈X : xRy ∀
y ∈X} (read as M(R, X) is the set of x’s in X such that xRy for all y
in X ).
The fundamental tenet of rationality is that agents choose outcomes
from the maximal set. Of course, this requirement is meaningful only if
1 Formally, a binary relation R is a subset of X × X such that if (x, y) ∈R then xRy.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
1. Finite Sets of Actions and Outcomes
9
the maximal set contains at least one outcome. Consequently, we are in-
terested in the properties of preferences that guarantee that M(R, X )
is nonempty.
The easiest way for the maximal set to be empty is for R to be silent
between a pair of outcomes. If neither xRy or yRx, it is not clear what
a rational choice is. Two conditions ensure that all elements of X are
ordered.
DEFINITION 2.3 A binary relation R on X is
(1) complete if for all x, y ∈X with x̸ = y, either xRy or yRx or both.
(2) reﬂexive if for all x ∈X, xRx.
Completeness means simply that the agent can compare any two out-
comes. This may not be a terribly controversial assumption, but we all
know people who cannot seem to make up their minds.2 Reﬂexivity is a
more technical condition. Some authors choose to deﬁne completeness
in a slightly different manner that also captures reﬂexivity.3
Although these properties rule out the noncomparability problem,
completeness and reﬂexivity do not ensure that rational choices exist.
We also must rule out the following problem: xPy, yPz, and zPx. The
problem is that there is no reasonable choice – why choose y when
you can choose x, why choose x when you can choose z, and why
choose zwhen you can choose y? Each of the following restrictions on
preferences resolves this problem.
DEFINITION 2.4 A binary relation R on X is
(1) transitive if xRy and yRz implies xRz for all x, y, z ∈X.
(2) quasi-transitive if xPy and yPz implies xPz for all x, y, z ∈X.
(3) acyclic if on any ﬁnite set {x1, x2 . . . , xn} ∈X xiPxi+1 for all i < n
implies x1Rxn.
Note the subtle differences among these deﬁnitions. Transitivity and
quasi transitivity may seem innocuous, but they are strong assumptions
that might be violated even by very reasonable behavior. For example,
2 Many economists and psychologists, however, have been concerned about the
assumption of completeness. A theory of choice without this condition has been
derived.
3 For all x, y ∈X, either xRy or yRx or both.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
10
The Theory of Choice
suppose X is a set of 1,000 different bottles of beer. Beer b1 has had
one drop of beer replaced with one drop of plain water, b2 has had
two drops replaced, and so on, to b1,000. Unless one is a master brewer,
b1I b2, and b2I b3, . . . , and b999I b1,000. Because xIy implies xRy (by the
deﬁnition of I ), then b1,000Rb999, . . . , b2Rb1. If the relation is transitive,
we derive b1,000Rb1. But clearly, b1Pb1,000.4 The assumption of acyclicity
does not suffer from this problem, however, and is typically sufﬁcient
for our purposes. Despite the problems associated with transitivity, we
maintain it as an assumption (rather than acyclicity) to simplify many
of the results that follow.
The properties of completeness, reﬂexivity, and transitivity together
form the basis of a weak ordering.
DEFINITION 2.5 Given a set X, a weak ordering is a binary relation that
is complete, reﬂexive, and transitive.
Our recurring analogy of ≥satisﬁes all of the conditions for a weak
ordering. We now state our ﬁrst result.
THEOREM 2.1 If Xis ﬁnite and Ris a weak ordering then M(R, X )̸ = ∅.
Theorem 2.1 guarantees that there is a best choice so long as the
choice set is ﬁnite and that R is complete, reﬂexive, and transitive. Its
proof follows.
Proof Let X be ﬁnite and R be complete, reﬂexive, and transitive. We
establish the result by induction (see Mathematical Induction in the
Mathematical Appendix) on the number of elements in X.
Step 1: If X has one element, X = {x}. From reﬂexivity xRx,
M(R, X ) = {x}.
Step 2: We show that if the statement of the theorem is true that for
any set X ′ with n elements and weak ordering R′ on X ′ then it must
be true for any X with n + 1 elements and weak ordering R on X.
Proof of Step 2: Assume that M(R′, X ′)̸ = ∅for any X ′ with n ele-
ments and weak ordering R′. Now consider a set Xwith n + 1 elements
and any weak ordering R. For an arbitrary x ∈X, X = X ′ ∪{x} with
X ′ a set having nelements. Let R′ denote the restriction of Rto X ′ (i.e.,
4 This is approximately the difference between Guinness and Coors Light.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
2. Continuous Choice Spaces∗
11
R ∩

X ′ × X ′
). By assumption M(R′, X ′)̸ = ∅. So for an arbitrary
y ∈M(R′, X ′) either yRx or xRy or both by completeness.
If yRx, then yRz for all z ∈X ′ ∪{x} and thus y ∈M(R, X ) and we
have proved step 2. Now assume xRy. Note that y ∈M(R′, X ′) implies
that yRzfor any z ∈X ′. Thus for any z ∈X ′, xRy and yRz. Because R
is transitive, xRzfor any z ∈X ′. This implies that xRw for any w ∈X ′.
Thus x ∈M(R, X), and we have proved step 2.
By mathematical induction, steps 1 and 2 establish the theorem. □
It turns out that a weak preference ordering is unnecessary for es-
tablishing that M(R, X) is nonempty. The statement of this Theorem
follows. Because the proof is a bit more complicated, we leave it as an
exercise.
THEOREM 2.2 Let X be ﬁnite and R be a complete and reﬂexive binary
relation on X. M(R, S )̸ = ∅on any S ⊂X (except S = ∅) if and only if
R is acyclic.
Even with a ﬁnite choice space and no uncertainty the theory of
choice is fairly rich. Austen-Smith and Banks (1999) is a good ﬁrst
source for students interested in further study. In the next, more tech-
nical, section, we consider rational choice when the set of outcomes
is not ﬁnite. We derive an analog to Theorem 2.1 for such choice sets.
Although the results are conceptually similar, additional mathematical
structure on the choice sets and preferences is required.
2. Continuous Choice Spaces∗
2.1. Nonemptiness of M(R, X ). The assumption of a ﬁnite choice
space is crucial for the proof of Theorem 2.1 because it allows us to use
mathematical induction. For an inﬁnite number of choices, however,
this approach does not work. If agents choose from a continuum (e.g.,
the set of real numbers denoted R or the set [0, 1] = {x ∈R : x ≥0
and x ≤1}), we need more structure on preferences to ensure that
M(R, S)̸ = ∅. Two simple examples demonstrate how matters can go
wrong.
EXAMPLE 2.1 Let X = (0, 1) (or let X = R1) and let R be equivalent
to ≥so that xRy if and only if x ≥y. The set M(≥, X ) is empty.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
12
The Theory of Choice
To see why M(≥, (0, 1)) is empty, note that for every x ∈X there
exists some y ∈X for which y > x. There is no x such that xRy for all
y ∈X. That (0, 1) has no biggest element is the key to this example.
If X were a closed interval such as [0, 1], however, there would be no
problem: M(≥, [0, 1]) = {1}. This is a strong hint that the nonemptiness
of the maximal set may depend on the choice set’s being “closed.”
Another example provides additional clues.
EXAMPLE 2.2 Let
X = [0, 1]
and
deﬁne
R as
follows:
xRy
if
max{x, y} ≤1/2 and x ≥y or if min{x, y} > 1/2 and x ≤y or if
x > 1/2 and y ≤1/2. The set M(R, X ) is empty.
No element of [0, 1/2] is a member of M(R, X ) – any element of
[0, 1/2] is defeated by every element of (1/2, 1] . Elements of (1/2, 1]
also cannot be elements of M(R, X ) because the preference ordering
increases as the choice gets closer to 1/2 but 1/2 is not in this set. Thus,
the problem is quite similar to that of the ﬁrst example. In this example,
however, the problem is not with X; it is a closed interval. Instead, the
problem is with R. It jumps at 1/2. Outcomes slightly less than or equal
1/2 are among the least preferred, but those slightly greater are among
the most preferred. It is this discontinuity in preferences that generates
the empty maximal set.
Before turning these examples and intuitions into general axioms,
we review a few mathematical concepts.5 We begin with the assump-
tion that preferences are deﬁned on n-dimensional Euclidean space
and consider choices from subsets, X ⊂Rn. A point in such a space is
written as a vector x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) where each coordinate xi is a
point in R1.
One of our primary concerns is whether the set X is open or closed.
Openness can be demonstrated with the simplest example of R1. A set
A⊂R1 is open if for every point x ∈A there is some number ε > 0
such that y ∈Afor any y ∈X satisfying |x −y| < ε. Therefore, a set
is open if all the points close to any given point in the set are also
elements of the set. Clearly, the set (0, 1) is open. For each point in
the set, there are some points higher and some points lower that are
also in the set. Thus, for any point x ∈(0, 1), there is a number ε such
5 More precisely we use a few topological concepts. Students interested in further study
of choice theory would be well served by a tour of the Mathematical Appendix to
this book or, better yet, a text on real analysis. An approachable introductory text is
Gaughan (1993). A more complete text is A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin (1970).

--- Sayfa 29 ---
2. Continuous Choice Spaces∗
13
that x −ε and x + ε are also in (0, 1). A set is closed if its complement
is open. Therefore, because (0, 1) is open, (−∞, 0] ∪[1, ∞) is closed.
Intervals such as [0, 1] are also closed. Some sets may be neither open
nor closed such as [0, 1).
To generalize these concepts to the n-dimensional Euclidean space,
we use a measure of distance called the norm:
∥x −y∥=




n

i=1
(xi −yi)2.
The quantity ∥x −y∥is the distance between points x and y and gener-
alizes the absolute value used in R1. Given this deﬁnition of distance,
we generalize the interval into a ball.
DEFINITION 2.6 An open ball of radius ε > 0 and center x ∈X is de-
noted B(x, ε) = {y ∈X : ∥x −y∥< ε}.
Now it is easy to deﬁne openness.
DEFINITION 2.7 A set A⊂Rn is open if for every x ∈A there is some
ε > 0 such that B(x, ε) ⊂A.
Just as before, a set is closed if its complement is open. Consequently,
closed sets have the property that some points are on the boundary so
that all open balls contain points outside the set.
DEFINITION 2.8 A set A⊂Rn is closed if its complement C = Rn\A is
an open set.
Recall our ﬁrst example. Because X is an open set, there is an
open ball around each x in X that is contained in X. As each of
these balls contains points weakly preferred to X, no maximal set
can exist. If X = [0, 1], any open ball around 1 contains points out-
side X.
Because all of the points preferred to 1 lie outside [0, 1],
M(≥, [0, 1]) = 1. Closed outcome sets are not sufﬁcient for nonempty
maximal sets, however. Recall that (−∞, 0] ∪[1, ∞) is a closed set, but
M(≥, (−∞, 0] ∪[1, ∞)) is empty. The problem, of course, is that there
is no upper bound on this set, so for any x there is a y > x so that yPx.
Therefore, another important condition is boundedness.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
14
The Theory of Choice
DEFINITION 2.9 A set A⊂Rn is bounded if there exists a ﬁnite number
b such that for every x ∈Ait is the case that ∥x∥< b.
The set (−∞, 0] ∪[1, ∞) clearly fails this criterion so we can rule
it out by requiring that choice sets be bounded. It is easy to see in
example 2.1 so long as Xis closed and bounded M(≥, X ) is nonempty.
In Rn, the following deﬁnition is used often.
DEFINITION 2.10 A set A⊂Rn is compact if it is closed and bounded.
Because all examples and problems in this book deal with subsets
of Euclidean spaces, we could stop here. In arbitrary choice spaces,
however, the equivalence between compactness and closedness and
boundedness does not hold. Ironically, the proof of nonemptiness of
the maximal set result is easier using a more general deﬁnition of com-
pactness (even if we lose some of the intuition of our examples). The
more general deﬁnition of compactness is based on sets known as open
covers. An open cover for a set A is a collection of open sets whose
union contains A.
DEFINITION 2.11 Given a set A, an open covering of Ais a collection of
sets {Oθ}θ∈ where  is an arbitrary index set and the sets Oθ are open
for every θ ∈ such that A⊂{∪θ∈Oθ} (in other words, if x ∈A, then
there is some θ ∈ such that x ∈Oθ).
The general deﬁnition of compactness can now be given.
DEFINITION 2.12 A set A is compact if for any open covering {Oθ}θ∈
of A there exists some ﬁnite set B ⊂, such that the ﬁnite covering
{Oθ}θ∈B is a covering of A(i.e., A⊂∪θ∈BOθ).
These deﬁnitions are subtle for those not familiar with analysis so
an example is surely warranted. Consider R1 and two subsets [0, 1]
and (0, 1). We already know that (0, 1) is not compact because it is
not closed. To demonstrate that (0, 1) is not compact using Deﬁnition
2.12, consider the following open covering of (0, 1). For each θ ∈ =
{3, 4, 5, . . .}, let Oθ = (1/θ, 1 −1/θ). This is a collection of open inter-
vals centered at 1/2, and the width of the intervals approaches 1 as θ
gets larger. Is {Oθ}θ∈ an open covering of (0, 1)? Yes, for any element
in x ∈(0, 1) there is a θ big enough that x ∈(1/θ, 1 −1/θ). So we have

--- Sayfa 31 ---
2. Continuous Choice Spaces∗
15
constructed an open covering of (0, 1). Deﬁnition 2.12 requires that
there be a ﬁnite subset B ⊂{3, 4, 5, . . . . . . .} so that (0, 1) ⊂∪θ∈BOθ.
But for any ﬁnite set B, there is a ﬁnite largest element θ∗∈B.6 The
value
1
θ∗is strictly larger than 0 and because (0, 1) contains points ar-
bitrarily close to 0,
1
θ∗is strictly larger than some element of (0, 1).
Accordingly, for any ﬁnite collection of subsets in the open covering,
we can ﬁnd an element of (0, 1) that is not contained in any set Oθ
for θ ∈B. Deﬁnition 2.12 demonstrates that (0, 1) is not compact. The
reader should try to prove that [0, 1] is compact using the open covering
deﬁnition.7
Having speciﬁed some desirable properties of X, we turn to proper-
ties of R. Not surprisingly, given example 2.2, it is useful for R not to
have jumps. We use the deﬁnition of upper and lower contour sets to
deﬁne continuity of R.8
DEFINITION 2.13 Given a binary relation R on Rn the strict upper con-
tour set of a point x ∈Rn is P(x) ≡{y ∈Rn : yPx}. The strict lower
contour set of point x is the set P−1(x) ≡{y ∈Rn : xPy}. The level
set of x is the set of points for which the agent is indifferent to x or
I(x) ≡{y ∈Rn : yRx and xRy}.
For any x, the upper contour set contains the points that are strictly
preferred to x, the lower contour contains the points that x is preferred
to, and the level set contains the points indifferent to x.
DEFINITION 2.14 A binary relation R on Rn is
(1) upper continuous if P(x) is open for all x ∈Rn
(2) lower continuous if P−1(x) is open for all x ∈Rn
(3) continuous if it is both lower and upper continuous.
6 The reader can prove this sentence by noting that ≥is a weak ordering and applying
our result about the nonemptiness of the maximal set for ﬁnite sets.
7 We direct the reader to the Heine-Borel theorem that relates the topological open-
covering and Euclidean closed-and-bounded deﬁnitions of compactness for Rn.
Gaughan (1993) presents a particularly detailed proof of the result for R1.
8 In political science, the upper contour set is often referred to as the “preferred to
set.” Keith Krehbiel has pointed out to both authors on numerous occasions that
this terminology (along with many others) contains a redundancy. Thus, he and we
implore all readers to use our preferred term preferred set.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
16
The Theory of Choice
Consider the implications of these conditions. Given a point x, com-
pleteness implies that any other point y is an element of either P(x),
P−1(x), or I(x). Continuity implies that if y ∈P(x) then all points suf-
ﬁciently close to y are in P(x) as well. Similarly, if y ∈P−1(x) nearby
points are also in P−1(x). This implies that small perturbations of y
should not affect its preference ordering with respect to x.
Example 2.2 illustrates how continuity helps rule out anomalous be-
havior. In that example P−1(1/2 + ε) = (−∞, 1/2] ∪(1/2 + ε, 1]. So
the lower contour set is not open. If the preferences were lower con-
tinuous, there would be no jump in the preference ordering.
We now state sufﬁcient conditions for a nonempty maximal set.
THEOREM 2.3 If X is nonempty and compact, and R on X is complete,
reﬂexive, transitive, and lower continuous, then M(R, X )̸ = ∅.
The proof of this result is more technical than most other sections of
this book. But the result holds very generally. This allows us to apply
it to choice problems in which x is an inﬁnite sequence of outcomes, a
function, or a probability distribution.
Proof Let X be nonempty and compact, and let R be complete, re-
ﬂexive, transitive, and lower continuous. To establish a contradiction,
assumethat M(R, X ) = ∅.Consequently,everypointin X iscontained
in P−1(α) for some α ∈X. Because R is lower continuous every such
P−1(α) is open. This means that {P−1(α)}α∈X is an open covering of
X. Because X is compact, there exists a ﬁnite set of points B ⊂X for
which the collection {P−1(α)}α∈B is also a covering of X. So for all
x ∈X it is the case that x ∈P−1(α) for some α ∈B (an appropriate α
is chosen for each X ). But from Theorem 2.1, M(R, B)̸ = ∅because B
is ﬁnite and Ris complete, reﬂexive, and transitive. Thus, x∗∈M(R, B)
exists.Nowconsideranyarbitrarypoint y ∈X.Either yisanelementof
M(R, B) or it is not. By deﬁnition, x∗Iy if y ∈M(R, B) so that x∗Ry.
Now suppose y /∈M(R, B). Because {P−1(α)}α∈B covers X, there is
some α ∈B
such that y ∈P−1(α). This means that αRy. Because
x∗∈M(R, B), however, we know that x∗Rα. Because R is transitive
on X, this implies that x∗Ry. Thus, we have shown that for all y ∈X,
x∗Ry. This implies that x∗∈M(R, X ) contradicting the emptiness of
M(R, X ).
□
Theorem 2.3 establishes sufﬁcient, but not necessary, conditions.
Sometimes we encounter situations in which X is either unbounded

--- Sayfa 33 ---
2. Continuous Choice Spaces∗
17
or not closed, and R is discontinuous. In each of these possibilities, the
nonemptiness of M(R, X ) must be established by other means. Viola-
tions of the compactness of X generally require stronger assumptions
about R whereas violations of continuity require more structure on X.
2.2. Uniqueness of M(R, X ). It is valuable to know whether or not
M(R, X ) has a unique element. If the choice set is ﬁnite, we can guar-
antee a unique element of M(R, X ) by assuming that all preferences
are strict. Without indifference, M(R, X ) cannot contain more than a
single element if X is ﬁnite.
If the choice space is not ﬁnite, however, additional structure is
needed to ensure that M(R, X ) contains a single element. Many ap-
plications impose an additional condition on X and an additional con-
dition on R. Typically, we assume that X is a convex set. Convexity
requires that if x and y are points in X all the points on the line seg-
ment between x and y must also be in X.
DEFINITION 2.15 A set X ⊂Rn is convex if for any x, y ∈X the point
λx + (1 −λ)y is an element of X for every λ ∈[0, 1].
The point λx + (1 −λ)y is often called a convex combination (or a
weighted average) of x and y. For example, the set [0, 1] is convex be-
cause any point between two points in the set is also in the set. Alterna-
tively, X = [0, 1/4] ∪[3/4, 0] is not convex because λ/4 + (1 −λ) 3/4 /∈
X for any λ ∈(0, 1). Informally, convexity requires that there are no
“holes” in the outcome set. If the outcome set has more than one
dimension, convexity also requires that its surface not have any ap-
pendages. Look at your hand. Convex combinations of points on your
thumb and index ﬁnger are not part of it.9 Your hand is not convex.
The sufﬁcient condition on preferences is also called convexity.
DEFINITION 2.16 Preference relation R deﬁned on the convex set X is
convex if xRy implies [λx + (1 −λ)y] Ry for any λ ∈(0, 1) and all dis-
tinct points x, y ∈X. Preference relation R is strictly convex if xRy
implies [λx + (1 −λ)y] Py for any λ ∈(0, 1) and all distinct points
x, y ∈X.
Essentially, convex preferences have the property that if the agent
prefers x to y she also prefers convex combinations of x and y to y.
9 Game theorists spend a lot of time contemplating such ironies.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
18
The Theory of Choice
Strict convexity goes a step further. Even if the agent is only indifferent
between x and y, she still prefers the convex combination to either x
or y. We leave it as an exercise to show that convexity of Rimplies that
the upper contour sets P−1(x) are convex. Because the upper contour
sets are convex, they cannot have holes or appendages. Strict convexity
also rules out ﬂat spots on the boundaries of the upper contours.
The following result is easy to establish.
THEOREM 2.4 If X is convex and R (deﬁned on X ) is strictly convex
then M(R, X ) contains at most one element.
Proof To establish a contradiction assume that Xis convex, Ris strictly
convex,andtwodistinctpolicies x, yarebothin M(R, X ).Forarbitrary
λ ∈(0, 1) the point [λx + (1 −λ)y] is in X because X is convex. But
R is strictly convex so that [λx + (1 −λ)y] Py. But this contradicts the
assumptions that y ∈M(R, X ).
□
Theorem 2.3 guarantees that a rational choice exists if the choice set
is compact and the weak ordering is lower continuous. If the choice set
is convex and the preference ordering is strictly convex, the rational
choice is unique.
3. Utility Theory
The model of choice and rationality described previously is based on
the use of binary preferences and the maximal set. Binary operators,
however, can be hard to work with except in the most trivial models.
Numbers on the other hand are easy to work with. If we can associate
a number with each element of the outcome set, then we can just use
the ≥operator to compare alternatives. In this section we explore the
conditions under which it is possible to represent outcome sets as sets
of real numbers and use ≥as the preference operator. In other words,
we would like to represent preferences using a utility function (a real-
valued function with domain X ) such that
u(x) ≥u(y) implies xRy,
u(x) > u(y) implies xPy, and
u(x) = u(y) implies xIy.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
3. Utility Theory
19
The idea of utility has been the subject of philosophical and moral
debates over the past 300 years, but again we use a narrow deﬁnition.
Utilities are simply numerical representations of preferences for which
≥is the appropriate preference operator – we imbue them with no
additional normative content.
At our current level of generality, utility functions are ordinal: they
are used only to rank alternatives. In particular, they do not tell us how
much something is preferred to something else. The value u(x) −u(y)
has no meaning. Any function w such that w(x) ≥w(y) if and only if
u(x) ≥u(y)representsexactlythesamepreferencesasu.Thisindicates
that comparing utilities across agents is generally not a meaningful ex-
ercise. As we discuss in the next chapter, however, the standard model
of choice under uncertainty presumes that utility functions contain
more than ordinal information.
The following is a formal deﬁnition of a utility function.
DEFINITION 2.17 Given X and R on X, we say the utility function
u : X →R1 represents R if for all x, y ∈X, u(x) ≥u(y) if and only
if xRy.
Using this deﬁnition it is quite easy to show that u(x) > u(y) if and
only if xPy and u(x) = u(y) if and only if xIy. If Xis ﬁnite the existence
of a utility representation of R hinges only on R’s being complete,
reﬂexive, and transitive.
Just as in the last section, we can characterize the agent’s optimal
choice.
Let x be a maximizer of u : X →R1 if u(x) ≥u(y) for all
y ∈X. As the next result shows the existence of a maximizer and the
nonemptiness of M(R, X ) are equivalent.
THEOREM 2.5 If the function u(·) is a utility representation of R on
choice set X then M(R, X ) = arg maxx∈X{u(x)}.
Proof To show that M(R, X ) ⊂arg maxx∈X{u(x)}, assume that u(·)
represents R and that x ′ ∈M(R, X ). Because x ′ ∈M(R, X ), x ′Ry
for all y ∈X. Consequently, u(x ′) ≥u(y) for all y ∈X. Thus x ∈
arg maxx∈X{u(x)}. To show that arg maxx∈X{u(x)} ⊂M(R, X ) assume
that u(·) represents R and that x ′ ∈arg maxx∈X{u(x)}. Then u(x ′) ≥
u(y) for all y ∈X, which implies that x ′Ry for all y ∈X. Thus x ∈
M(R, X ).
□

--- Sayfa 36 ---
20
The Theory of Choice
If X is ﬁnite and R is complete, reﬂexive, and transitive, M(R, X )
is nonempty (e.g., Theorem 2.1); thus a maximizer of u(x) must exist.
If X is not ﬁnite, however, further conditions on X and the utility
function are required to ensure the existence of maximizers. In the next
advanced section we consider utility functions on nonﬁnite outcome
spaces.
4. Utility Representations on Continuous Choice Spaces∗
For the same reasons that continuity of preferences is important in
establishing uniqueness of M(R, X ), we often assume utility functions
are continuous.
DEFINITION 2.18 A function f : X →R1 is continuous if the following
statement is true for every x ∈X. For every ε > 0 there exists some δ > 0
such that
 f (x) −f (y)
 < ε if ∥x −y∥< δ.
As is often taught to high school students, a continuous function
is one that can be drawn without lifting the pencil. Substantively, a
continuousutilityfunctionisonethatproducesalmostidenticalutilities
for outcomes that are close together.
The following sufﬁcient conditions on preferences ensure that a con-
tinuous utility representation exists.
THEOREM 2.6 (Debreu, 1959) If X ⊂Rn and R is complete, reﬂexive,
transitive, and continuous, then there exists a continuous utility function
u : X →R1 that represents R.
We do not prove this claim.10 Nevertheless the converse is not difﬁ-
cult to establish, and we leave it as an exercise. A result analogous to
theorem 2.3 is the following.
THEOREM 2.7 If X ⊂Rn is compact and u : X →R1 is continuous, then
a maximizer exists.
10 We do, however, encourage the interested student to look at Debreu’s monograph
(1959).

--- Sayfa 37 ---
5. Spatial Preferences
21
This result is sometimes known as the Weierstrass Theorem. We do
not prove the result here (see Royden (1988) for a proof); Theorem 2.3
is actually a stronger result requiring only lower continuity (i.e., for
every x the set {y : u(y) < u(x)} is open) and compactness.
As noted earlier, utility functions are somewhat arbitrary; they con-
tain ordinal but not cardinal information. Consequently, there is noth-
ing intrinsically meaningful about any particular value of a utility func-
tion. All that matters is the ordering of u(x) and u(y) for any two
x, y ∈X. We say that f : R1 →R1 is a strictly increasing function if
for all x, y ∈X x > y implies that f (x) > f (y). Utility functions are
deﬁned only up to strictly increasing transformations. This means that
if u : X →R1 represents R and f (·) is a strictly increasing transforma-
tion, then f ◦u : X →R1 represents R where f ◦u : X →R1 is a nice
way to write the function that maps x into f (u(x)). Rescaling a utility
function has no consequence for choice, and the magnitude of a utility
function has no natural meaning.
Although we have listed conditions sufﬁcient to guarantee a max-
imizer of a utility function, we have not characterized the maxi-
mizer. If utility functions are differentiable, however, the tools of
calculus allow us to characterize optimal choices. The Mathemat-
ical Appendix reviews key results from calculus and optimization
theory.
5. Spatial Preferences
In most economic applications, outcomes are denominated in money
(incomes, wealths, wages, proﬁts, etc.) or commodities (widgets, giz-
mos, chili burritos). It is sensible to assume that larger outcomes are
preferred to smaller outcomes (except perhaps in the case of chili burri-
tos). In other words, many of the preferences considered in economics
are nonsatiable in that agents believe either that more is always bet-
ter (i.e., money) or that less is always better (air pollution). In political
game theory, however, many of the outcomes we want to study are poli-
cies in which at least some agents have a most preferred outcome that
is neither 0 or inﬁnite (e.g., taxes, welfare beneﬁts, or abortion restric-
tions). A voter’s utility may be increasing in tax rates below some level
and decreasing for higher levels. A voter may prefer restrictions on
abortion only so stringent as outlawing them in the third trimester but
not otherwise. Thus, in applications it is often necessary to assume that

--- Sayfa 38 ---
22
The Theory of Choice
( )
u x
x
Nonsatiable
Satiable
( )
u x
Figure 2.1. Satiable and Nonsatiable Utility Functions.
political actors have satiable preferences. Formally, an agent has sa-
tiable preferences if M(X, R) contains elements that are interior to the
outcome space X. Similarly, preferences are satiable when the max-
imizer of u : X →R is in the interior of X. Figure 2.1 illustrates the
difference between satiable and nonsatiable preferences.
The most common application of satiable preferences is the spatial
model that represents policy outcomes as points in a subset of Rd. In
principle, one could specify very general preferences of this sort, but
in practice (and most applications in this book) it is generally assumed
that voters have single-peaked and symmetric preferences. We discuss
single peakedness in more detail in Chapter 4, but for now we simply
note that it implies that the agent’s maximal set has a single element
and that the utility function has a single maximizer. This most preferred
policy outcome is the agent’s ideal point. The assumption of symmetry
requires that the agent’s utility declines at the same rate regardless
of direction. This implies that preferences are a decreasing function
of the distance between the policy outcome and the agent’s ideal
point.
If the policy space is one-dimensional, single-peaked, symmetric
preferences are represented by utility functions of the form ui(x) =
h(−|x −zi|) where zi is agent i’s ideal point and h is an increasing func-
tion. The two most popular examples are the linear, ui(x) = −|x −zi|
and quadratic utility functions ui(x) = −(x −zi)2. These functions are
plotted in Figure 2.2.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
5. Spatial Preferences
23
0
0
Linear
( )
u

( )
u x
*
x
*
x
x
x
Quadratic
x
Figure 2.2. Linear and Quadratic Preferences.
In outcome spaces with more than one dimension (i.e., X ⊂Rd),
distances are generally measured by the Euclidean norm deﬁned as
∥x −y∥=




n

j=1

x j −zj
i

2
.
Thus, symmetric, single-peaked preferences take the form
ui(x) = h(−∥x −zi∥)
where again, zi ∈Rd is the ideal point of agent i, and h is an increasing
function.
It is difﬁcult to visualize utility functions over multidimensional
spaces. For two dimensions, however, graphical analysis is simpliﬁed
because each agent’s preferred sets (i.e., P(y) = {x ∈X|xRy}) form
circular regions centered on the agent’s ideal point. Similarly, given a
policy y, an agent is indifferent between y and all of the points on the
circle through y centered on her ideal point. These sets are illustrated
in Figure 2.3. For any indifference curve, an agent prefers an outcome
inside the circle to any outside it.
One of the reasons that single-peaked, symmetric preferences are
so popular in applied political game theoretic models is the ease with
which the predicted choices of agents can be characterized. As long as
one is willing to make the appropriate assumptions, choice over a pair

--- Sayfa 40 ---
24
The Theory of Choice
z
w
Dimension 2
Dimension 1
*
x
(
)
( )
( )
( )
*
x
u w
u y
u z
>
>
>

u
y
Figure 2.3. Indifference Curves for Two-Dimensional Quadratic Preferences.
of outcomes can be characterized by an agent’s ideal point and a “cut
point” in R1 or a “cutting plane” in Rd.
To see this, consider an agent with symmetric single-peaked prefer-
ences over R1. Thus, agent i prefers x to y if and only if h(−|x −zi|) >
h(−|y −zi|). Assuming that x > y, this condition becomes
zi > c ≡x + y
2
.
Conversely, yPx if and only if zi < c. Thus, given a set of agents and
outcomes x > y, the model predicts that all agents with ideal points
greater than the midpoint of x and y prefer x, and those with ideal
points lower than the midpoint prefer y. Note that this prediction is
completely independent of the function h.
This logic extends to Rd as well. Now agent i prefers x to y if and only
if h(−∥x −zi∥) > h(−∥y −zi∥). Now we can deﬁne a separating hy-
perplane as follows. Let C = {c | ∥x −c∥= ∥y −c∥}. This hyperplane
is equivalent to the cut point in R1. It divides the ideal points into those
who prefer x to y and those who prefer y to x. Again armed only with

--- Sayfa 41 ---
6. Exercises
25
knowledge of ideal points and C, we can conﬁdently characterize the
choices of the agents.
6. Exercises
EXERCISE 2.1 Prove the following statement. If X is ﬁnite and R is a
complete and reﬂexive binary relation on X, then M(R, S)̸ = ∅on any
S ⊂X (except S = ∅) if and only if R is acyclic.
EXERCISE 2.2 Prove that if R on X is transitive then the weak and strict
preferences I and P derived from R are also transitive.
EXERCISE 2.3 In this chapter we ﬁrst deﬁned the weak ordering R and
then deﬁned P as xPy if and only if xRy and ˜yRx. Suppose instead we
ﬁrst deﬁne a strict preference P relation and deﬁne R as xRy if and only
if ˜yPx.
(1) A relation P is called asymmetric if there are no distinct points
x, y ∈Xwhere xPy and yPx are both true. Show that P is asym-
metric if and only if R is complete.
(2) A relation P is called negatively transitive if for any x, y, z ∈X,
xPy implies either xPzor zPy or both. Show that P is negatively
transitive if and only if R is transitive.
EXERCISE 2.4 For the following utility functions, describe the preferred
set. This can be done either graphically or by formally characterizing
P(x) = {y : yRx} for all x ∈X. Plot the utility curve if possible.
(1) u(x) = −|1 −x| for x ∈[0, 1].
(2) u(x) = −x2 for x ∈[0, 1].
(3) u(x) = √x for x ∈[0, 1].
(4) u(x) = −αx2
1 −(1 −α)x2
2 for x ∈R2.
EXERCISE 2.5 An agent has spatial preferences R over Rd represented
by the utility function ui(x) = h(−∥x −zi∥).
(1) Prove that for any compact X ⊂Rd, M(R, X ) is nonempty.
(2) Give a characterization of M(R, X ).
(3) Show that if X is also convex, M(R, X ) has a unique element.
(4) Now assume that X is a ball of the form {x ∈Rd : ∥x −w∥< k}
for a ﬁxed w ∈Rd and k > 0. Characterize the set M(R, X ) as a
function of the vectors zi and w and the scalar k.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
26
The Theory of Choice
EXERCISE 2.6 (∗) Suppose that X is convex and R is a weak ordering.
Prove that if Ris strictly convex the upper contour sets P(x) are convex.
EXERCISE 2.7 (∗) Use Deﬁnition 2.12 to show that [0, 1] is compact.
EXERCISE 2.8 (∗) Let X ⊂Rn and u : X →R1 be a continuous utility
function representing the binary ordering R on X. Prove that R is com-
plete, reﬂexive, transitive, and continuous.
EXERCISE 2.9 (∗) Use Theorem 2.7 to prove the Weierstrass Theorem: if
X is compact and u(·) is a continuous, real-valued function on X, then
there exists at least one point x = arg maxx∈X u(x) that maximizes u(·)
on X.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
3 Choice Under Uncertainty
In this chapter we relax the assumption that agents can perfectly pre-
dict the consequences of their actions. Instead agents understand that
the outcomes are generated probabilistically from their choice of ac-
tion – certain actions increase or decrease the likelihood of particular
outcomes.Peopleknowwhichactionsaremoreorlesslikelytoproduce
speciﬁc outcomes. Recall the example from the last chapter where A=
{send in the troops, try negotiating, do nothing} and X = {win large con-
cessions, win minor concessions, status quo}. The agent might believe
that large concessions are more likely when the troops are deployed
than when negotiation is initiated. Thus, in her decision, she balances
this likelihood of generating a better outcome against the costs of each
action. Deploying the troops would be rational if it is much more likely
to lead to large concessions, if the additional concessions are valuable
to the agent, or if the costs of deployment are low. These are the basic
trade-offs underlying the classical theory of choice under uncertainty.
There are two key elements of this model of uncertainty. The ﬁrst are
beliefs that we model as probability distributions or lotteries over the
outcomes associated with each action. The second are the payoffs as-
sociated with each outcome. These two elements combine to generate
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions over actions. This naming
convention honors two pioneers of classical decision theory. As we will
see, the von Neumann-Morgenstern functions rely on a much stronger
concept of utility than the ordinal functions discussed in Chapter 2.
1. The Finite Case
We begin with models in which the number of actions and outcomes
is ﬁnite. As in the previous chapter, we denote the feasible actions
27

--- Sayfa 44 ---
28
Choice Under Uncertainty
and outcomes as sets A= {a1, . . . , aI} and X = {x1, . . . , xJ}. Actions
and outcomes are now linked probabilistically rather than determin-
istically. To model this link, outcomes now depend both on the action
taken and on the state of the world, s. From the point of view of the
agent, s is a random variable like rainfall on election day or missile
precision in a war. In decision theoretic models (or in game theoretic
models where agents choose actions randomly), s can also represent
the actions of other agents. The set of states is S = {s1, . . . , sK}. Agents
have beliefs about the likelihood of each state represented by the prob-
ability function π (sk) ≡πk. These probabilities must satisfy the basic
axioms of probability theory – each must be between 0 and 1 and to-
gether they must sum to 1. Formally, these probabilities satisfy
0 ≤πk ≤1 for each k
π1 + π2 + · · · + π K =
K

k=1
πk = 1.
An outcome function, written as χ (a, s) : A× S →X, links actions,
states, and outcomes.1 Consider the example in Table 3.1 where an
outcome is speciﬁed for each combination of states and actions.
Outcome x1 occurs in state s1 regardless of the chosen action. In
Table 3.1
A\S
s1
s2
s3
a1
x1
x1
x2
a2
x1
x2
x3
states s2 and s3, however, the outcome depends on
the action chosen by the agent. For agents it is not
the state that matters so much as the likelihood of
the outcomes following each action. Because the
agent does not know the state when she chooses ai,
the probability of receiving outcome x is the prob-
ability that the state takes on a value s such that
χ (ai, s) = x. Let pi j be the probability that out-
come xj follows action ai.
One can easily compute these probabilities from Table 3.1: p11 =
π1 + π2, p12 = π3, p13 = 0, p21 = π1, p22 = π2, and p23 = π3. The
general formula for these probabilities is
pi j =

{k : χ(ai,sk)=xj}
πk.
1 Because we focus only on outcomes that can occur for some combination of a and
s, we require that the total number of action-state combinations be no less than the
number of outcomes or I · K ≥J.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
1. The Finite Case
29
These pi j inherit the following properties from the πk:
0 ≤pi j ≤1 for each i, j
pi1 + pi2 + · · · + pi J =
J

j=1
pi j = 1 for each i.
Consequently, we simplify the notation by suppressing the dependence
of the outcome probabilities on s and focus solely on pi j. In later
chapters, however, we do use the action-state representation of the
agent’s problem more explicitly.
Also to minimize notation, we deﬁne the vector pi = (pi1, . . . , pi J)
as the lottery over the outcomes associated with action ai. Because
of the correspondence between an action and the lottery it generates,
we refer interchangeably to an agent’s choosing action ai or simply
choosing the lottery pi. Let P be the set of all lotteries. Given that
there are J possible outcomes, the set P consists of the set of vectors
with J elements that satisfy the preceding conditions (each element
is between 0 and 1, and all coordinates sum to 1). This set is denoted
J and termed the J-dimensional simplex.2 For two dimensions, the
simplex is simply the straight line from coordinate (0, 1) to (1, 0) as
in Figure 3.1. For three dimensions, it is the triangular segment of
the plane with the following corners (vertices) (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0) , and
(0, 0, 1) as in the lower panel of Figure 3.1.
Another way to visualize lotteries is to use trees as in Figure 3.2.
Beginning from the initial node, each branch corresponds to a speciﬁc
outcome and is labeled with the probability of that outcome. Lottery p
generates a larger probability of x1 and a lower probability of x3 than
thelotteryq,whereasbothlotteriesgeneratethesameprobabilityof x2.
To build some intuition for our subsequent discussion, let us consider
how an agent might choose between an action that generates p and
one that generates q. First, it seems unreasonable for the agent to base
her decision on her preferences for x2 – both lotteries generate this
outcome with identical probabilities. Because these lotteries differ in
the likelihoods of x1 and x3, a rational agent chooses p only if x1Rx3.
Using these two intuitive arguments (which we formalize shortly), we
anticipate that the agent chooses p if x1Px3, chooses q if x3Px1, and is
indifferent if x1Ix3.
2 We refer those readers who are unfamiliar with vectors and coordinate systems to
the Mathematical Appendix.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
30
Choice Under Uncertainty
1p
2
p
1
0
1
(0,0,0)
1p
2
p
3p
(1, 0, 0)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 0, 1)
Two-Dimensional Simplex
Three-Dimensional Simplex
Figure 3.1. The Simplex.
A feature of this example, one that facilitated our intuitive predic-
tion, is that the lotteries are simple. In other words, each outcome is
associated with a single probability number. It is often necessary, how-
ever, to consider more complicated situations where agents choose
between lotteries over lotteries over lotteries, . . . , ad inﬁnitum. Such
choices are called compound lotteries. A compound lottery over P
is represented by {α1, . . . , αI} where αi represents the probability of
playing lottery pi. For example, consider how a rational agent eval-
uates a lottery in which she gets lottery p with probability 1/4 and
lottery q with probability 3/4. We abuse the notation slightly and la-
bel this lottery r = (1/4)p + (3/4)q. Figure 3.3 represents this lottery

--- Sayfa 47 ---
1. The Finite Case
31
1
3
1
2
1
6
1
1
3
6
,
,
p
1x
2x
3
x
1
4
1
2
1
4
1x
2
x
3
x
1
1
4
4
2,
q
=
=
1
2
1,
(
)
(
)
Figure 3.2. Tree Representations of Lotteries.
as a tree. How does an agent choose among p, q, and r? First, the
availability of r should not change the preference ranking between p
and q so we only need consider comparisons of r versus p and r ver-
sus q. But these comparisons seem difﬁcult because of r’s compound
structure. Fortunately, preferences over r are easy to analyze. Rational
agents should care only about the probabilities associated with each
outcome, not the paths traveled to reach those outcomes. Therefore,
the agent computes that the probability of receiving outcome x1 is the
probability of receiving lottery p (1/4) times 1/3 plus the probability
of receiving q (3/4) times 1/4. She computes the probabilities of x2 and
x3 similarly. Because the agent computes a single probability number
for each outcome, r is represented as a simple lottery as in the second
panel of Figure 3.3. Formally, any compound lottery {α1, . . . , αI} over
P that assigns probability αi to lottery pi can be represented as a simple
lottery with the probability of xj given by I
i=1 αi pi j.
Once r is reduced to a simple lottery, which lottery does the agent
prefer? In the simpliﬁcation of r, the probability of x2 is remains 1/2
as it is in p and q. So preferences over x2 are again irrelevant – only

--- Sayfa 48 ---
32
Choice Under Uncertainty
3
1
4
4
p
q
r
p
q
1
4
3
4
1
3
1
2
1
2
1
6
1
4
1
4
1x
2
x
3
x
1x
2
x
3
x
3
13
1
1
1
4
3
4
4
48
1x
2
x
3
x
13
1
11
48
2
48
, ,
r
3
1
1
1
1
4
2
4
2
2
3
1
1
1
11
4
6
4
4
48
+
=
=
=
=
=
+
+
+
.
.
.
.
.
.
(   )
Figure 3.3. Compound Lotteries.
the comparison of x1 to x3 matters. Because under r the outcome x1
is more likely than x3, any agent for whom x1Px3 prefers r to q. The
agent prefers p to r because outcome x1 is also more likely under p.
This discussion of how agents with preferences over the outcomes
X evaluate lotteries illustrates some of the key features of the stan-
dard model of choice under uncertainty. This model formalizes weak
preferences on P to deal with choice under uncertainty. Just as utility
functions greatly simplify the analysis of choice under certainty, the

--- Sayfa 49 ---
1. The Finite Case
33
model of expected utility simpliﬁes the analysis of choice under uncer-
tainty. All of the intuition used in our example is succinctly summarized
by four axioms about weak preferences R on P.
AXIOM 3.1. Completeness and Transitivity: The weak preference re-
lation R over P is complete, reﬂexive, and transitive.
AXIOM 3.2. Reduction of Compound Lotteries: For any α ∈[0, 1]
and p ∈P, pI [αp + (1 −α) p] .
AXIOM 3.3. Continuity: Let p, q , and r be three lotteries in P. The set of
scalars α ∈[0, 1] such that [αp + (1 −α) r] Rq is a closed interval. The
set of scalars β ∈[0, 1] such that qR[βp + (1 −β) r] is a closed interval.3
AXIOM 3.4. Independence: Let p, q , and r be three lotteries in
P. For any scalar α ∈(0, 1) , pRq if and only if [αp + (1 −α) r]
R[αq + (1 −α) r].
The meaning of each of the axioms is pretty straightforward. First, as
in the case of outcomes, any two lotteries can be compared, and prefer-
ences over lotteries do not cycle. This axiom is critical in our example.
As in the Chapter 1, transitivity may be extended to indifference and
strict preference. The second axiom simply formalizes Figure 3.3 to
guarantee that agents care only about the probabilities of outcomes,
not the representation of the probabilistic process generating those
outcomes.4
The continuity axiom is more abstract than the previous two, but
it implies that small changes in the probabilities of outcomes do not
generate large changes in the preferences. It requires that if pPq then
all lotteries sufﬁciently close to p are also preferred to q. If pPq, a
modiﬁcation of p that adds a very small probability of a really bad out-
come does not reverse the preference ordering. The continuity axiom
has the following straightforward and useful implication.
3 The Mathematical Appendix has a detailed discussion of closed sets. For the present
purposes, however, it is sufﬁcient to know that a closed interval [a, b] is one that
includes points a and b and all points in between.
4 In some texts this assumption is implicit when authors deﬁne preferences over lotter-
ies. We choose to make the assumption explicit to highlight that this theory ignores
details regarding the representation of lotteries.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
34
Choice Under Uncertainty
LEMMA 3.1 If pRqRr then there exists some λ ∈[0, 1] such that
[λp + (1 −λ) r] Iq.
Proof Let pRqRr. For every λ ∈[0, 1], either [λp + (1 −λ) r] Pq
or qP [λp + (1 −λ) r] or [λp + (1 −λ) r] Iq. If pIq or rIq , the
claim is true at λ = 1 or λ = 0. The case where pPqPr remains.
This statement implies that the sets {α : [αp + (1 −α) r] Rq} and
{β : qR[βp + (1 −β) r] } are nonempty. The continuity axiom implies
that these sets must be closed. Consequently, the ﬁrst set contains a
smallest element, α, and the second set contains a largest element,
β. Because the strict preference relation is not reﬂexive, it cannot
be simultaneously true that [λp + (1 −λ) r] Pq and qP [λp + (1 −λ) r]
for any value of λ. Thus, β ≤α. But then neither [λp + (1 −λ) r] Pq
nor qP [λp + (1 −λ) r] is true for λ ∈[β, α]. Thus, by completeness
[λp + (1 −λ) r] Iq for all λ ∈[β, α].
□
Now consider the independence axiom – perhaps the most contro-
versial of the four.5 Suppose an agent has a preference ranking be-
tween two lotteries. If those lotteries are mixed with a third (using the
same probabilities), the independence axiom holds that the preference
ordering is the same as that over the original lotteries. For example,
consider two lotteries. The ﬁrst pays $100 with probability .5 and $0
otherwise. The second pays $75 for sure. If we compound each of these
lotteries with a .5 chance of $1,000,000 for sure and .5 chance of playing
the original lottery, the independence axiom says that the preferences
over the compound lotteries correspond to the original lotteries. Using
the tree metaphor for lotteries, the independence axiom says that the
comparison of two lotteries is based only on the comparison of the
outcome branches that are distinct across lotteries. This axiom, there-
fore, justiﬁes ignoring x2 in our ﬁrst example. The next two lemmas
extend the independence axiom to the case of indifference and strict
preference.
LEMMA 3.2 For any scalar α ∈(0, 1) and lotteries r, p, q ∈P, pIq if and
only if [αp + (1 −α) r] I [αq + (1 −α) r].
Proof To establish sufﬁciency, suppose that pIq. The indepen-
dence axiom requires both [αp + (1 −α) r] R[αq + (1 −α) r] and
5 In some texts and articles the independence axiom is called the substitution axiom.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
1. The Finite Case
35
[αq + (1 −α)r]R[αp + (1 −α) r] . Consequently,
[αp + (1 −α)r]I[αq + (1 −α)r] is the only possibility. The proof of ne-
cessity is similar.
□
LEMMA 3.3 For any scalar α ∈(0, 1) and lotteries r, p, q ∈P, pPq if
and only if [αp + (1 −α) r] P [αq + (1 −α) r].
Proof To establish sufﬁciency, suppose that pPq. The indepen-
dence axiom requires that [αp + (1 −α) r] R[αq + (1 −α) r]. To show
that indifference violates the independence axiom, assume that
[αq + (1 −α) r] I [αp + (1 −α) r]. Lemma 3.2 implies that qIp, con-
tradicting the assumption that pPq. The proof of necessity is very
similar.
□
An equally important, but less direct, implication of the indepen-
dence axiom is the following lemma.
LEMMA 3.4 If pRq and α ∈(0, 1), then pR[αp + (1 −α) q] Rq.
Proof Suppose pPq. The reduction of compound lotteries, Lemma 3.3,
and transitivity imply that
pI [αp + (1 −α) p] P [αp + (1 −α) q] P [αq + (1 −α) q] Iq.
If pIq , Lemma 3.2 implies that pI [αp + (1 −α) q] Iq by alternating
the use of r = p and r = q. Consequently, pR[αp+ (1 −α) q] Rq.
□
This lemma establishes that given a weighted average of two lotter-
ies, the resulting lottery has an intermediate preference ranking. The
independence and continuity axioms have another implication that is
crucial for the existence of expected utility functions.
LEMMA 3.5 Suppose the alternatives are indexed so that x1Rxj for all j
and xj RxJ for all j. Then for all α, β ∈[0, 1] ,
[αx1 + (1 −α) xJ]R[βx1 + (1 −β) xJ] if and only if α ≥β.
Proof Suppose α ≥β. We can write αx1 + (1 −α) xJ as
γ x1 + (1 −γ ) [βx1 + (1 −β) xJ] where γ = (α −β)/(1 −β) ∈(0, 1].
From Lemma 3.4, x1R[βx1 + (1 −β) xJ]. Applying Lemma 3.4 again,
[γ x1 + (1 −γ ) [βx1 + (1 −β) xJ]] R[βx1 + (1 −β) xJ]. The proof of
necessity is identical to the earlier proof where the roles of α and β are
reversed.
□

--- Sayfa 52 ---
36
Choice Under Uncertainty
Intuitively, in comparing lotteries over the best and worst outcomes,
the agent prefers the one with the greatest likelihood of producing the
best outcome. These axioms and lemmas are used to prove that pref-
erences over lotteries can be represented by expected utility functions.
We state the theorem in terms of preferences over lotteries. Because
actions induce lotteries over outcomes, an analogous statement can be
made about preferences over actions.
THEOREM 3.1 (von Neumann-Morgenstern) If Axioms 3.1.–3.4. hold,
then there exists a function u(xj) that assigns a number u j for each
outcome such that the expected utility of a lottery pi induced by action i
is given by
EU(pi) = pi1u1 + pi2u2 + · · · + pi JuJ =
J

j=1
pi ju j
and pi Rp j if and only if EU(pi) ≥EU(p j).
The function u(xj) is sometimes called a Bernoulli utility function to
distinguish it from the expected utility function EU(p). The Bernoulli
and expected utility functions are very different. The Bernoulli func-
tions are deﬁned over outcomes, whereas expected utility functions are
deﬁned over lotteries.
Theorem 3.1 shows that expected utility of a lottery is simply the
weighted average of the utilities over outcomes where the weights are
the probabilities of each outcome. Returning to our earlier example,
if we assign utilities to outcomes x1, x2, and x3 of u(x1), u(x2), and
u(x3), then the expected utility of lottery p is EU(p) = (1/3)u(x1) +
(1/2)u(x2) + (1/6)u(x3), but that of q is
EU(q) = (1/4)u(x1) +
(1/2)u(x2) + (1/4)u(x3). One of the most attractive properties of ex-
pected utility functions is that they are linear functions of the Bernoulli
utilities. Among other things this result implies that if r is a compound
lottery resulting in p with probability 1/2 and q with probability 3/4
then
EU(r) = EU((1/4)p + (3/4)q) = (1/4)EU(p) + (3/4)EU(q) =
(13/48)u(x1) + (1/2)u(x2) + (11/48)u(x3): exactly what one gets from
computing the expected utility of the reduced lottery.
We do not prove the von Neumann-Morgenstern Theorem formally.
Rather we sketch the argument for the case of three outcomes and

--- Sayfa 53 ---
1. The Finite Case
37
leave the proof of the general result as an exercise in the use of math-
ematical induction. Let X = {x1, x2, x3} where x1Rx2Rx3 and assume
that at least one of the preferences is strict: x1Ix2Ix3 is a trivial case.
We represent lotteries over X as a vector (p1, p2, p3). From Lemma
3.1, there exist an α such that x2I(α, 0, 1 −α). Similarly, x1I(1, 0, 0)
and x3I(0, 0, 1) Therefore, let u1 = 1, u2 = α, and u3 = 0. Now con-
sider any lottery p = (p1, p2, p3). From this lottery, a compound lottery
(p1 + u2 p2, 0, p3 + p2 (1 −u2)) is formed by substituting the lottery
(u2, 0, 1 −u2) for the degenerate lottery that reaches x2. From Lemma
3.2, the agent must be indifferent between this compound lottery and
p. Using similar substitutions for x1 and x2, the indifference between
p and

p1u1 + p2u2 + p3u3, 0, p1 (1 −u1) + p2 (1 −u2) + p3 (1 −u3)

is established. Now consider an alternative lottery q. From the repli-
cation of the preceding arguments, the agent is indifferent between q
and (q1u1 + q2u2 + q3u3, 0, q1 (1 −u1) + q2 (1 −u2) + q3 (1 −u3)).
For the proof’s grand ﬁnale, the application of Lemma 3.5 says that
pRq if and only if p1u1 + p2u2 + p3u3 ≥q1u1 + q2u2 + q3u3. Conse-
quently, preferences over lottery p are represented by the scalar p1u1 +
p2u2 + p3u3. The theorem does not claim that any α ∈[0, 1] works,
however. Rather the theorem ensures that there exists at least one
such α so that the outcome utilities u1 = 1, u2 = α, and u3 = 0 work.
1.1. Cardinal Utility. In the previous chapter, we assuaged utility skep-
tics with the argument “Relax, utility functions do nothing more than
represent preference orderings.” For expected utilities, however, such
a defense is no longer tenable. The utility functions over outcomes
u(xj) are no longer simply ordinal, but cardinal because they repre-
sent information about relative preferences over outcomes. Just as the
Fahrenheit temperature scale says the difference between 212◦and 32◦
is twice the difference between 122◦and 32◦, cardinal utility functions
allow one to say that “my preference for steak over chicken is 3.8 times
my preference for chicken over ﬁsh.” Unlike ordinal utilities, the value
u(xj) −u(xk) has a meaningful interpretation.
It is easy to see why expected utility theory depends on cardinal
Bernoulli utility functions. Suppose that an agent were choosing be-
tween two lotteries over the three outcomes x1, x2, x3 where x1Px2Px3.
Lottery 1 provides a .5 shot at x1 and a .5 shot at x3 whereas lottery
2 generates x2 with certainty. Suppose u(x1) = 1, u(x2) = α ∈(0, .5),
and u(x3) = 0. This utility representation suggests that the agent would

--- Sayfa 54 ---
38
Choice Under Uncertainty
choose lottery 1. If this representation were simply ordinal, we could
apply any order-preserving transformation to the utility functions, and
the resulting function would represent the exact same preferences. But
consider the following transformation of the Bernoulli utilities: v(x1) =
1, v (x2) = 1 −α, and v(x3) = 0. This transformation preserves the
preference ordering over outcomes, but now the agent prefers lottery 2.
Just as Fahrenheit is not the only temperature scale that pro-
duces identical relative information about heat, expected utility
representations are not unique. To see this, consider two cardinal utility
functions u(xj) and v(xj) = a + bu(xj) where b > 0. Given a lottery
p, these produce expected utility functions of J
j=1 pju (xj) and
a + bJ
j=1 pju (xj), respectively. Because the ordering produced by
J
j=1 pju (xj) and J
j=1 qju (xj) is the same as the ordering of a +
bJ
j=1 pju (xj) and a + bJ
j=1 qju (xj), each cardinal utility func-
tion produces exactly the same behavior. This also implies that
u(xj) −u(xk) is unique up to a scale factor b while relative differ-
ences (u(xj) −u(xk)) / (u(xl) −u(xm)) are uniquely determined. The
conclusion, then, is that while Bernoulli utility functions are not just
ordinal, they are, however, deﬁned only up to positive linear (or afﬁne)
transformations.
2. Risk Preferences
One aspect of choice under uncertainty not determined by the axioms
of the previous section is the amount of risk a rational agent is willing
to tolerate. Some agents are willing to accept a substantial probability
of a bad outcome in exchange for moderately higher probabilities of
good outcomes, while others prefer to minimize the probability of bad
outcomes by forgoing certain opportunities for high payoffs. Recall
that the continuity axiom says that given three outcomes xPyPz, an
agent prefers a lottery between x and zto y for certain if the probability
of z is sufﬁciently small. The axiom, however, is silent about how small
this risk needs to be.
A common way to characterize an agents’s preference for risk is to
ask whether the agent is willing to accept a fair bet. A fair bet is one that
pays its price or stake in expectation. Suppose for now that the price
and rewards (i.e., outcomes) are denominated in money or some other
commodity of which agents prefer to have more. In later sections, we
return to the case of agents that have satiable preferences where more
is better only up to a certain point.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
2. Risk Preferences
39
Let w be the stake or wager, x1 > x2 be distinct monetary outcomes,
p be the probability of x1, and 1 −p be the probability of x2. Consider
the following deﬁnitions:
DEFINITION 3.1 A bet is fair if w = px1 + (1 −p)x2. A bet is favorable
if w < px1 + (1 −p)x2. A bet is unfair if w > px1 + (1 −p)x2
For example, a fair bet would be buying a $1 lottery ticket that pays
$100 with probability 1/100 and nothing with probability 99/100. The
bet would be favorable if the ticket cost less than a dollar and unfair if it
cost more. Needless to say, nearly all lotteries that are called “lotteries”
in the real world (especially those run by state governments) are of the
unfair variety. Using the notion of fair bets, we characterize preferences
for risk.
DEFINITION 3.2 An agent is risk averse if she does not accept unfair bets,
that is, u(px1 + (1 −p)x2) > pu(x1) + (1 −p)u(x2) for all p, x1, x2.
DEFINITION 3.3 An agent is risk acceptant if she accepts unfair bets, that
is, u(px1 + (1 −p)x2) < pu(x1) + (1 −p)u(x2) for all p, x1, x2.
DEFINITION 3.4 An agent is risk neutral if she is indifferent between
any fair bet and its stake, that is, u(px1 + (1 −p)x2) = pu(x1) +
(1 −p)u(x2) for all p, x1, x2.
It turns out that an agent’s preference for risk is closely related
to the shape of her utility function for money. Consider Figure
3.4, which demonstrates the utility comparison for the fair bet
w = px1 + (1 −p)x2. The line connecting the coordinates (u (x1) , x1)
and (u (x2) , x2) must travel through the point (pu(x1) + (1 −p)u(x2),
px1 + (1 −p)x2). Thus, we know that the value of
pu(x1) +
(1 −p)u(x2) lies at the intersection of the line between u(x1)
and u(x2) and the vertical line beginning at w. Consequently, we can
see that u (w) > pu(x1) + (1 −p)u(x2) so that the agent is risk averse
and rejects the fair bet. Obviously, the feature of the utility function
generating this result is that the utility function always lies above any
line connecting two utilities. This property is called concavity.
In Figure 3.5, we can see that the utility function always lies be-
low lines connecting two utility values. For a convex utility function,

--- Sayfa 56 ---
40
Choice Under Uncertainty
Outcomes
1
u x
1x
2x
2
u(x )
(
2
1
w = px
x
u(w)
1
2
1
pu(x )
p) u x
Utilities
+
−
−
(
(
(
)
)
p
1+
)
Figure 3.4. Risk-Averse Preferences.
such as this one, the agent always accepts the fair bet as pu(x1)+
(1 −p)u(x2) > u(px1 + (1 −p)x2). Figure 3.6 illustrates that linear
utility functions produce risk-neutral behavior; under this type of util-
ity function the expected utility of a gamble is identical to the utility of
the expected outcome.
2.1. Risk Preferences and Stochastic Dominance∗. It is not difﬁcult
to extend these ideas to lotteries that assign positive probability to an
arbitrary number (ﬁnite) of possible outcomes.
DEFINITION 3.5 A preference relation exhibits risk aversion if for any
nondeterministic lottery p, u(
j pjxj) > 
j pju(xj).
DEFINITION 3.6 A preference relation exhibits risk acceptance if for any
nondeterministic lottery p, u(
j pjxj) < 
j pju(xj).

--- Sayfa 57 ---
2. Risk Preferences
41
Outcomes
1
u(x )
1x
2x
2
u(x )
u(w)
Utilities
1
2
1
pu(x )
p) u x
+ −
(
( )
(
2
1
w = px
x
−p
1+
)
Figure 3.5. Risk-Acceptant Preferences.
To link risk aversion to behavior, we require additional deﬁnitions.
For lottery p the expected value is E(p) = 
j pjxj, and the variance
of this lottery is V (p) = 
j pj(E(p) −xj)2. For lottery p and ex-
pected utility representation u = (u1, . . . , uJ), the certainty equivalent
C (p) is the outcome that the agent values just as much as the lottery.
That is,
u(C (p)) = EU(p).
The behavior of risk-averse agents is somewhat predictable. They sac-
riﬁce expected value for a reduction in variance so that the certainty
equivalent is less than the expected value. In addition if there are two
lotteries p and q where q has the same expected value as p but a greater
variance, the agent prefers p. In this case q is a mean-preserving spread
of p.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
42
Choice Under Uncertainty
Outcomes
1
u(x
1x
2x
2
u(x )
2
(1
w =  px
p x
2
1
u(w)
pu(x
u(x
Utilities
=
p
1) +
_
(
)
)
)
1+
_ )
Figure 3.6. Risk-Neutral Preferences.
DEFINITION 3.7 Lottery q is a mean-preserving spread of p if q is
a compound lottery that ﬁrst takes the realization of p and then
adds to it a random term ε with distribution z having E(z) = 0 and
V (z) > 0.
THEOREM 3.2 Given a preference relation R on lotteries and the
Bernoulli utility function u(x) representing R, the following statements
are equivalent.
(1) The preference relation R exhibits risk aversion.
(2) The utility function u(x) is strictly concave.
(3) For any lottery p, C (p) ≤E(p) (and if V (p) > 0 the inequality
is strict).
(4) For any two lotteries q and p where q is a mean-preserving spread
of p, EU(q) < EU(p).

--- Sayfa 59 ---
2. Risk Preferences
43
Proof The equivalence of statements 1 and 2 is immediate. To show
that statement 2 implies 3, assume that R exhibits risk aversion.
This implies that for any nondeterministic lottery p (e.g., V (p) > 0),
u(E(p)) > 
j pju(xj). But u(C (p)) = EU((p)) imply that u(E(p)) >
u(C (p)). Because u(x) is an increasing function, this last statement im-
plies that E(p) > C (p) .
To see that statement 3 implies 2, assume that 3 is true and consider
any two outcomes x1 and x2 with p1 ∈(0, 1). In this case, statement 3
and that u(x) is increasing imply that u(px1 + (1 −p)x2) > pu(x1) +
(1 −p)u(x2) so that the function u(x) is concave. Because V (p) = 0
(i.e., p is deterministic) results in equality, this case is trivial.
To see that 2 implies 4, consider p and a mean-preserving spread q
that results in x + ε with x having the distribution p and ε ∈{ε1, . . . , εT}
having the distribution z. Thus,
EU(q) =

t

j
zt pju(xj + εt).
By statement 2, for each value of xj,

t
zt pju(xj + εt) < u
 
t
zt pj(xj + εt)

.
Rearranging the right-hand side yields

t
zt pju(xj + εt) < u(pjxj +

t
ztεt) = u(pjxj).
Summing over j yields
EU(q) =

t

j
zt pju(xj + εt) <

j
u(pjxj) = EU(p).
To see that statement 4 implies 3, consider lottery q. The lottery q
is a mean-preserving spread of the lottery p that assigns probability
1 to E(q). Statement 4 implies that EU(p) > EU(q). Because p is a
deterministic lottery, u(E(p)) = EU(p) so we have u(E(p)) > EU(q).
The monotonicity of u(x) and u(C(q)) = EU(q) imply that E(p) =
E(q) > C (q).
□

--- Sayfa 60 ---
44
Choice Under Uncertainty
If lottery q is a mean-preserving spread of p, lottery q is second-order
stochastically dominated by p. An additional result, proved by reapply-
ing the logic of the last proof, provides a convenient characterization
of second-order stochastic dominance.
THEOREM 3.3 Lottery q is second-order stochastically dominated by p
if and only if for every concave increasing function u(x),

j
pju(xj) ≥

j
qju(xj).
Consequently, the preferences of risk-averse agents conform with
second-order stochastic dominance – if p second-order stochastically
dominates q , a risk-averse agent prefers p to q. In some cases the
choice over lotteries is trivial. One common notion of such a “no-
brainer” decision involves the choice between a lottery and another
that ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates it.
DEFINITION 3.8 Lottery q is ﬁrst-order stochastically dominated by p if
for any nondecreasing function u(x)

j
pju(xj) ≥

j
qju(xj).
So in choosing between lotteries that are ordered by ﬁrst-order
stochastic dominance, risk attitudes are irrelevant.
2.2. Risk Preferences with Satiable Preferences. As discussed in
Chapter 2, many utility functions used in political science are satiable
because agents have most preferred outcomes. Such preferences have
important implications for risk tolerance. Consider the utility function
in Figure 3.7 and a lottery over x1 and x2. Note that x1 is less than the
agent’s ideal point whereas x2 is greater. Again the expected utility of
such a lottery is the intersection of the line between u(x1) and u(x2) and
the vertical line beginning at w. Because the ideal point lies between
x1 and x2, there must be at least one outcome w1 in this interval such
that u (w1) > pu(x1) + (1 −p)u(x2). As a result, satiable preferences
produce risk-averse behavior near the ideal point. Satiable preferences
need not produce global risk aversion, however. Gambles over a set
of outcomes bounded away from the ideal point over a region where

--- Sayfa 61 ---
2. Risk Preferences
45

1x
1
w
2x
3x
2
w
Outcomes
(
)
1
1
2
1
w
px
p x
=
+

(
)
2
2
3
1
w
qx
q x
=
+
(
)
1
u w
(
)
2
u w
(
) (
) (
)
1
2
1
pu x
p u x
+
–
–
–
–
(
) (
) (
)
2
3
1
qu x
q u x
+
Utilities
Figure 3.7. Risk and Spatial Preferences.
the agent’s utility function is convex produce risk-acceptant behavior.
The next section elaborates this point in more detail.
2.3. Risk and Higher-Dimension Euclidean Preferences∗. In this sec-
tion we consider choice over lotteries on Rn. Bendor and Meirowitz
(2004) show that we can extend notions of risk aversion developed for
the case of strictly increasing preferences to that of Euclidean pref-
erences. Recall that preferences over x ∈Rn are Euclidean if we can
represent them with a utility function of the form
u(x) = h(−
x −x∗)
where x∗is a point in Rn and h(·) is a strictly increasing function. If the
function h(·) is strictly convex, it is not difﬁcult to see that the utility
function u(x) is itself strictly concave. In this case the Bernoulli utility
function represents risk-averse preferences. Even if the function h is
not convex, however, the preferences exhibit a form of risk aversion.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
46
Choice Under Uncertainty
To extend the concept of a mean-preserving spread to Rn, we simply
apply Deﬁnition 3.7 with the relevant states in Rn.
THEOREM 3.4 If u(x) is Euclidean with ideal point x∗then for any two
lotteries q and p on Rn with expected value x∗in which q is a mean-
preserving spread of p, EU(q) < EU(p).
Proof Let q and p be lotteries on Rn, each with expected value x∗. Lot-
tery q is a mean-preserving spread of p. Deﬁne dj ≡
xj −x∗ as the
distance between realization xj and the point x∗. Because preferences
are Euclidean, EU(q) < EU(p) if and only if

j
qjh(−dj) <

j
pjh(−dj)
for some increasing function h(·). Because q is a mean-preserving
spread of p, it must be the case that

j
qjdj >

j
pjdj.
This requires that

j
qjg(−dj) <

j
pjg(−dj)
for any increasing function g(·) including h(·).
□
This theorem establishes that for lotteries centered at the agent’s
ideal point, second-order stochastic dominance in outcomes corre-
sponds to ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance in disutility. Alternatively,
all agents with Euclidean preferences are risk averse over lotteries
centered at their ideal point.
3. Learning
It is important to model how rational agents respond to new informa-
tion about the likelihood of different outcomes. Again it is convenient
to begin the discussion with an example. Consider Figure 3.8 where
the agent believes that the incumbent politician is “good” with prob-
ability 3/4 and “bad” with probability 1/4. Suppose that the agent

--- Sayfa 63 ---
3. Learning
47
3
4
Good Incumbent
Bad Incumbent
1
4
Good Incumbent,
Low Inflation
Good
Incumbent
Bad
Incumbent
Good Incumbent,
High Inflation
Bad Incumbent, Low
Inflation
Bad Incumbent, High
Inflation
3
4
1
4
2
3
1
3
1
5
4
5
Figure 3.8. Learning the Incumbent’s Type.
incorporates information about the incumbent’s performance in ofﬁce
such as the inﬂation rate generated by his economic policies. How does
this information change her probability assessment of the incumbent’s
quality?
Suppose the agent knows that good incumbents produce low inﬂa-
tion with a greater likelihood than bad incumbents. To be speciﬁc the
agent knows that good incumbents produce low inﬂation with proba-
bility 2/3 and that bad incumbents produce low inﬂation with only a
1/5 probability. Intuition tells us is that when inﬂation is low the agent
should increase her probability assessment that the incumbent is good
beyond her original belief of 3/4. Conversely, when inﬂation is high,
the agent should lower the probability that the incumbent is good. For-
tunately, we can take the analysis a step further and compute the exact

--- Sayfa 64 ---
48
Choice Under Uncertainty
probability of a good incumbent after each realization of the inﬂation
rate.
First, consider the case where inﬂation is low. A rational agent knows
that the outcome is either the top or the third node of the second panel
of Figure 3.8. Further, she knows that there is a (3/4)(2/3) = 1/2 prob-
ability of reaching the top node and a (1/4)(1/5) = 1/20 probability of
reaching the third node. Therefore, after observing low inﬂation, it is
ten times more likely that the incumbent is good than it is that he is
bad. Let p(l) be the probability of a good incumbent conditional on
low inﬂation. Because probabilities must sum to 1, p(l) + p(l)/10 = 1
so that p(l) = 10/11. Similar reasoning leads to p(h) = 4/9. This con-
ﬁrms our intuition that low inﬂation raises the probability that the
incumbent is good whereas high inﬂation lowers it.
Generalizing this example into a model of learning requires more
precise statements from probability theory. Let Aand B represent two
events (such as the terminal nodes in Figure 3.8). Suppose an agent
observes that event B has occurred and computes the probability that
event Aoccurs. This estimate is the conditional probability of A given
event B. We write it as
Pr(A| B) = Pr(A&B)
Pr(B)
assuming Pr(B) > 0
where Pr(A) is the probability of event A, Pr(B) is the probability of
event B, and Pr(A& B) is the probability that both events occur (the
joint probability). This formula, known as Bayes’ rule, is deﬁned only
if Pr(B)̸ = 0. A special case, independent events, has the property that
Pr(A& B) = Pr(A)Pr(B) so that
Pr(A| B) = Pr(A) Pr(B)
Pr(B)
= Pr(A).
To see Bayes’ rule in action, note that the probability of low inﬂation
and a good incumbent (1/2) is the probability of low inﬂation con-
ditional on a good incumbent (2/3) times the probability of a good
incumbent (3/4). Given these deﬁnitions, we state the main result.
THEOREM 3.5 (Bayes’ Rule) Let A1 . . . AN be disjoint events (i.e., no two
can occur simultaneously) such that  Pr(An) = 1 and Pr(An) > 0 for

--- Sayfa 65 ---
3. Learning
49
all n. Let B be some other event. Then
Pr(Aj | B) =
Pr(B | Aj) Pr(Aj)
N
n=1 Pr(B | An) Pr(An)
.
Bayes’ rule provides an easy to use formula to compute how rational
agents update their probability assessments after new information. We
can apply it easily to the voter’s problem we saw earlier. Let A1 be the
event that the incumbent is good and A2 be the event that she is bad.
Because the incumbent cannot be both good and bad, these events
satisfy the requirement of disjointedness. Event B is low inﬂation. For
two events the formulae are
Pr(A1 | B) =
Pr(B | A1) Pr(A1)
Pr(B | A1) Pr(A1) + Pr(B | A2) Pr(A2)
and
Pr(A2 | B) =
Pr(B | A2) Pr(A2)
Pr(B | A1) Pr(A1) + Pr(B | A2) Pr(A2).
We obtain all of the following probabilities from Figure 3.8:
Pr(A1) = 3
4
Pr(A2) = 1
4
Pr(B | A1) = 2
3
Pr(B | A2) = 1
5.
Thus, we can plug these numbers into Bayes’ rule to get
Pr(A1 | B) =
2
3 · 3
4
2
3 · 3
4 + 1
5 · 1
4
= 10
11
and
Pr(A2 | B) =
1
5 · 1
4
2
3 · 3
4 + 1
5 · 1
4
= 1
11.
Voila!

--- Sayfa 66 ---
50
Choice Under Uncertainty
Although seemingly straightforward and logical, Bayes’ rule is often
criticized as a poor model of learning. Not only can the rule be compu-
tationally challenging and exceed the typical person’s grasp of condi-
tional probability, its predictions are often counterintuitive. Consider
the following scenario from the Let’s Make a Deal game show hosted
by Monte Hall. Monte offers contestants the choice of opening three
doors. Behind one door is a luxury car, but the other doors hide prizes
of little pecuniary value (goats seem to have been a favorite). Once a
door is selected but before it is opened, Monte opens one of the remain-
ing two doors to reveal a goat. He then asks the contestant whether
he would like to switch his selection to the remaining closed door.
Should a rational contestant switch? Most people intuitively say there
is nothing to gain from switching: getting the car from a subsequent
switch is just as likely as getting it on the original try. The probability of
winning the car is 1/3 either way. Indeed a number of mathematicians
and statisticians took this position in response to the publication of
this problem in a popular newspaper column. Nevertheless, this logic
is incompatible with Bayes’ rule.
To simplify, suppose the contestant chooses door 3. Because the
doors are ex ante the same, the analysis of the other cases is identi-
cal. First, consider the probability of winning if the contestant does not
switch to the remaining door. Obviously, this is the same as the original
probability that a car is behind door 3, and thus the probability is just
1/3. Now consider the probability of winning by switching. To formal-
ize, let A1, A2, A3 correspond to the car’s being located behind doors 1,
2, and 3, respectively. Let B1, B2 corresponds to the event that Monte
opens door 1 or 2. Because Pr(A1) = Pr(A2) = Pr(A3) = 1/3, we sim-
ply need to compute Pr(Bi|Aj) for all of the events. Because Monte
never exposes a car, Pr(B1|A1) = Pr(B2|A2) = 0. We also assume that
in the event A3 Monte randomly selects which goat to expose. There-
fore, Pr(B1|A2) = Pr(B2|A1) = 1 and Pr(B1|A3) = Pr(B2|A3) = 1/2.
Suppose Monte opens door 2; then the probability that a switching
contestant wins is
Pr(A1 | B2)
=
Pr(B2 | A1) Pr(A1)
Pr(B2 | A1) Pr(A1) + Pr(B2 | A2) Pr(A2) + Pr(B2 | A3) Pr(A3)
=
1 · 1
3
1 · 1
3 + 0 · 1
3 + 1
2 · 1
3
= 2
3.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
4. Critiques of Expected Utility Theory
51
Similarly, if Monte opens door 1, the probability of winning is Pr(A2 |
B1) = 2/3. So a switching contestant wins with probability 2/3 whereas
a sticking one only wins 1/3 of the time.6
So why does the intuition that switching does not pay fail so badly?
Because most people do not appreciate the implication of the fact
that Monte never reveals a car. Observing that he does not open a
particular door is information that a switcher uses in his decision that
a stand-patter cannot.
Although the Monte Hall problem does expose an important set of
problems with Bayesian learning, the objections can be carried too far.
Bayes’ rule does tell us correctly that switchers win 2/3 of the time.
Thus, a frequent viewer of the show can learn that one should switch
without ever doing a conditional probability calculation. So one can
justify the use of Bayes’ rule by appealing to the notion that agents are
acting as if they had performed the calculation even if they are simply
following rules that they learn from experience.
4. Critiques of Expected Utility Theory
Whereas most of the models used in this book rely heavily on expected
utility theory, a large and inﬂuential body of work is critical of expected
utility theory. The application of these critical insights and alternative
models to political game theory, however, is still in its infancy.7
4.1. Risk, Uncertainty, and Subjective Probability. One of the basic
criticisms of expected utility theory is based on a distinction between
risk and uncertainty. The economist Frank Knight (1921) originally ar-
gued that expected utility theory models risk rather than uncertainty.
In his formulation, uncertainty implies that agents lack sufﬁcient sta-
tistical information to form estimates of the probabilities of various
outcomes. Formally, uncertainty implies that agents do not know the
true set of lotteries P. The standard response to this distinction, pro-
posed by the statistician Leonard Savage (1954), argues that agents
6 The solution we present to this problem is somewhat convoluted in order to provide
an additional demonstration of Bayes’ rule. An easier proof is to note that a switcher
only loses if he picked the right door in the ﬁrst place. Thus, a switcher loses 1/3 of
the time and wins 2/3.
7 “Behavioral models” (as opposed to those based on expected utility theory) have
become far more common in economics in recent years (see Camerer 2003).

--- Sayfa 68 ---
52
Choice Under Uncertainty
have subjective beliefs about P that can be used to formulate (subjec-
tive) probability distributions over outcomes.
Nevertheless, experimental evidence has cast doubt as to whether
uncertainty is reducible to beliefs about beliefs. Consider the paradox
ﬁrst formulated by Daniel Ellsberg (1961). There are two urns contain-
ing red and black balls. In urn 1, there are 100 red and black balls where
the proportion of red balls is unknown. Urn 2, however, contains 50
red balls and 50 black balls.
Subjects are given $100 for selecting a red ball. Most subjects choose
urn 2. But when offered $100 for selecting a black ball, the modal choice
is again urn 2. Choosing urn 2 for both gambles, however, violates the
axioms of expected utility theory. According to expected utility theory,
choosing urn 2 in search of a red ball indicates a belief that urn 1 has
fewer than 50 red balls whereas selecting urn 2 for a black ball sug-
gests that the subject believes that urn 1 has fewer than 50 black balls.
Obviously, these beliefs are inconsistent with the knowledge that urn
1 contains 100 balls. Selecting urn 1 in both gambles similarly violates
expected utility theory.
4.2. The Allais Paradox. Other predictions of expected utility theory
have been tested in experimental settings. These studies provide robust
evidence for a number of decision-making anomalies inconsistent with
expected utility theory. One of the earliest and most studied anomalies
was ﬁrst uncovered by the French economist Maurice Allais. His ex-
periment ﬁnds that subjects often make choices inconsistent with the
independence axiom.
Initially, subjects are asked to choose between lotteries a and b where
Lottery a: .33 chance of $2500, .66 chance of $2400, and .01 chance
of 0
Lottery b: $2400 for sure
When given these choices, subjects overwhelmingly choose lottery
b. For example, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) ﬁnd that 82 percent
choose lottery b when given this hypothetical choice.
Next the subjects are given the choice between lotteries c and d.
Lottery c: .33 chance of $2500, .67 chance of 0
Lottery d: .34 chance of $2400 and .66 chance of 0
Experimental subjects generally choose c. Kahneman and Tversky
ﬁnd that 83 percent choose this lottery. It can easily be shown that

--- Sayfa 69 ---
4. Critiques of Expected Utility Theory
53
choosing b in the ﬁrst experiment and c in the second violates the
independence axiom and therefore expected utility theory. The choices
of b and c imply that
u(2400) > .33u(2500) + .66u(2400) + .01u(0)
and
.33u(2500) + .67u(0) > .34u(2400) + .66u(0).
Rearranging the top inequality, we get .34u(2400) > .33u(2500) +
.01u(0) for the ﬁrst inequality and .33u(2500) + .01u(0) > .34u(2400)
for the second. Therefore, we derive a contradiction. The contradic-
tion is attributable to a violation of the independence axiom. Lot-
tery a is the compound lottery .34(33/34, 0, 1/34) + .66(0, 1, 0) over
the outcomes (2500, 2400, 0) while b is .34(0, 1, 0) + .66(0, 1, 0). If
aP b, then the independence axiom holds that (33/34, 0, 1/34) P
(0, 1, 0). But this in turn implies that .34(33/34, 0, 1/34) + .66(0, 0, 1)
P .34(0, 1, 0) + .66(0, 0, 1), which means that cPd.
4.3. Prospect Theory. In their classic article, Kahneman and Tversky
(1979) propose an alternative model of decision making to account
for the Allais paradox and other experimental anomalies. Whereas
manypreviousauthorsattributedtheAllaisparadoxtoapreferencefor
certainty, Kahneman and Tversky note that the independence axiom
is often violated when all of the lotteries are far from sure things.
Consider the following pairs of lotteries:
Lottery a: .45 chance of $6000, .55 chance of 0
Lottery b: .90 chance of $3000, .10 chance of 0
Lottery c: .001 chance of $6000, .999 chance of 0
Lottery d: .002 chance of $3000, .998 chance of 0
They ﬁnd that the modal choices were b over a and c over d, choices
that violate the independence axiom. Because the large payoffs in lot-
teries c and d have minuscule probabilities, subjects seem inclined to go
for the one with the bigger prize. But when both probabilities are rea-
sonably high, subjects are still inclined to take the one that is relatively
more certain.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
54
Choice Under Uncertainty
Kahneman and Tversky note, however, that this preference for cer-
tainty does not hold when gambles are over losses rather than gains.
Consider the following pairs of lotteries:
Lottery a: .80 chance of −$4000, .20 chance of 0
Lottery b: −$3000 for sure
Lottery c: .20 chance of −$4000, .80 chance of 0
Lottery d: .25 chance of −$3000, .75 chance of 0
If the Allais paradox were simply due to a preference for certainty, b
and c would be the modal choices. Kahneman and Tversky, however,
ﬁnd that a and d are the modal choices. Their interpretation is that
even though people are risk averse over gains, they are risk acceptant
over losses.
Kahneman and Tversky also argue that the presentation of the lot-
teries affects the choices that people make. Suppose that a person has
been given $1000 and then offered
Lottery a: .5 chance of an additional $1000, .5 chance of 0
Lottery b: $500 for sure
Next consider a person who has been given $2000 and offered the
choice of
Lottery c: .5 chance of losing $1000, .5 chance of 0
Lottery d: Loss of $500 for sure
Kahneman and Tversky ﬁnd that b and c are the modal choices.
To account for these ﬁndings, Kahneman and Tversky propose
prospect theory as an alternative to expected utility theory. Accord-
ing to their model, choice involves two distinct phases: editing and
evaluation. In the editing phase, people “organize and reformulate the
options so as to simplify subsequent evaluation and choice.”
4.3.1. The Editing Phase. Kahneman and Tversky identify six distinct
operations that occur during the editing phase.
(1) Coding: Because Kahneman and Tversky argue that people
evaluate gains and losses separately, the ﬁrst stage of editing
involves determining a reference point and coding outcomes as
either gains or losses.
(2) Combination: People combine probabilities associated with
identical outcomes.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
4. Critiques of Expected Utility Theory
55
(3) Segregation: People identify and segregate the riskless compo-
nents of a choice. For example, a lottery that produces $200 with
probability .7 and $100 with .3 is interpreted as a riskless $100
gain and a lottery over an addition $100.
(4) Cancellation: When comparing two lotteries, people ignore the
common elements of both lotteries. For example, the $2000
bonus in the last example “cancels out” and does not affect
the choice between c and d.
(5) Simpliﬁcation: People may simplify the tasks by rounding prob-
abilities such as recoding .49 to even odds or by dropping ex-
tremely unlikely outcomes from consideration.
(6) Detection of dominance: People drop from consideration any
lottery that is ﬁrst-order stochastically dominated.
4.3.2. The Evaluation Phase. Kahneman and Tversky’s model of eval-
uation is very similar to expected utility theory in that both models
postulate that people evaluate gambles using a weighted average of the
payoffs to the outcomes. In Kahneman and Tversky’s model, however,
the weights used are not the subjective probabilities of the outcomes
but rather functions of the probabilities. They also argue, against ex-
pected utility theory, that the outcome value functions should treat
gains and losses asymmetrically.
Let x and y be two distinct monetary outcomes where p is the prob-
ability of x and q is the probability of y. With probability 1 −p −q,
nothing happens or the payoff is 0. Kahneman and Tversky deﬁne
prospects as strictly positive if x, y > 0 and p + q = 1, strictly negative
if x, y < 0 and p + q = 1, and regular in all other cases. For a regular
prospect, agents maximize
V (x, p; y, q) = π (p) v(x) + π(q)v(y)
where v(x) and v(y) are the values of each outcome and π(p) and
π(q) are weights based on the outcome probabilities. They assume that
v(0) = 0, π(0) = 0, and π(1) = 1. This function would be equivalent to
a expected utility function if v were a Bernoulli function and π(p) = p
for all p.
For strictly positive or strictly negative prospects such as x > y > 0
and x < y < 0 where p + q = 1, agents maximize
V (x, p; y, q) = v(y) + π (p) [v(x) −v(y)] .

--- Sayfa 72 ---
56
Choice Under Uncertainty
Losses
Gains
Value
Figure 3.9. Prospect Theoretical Value Functions.
This functional form captures the idea that people evaluate such lotter-
ies as a risk-free component v(y) plus a risky component v(x) −v(y).
A key assumption of Prospect Theory is that v (·) is asymmetric with
respect to gains and losses. Kahneman and Tversky make three speciﬁc
assumptions.
(1) The value function is deﬁned in terms of deviations from a ref-
erence point (no gains or losses).
(2) The value function is concave for gains and convex for losses.
(3) The value function is steeper for losses than for gains.
Figure 3.9 illustrates a function satisfying these properties.
Additionally, Kahneman and Tversky make several assumptions
about the form of the decision weights π (p).
(1) π is an increasing function of p.
(2) π(0) = 0.
(3) π(1) = 1.
(4) For low values of p, π(p) > p.
(5) For low values of p, π is subadditive: that is, π(rp) > rπ(p) for
0 < r < 1.
(6) For all p, π satisﬁes the property of subcertainty: that is, π(p) +
π(1 −p) < 1.
(7) For all 0 < p, q,r < 1, π is subproportional: that is, π(pq)/
π(p) ≤π(pqr)/π(pr).

--- Sayfa 73 ---
5. Time Preferences
57
Decision
Weight
p
π(
p
Probability
0
1
1
)
Figure 3.10. Decision Weights.
The ﬁrst three assumptions are straightforward. The fourth is sim-
ply the idea that people overweigh small probabilities. Subadditivity,
which helps resolve the Allais paradox, implies in conjunction with
assumption 2 that p is convex for low values of p (see exercises 1 and
2). Subcertainty also helps resolve the Allais paradox. Recall that the
modal choices require that v(2400) > π(.33)v(2500) + π(.66)v(2400)
and π(.33)v(2500) > π(.34)v(2400). These two inequalities require
that 1 > π(.66) + π(.34). Subproportionality accounts for many of the
violations of the independence axiom because it implies that for a
ﬁxed ratio of probabilities, the ratio of decision weights is closer to
unity when the probabilities are high.
A function satisfying these assumptions is plotted in Figure 3.10.
5. Time Preferences
Many dynamic models in this book require agents to trade off payoffs
received now against those received in the future. It is natural to as-
sume that agents value current utility more than future utility (if for
no other reason, we could die tomorrow). We use the discount factor
to model this intuition. Let 0 < δ < 1 be the weight that players place
on utilities one period in the future relative to current utility. Such
constant discounting implies that utilities two periods in the future are
weighted by δ2, and so on, such that utilities t periods in the future are
discounted by δt.
5.1. Computing Payoff Streams. Often we model games with no de-
terminate end point as inﬁnite games where the number of periods

--- Sayfa 74 ---
58
Choice Under Uncertainty
goes to ∞. Clearly, in an inﬁnite game we cannot simply add up
the payoffs from each period in order to determine the utility from
a sequence of actions. Any such sum of a constant stream of utili-
ties is inﬁnite. Fortunately, geometric discounting helps facilitate these
calculations.
Consider the easiest case: an agent receives a payoff of ut = u for an
inﬁnite number of periods. There are two ways to calculate the value
v∞of this stream of utilities.
Method 1: Note that one can write v∞as u + δu + δ2u + · · · =
u ∞
t=0 δt. Because 0 < δ < 1, ∞
t=0 δt is a convergent power series.
It is a well-known result that t
t=0 δt converges to 1/(1 −δ) as t →∞,
so that v∞= u/(1 −δ). We can easily derive the following facts about
this important power series:
T

t=0
δt = 1 −δT+1
1 −δ
∞

t=T
δt =
δT
1 −δ
S

t=T
δt = δT −δS+1
1 −δ
.
We can use these results to compute ﬁnite streams of utility as well.
For example, the value of receiving u for T periods is u T
t=0 δt =
u

1 −δT+1
/(1 −δ).
Method 2: Another way to derive v∞is to use recursion. This ap-
proach also forms the basis of Bellman’s (1957) principle of optimality.
Because v∞is an inﬁnite stream of utilities, we can write it as a one-
period utility u plus the discounted value of an inﬁnite stream of utility
beginning one period hence. Therefore,
v∞= u + δv∞
so that v∞= u/(1 −δ). We can compute ﬁnite streams by using this
method as well. Again suppose that the agent receives payoff u for T
periods, and we wish to compute vT. We know that vT = v∞−δT+1v∞
so that vT = u/(1 −δ) −δT+1u/(1 −δ) = u

1 −δT+1
/(1 −δ).
Although the advantages of this method are small in this simple
example, they are substantial in more complex settings. Assume that
there are n states of the world (s1, . . . , sn). In each state, the agent

--- Sayfa 75 ---
5. Time Preferences
59
receives u j. We assume that the state evolves according to a Markov
process such that the conditional probabilities of a state in period t
depend only on the state in period t −1. In other words, assume that
for each i, j, t, Pr(St = si|St−1 = s j) = πi j.
Now suppose we want to compute the value v j of the stream of
utilities beginning from state j. Using recursion, it is easy to see that
v j = u j + δ
n

i=1
πi jvi.
This creates a linear system of n equations and n unknowns (the vis).
Sometimes it is easier to solve such a system by replacing one of the
equations with the requirement that n
i=1 πi j = 1 for all j.
Consider an easy example. Suppose we want to compute the long-
term payoff to a political party that receives payoff u1 per period for
each period it is in ofﬁce and gets a payoff of u2 in periods in which it
does not hold ofﬁce. Suppose that there is an incumbent party effect so
that in periods that it holds ofﬁce, the party is reelected with probability
p > 1/2 and remains in ofﬁce (i.e., state 1). This also implies, however,
that when it is out of ofﬁce (state 2), it remains out of ofﬁce in the next
period with probability p. With probability 1 −p, it transitions either
from in ofﬁce to out of ofﬁce or vice versa. To compute the party’s
payoffs from each state, we can set up the relevant recursive equations.
Note that there are n = 2 unknowns and the equations deﬁning the
system are π11 = π22 = p, π12 = π21 = 1 −p. In addition assume that
u1 > u2. Consequently, the equations are
v1 = u1 + δ(pv1 + (1 −p)v2)
v2 = u2 + δ((1 −p)v1 + pv2).
Solving the two equations with two unknowns, we derive
v1 = (1 −δ p) u1 + δ(1 −p)u2
1 −2δ p + δ2(2p −1)
v2 = δ(1 −p)u1 + (1 −δ p) u2
1 −2δ p + δ2(2p −1)
.
In these examples, the utility streams are exogenous – either constants
or generated by a ﬁxed probability distribution. This can be relaxed
signiﬁcantly. Suppose that the agent chooses a policy xt from a state

--- Sayfa 76 ---
60
Choice Under Uncertainty
contingent choice set X(st) to maximize the discounted value of the
stream u(xt, st) where st ∈(s1, . . . , sn) is the state of the world in time
t. We may also allow the probability distribution of transitions from
st to depend on xt so let π(st+1|xt, st) be the probability of observing
some state st+1 after state st and choice xt. We only consider stationary
plans (i.e., those in which the prescription depends only on the state).
Let x(s) be a stationary plan specifying the action taken when the state
is s.
We can then characterize the payoffs to implementing plan x(s) in
state s as
v(x(s), s) = u(x(s), s) + δ

s′
v(x(s′), s)π(s′|x(s), s).
Assuming that we can solve for v(x(s), s) for all plans, we can compute
the optimal one as
v∗(s) = sup
x
v(x(s), s).
Bellman’s principle of optimality is that
v∗(s) = sup
x∈X(s)

u(x, s) + δ

s′
v∗(s′)π(s′|x, s)

.
5.2. Hyperbolic Discounting. Although most models in game theory
use constant geometric discounting, a growing literature in behavioral
decision theory focuses on alternative speciﬁcations more consistent
with experimental evidence.8 The most widely studied alternative is
hyperbolic discounting, which assumes that at time 0 agents discount
the utility at time t by
h(t) = (1 + αt)−γ
α
for γ > 0 and α > 0. Unless α is close to 0, hyperbolic discounting
weighs the future much more heavily than constant discounting does.
It also implies that agents have a “time consistency” problem. The
optimal plan for time t depends on how far time t is in the future.
8 The reader should review optimization in the Mathematical Appendix before reading
this section.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
5. Time Preferences
61
Suppose that an agent decides how to allocate $1 of consumption over
three periods 0, 1, 2. Let U(x) = √x. Using constant discounting the
optimal plan solves
√x0 + δ√x1 + δ2√x2
such that

xt = 1.
The solution must satisfy x1 = δ2x0 and x2 = δ4x0. Substituting into the
budget constraints, we ﬁnd that
x0 =
1
1 + δ2 + δ4
x1 =
δ2
1 + δ2 + δ4
x2 =
δ4
1 + δ2 + δ4 .
Now consider what happens if the agent reoptimizes after consuming
x0 = 1/(1 + δ2 + δ4) in the ﬁrst period. She again optimally chooses
x2 = δ2x1. Substituting this into the constraint x1 + x2 = (δ2 + δ4)/
(1 + δ2 + δ4), we get
x1 =
1
1 + δ2 ·
δ2 + δ4
1 + δ2 + δ4 =
δ2
1 + δ2 + δ4
x2 =
δ4
1 + δ2 + δ4 .
Therefore, she wishes to continue with her optimal consumption plan
by consuming exactly as much as in period 2 as she had originally
forecast.
Now consider the same allocation problem when the agent uses hy-
perbolic discounting. To keep the algebra simple, let α = γ = 1. Thus,
the agent solves
√x0 + 1
2
√x1 + 1
3
√x2
such that

xt = 1.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
62
Choice Under Uncertainty
The ﬁrst-order conditions for the optimum are x1 = (1/4)x0 and x2 =
(1/9)x0. Therefore, the solution is
x0 = 36
49
x1 = 9
49
x2 = 4
49.
Again consider what happens if the agent re-optimizes after consum-
ing x0 . Now the ﬁrst-order condition is x2 = (1/4)x1. Substituting the
constraint that x1 + x2 = (13/49), we ﬁnd that
x1 = 4
5 · 13
49 = 52
245 > 9
49
x2 = 13
245 < 4
49.
The agent wishes to change her optimal plan and shift more consump-
tion to period 1. The reason for this anomaly is that the relative weight
of period 1 to period 2 consumption is higher in period 1 than it was in
period 0.
Though hyperbolic discounting has been useful in explaining experi-
mental anomalies and temporal patterns in consumption (e.g., retirees
consume less than a constant discounting model would predict), there
have been few applications in political science.9
6. Exercises
EXERCISE 3.1 Smith is a member of the House of Representatives. She
is trying to decide whether or not to run for the Senate. She believes that
she has a 50 percent chance of winning her party’s nomination and if
she gets the nomination has a 40 percent chance of winning the seat.
Suppose that her utility from the Senate seat is W whereas her utility of
losing, returning home, and running her family used car lot is L. Her
utility of keeping her House seat is H.
9 One conceptual obstacle is that utilities over inﬁnite horizons may not be well deﬁned.
Suppose that an agent evaluates an inﬁnite stream of constant utilities u. Evaluation
requires that the series ∞
t=0 h(t)u converge. This, however, is not the case for a large
set of parameters α and γ .

--- Sayfa 79 ---
6. Exercises
63
(1) Using a lottery tree, describe the lottery involved with running
for the Senate.
(2) Compute the expected utility of running for the Senate.
(3) How low must H be relative to W and L before Smith decides to
run for the Senate?
EXERCISE 3.2 Prove Theorem 3.1.
EXERCISE 3.3 Compute the expected payoff of the following lottery. In
each of ﬁve periods, the agent ﬂips a coin and receives $1 for each con-
secutive period she obtains heads. In other words, if she receives heads
x consecutive times, she receives $x.
EXERCISE 3.4 Suppose that instead of always revealing a goat, Monte
Hall randomly selects a door to open and thus occasionally reveals the
car. Clearly, a contestant should switch to the open door if the car is
revealed, but should she switch to the closed door if a goat is revealed?
EXERCISE 3.5 A country is ﬁghting a war. In each period, it costs f > 0
to ﬁght a battle. The country wins each battle with probability π. The
country wins the war and receives a payoff of w > 0 forever if it wins
two consecutive battles. If it loses two consecutive battles, it loses and
receives l = 0 forever. The country discounts future periods by δ.
There are ﬁve states corresponding to the consecutive wins and losses
in battle. Two of these are terminal states corresponding to victory or
loss of the overall war. For each of the nonterminal states, compute the
expected utility of continuing the war. Find a condition for f in terms
of π, w, l for which the country chooses not to start the war. Find a
condition for the country to surrender after losing one battle.
EXERCISE 3.6 Prove that π(p) > p and sub-additivity imply that the
decision weight function π is convex for small values of p.
EXERCISE 3.7 Consider the following pairs of lotteries:
Lottery a: .45 chance of $6000, .55 chance of 0
Lottery b: .90 chance of $3000, .10 chance of 0
Lottery c: .001 chance of $6000, .999 chance of 0
Lottery d: .002 chance of $3000 and .998 chance of 0
Which choices are predicted by Prospect Theory? Why?
EXERCISE 3.8 Kahneman and Tversky ﬁnd that b and c are the modal
choices in the following experiment:

--- Sayfa 80 ---
64
Choice Under Uncertainty
Treatment 1: A person has been given $1000 and then offered
Lottery a: .5 chance of an additional $1000, .5 chance of 0
Lottery b: $500 for sure
Treatment 2: A person has been given $2000 and offered the
choice of
Lottery c: .5 chance of losing $1000, .5 chance of 0
Lottery d: Loss of $500 for sure.
Is this behavior alone inconsistent with the expected utility framework?
EXERCISE 3.9 Show that
(1) ∞
t=0 δt =
1
1−δ.
(2) ∞
t=1 δt−1 = ∞
t=0 δt.
(3) T
t=0 δt = 1−δT+1
1−δ .
(4) ∞
t=T δt =
δT
1−δ.
(5) S
t=T δt = δT−δS+1
1−δ
.
EXERCISE 3.10 Find the value of ∞
t=0 δ2t.
EXERCISE 3.11 What is the value of the sequence of payoffs (1, 2, 1,
2, 1, 2, 1, . . . . .) when the discount rate δ = 2/3 is used?
EXERCISE 3.12 Suppose that you toss a three-sided die for an inﬁnite
number of periods and receive $1 in each period that the die lands on
face $1 and $0 in each period that the die lands on face 2 and 2 dollars in
each period that the die lands on face 3. Assume that the die lands on face
x with probability π x and that these draws are independent. Assume that
the die is fair and that discounting occurs at rate δ. What is the expected
value of this sequence of lotteries? Suppose that the utility function for
(dollars) is given by u(x) = ln(x). What is the certainty equivalent of
this lottery?
EXERCISE 3.13 Repeat the last exercise under the assumption that the die
is very special. It’s realizations follow a Markov process with transition
probabilities πi j for i, j ∈{1, 2, 3}. Let the discount rate be 3/4 and
πii = 2/3, πi j = 1/6 for i̸ = j.
EXERCISE 3.14 Let {xt}∞
t=1 denote a sequence of payoffs. Provide nec-
essary conditions on this sequence such that the value ∞
t=0 xtδt−1 is
ﬁnite.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
6. Exercises
65
EXERCISE 3.15 For what values of the parameters α, γ is ∞
t=1 h(t) =
∞
t=1(1 + αt)−γ /α ﬁnite?
EXERCISE 3.16 What is the value of the sequence of payoffs (1, 2, 1,
2, 1, 2, 1, . . .) when the agent uses hyperbolic discounting with h(t) =
(1 + αt)−γ /α?

--- Sayfa 82 ---
4 Social Choice Theory
1. The Open Search
In the pages that follow we consider a scenario that many readers of
this book may soon encounter in their professional lives (if they have
not already): the “open” faculty search. Consider a ﬁctional, yet real-
istic, political science department whose membership is spread evenly
across ﬁve subﬁelds: American (A), comparative (C), international re-
lations (I), theory (T), and formal theory/methods (F). The ﬁctional
university is having a mediocre year ﬁnancially so the dean gives the
department authorization for only one additional hire. This dean, un-
willing to alienate any of the department’s various factions, does not
specify in which ﬁeld the department should search, but tells the de-
partment, “Because you study politics you should be able to settle this
fairly.” Those readers who have experienced a similar situation in their
own departments should smile knowingly at the dean’s folly.
Members of each subﬁeld have homogeneous preferences over
which ﬁeld to hire. Indeed, each ﬁeld has its own complete and transi-
tive ordering over the ﬁelds. These rankings are given by Table 4.1.
Thus, Americanists ﬁnd hiring an Americanist most desirable and
hiringininternationalrelationsleastdesirable.Sothedepartmentchair
begins to decide how the department should decide. The ﬁrst idea she
entertains is having the department vote on the basis of plurality rule.
Each member of the department is to cast a ballot for his favorite
ﬁeld and the one with the most votes wins. The chair quickly deter-
mines, however, that the election would generate a ﬁve-way tie so she
abandons that idea. Next she considers pairwise majority voting. Un-
der this procedure, each ﬁeld is paired against each other ﬁeld. If any
ﬁeld wins all of the pairwise comparisons, the department hires in that
66

--- Sayfa 83 ---
1. The Open Search
67
Table 4.1
A
C
I
T
F
A
C
I
T
F
F
T
C
I
A
C
I
T
C
I
T
A
F
F
C
I
F
A
A
T
ﬁeld. Conﬁdent that this is a fair way to decide, she
implements this procedure in the next department
meeting. The meeting begins with a vote between
Aand C. Field C wins with support from T and I.
In the vote between C and I, I wins 3-2. In turn, T
beats I. Whereas T survives votes against F and A,
it loses to C. Consequently, each ﬁeld is defeated
in at least one pairwise vote. The chair’s procedure
failed to produce any resolution. The chair notes,
however, that A loses in every pairwise vote and
F loses to all ﬁelds except A. So at least she can
conclude that neither an Americanist nor a formal theorist should be
hired.
Frustrated, the chair decides that a scoring system such as the one
used to rank college football teams might do the trick. Undeterred
by previous failures, she proposes that each department member rank
each ﬁeld. A top ranking gives the ﬁeld 5 points, a second ranking
4 points, and so on (this procedure is known as the Borda Count).
If everyone voted according to his preferences, the chair calculated
that the ranking would be C (17 points), I (16 points), T (15 points),
F(14 points), and A(13 points).
When the vote occurs, the chair is taken aback by the results. The
formal theorists, sensing the opportunity to be strategic, cast their bal-
lots with I in the ﬁrst position and C in the ﬁfth position. This results
in 18 points for I and only 16 for C, an outcome preferred by F. Infu-
riated by the duplicity, the Cs call for a revote. Their plan is to drop I
to the ﬁfth position on their ballots to ensure that C ties for the lead.
The chair quickly realizes that in this revote, I would simply drop C to
the bottom in retaliation; this might even lead to T’s winning if they
also cast their ballots strategically. She quickly adjourns the meeting.
The next day she calls the dean to have the faculty line transferred to
the economics department.
That such a collective choice problem ends in failure is not surprising.
A fundamental result of social choice theory is that collective choice
processes must either restrict the set of alternatives, or the set of pos-
sible preference proﬁles or violate some other desirable normative
properties. As we discuss later, all reasonable mechanisms for mak-
ing collective decisions are subject to strategic manipulation by agents
such as that perpetrated by F in the Borda Count example.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
68
Social Choice Theory
2. Preference Aggregation Rules
This section provides the basic notation and ideas for the formal anal-
ysis of preference aggregation rules. The discussion is limited to the
case of a ﬁnite set of agents N = {1, 2, . . . , n} (n > 2) who must choose
an outcome from the set X.1 Our goal is to understand how the prefer-
ences of the individual agents map into collective preferences. Agent
i holds preference ordering Ri on X. As in Chapter 2, these prefer-
ence orderings are complete, reﬂexive, and transitive. The set of all
possible complete, reﬂexive, and transitive preference orderings is de-
noted by R . We denote a list of preference orderings for all n agents
as ρ = {R1, R2, . . . , Rn}, which we call a preference proﬁle. The set of
proﬁles is therefore Rn. The set B is the set of complete social orderings
on X. An ordering in B need not be transitive.
DEFINITION 4.1 A preference aggregation rule is a function f : Rn→B.
A preference aggregation rule is simply a procedure that takes the
set of individual preference orderings and produces a social prefer-
ence ordering. Subscripted Ri represents individual orderings, but we
denote the social ordering as R. As an example, consider the pairwise-
majority voting illustrated in the introduction to this chapter. We de-
ﬁne the corresponding preference aggregation rule as xRy if at least as
many agents have the ordering xRi y as have yRix. Because a complete
ordering can be produced for any set of preferences, this procedure
satisﬁes the deﬁnition. Importantly, the deﬁnition does not restrict the
outcomes of preference aggregation rules to be transitive. Indeed, in
our ﬁctional department, pairwise-majority voting produces the cyclic
ordering T P I P C P T.
What properties do we want preference aggregation rules to satisfy?
Perhaps the most important feature is the ability to generate a best
outcome so that the agents can actually choose something. In other
words,itisdesirableforthesocialmaximalset M(R, X)tobenonempty
for all preference proﬁles. We know from Chapter 2 that this occurs if
R is acyclic or transitive.
DEFINITION 4.2 A preference aggregation rule f is transitive if for every
ρ ∈Rn the social ordering attained by f is transitive.
1 Throughout this chapter, we focus only on models of complete information so that
we can speak interchangeably of choosing actions, policies, or outcomes.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
2. Preference Aggregation Rules
69
Second, the rule should be at least minimally democratic so that the
preferences of a single agent or dictator do not completely determine
the social ranking of the alternatives.
DEFINITION 4.3 A preference aggregation rule f is nondictatorial if
there does not exist an i ∈N such that for every ρ ∈Rn and every
x, y ∈X, xPi y implies xPy.
This condition is very strong. If it is violated, the “dictator” gets her
way under every possible proﬁle of preferences.
Next, social rankings that agents unanimously disagree with are also
undesirable. If all agents prefer x to y, society’s preferences should
also reﬂect this ordering. This criterion, named in honor of the Italian
economist Vilfredo Pareto, is often referred to as Pareto efﬁciency or
Pareto optimality.
DEFINITION 4.4 A preference aggregation rule f is weakly Paretian if
xPi y for every i ∈N implies that xPy for all x, y ∈X.
Finally, the social preferences ordering for any two outcomes should
depend only on the individual preference orderings for those two
outcomes. One of the reasons that the formal theorists were able to
manipulate the outcome of the chair’s counting procedure is that the
social ranking between C and T depended on F’s relative preferences
for F, A, and I. From the perspective of a choice between C and T
those preferences should be irrelevant. This property is known as the
independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA).
DEFINITION 4.5 A preference aggregation rule f is independent of ir-
relevant alternatives if xRy if and only if xR′y for any pair of policies
x, y ∈Xand any two proﬁles ρ, ρ′ ∈Rn satisfying the condition that for
each i ∈N, xRi y if and only if xR′
i y.
These all seem to be reasonable properties and each can be justiﬁed
easily on normative or practical grounds (though the case for IIA is
weaker). Unfortunately, one of the most fundamental results in the
social sciences proves that aggregation rules cannot satisfy all of these
properties simultaneously . Arrow’s Theorem (1951) says that the only
aggregation function that produces transitive preferences, satisﬁes the
Pareto principle, and is IIA is a dictatorship. In other words, the only

--- Sayfa 86 ---
70
Social Choice Theory
way social preferences behave as individual preferences is if they are
the individual preferences of a single person (the dictator).
We now state and prove Arrow’s Theorem.
THEOREM 4.1 If X is ﬁnite and has at least three alternatives, there is no
preference aggregation rule f : Rn→B that is transitive, nondictatorial,
weakly Paretian, and independent of irrelevant alternatives.
An important, and often misunderstood, aspect of the result is that
we are looking for aggregation rules that are deﬁned for all possible
proﬁles in Rn. The result does not say that an IIA, weak Paretian, and
nondictatorial rule results in an intransitive ordering for any proﬁle
ρ ∈Rn, just that transitivity is violated for some proﬁle(s). Some au-
thors state Arrow’s Theorem with an additional condition known as
unrestricted domain – all proﬁles in Rn are possible. We prefer just to
be clear that a preference aggregation rule has as its domain Rn. We
need one more deﬁnition before proving Arrow’s Theorem.
DEFINITION 4.6 For a preference aggregation rule f , a set W ⊂N is
semidecisive for x against y if xPy for every ρ ∈Rn in which xPi y for
all i ∈W and yPjx for all j ∈Wc = N\W. A set W is decisive for x
against y if xPy for every ρ ∈Rn in which xPi y for all i ∈W. A set W
is decisive if it is decisive for x against y for every x, y ∈X.
A convenient proof of Arrow’s Theorem rests on ﬁrst establish-
ing a property about decisive sets when the rule satisﬁes some of the
Arrovian conditions.
LEMMA 4.1 If f is a transitive preference aggregation rule that is inde-
pendent of irrelevant alternatives and weakly Paretian, W ⊂N is decisive
if W is semidecisive for x against y for some x, y ∈X .
Proof Assume that W ⊂N is semidecisive for x against y and that
xPiz for all i ∈W under the proﬁle ρ ∈Rn. Consider another proﬁle
ρ′ ∈Rn with the following properties: (1) xP′
i yP′
i z for i ∈W; (2) yP′
jx
and yP′
jz for all z /∈{x, y} and j ∈Wc; and (3) xRjz if and only if xR′
jz
for all z /∈{x, y} and j ∈Wc. So ρ and ρ′ do not differ on individual
orderings of x and z. Because W is semidecisive for x against y, xP′y.
That f is weakly Paretian implies that yP′z, whereas the transitivity of
f implies that xP′z. But because (1) preferences of Wc on x and zhave
not been speciﬁed in ρ′ and (2) ρ and ρ′ agree on x and z (i.e., xRjz

--- Sayfa 87 ---
2. Preference Aggregation Rules
71
if and only if xR′
jz), the assumption that f is IIA requires that xPz.
Consequently, W is decisive for x against z. This, of course, implies that
W is semidecisive for x against z. An analogous argument demonstrates
that W is decisive for x against y. We now verify that W is decisive
for y against z. Consider two proﬁles: ρ0 ∈Rn with yP 0
i z for all i ∈W,
and ρ+ ∈Rn with yP +
i xP +
i z for all i ∈W and both zP +
j x and yP +
j x
for all j ∈Wc. Further, assume that yR0
j z if and only if yR+
j z for all
j ∈Wc. Because W is decisive for x against z, xP +z. Further, yP +x
because f is weakly Paretian. Because f is transitive, yP +z. Only the
preferences of members of W have been speciﬁed on {y, z} by ρ+ and
both ρ0 and ρ+ agree on y and z. Consequently, IIA implies yP 0z, so
that W is decisive for y against z. This implies that W is semidecisive
for y against z. Relabeling the ﬁrst step and using this fact imply that
W is decisive for y against x. Combining these conclusions leads to the
claim that W is decisive.
□
Accordingly, if any group is semidecisive for some pairwise compari-
son then the group is decisive. For preference aggregation rules satisfy-
ing IIA and the weak Pareto criterion, a group that gets its way on one
pairwise comparison gets it on all of them. We now complete the proof
of Arrow’s Theorem by showing that either a single agent is decisive or
the entire collective is not decisive. The ﬁrst ﬁnding violates the nondic-
tatorial condition and the second violates the weak Paretian condition.
Consequently, Arrow’s conditions are logically incompatible.
Proof of Arrow’s Theorem Assume that X is ﬁnite and contains at
least three alternatives. To generate a contradiction, assume that a pref-
erence aggregation rule is transitive, nondictatorial, weakly Paretian,
and independent of irrelevant alternatives. Given Lemma 4.1, for any
set W ⊂N either W is decisive or there is no pair of alternatives
x, y ∈X such that W is semidecisive for x against y. Consider two
disjoint sets A, B ⊂N that are not semidecisive for any x and y (and
thus not decisive). Let C = N\{A∪B}. Because n > 2 and no singleton
set {i} is decisive, three such sets A, B, C exist. Now consider the proﬁle
ρ−∈Rn with xP−
i yP−
i z for i ∈A; zP−
j xP−
j y for j ∈B; and yP−
t zP−
t x
for t ∈C. Because A and B are not semidecisive for any pairs, zR−x
and yR−z. That f is transitive requires yR−x. This implies that the
set A∪B is not semidecisive for x against y, and the set A∪B is not
decisive. Thus the union of two disjoint sets that are not decisive is not
decisive. Because f is not dictatorial, no singleton set is decisive. This
conclusion means that no union of agents is decisive. But this implies

--- Sayfa 88 ---
72
Social Choice Theory
that N is not decisive. This contradicts the assumption that f is weakly
Paretian.
□
The introduction of this chapter provides some examples of the im-
plications of Arrow’s Theorem. As we have shown, pairwise majority
Table 4.2
1
2
3
y
z
z
z
y
x
x
x
y
voting is not transitive and the Borda Count does not
satisfy IIA. An additional example is the unanimity
rule deﬁned as xPy if and only if xRi y for all i and
xPi y for some i. Clearly, this rule satisﬁes the weak
Pareto criterion and satisﬁes IIA because the rule
chooses between x and y on the individuals prefer-
ences over x and y. But it is not transitive. To see
this consider the individual preference orderings, as
in Table 4.2.
Clearly, the unanimity rule implies xRy and yRz. Yet, the rule also
implies zPx.
A
C
I
T
F
5
4
3
2
1
Rankings
Alternatives
A
C
I
T
F
Figure 4.1. Preferences over Subﬁelds.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
2. Preference Aggregation Rules
73
Because the domain of a preference aggregation rule is the set of
all possible preference proﬁles, Arrow’s Theorem still allows for the
possibility that there is a satisfactory way to aggregate preferences for a
given proﬁle. Thus, one response to Arrow’s Theorem is to restrict the
set of proﬁles and consider whether there are preference aggregation
rules that satisfy the normative axioms on the restricted set.
One common restriction is single-peakedness. Intuitively, single-
peakedness requires that there is some ordering of the outcomes so
that each agent’s preference ranking increases up to the most pre-
ferred outcome and then declines after that. Consider Figure 4.1,
which plots the preference orderings of our ﬁctional political science
Table 4.3
A
C
I
T
F
A
C
I
T
F
F
T
C
C
A
I
I
A
I
I
C
A
F
A
C
T
F
T
F
T
department. Given the ordering ACITF, only
ﬁelds I and T have preferences with a single peak as
their preference rankings increase up to their ideal
outcome and decline afterward. The other ﬁelds
have multiple-peaked preferences over the order-
ing ACITF. For example, ﬁeld A has peaks at A
and F. The motivated reader can verify that there
is no way to order the outcomes so that all prefer-
ences have a single peak. Thus, the preference pro-
ﬁle of our ﬁctional department is not single-peaked.
Consider the proﬁle shown in Table 4.3, however.
Now if we order the outcomes TCI AF (or F AICT) then all subﬁeld
preferenceshaveasinglepeakattheoutcomeassociatedwiththeirown
ﬁeld as illustrated in Figure 4.2. To foreshadow the next main result
of this section, consider the outcome of pairwise-majority voting. Now
I defeats all of the other alternatives. Furthermore, pairwise-majority
voting produces the transitive strict preference order IACFT, identical
to the preferences of I. Is it a coincidence that majority voting works
well with our single-peaked preference proﬁle? No, single-peakedness
is a sufﬁcient (though not necessary) condition for the transitivity of
majority rule.
Stating and proving this result require a bit more notation. Let q be
an ordering function that takes the set of outcomes and assigns each a
unique rank. Formally, q : X →{1, 2, . . . , |X|} is a one-to-one and onto
function (or bijection).2 Now we deﬁne single-peakedness.
2 A function q : X →X is one-to-one if for every y ∈X the set q−1(y) = {x ∈X;
q(x) = y} is a singleton. The function is onto if for every y ∈X there is some x ∈X
such that q(x) = y.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
74
Social Choice Theory
T
C
I
A
F
5
4
3
2
1
Rankings
Alternatives
A
C
I
T
F
Figure 4.2. Single-Peaked Preferences over Subﬁelds.
DEFINITION 4.7 For a set N and a ﬁnite choice space X, a preference
proﬁle ρ ∈Rn is single-peaked if there exists some bijection q : X →
{1, 2, . . . , |X|} such that for every i ∈N there is some ti ∈X such that if
q(y) < q(ti) then ti Pi y (and if q(x) < q(y) < q(ti) then ti Pi yPix) and
if q(ti) < q(b) then ti Pib (and if q(ti) < q(b) < q(c) then ti PibPic). The
set of single-peaked proﬁles is denoted S ⊂Rn.
In this deﬁnition the policy ti is interpreted as i’s ideal policy as
it is the unique element of M(Ri, X). Agent i’s preference ordering
declines as q(x) deviates from q(ti) both above and below.
We now formally state the theorem.
THEOREM 4.2 Given ρ ∈S majority rule is transitive, weakly Paretian,
IIA, and nondictatorial.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
2. Preference Aggregation Rules
75
The proof is very straightforward. We begin by proving transitivity.
Let x, y, and zbe three alternatives where without loss of generality, we
can deﬁne the single-peaked ordering (using deﬁnition 4.7) as q(z) >
q(y) > q(x). Let P(x, y; ρ) be the set of agents who prefer x to y given
proﬁle ρ.
Single-peakedness puts restrictions on the preference orderings over
x, y , and z. For example, suppose than an agent prefers x to y. With
single-peakedness, such an agent can have only one preference order –
xPi yPiz – any other ordering has peaks at both x and z. Consequently,
we know that she also prefers x to z. Thus, all agents who prefer x to y
also prefer x to z so that P(x, y; ρ) ⊆P(x, z; ρ). We ask the reader to
verify that single-peakedness generates all of the following conditions:
P(x, y; ρ) ⊆P(x, z; ρ)
P(z, x; ρ) ⊆P(y, x; ρ)
P(z, y; ρ) ⊆P(z, x; ρ)
P(x, z; ρ) ⊆P(y, z; ρ).
A property of majority rule is that a set of agents is decisive over
a pair of alternatives if any of its subsets is decisive – if a group is a
majority, all the groups to which its belongs are bigger and therefore
must be majorities as well. Thus, the restrictions imposed by single-
peakedness imply the following:
If xPy then xPz.
(4.1)
If zPx then yPx.
(4.2)
If zPy then zPx.
(4.3)
If xPz then yPz.
(4.4)
In order to establish transitivity, we need to show that none of the
following six statements is contradicted. Either each of the following
statements follows directly from one of the preceding conditions or its
premise is contradicted.3
(1) If xPy and yPz then xPz. This follows from (4.1).
(2)
If xPzand zPy then xPy. The premise is contradicted by (4.3).
3 If a statement’s premise (the “if” part) is invalid, then the statement is not
contradicted.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
76
Social Choice Theory
(3) If yPx and xPz then yPz. This follows from (4.4).
(4) If yPz and zPx then yPx. This follows from (4.2).
(5) If zPx and xPy then zPy. The premise is contradicted by (4.2).
(6) If zPy and yPx then zPx. This follows from (4.3).
Having exhausted the possibilities, we establish that majority rule
is transitive if preferences are single-peaked when the choice space
has three policies. The extension is not challenging. We leave it to
the reader to show that majority rule is weakly Paretian, IIA, and
nondictatorial.
3. Collective Choice
Whereas it is useful to begin with the properties of aggregate pref-
erence orderings, ultimately we are interested in the set of policies
that are maximal given a preference aggregation rule. Analogously to
individual choices, we assume social choices are generated from the
maximal set determined by the aggregate preference ordering. In the
social choice setting, we refer to the set of maximal choices as the
core.
DEFINITION 4.8 Given X, ρ ∈Rn, and a preference aggregation rule f ,
the core is deﬁned as C f (ρ)(X) = M( f (ρ), X).
Applying Theorem 2.1 establishes that if Xis ﬁnite and the collective
preference is complete and transitive, the core is nonempty, and the
social choice is well deﬁned. Arrow’s Theorem, however, indicates that
transitivity of preference aggregation rules is not always satisﬁed. In
such cases, the core may be empty.
When a majority-rule core exists, its outcomes are known as Con-
dorcetwinnersaftertheMarquisdeCondorcet,whowasamongtheﬁrst
to study the properties of voting procedures formally. Nevertheless, the
result that the majority-rule core is nonempty with single-peaked pref-
erences is generally attributed to Duncan Black.
THEOREM 4.3 Let
n > 2
(odd),
ρ ∈S,
and
f (·)
be
pairwise-
majority voting. Then C f (ρ)(X) = {tm :
 j ∈N\m : q(t j) ≤q(tm)
 =
k ∈N\m : q(tk) ≥q(tm)
}. Consequently, the core is the median voter’s
ideal point.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
3. Collective Choice
77
The proof is similar to, but easier than, the proof of the transitivity
of majority rule with single-peaked preferences. Let tm be the median
ideal point so that n/2 agents have ideal points such that q(ti) < q(tm)
and n/2 agents have ideal points such that q(ti) > q(tm). Then we can
deﬁne P(tm, x) as the set of agents that prefer tm to x. If q(x) < q(tm),
then single-peakedness implies that P(tm, x) must include the median
agent and all agents for whom q(ti) > q(tm). This set is a majority as
it contains at least (n + 1)/2 agents. Similarly, if q(x) > q(tm), P(tm, x)
contains the median and all agents for whom q(ti) < q(tm). Conse-
quently, tmPx for all x̸ = tm and is therefore the unique element of the
maximal set.
This result indicates that if preferences are single-peaked, the
majority-rule core is well deﬁned. In such cases, submitting to the “will
of the majority” might be a reasonable way to make collective choices.
The restriction to single-peaked preferences may not always be ap-
propriate, however. For example, the set of policies may be multi-
dimensional. In such cases, the generalization of single-peakedness
is extraordinarily restrictive. Consider Figure 4.3, which shows ideal
points for ﬁve voters in two dimensions. Each agent has circular in-
difference curves so that in any binary comparison, she prefers the
alternative closest to her ideal point. These indifference curves corre-
spond to Euclidean preferences. Point 5 is a majority-rule core point
or the Condorcet winner as a majority prefers it to any other point in
the policy space. To demonstrate this claim, we show that at least three
voters block any other policy. First, consider a move to any policy in
the region marked W. Obviously, voter 5 votes against any such move,
as do voters 1 and 3. Thus, 5’s ideal point is majority preferred to any
3
2
1
4
5
X
Y
Z
W
Figure 4.3. Condorcet Winner in Two Dimensions.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
78
Social Choice Theory
Y’
3
2
1
4
5
Figure 4.4. No Condorcet Winner.
policy in region W. Similarly, voters 1, 2, and 5 vote against moves to
region X, voters 2, 4, and 5 vote against points in region Y, and 3, 4,
and 5 vote against points in region Z.
Voter 5’s ideal point is the core because voter 5 is the median voter
over any two alternatives: if she prefers x to y at least two other voters
do so as well. Because this must also be true for comparisons of the
ideal points of other players, voter 5’s ideal point must lie on the lines
connecting opposing pairs of ideal points (2–3 and 1–4). This condi-
tion is closely related to the Plott (1967) conditions. We formalize the
condition in the next section; for now it is sufﬁcient to note that the
condition is fragile. A slight deviation from the intersection of these
lines as in Figure 4.4 destroys the majority core. First, the intersection
cannot be a core point because voters 3, 4, and 5 prefer 5’s ideal point
to the intersection. Second, voter 5’s ideal point cannot be a Condorcet
winner because there is a set of points Y′ that are preferred by 1, 2,
and 3.
Given that the conditions for the existence (or more precisely the
nonemptiness) of a majority rule core are so restrictive, an obvious
question is whether majority rule can at least reduce the set of pos-
sible outcomes by eliminating some as undesirable. Recall in our in-
troductory example the department chair felt that it was reasonable
to conclude that the department should not hire in American or for-
mal theory – both of those ﬁelds were defeated by the three other
ﬁelds. Consequently, majority rule eliminates two options even though
it created a cycle among the three top alternatives. In the example,
C, I, and T represent a top cycle set: a set of alternatives that defeat
all alternatives outside the set but over which the aggregation rule is

--- Sayfa 95 ---
3. Collective Choice
79
a
b
c
d
e
1
2
3
Figure 4.5. McKelvey’s Theorem.
intransitive. Perhaps, although majority rule does not produce a core,
it can produce a small top cycle set. Unfortunately, this optimism is
also unwarranted. Richard McKelvey (1976) has shown that with sin-
cere voting (given any pair of alternatives, each agent votes for the
one she prefers) and Euclidean preferences the top cycle set is either
the core or the entire set of alternatives. We treat McKelvey’s result
more formally in the next section, but its intuition is illustrated in the
example of Figure 4.5. Here three voters have quadratic preferences,
and there is an initial status quo policy a. To illustrate the result, it is
sufﬁcient to demonstrate that pairwise-majority voting can lead from
point a to anywhere in the policy space. First, note that point b is ma-
jority preferred to a because voters 1 and 2 prefer it. Continuing, note
that voters 2 and 3 prefer c to b, and voters 1 and 3 prefer d to c. At
each subsequent stage of the agenda, the set of policies that are major-
ity preferred to the current status quo is getting larger. This allows us
to reach points farther and farther away from the voters’ ideal points.
Ultimately voters 1 and 2 prefer the very distant point e to d. From e,
the agenda can return to a (the voters unanimously prefer a to e) or e
can be leveraged to get to even more distant points.
This approach to preference aggregation is not well suited as a posi-
tive methodology because it does not offer clear empirical predictions.
Some have interpreted McKelvey’s result to predict political chaos:
choicesareunstablewithobservablecycles.Thisinterpretationisnaive;
it attributes a positive prediction to a model that does not make any.
A more reasonable interpretation is that the results demonstrate the

--- Sayfa 96 ---
80
Social Choice Theory
importance of investigating the effects of the political institutions
within which collective choices are made. The conclusion, therefore, is
that a model that takes as primitives only preferences and a preference
aggregation rule is often underspeciﬁed. The tools of noncooperative
game theory developed in later chapters allow us to construct more
empirically relevant models of collective choice.
3.1. Formal Analysis of the Plott Conditions and McKelvey’s
Theorem∗. In this section, we present a formal analysis of Plott and
McKelvey’sresultsformajorityruleandmultidimensionalpreferences.
The following analysis is based on the following social choice environ-
ment.
Condition 4.1 Let X ⊂Rd (d ﬁnite) be convex. Agents have strictly con-
vex, continuous preferences on X.
If Xis compact, Theorem 2.3 and Theorem 2.4 imply that each agent
has a unique ideal point yi in X. Instead of assuming that X is com-
pact, therefore, we assume that each agent has an ideal point. The
assumption that preferences are strictly convex requires that the up-
per contour sets be strictly convex sets. If we further restrict the model
to Euclidean preferences, ui(x) = −∥x −yi∥, we can specify exactly
how utility changes as the policy alternatives are varied.
DEFINITION 4.9 If preferences are Euclidean then for any x ∈Xthe gra-
dient vector ∇ui(x) = yi −x.
The gradient vector is a directed vector or line segment pointing in
the direction that agent i prefers policy to move from point x. For a
general utility function, the gradient vector at x is simply the vector of
partial derivatives evaluated at x.
DEFINITION 4.10 Given a utility function u : Rd →R1 the gradient vec-
tor is ∇ui(x) = (∂u(x)/∂x1, ∂u(x)/∂x2, . . . , ∂u(x)/∂xd)′.
The statement of Plott’s result also uses the notion of a pairing. For
a ﬁnite set A, a mapping p : A→Ais a pairing if it is a bijection. This
means that each i in Ais paired with exactly one j in A. Now we can
deﬁne Plott’s conditions.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
3. Collective Choice
81
DEFINITION 4.11 In the spatial model with Euclidean preferences the
Plott conditions are satisﬁed at a policy x ∈X if there exists a pairing
p(·) on the set L = { j ∈N : yj̸ = x} such that for every i ∈L, ∇ui(x) =
−λi∇up(i)(x) for some λi > 0.
If the Plott conditions are satisﬁed at x, each agent with an ideal point
different from x can be paired with an agent so that each agent in the
pair wants policy to move in the exact opposite direction. Because pro-
ponents of any change are paired with opponents, it is impossible to
build a majority coalition to overturn x. The following result character-
izes the relationship between the Plott conditions and the majority-rule
core in the spatial model with Euclidean preferences.
THEOREM 4.4 In the spatial model with Euclidean preferences and n
odd the point x in the interior of X is in the core C f (ρ)(X) if and only if
the Plott conditions are satisﬁed at x.4
It is clear that the Plott conditions are not satisﬁed generally. Sup-
pose the conditions are satisﬁed for some x. Then for all i, yi −x =
−λi

yp(i) −x

. If we perturb yp(i) so that it lies on a different vector
from the origin, this condition no longer holds at x. More precisely
if Rdn is the space of possible ideal points of n agents with Euclidean
preferences on the choice space Rd then the subset of Rdn for which
the Plott conditions are satisﬁed at some x ∈Rd is incredibly small.
It contains no open sets and has an empty interior. If one randomly
picked an arbitrary preference proﬁle, the probability of selecting one
that satisﬁes the Plott conditions for some point would be 0.
Although the set of proﬁles with a core point is very small, each
proﬁle with a core point is arbitrarily close to another proﬁle with
a core point. In the exercises, we ask the reader to show that if one
perturbs a proﬁle with a core point, the core point of the new proﬁle
(if it exists) is arbitrarily close to the old one.5
Even though the core is generally empty, is there some other subset
of the policy space that possesses normatively desirable properties and
is a reasonable prediction? One possibility is the top cycle set.
4 A policy x is in the interior of X if there is an open ball B(x, ε) that is contained in
X. See the Mathematical Appendix for more on this concept.
5 The assumption that preferences are Euclidean can be replaced by a differentiability
condition to produce a more general result.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
82
Social Choice Theory
DEFINITION 4.12 For a set X, a proﬁle ρ ∈Rn, and a preference aggrega-
tion rule f , the top cycle set is Tf (ρ) = {x ∈X : ∀y ∈X\x, ∃{a0, . . . , at} ⊂
X such that a0 = x, at = y for t < ∞and ∀z ≤t az−1Paz}.
The top cycle set is the set of points that can be reached from any
other point via a ﬁnite chain of strict preferences. That is, if x ∈Tf (ρ)
then for every y ∈X\x we can select a ﬁnite number of policies
{a1, a2, . . . , at} such that xPa1Pa2P . . . .Pat Py. The following result
(proved by McKelvey) indicates that either the Plott conditions are
satisﬁed or the top cycle set covers the policy space.
THEOREM 4.5 In the spatial model either C f (ρ)(X) is nonempty or
Tf (ρ) = X.
The implications of the last two theorems are striking. In the spatial
model with Euclidean preferences, any policy can be reached by any
other policy in a ﬁnite chain of strict preferences unless the knife-edged
Plott condition holds at some policy.
4. Manipulation of Choice Functions
The previous section illustrates that majority rule very often fails to
provide sufﬁcient guidance for making social choices. Even when a
majority core exists, however, agents may not have incentives to re-
veal their preferences truthfully. As Gibbard (1973) and Sattherwaite
(1975) have proved, all reasonable social choice functions including
majority rule are susceptible to manipulation by strategic agents. Re-
call the attempt of the formal theorists to manipulate the Borda Count
by misrepresenting their preferences over the ﬁelds. Similar manipu-
lation is also possible in voting. Consider a voting agenda in which x is
ﬁrst paired against y and then against z. Suppose that by majority vote,
xPy, zPx, and yPz. If all voters vote according to their actual prefer-
ences, x defeats y and loses to z. Voters who prefer x to y and y to z,
however, have incentives to vote strategically for y (i.e., misrepresent
their preferences over x and y) in the ﬁrst round so that y might win
round 1 and go on to defeat z.
Formalizing the Gibbard-Sattherwaite theorem requires additional
notation and deﬁnitions.
DEFINITION 4.13 The social decision function is an onto function
G : Rn →X that generates an outcome given a preference proﬁle.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
4. Manipulation of Choice Functions
83
A social decision function inputs a preference proﬁle and generates
an outcome. The requirement that G be “onto” suggests that every
outcome is supported by some proﬁle. Now we deﬁne manipulation.
DEFINITION 4.14 G(ρ) is manipulable at proﬁle ρ if and only if for some
i there exists an alternative proﬁle ρ′ =

R1, . . . , Ri−1, R′
i, Ri+1, . . . , Rn

such that G(ρ′)PiG(ρ). G is nonmanipulable if it is not manipulable at
any ρ.
A social decision function is manipulable if a single agent can change
the outcome to one she prefers by misreporting her preferences. In the
deﬁnition, agent i changes the outcome from G(ρ) to G(ρ′), one she
prefers, by reporting preferences R′
i instead of Ri. The following is
Gibbard and Sattherwaite’s theorem:
THEOREM 4.6 If there are more than three alternatives and G is non-
manipulable, then there is a dictator (i.e., G(ρ)Pix for some i, all
x ∈X \G(ρ) and all ρ ∈Rn).
An outline of the proof follows. Assume that G is nonmanipulable.
Then we can construct a transitive and IIA preference ordering by
applying G to all of X to get the most preferred outcome, and subse-
quently applying G to the remaining elements of X to get the second
outcome, and so on. Because this ordering satisﬁes the weak Pareto
criterion, Arrow’s Theorem says there must be a dictator.
Now consider the details. Suppose that G is nonmanipulable. For
step 1, let ρ be such that there exists a set B where xPi y for all i, all
x ∈B, and all y ∈X\B. Consequently, Bis a set of alternatives that all
agents prefer to all alternatives outside the set. The ﬁrst claim is that the
social decision is an element of this “best” set, G(ρ) ∈B. Suppose that
this were not true. Because Gis onto, we can pick an alternative proﬁle
ρ′ such that G(ρ′) ∈B. Then we can construct a series of alternatives:
y0 = G(ρ)
y1 = G(ρ|R′
1) = G(R′
1, R2, . . . , Rn)
yi = G(ρ|R′
1 . . . , R′
i) = G(R′
1, . . . , R′
i, Ri+1, . . . , Rn)
yn = G(ρ′) .
Let k be the smallest integer such that yk ∈B. Because agent k prefers
everything inside B to everything outside it, she generates a better

--- Sayfa 100 ---
84
Social Choice Theory
outcome by reporting R′
k instead of Rk. So G is not nonmanipulable. It
must be true that G(ρ) ∈B.
Thenextstepistocreateanaggregationruleorsocialrankingoverall
policies given ρ. Let the highest-ranked element be x1 = G(ρ). We can
then move x1 to the bottom of everyone’s preference ranking to create
ρ2. The second-ranked choice is x2 = G(ρ2). From step 1, x2̸ = x1. We
continue this process until we rank all of the alternatives.
It is easy to see that this preference ordering satisﬁes the weak Pareto
criterion – at every stage the decision rule chooses an element of the
“best” set for the constructed proﬁle. Now we show that our aggrega-
tion rule is IIA. Suppose that it were not. Then there would be two
proﬁles ρ and ρ′ and two alternatives x, y ∈X such that xRi y if and
only if xR′
i y for all i but x f (ρ) y and y f (ρ′) x. Let ρ(x, y) be the
proﬁle that agrees with ρ everywhere except that x and y are moved to
the top of everyone’s ordering. We claim that G(ρ(x, y)) = x. Suppose
this statement were not true. Then letρ be the proﬁle created by drop-
ping alternatives to the bottom until G(ρ ) = x. Consider a sequence
yi = G(ρ(x, y)|R1, . . . , Ri) so that yi is the social decision created by
switching the ﬁrst i agents to the new proﬁle. Note that yn = G(ρ) = x
and y0 = G(ρ(x, y)) = y because step 1 implies G(ρ(x, y)) ∈{x, y}.
As earlier, let k be the smallest integer such that yk̸ = y. If yk = x and
xPky, G can be manipulated by switching from Rk to Rk. Alternatively,
if yPkx, a switch from Rk to Rk manipulates G. If yk̸ = x, then consider
the smallest j > ksuch that yj ∈{x, y}. Using exactly the same logic as
earlier, we can verify that agent j can manipulate G. So we contradict
the assumption that Gis nonmanipulable and establish G(ρ(x, y)) = x.
Now consider a sequence zi = G(ρ(x, y)|R′
1(x, y), . . . , R′
i(x, y)).
The assumption of not IIA implies that zn = G(ρ′ (x, y)) = y and
z0 = G(ρ (x, y)) = x. As earlier, there must be an agent who prefers
y to x and can switch his stated preference from R(x, y) to R′(x, y) to
change the outcome from x to y or an agent who prefers x to y who can
switch from R′(x, y) to R(x, y) Thus, G is manipulable. This contradic-
tion implies that the preference ordering must be IIA. From Arrow’s
Theorem, there must be a dictator for f and therefore a dictator
for G.
Although the Gibbard-Sattherwaite Theorem is a negative result, it
has important implications for the study of politics. Perhaps the most
important is that strategic behavior is ubiquitous in politics: “strategy-
proof” mechanisms often do not exist. Appropriately, the next chapter
begins our study of strategic models of politics.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
5. Exercises
85
5. Exercises
EXERCISE 4.1 Suppose players have the following preferences:
1
2
a
e
b
b
c
d
d
a
e
c
(1) What are the Borda counts for each of the alternatives?
(2) How can player 1 do better by misrepresenting her preferences?
(3) How can player 2 do better by misrepresenting his preferences?
(4) Is there any combination of statements (not necessarily truthful)
for which the two players would not have an incentive to change,
ex post?
EXERCISE 4.2 Prove the following proposition: Given ρ ∈S majority
rule is transitive, weakly Paretian, IIA, and nondictatorial.
EXERCISE 4.3 (drawn from Austen-Smith and Banks 1999) A prefer-
ence aggregation rule f satisﬁes citizen’s sovereignty if for all x, y ∈X
(where x̸ = y) there exist ρ ∈Rn such that xPy. A preference aggre-
gation rule f is monotone if for all x, y ∈X, and for all ρ, ρ′ ∈Rn
the following is true: if (1) xPi y implies xP′
i y, and (2) xRi y implies
xR′
i y, and (3) xPy then it must be the case that xP′y. Prove that if f
is weakly monotonic and satisﬁes citizen’s sovereignty then f is weakly
Paretian.
EXERCISE 4.4 Suppose there are three voters who are to decide on an
alternative via pairwise-majority rule. If there are three alternatives, all
preferences are strict, and each voter has a different preference ordering
from the other two, what percentage of the possible combinations of
preferences result in a Condorcet winner? (Note that if two agents share
acommonpreferenceordering,theirmostpreferredmustbeaCondorcet
winner. Why?)
EXERCISE 4.5 Assume that there are three voters with Euclidean prefer-
ences in two dimensions with ideal points at (−1, 0), (0, 1), and (1, 0),
respectively.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
86
Social Choice Theory
(1) Construct an agenda to get from (0, 0) to (2, 2).
(2) Construct an agenda to get from (0, 0) to (5, 5).
(3) Construct an agenda to get from (0, 0) to (−5, −5).
Try to keep these agendas as short as possible.
EXERCISE 4.6 Show that if ρ ∈Rdn is a proﬁle of ideal points for which
the Plott conditions are satisﬁed at some x ∈Rd then for every ε > 0
there exists a proﬁle ρε ∈B(ρ, ε) for which the Plott conditions are not
satisﬁed at any point for the proﬁle ρε.
EXERCISE 4.7 Show that if ρ ∈Rdn (n odd) is a proﬁle of ideal points
for which the Plott conditions are satisﬁed at some x ∈Rd then for every
ε > 0thereexistsaδ > 0suchthatifρδ ∈B(ρ, δ) andthePlottconditions
are satisﬁed for some point at the proﬁle ρδ then the Plott conditions are
satisﬁed for a point x′ ∈B(x, ε) by the proﬁle ρδ.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
5 Games in the Normal Form
At twelve and a half minutes into the broadcast, Detectives Logan and
Briscoe arrest two murder suspects. District Attorney Adam Schiff
instructs Assistant D.A. Jack McCoy to make the following offer to
each separately:
r If you confess and provide evidence of ﬁrst-degree murder by
your accomplice, you will receive a 1 year sentence on a weapons
charge provided that your accomplice does not confess. If she does
confess as well, you both will get 8 years for murder II.
r If you hold out and your accomplice turns state’s evidence, you
will serve 25 to life for murder I. If she also holds out, you will
serve 4 years for voluntary manslaughter.
Assuming each suspect loses one unit of utility for each year in
prison, Table 5.1 shows the payoffs of each subject given all of the pos-
sible outcomes. The rows represent the actions of suspect 1 whereas
the columns represent the actions of suspect 2. Each pair of numbers
represents the payoffs for suspect 1 and suspect 2 for each combination,
respectively.
The situation of the suspects is strategic because the outcome of
any action by suspect 1 depends on the choices of suspect 2, and vice
versa. What should the suspects do? Collectively, they prefer to hold
out. If they both hold out, the total jail time is only eight years, far
less than any other outcome. Unless, however, they reach a binding
agreement, the individual incentives of the suspects undermine this
outcome. Suppose that suspect 1 holds out. Suspect 2 then recognizes
that she does better by confessing, reducing jail time from 4 years to 1.
In fact, both suspects recognize that each does better by confessing
87

--- Sayfa 104 ---
88
Games in the Normal Form
regardless of the other’s actions. Thus, they both confess, leading to a
total of 16 years of jail. Individual rationality leads to socially inferior
outcomes (where society refers to the suspects; the D.A. and the police
presumably prefer this outcome).1
In this game, the well-known “Prisoner’s Dilemma,” we deduce the
strategies of rational actors straightforwardly. In other strategic situa-
tions, however, the predictions are more subtle. Consider the “Terrorist
Table 5.1. The Prisoner’s
Dilemma
1\2
Hold Out
Confess
Hold Out
−4, −4
−25, −1
Confess
−1, −25
−8, −8
Hunt.” Two agencies, the FBI and the
CIA, are responsible for investigat-
ing and apprehending terror suspects.
There are two types of suspects: king-
pins and operatives. Both agencies pre-
fer the capture of kingpins to the cap-
ture of operatives, and both agencies
prefer either of these outcomes to a
failure to capture anyone. Capturing a
kingpin, however, requires that the two agencies cooperate by dedicat-
ing resources to a joint effort. If one agency fails to cooperate, the other
agency fails to capture any suspects. On the other hand, each agency
captures an operative by conducting its own investigation. Table 5.2
illustrates the strategic situation of each agency in deciding whether to
go after the kingpin or the operative.
The rows of this matrix represent the possible strategies of the FBI
(hunt kingpin or hunt operative) whereas the columns represent those
Table 5.2. The Terrorist Hunt
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 2
0, 1
Operative
1, 0
1, 1
of the CIA. Both agencies earn a util-
ity of 2 for capturing the kingpin, 1 for
capturing the operative, and 0 for fail-
ing. We begin with the FBI’s decision.
Unlike in the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
the FBI’s best choice depends on the
choiceoftheCIA.IftheCIAhuntsthe
kingpin, the FBI gets 2 units of utility
for cooperating instead of the 1 unit it
receives for hunting the operative by itself. If the CIA strikes out on its
own, however, the FBI gets 0 for hunting the kingpin. Consequently,
the FBI’s choice depends on what it believes the CIA does, and vice
1 Not to leave the reader in limbo, here is a quick summary of the rest of the episode.
The confessions are thrown out on a technicality by an Upper West Side judge. The
episode ends with a pithy piece of wisdom by Schiff just as McCoy pours himself an
eighteen year old Scotch.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
1. The Normal Form
89
versa. What is reasonable for each agency to believe? A key devel-
opment in the study of strategic interaction is John Nash’s character-
ization of rational equilibrium behavior. In Nash’s formulation, each
agency chooses strategies that are “best responses” to the strategies
of the other agency. If both agencies choose this way, the outcome is a
best response to a best response, and neither agency has an incentive to
change its strategy. Because such a combination of strategies produces
a stable behavioral prediction, it is called an equilibrium. In honor of
Nash’s (1950b) contribution, it is called a Nash equilibrium.
To ascertain whether a particular combination (or proﬁle) of strate-
gies is a Nash equilibrium, it sufﬁces to check that neither agency can
achieve a higher utility level by unilaterally deviating to another strat-
egy. Is the outcome in which both agencies hunt the kingpin a Nash
equilibrium? If the CIA hunts the kingpin, the best choice of the FBI
is to hunt the kingpin. Similarly, the CIA’s best response to the FBI’s
choice to hunt the kingpin is to hunt the kingpin also. Thus, both agen-
cies’ pursuing the kingpin is a Nash equilibrium. This is not the only
Nash equilibrium of the game, however. If the CIA decides to hunt the
operative, the best that the FBI can do is also to settle for the opera-
tive. Because the CIA also prefers to hunt the operative when the FBI
hunts one, both agencies’ pursuing an operative is also a Nash equilib-
rium.2 Although Nash’s solution does not lead to a unique prediction,
it rules out some behavior. A situation in which one agency hunts the
kingpin while the other tracks an operative is not a Nash equilibrium –
the agency hunting the kingpin would get more utility if it switched to
searching for an operative. Conversely, the agency hunting an opera-
tive also prefers to deviate from its strategy.
Although these examples are quite simple, Nash’s equilibrium con-
cept is a very powerful tool in analyzing behavior across a large class
of games. Consequently, the remainder of this chapter (and most of
this book, for that matter) extends and develops the Nash equilibrium
concept.
1. The Normal Form
The ﬁrst step in using game theory to model political phenomena is
to decide how to represent the strategic situation. We begin with the
2 Although we defer the discussion of such possibilities, there is also a third equilibrium
where each agency pursues the kingpin with probability .5 and the operative with
probability .5.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
90
Games in the Normal Form
simplest representation: the normal form with complete and perfect
information. This representation contains the following elements:
(1) Agents: Let N represent the set of agents. In referring to an
arbitrary agent, we use the notation i ∈N. The symbol −i ∈N
(read “not agent i” ) refers to all agents other than agent i.
(2) Pure Strategies: A pure strategy is an agent’s plan of action such
as “confess” or “hunt an operative” in our motivating exam-
ples. In games with single interactions such as our examples,
a strategy is simply an action. In a game with multiple inter-
actions, however, a strategy speciﬁes the action to be taken in
each interaction as a function of what happened in previous
stages. In the normal form representation, we specify the set of
pure strategies for each player and denote them as Si for each
i ∈N. We write an arbitrary strategy by agent i as si ∈Si. List-
ing all possible combinations of strategies generates the set of
strategy proﬁles S. Formally, S ≡×i∈NSi. A proﬁle is therefore a
vector s = (s1, . . . , si, . . . , sn) ∈S. The set S−i ≡× j∈N\{i}Sj con-
tains the set of strategies for every player except i. An element
of this set, s−i, is the proﬁle of strategies for players N\{i}. To
economize on notation, we often write s as (si, s−i). In the fol-
lowing we extend the deﬁnition of strategies to allow agents to
randomize over pure strategies.
(3) Payoffs: A normal form representation requires von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility functions over lotteries on S. Agents
have utility functions deﬁned over the set of strategy proﬁles,
ui(s) : S →R1. Sometimes the utility function for i is denoted
ui(si, s−i). Following the development in Chapter 3, the func-
tions ui(·) are Bernoulli utility functions, and given any lottery
over Sthe agent calculates her expected utility under the lottery.
The normal form representation can also be used in situations
in which the payoffs are interpreted as expected utilities. For
example, the payoff of 2 associated with both agencies’ play-
ing kingpin could be interpreted as the expected utility from
the lottery over catching bad guys that is associated with each
agency choosing kingpin.
One interpretation of a normal form game is that in period 1 each
player i ∈N chooses her strategy si ∈Si and in period 2 each player
i receives a payoff of ui(s). Recall that s = (s1, . . . , sn). Games with

--- Sayfa 107 ---
1. The Normal Form
91
more periods, as we demonstrate later, can be reinterpreted as large
normal form games.
Accordingly a normal form game is deﬁned by the collection

N, {Si, u(·, . . . , ·)}i∈n

. The shorthand ⟨N, S, u⟩also represents a game
where u without a subscript represents the vector of utility functions
(u1(·), . . . , un(·)). Some simple, yet interesting games that involve only
two players can be represented as matrices (as we have seen already).
To make these ideas concrete, we now describe our two motivat-
ing examples using the normal form. First consider the Prisoner’s
Dilemma. Clearly N = {player 1, player 2}, S1 = S2 = {hold out,
confess}. The payoff functions are
ui(si, s−i) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
−8 if si = s−i = confess
−4 if si = s−i = hold out
−1 if si = confess & s−i = hold out
−25 if si = hold out & s−i = confess
.
Similarly, we represent the Terrorist Hunt as N = {CI A, FBI}, S1 =
S2 = {hunt kingpin, hunt operative}, and
ui(si, s−i) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
2 if si = s−i = hunt kingpin
1 if si = s−i = hunt operative
1 if si = hunt operative & s−i = hunt kingpin
0 if si = hunt kingpin & s−i = hunt operative
.
We can represent both of these normal forms with matrices. For two-
agent games and ﬁnite strategy spaces, the relationship between the
normal form and a game matrix generalizes to the pattern shown in
Table 5.3, where N = {1, 2} , S1 = {s11, . . . , s1l}, and S2 = {s21, . . . , s2k}.
Table 5.3. Generic Normal Form Game
1\2
s21
s22
· · ·
s2k
s11
u(s11, s21)
u(s11, s22)
· · ·
u(s11, s2k)
s12
u(s11, s21)
u(s12, s22)
· · ·
u(s12, s22)
...
...
...
...
...
s1l
u(s1l, s21)
u(s1l, s22)
· · ·
u(s1l, s2k)

--- Sayfa 108 ---
92
Games in the Normal Form
Using a matrix to represent a normal form with more than two play-
ers is more difﬁcult because we cannot show the strategy combinations
in two dimensions. Sometimes, however, we can use a trick to put such
games in matrix form. Suppose the Terrorist Hunt includes a third
agency, the National Security Agency (NSA), whose strategy set is
the same as that of the other two, S3 = {hunt kingpin, hunt operative}.
Now capturing the kingpin requires cooperation by at least two agen-
cies, but each still can capture an operative on its own. The payoff
function for the FBI is now
u1(s1, s−1) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
2 if s2 = kingpin or s3 = kingpin
1 if s1 = operative
0 if s2 = operative & s3 = operative
.
Consider the pair of matrices shown in Tables 5.4 and 5.5.
Table 5.4 Game If NSA Hunts
Kingpin
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 2, 2
2, 1, 2
Operative
1, 2, 2
1, 1, 0
Table 5.4 displays the payoff triples
corresponding to the strategy combi-
nations where the NSA hunts the king-
pin, whereas the payoffs in Table 5.5
are those in which the NSA hunts
the operative. In general three-player
normal form games with ﬁnite strat-
egy spaces can be represented by ma-
trices of payoff triples corresponding to each possible strategy for
player 1.3
There is no uncertainty in any of the games considered thus far. In
each game, players know the strategy sets and the payoffs, and they
Table 5.5. Game If NSA Hunts
Operative
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 2, 1
0, 1, 1
Operative
1, 0, 1
1, 1, 1
know that the other players know
these elements, and they know that
theotherplayersknowthattheyknow,
and they know that the other players
know that they know that they know,
and so on. This inﬁnite loop is termed
commonknowledge.Thenormalform
representation, however, can accom-
modate more complex situations when the agents do not know the
3 For games with more than three players, graphical representations are more difﬁcult
without moving pages and holograms.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
2. Solutions to Normal Form Games
93
Table 5.6. Terrorist Hunt with Uncertainty
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
10 × 1
5 + 0 × 4
5, 10 × 1
5 + 0 × 4
5
0, 6 × 1
6 + 0 × 5
6
Operative
6 × 1
6 + 0 × 5
6, 0
6 × 1
6 + 0 × 5
6, 6 × 1
6 + 0 × 5
6
payoffs associated with each strategy proﬁle. Instead they know the
expected utility associated with strategy proﬁles, and they know that
they know this expected utility, and so forth. For example, consider a
modiﬁed Terrorist Hunt model where the players believe that catching
a terrorist is a bit unpredictable. Here both players have beliefs about
the probability of catching a terrorist conditional on strategies. We can
rationalize the original matrix with Table 5.6, where the payoffs are
explicitly represented in expected utilities.
In Table 5.6, 10 is the utility payoff to catching a kingpin and 1/5
is the probability of catching a kingpin if both agencies cooperate
on a kingpin search. Alternatively 0 is the payoff to a failed king-
pin search that occurs with probability 4/5 when the agencies co-
operate on a kingpin search. Although the overall payoffs are the
same in this matrix and the earlier one, this representation explic-
itly shows how payoffs can depend both on strategies and on random
events. In this example, however, all players have the same beliefs
about the random variation. Consequently, this is a game of symmet-
ric information. Of course, many strategic situations involves play-
ers’ having different beliefs and information about the likelihood
of outcomes. Our next chapter discusses these games of asymmetric
information.
2. Solutions to Normal Form Games
One aim of a game theoretic model is to generate a prediction that
one element of S will be chosen by the agents. A second goal is to
rule out the elements of S that are inconsistent with rationality. In the
Prisoner’s Dilemma we argued that {confess, confess} is plausible and
that {kingpin, kingpin} or {operative, operative} is likely outcome of the
Terrorist Hunt. Now we develop the general principles behind these
predictions.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
94
Games in the Normal Form
2.1. Elimination of Dominated Strategies. The ﬁrst principle of ratio-
nal behavior is that agents should not choose a strategy if there exists
an alternative strategy that raises her payoffs against all possible strate-
gies of her opponent. Recall the Prisoner’s Dilemma of Table 5.1. The
premise of our solution is that player 1 never plays hold out because it
provides strictly less utility than conf ess independently of the choice
of player 2. The strategy hold out is therefore, strictly dominated for
player 1 by conf ess. Similarly, hold out is strictly dominated for player
2 as well. The only strategy combination that does not contain strictly
dominated strategies is {confess, confess}. A formal deﬁnition of strict
dominance follows.
DEFINITION 5.1 (Strict dominance in pure strategies) A strategy si is
strictly dominated by s′
i for player i if and only if ui(si, s−i) < ui(s′
i, s−i)
for all s−i ∈S−i.
In what follows, it is useful to focus on the strategy proﬁles in which
strictly dominated strategies have been eliminated.
DEFINITION 5.2 (Elimination by Strict Dominance in Pure Strategies)
A strategy proﬁle s = (si, s−i) is consistent with elimination by strict
dominance if si is not strictly dominated for any i ∈N.
Generally, unique solutions cannot be obtained by simply elim-
inating dominated strategies. Nevertheless, predictions often can
Table 5.7
1\2
Left
Middle
Right
Up
1, 0
1, 2
0, 1
Down
0, 3
0, 1
2, 0
be tightened by using the procedure it-
eratively. This involves eliminating the
strictly dominated strategies from a
strategy proﬁle whose strictly domi-
nated strategies were eliminated in pre-
vious iterations. To illustrate how this
works, consider the game matrix in
Table 5.7.
In this game agent 1 has no strictly dominated strategies. For agent
2, Right is dominated by Middle because Middle generates 2 ver-
sus 1 against Up and 1 versus 0 against Down. If agent 1 recog-
nizes that agent 2 will not choose Right, he perceives the game as in
Table 5.8.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
2. Solutions to Normal Form Games
95
Table 5.8
1\2
Left
Middle
Up
1, 0
1, 2
Down
0, 3
0, 1
In this reduced form, Down is now dominated
for agent 1 by
Up (payoff of 1 versus 0 for
any strategy by agent 2). Because agent 2 knows
that agent 1 plays Up, she prefers Middle. Thus,
{Down, Middle} is the unique solution consis-
tent with iterated elimination of strictly dom-
inated strategies. The following deﬁnition is a
formal description of this process.
DEFINITION 5.3 (Iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies)
For a normal form game 0 =

N, S0, u0
, the following algorithm iter-
atively deletes strictly dominated strategies.
In period t arbitrarily select a player it ∈N\{it−1} and remove from
St−1
i
each strategy that is strictly dominated in the game t−1. Call the
set of strategies that survive St
i . Let St
j = St−1
j
for j ∈N\it and let ut
z be
the restriction of u0
z to St for each z ∈N.
If at τ there is no iτ ∈N having a strictly dominated strategy in the
game τ−1 then call the set Sτ−1 the set of outcomes that survive iterative
deletion of strictly dominated strategies.
Regardless of the sequence of players, the same set of iteratively
undominated strategies is reached. A behavioral justiﬁcation for this
process is that agents reason in the following manner.
Iknowthatmyopponentsdonotusestrictlydominatedstrategies,and
I know that my opponents know that I do not use strictly dominated
strategies. Given this we are all really choosing from the smaller
strategy space that survives the ﬁrst n iterations. But I know that my
opponents do not use a strategy that is strictly dominated in this game,
and I know that my opponents know that I do not play a strategy that
is strictly dominated in this new game, . . . , ad inﬁnitum.
Although it is based on a much stronger premise, we can also use
weak dominance to generate predictions. Weakly dominated strategies
are those such that some alternative strategy produces at least as large
a payoff against all opponents’ strategy proﬁles and generates a strictly
higher payoff against at least one proﬁle.
DEFINITION 5.4 (Weak dominance in pure strategies) A strategy si is
weakly dominated by s′
i if and only if ui(si, s−i) ≤ui(s′
i, s−i) for all s−i ∈
S−i and ui(si, s−i) < ui(s′
i, s−i) for at least one s−i ∈S−i.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
96
Games in the Normal Form
The deﬁnition of elimination by weak dominance is analogous to
that of elimination by strict dominance. An important application of
elimination by weak dominance in political science occurs in majority-
rule voting games. Consider n (an odd number) agents voting between
two candidates D and R. Each agent gets a payoff of 1 if her preferred
candidate wins and 0 otherwise. We deﬁne the strategy sets so that
si = 1 is a vote for D and si = 0 is a vote for R. Because the choice is
made by majority rule, the payoff for an agent who prefers D is
uD =

1 if 	 si > (n+1)
2
0 otherwise.
and the payoff for an agent who prefers R is 1 −uD. It is easy to ver-
ify that no strategies are strictly dominated. Unless exactly (n −1)/2
agents choose si = 1 and exactly (n −1)/2 choose si = 0, an agent’s
utility does not depend on her individual vote. Consequently, under al-
most all strategy proﬁles, agents do not have strict preferences. Agent
i, however, has strict preferences at proﬁles of S−i that generate ties –
she prefers voting for the candidate whose victory provides her the
most utility. Thus, voting for the preferred candidate weakly domi-
nates voting for the less preferred. It generates a strictly higher utility
for one proﬁle and the same utility at all other proﬁles. If we elimi-
nate weakly dominated strategies, each agent votes for her preferred
candidate and the candidate preferred by a majority wins.
Although solutions based on dominance are attractive, dominance
often fails to eliminate any strategies. Neither version of the Terrorist
Hunt contains dominated strategies (strict or weak). All strategy pro-
ﬁles are plausible if we consider only the criterion of dominance.
2.2. Nash Equilibrium. John Nash’s fundamental contribution to
game theory is the formulation of a solution for normal form games
that can be applied broadly. Nash’s solution involves selection of strat-
egy proﬁles s∗such that agent i’s strategy s∗
i is a “best response” to the
strategies played by the other players s∗
−i for all i ∈N. Consequently,
one of the most important concepts in game theory is the best response
correspondence.4
4 For a discussion of correspondences, see the Mathematical Appendix.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
2. Solutions to Normal Form Games
97
DEFINITION 5.5 The best response correspondence for agent i ∈
N is a mapping bi(s−i) : S−i →→Si deﬁned as bi(s−i) = {si ∈Si :
ui(si, s−i) ≥ui(s′
i, s−i) for every s′
i ∈Si} for every s−i ∈S−i.
The best response to an opponent’s proﬁle s−i is simply the set of
strategies that maximize an agent’s utility when played against s−i. So
the best response correspondence simply assigns the set of best re-
sponses by agent i to each proﬁle s−i. Consider the best response cor-
respondences from some of our examples. In the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
the best responses are:
b1(confess) = {confess}
b1(hold out) = {confess}
b2(confess) = {confess}
b2(hold out/) = {confess}.
Similarly, the best response correspondences for the two-agency ver-
sion of Terrorist Hunt are
b1(kingpin) = {kingpin}
b1(operative) = {operative}
b2(kingpin) = {kingpin}
b2(operative) = {operative}.
In these examples, the best response is a single action, but in many
cases it may be a set of strategies. Recall the majority-voting game.
Unless the opposing agents’ proﬁle generates an exact tie, voting for
either candidate represents a best response. Formally best response
correspondence for agent i preferring candidate D is
bi

s−i :

j∈N\{i}
s j = n −1
2

= {1}
bi

s−i :

j∈N\{i}
s j̸ = n −1
2

= {0, 1}.
A Nash equilibrium is simply a strategy proﬁle in which every agent is
playing an element of her set of best responses given the strategies of
the other agents.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
98
Games in the Normal Form
DEFINITION 5.6 A Nash equilibrium (in pure strategies) to a normal
form game is a strategy proﬁle, s∗, satisfying
s∗
i ∈bi(s∗
−i) for every i ∈N.
We can also state a deﬁnition of Nash equilibrium that is not based
on the best response correspondence.
DEFINITION 5.7 A Nash equilibrium (in pure strategies) of a normal
form game is a strategy proﬁle, s∗, satisfying
ui(s∗
i , s∗
−i) ≥ui(s′
i, s∗
−i) for every s′
i ∈Si and every i ∈N.
The two deﬁnitions are equivalent. The concept of a Nash equilib-
rium is deceptively simple. It requires that agents correctly conjecture
what the other players do and then play a best response to this con-
jecture. An alternative interpretation of Nash equilibrium, based on
the second deﬁnition, is that no player has an incentive to change her
strategy unilaterally from a Nash equilibrium proﬁle.
We can apply these deﬁnitions to our examples.
(1) The Prisoner’s Dilemma: The strategy {confess} is the sole
element of the best response set for both agents against
all outcomes. Consequently, the unique Nash equilibrium is
{confess, confess} .
(2) The
two-agency
Terrorist
Hunt:
Because
bi(kingpin) =
{kingpin} for both agencies, {kingpin, kingpin} is a Nash
equilibrium. Similarly, bi(operative) = {operative} suggests that
{operative, operative} is also a Nash equilibrium.
(3) The three-agency Terrorist Hunt: Verify that the best response
correspondence is
bi(kingpin, kingpin) = {kingpin}
bi(operative, kingpin) = {kingpin}
bi(kingpin, operative) = {kingpin}
bi(operative, operative) = {operative}.
From the ﬁrst deﬁnition, bi(kingpin, kingpin) = {kingpin} im-
plies that {kingpin, kingpin, kingpin} is a Nash equilibrium.
The best response correspondence bi(operative, operative) =

--- Sayfa 115 ---
2. Solutions to Normal Form Games
99
{operative} implies that {operative, operative, operative} is also
a Nash equilibrium. But bi(operative, kingpin) = {kingpin} and
bi(kingpin, kingpin) = {kingpin} imply that there are no Nash
equilibria where just two agencies pursue the kingpin, even
though cooperation of two agencies is sufﬁcient to capture
him.
(4) Majority-Voting Game: Almost any strategy proﬁle is a Nash
equilibrium. Consider any proﬁle such that
i∈N si < (n −1)/2
or
i∈N si > (n + 1)/2. For these proﬁles, bi(s) = {0, 1} for
all i. Consequently, each such proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium.
Now consider
i∈N si ∈

(n −1)/2, (n + 1)/2

. Suppose that

i∈Ni = (n + 1)/2. This proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium if and
only if all agents choosing si = 1 prefer D. If this were not true,
there is some agent i that chooses si = 1 but prefers R. But be-
cause
j N\{i} s j = (n −1)/2, bi (s−i) = {0}. Such a proﬁle is not
a Nash equilibrium. Similarly, if
i∈N si = (n −1)/2, s is a Nash
equilibrium if all agents choosing si = 0 prefer R. In summary,
the set of Nash equilibria includes every proﬁle except those in
which one candidate wins by a bare majority and a voter who
prefers the losing candidate votes for the winning candidate.
Itisimportanttoobservethesimilaritiesanddifferencesbetweenthe
set of Nash equilibria and the set proﬁles surviving iterated elimination
of strictly dominated strategies. In one case, the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
the predictions are the same. In the various versions of the Terrorist
Hunt, the set of Nash equilibria is smaller than the set of proﬁles sur-
viving elimination of dominated strategies. In the case of majority-rule
voting, the set of Nash equilibria is smaller than the set of strategies
surviving strict dominance but much larger than the unique prediction
of the elimination of weakly dominated strategies.
The following theorems establish the precise link between Nash
equilibria and proﬁles surviving iterated elimination of strictly domi-
nated strategies.
THEOREM 5.1 If a strategy proﬁle (s∗
1, . . . , s∗
N) is a Nash equilibrium,
none of its strategies can be eliminated through iterated elimination of
strictly dominated strategies.
Proof Suppose the theorem is false. Let s∗
i be the ﬁrst of the strate-
gies in the equilibrium proﬁle to be eliminated. Elimination requires
that ui(s∗
i , s−i) < ui(si, s−i) for some si and for all s−i that have not

--- Sayfa 116 ---
100
Games in the Normal Form
been eliminated. By assumption s∗
−i has not been eliminated so that
we require ui(s∗
i , s∗
−i) < ui(si, s∗
−i). This violates the assumption that
(s∗
1, . . . , s∗
N) is a Nash equilibrium.
□
THEOREM 5.2 If the strategy proﬁle (s∗
1, . . . , s∗
N) is the unique survivor
of iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies it is the unique
pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
Proof Uniqueness follows from the previous theorem because any
Nash equilibrium must survive iterated elimination. So we focus on
showing that the remaining proﬁle must be a Nash equilibrium. Sup-
pose (s∗
1, . . . , s∗
N) is not a Nash equilibrium. Then there exists s′
i such
that ui(s∗
i , s∗
−i) < ui(s′
i, s∗
−i) but s′
i must be eliminated by dominance.
Let si be the strategy that eliminates s′
i. If si = s∗
i , there is an immedi-
ate contradiction. So assume that si̸ = s∗
i . Then because si eliminates s′
i,
ui(s′
i, s∗
−i) < ui(si, s∗
−i). This process may continue no more than a ﬁnite
number of times until we conclude that ui(s∗
i , s∗
−i) > ui(s′
i, s∗
−i).
□
In all of our examples, there is at least one Nash equilibrium. It is
possible, however, that there are no strategy proﬁles satisfying the re-
quirements of a Nash equilibrium. Consider the following game. There
Table 5.9. Colonel
Blotto
D\I
M
P
M
1, −1
−1, 1
P
−1, 1
1, −1
are two armies: one defending army (D) and an
invader (I). The invading army decides whether
to invade through the mountains M or to march
through the plains P. In response to the threat, the
defender decides whether to fortify its defenses in
themountainsorintheplains.Iftheinvaderattacks
an undefended area, it wins a payoff of 1. It loses 1
if it attacks a fortiﬁcation, however. The defender
gets 1 by correctly predicting the direction of the
attack and loses 1 otherwise. We can represent this normal form game,
known as a Colonel Blotto game, with the matrix in Table 5.9.
The best response correspondences are bD (M) = {M}, bD (P) =
{P} , bI (M) = {P}, and bI (P) = {M} . The existence of Nash equi-
librium requires that there is some strategy pair {sD, sI} such that
bI (sD) = sI and bD (sI) = sD. The best response correspondences of
this game do not satisfy these conditions. Given any pair of strategies,
one agent has an incentive to choose a different one. Absent a Nash
equilibrium (or any restrictions imposed by dominance), we lack a
prediction for how this game is played.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
3. Application: The Hotelling Model of Political Competition
101
In applications one generally deﬁnes a game and characterizes the
set of Nash equilibria. In characterizing the equilibrium set, the two
most important properties are existence and uniqueness. For applied
researchers, a unique Nash equilibrium is desirable as there is little
ambiguity about the empirical predictions. Accordingly, the case of
multiple equilibria is less desirable as the model yields ambiguous pre-
dictions. The case of no equilibria is especially unsatisfactory as the
model makes no predictions. We show later, however, that for games
with ﬁnite numbers of strategies and actors, like the Colonel Blotto
games, the opportunity for agents to randomize over strategies is suf-
ﬁcient for the existence of Nash equilibria.
3. Application: The Hotelling Model of Political Competition
The Hotelling (1929) model of political competition, as extended by
Downs (1957), is one of the most widely applied games in political
science. A small town must decide where to build a school. Its citizens
live uniformly along a one-mile stretch of road and all want the school
built as close to their home as possible. Thus, the voters’ ideal locations
are distributed uniformly over [0, 1]. The town holds an election in
which two candidates compete for ofﬁce by campaigning on promises
about the school’s location. The winning candidate builds the school at
the promised location and receives a payoff of 1. The losing candidate
gets −1. In the case of a tie, the election is decided by a coin toss, with
each candidate winning with probability .5. To keep the discussion
simple, the voters are not strategic agents in the game but always vote
for the closest candidate.5
The candidate’s strategy sets are S1 = S2 = [0, 1] . On the assump-
tion that voters vote for the closest candidate, we compute the vote
shares for both candidates for any strategy proﬁle (s1, s2) . Because the
voters are distributed uniformly, the number of voters in any interval
is equal to the width of that interval. So if s2 > s1, all voters to the left
of (s1 + s2)/2 vote for candidate 1 and her vote share is (s1 + s2)/2. The
remaining 1 −(s1 + s2)/2 percentage of the voters support candidate 2.
Conversely, if s1 > s2, candidate 2 receives a vote share of (s1 + s2)/2,
5 It turns out that this assumption is innocuous; voting for the candidate who
promises the preferred school is consistent with the appropriate notion of equilib-
rium in a larger game in which voters decide how to vote after hearing candidate
locations.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
102
Games in the Normal Form
and candidate 1 gets the rest. The candidate payoffs for any strategy
proﬁle are
u1(s1, s2) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5
0 if s1 = s2
−1 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5
and
u2(s1, s2) = −u1(s1, s2).
The unique Nash equilibrium of this game is s1 = s2 = .5. To demon-
strate, we begin by computing the best response correspondence of
candidate 1. Suppose that s2 < .5; then candidate 1 wins with certainty
by choosing any platform that generates a vote share of .5 or more.
Thus, b1(s2) = (s2, 1 −s2). For s2 > .5, similar calculations suggest that
b1(s2) = (1 −s2, s2) . If s2 = .5, candidate 1 generates a tie at best by
also choosing .5 so that b1(.5) = .5. Because candidate 2’s situation is
symmetric, her best response correspondence is
b2 (s1) = (s1, 1 −s1)
if s1 < .5
b2 (s1) = (1 −s1, s1)
if s1 > .5
b2 (s1) = s1
if s1 = .5.
That s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is in fact a Nash equilibrium follows immediately
because b1(.5) = .5 and b2(.5) = .5. The trick is to show that it is
the only Nash equilibrium. Suppose to the contrary that s∗
1 = s∗
2̸ = .5.
This cannot be a Nash equilibrium, however, because b1 (s∗
2) does not
include s∗
2. Now suppose s∗
1 < s∗
2. Now b1 (s∗
2) = (1 −s∗
2, s∗
2) whereas
b2

s∗
1

=

s∗
1, 1 −s∗
1

. Putting all of these conditions together, a Nash
equilibrium requires that 1 −s∗
2 < s∗
1 and s∗
2 < 1 −s∗
1. But these in-
equalities are contradictory because they require s∗
2 > 1 −s∗
1 and s∗
2 <
1 −s∗
1. The case of s∗
1 > s∗
2 is analogous and so establishes the unique-
ness of s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 as a Nash equilibrium.
A more intuitive proof of the claim follows from our second deﬁni-
tion of Nash equilibrium (a strategy proﬁle from which no agent has
a strict preference to deviate). Clearly, no candidate wishes to defect
from s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 as her payoff would fall from 0 to −1. Now con-
sider another possible equilibrium

s∗
1, s∗
2

. If one candidate wins in
this equilibrium, the other candidate can move to .5 and at least gener-
ate a tie. Any equilibrium, therefore, must generate a tie. Furthermore,

--- Sayfa 119 ---
3. Application: The Hotelling Model of Political Competition
103
unless s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5, either candidate can move to .5 and win for sure.
The proﬁle s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is the only Nash equilibrium.
The same outcome is generated by applying elimination of weakly
dominated strategies. Each candidate generates at least a tie by choos-
ing .5. The tie occurs only if the opponent chooses .5 as well. Against
this proﬁle any other platform loses. Consequently si = .5 weakly dom-
inates all other strategies.
3.1. Vote Maximizing Candidates. Instead of maximizing chances of
winning, each candidate now maximizes his vote share. Thus, the new
payoffs are
u1(s1, s2) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
s1+s2
2
if s1 < s2
.5 if s1 = s2
1 −s1+s2
2
if s1 > s2
and
u2(s1, s2) = 1 −u1(s1, s2).
The proﬁle s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is again the unique Nash equilibrium. Again,
start with the best response correspondences. Suppose that s2 < .5;
candidate 1 prefers the smallest platform greater than s2. Because
the strategy sets are continuums, no such platform exists. Similarly,
if s2 > .5, candidate 1 would like to choose the smallest platform less
than s2, which does not exist either. Candidate 2 faces the same situ-
ation so that bi (s−i̸ = .5) = ∅, the empty set. Now consider the best
response to s2 = .5. Candidate 1 gets .5 for proposing .5, generating
the tie, and a strictly lower vote share for any other platform. Thus,
.5 is the best response. Because candidate 2 faces the same incentives,
bi (s−i = .5) = .5. Clearly s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is a Nash equilibrium. Because
the best response sets for any other strategy pair are empty, it is also
the unique Nash equilibrium.
3.2. Ideological Candidates. Consider another version of the Hotel-
ling model. In this version, the candidates are ideological because they
care about which policy is implemented by the winning candidate. Can-
didate 1 wants the school to be as close to 0 as possible and her util-
ity from the winning outcome x is −x2. Similarly, candidate 2 wants

--- Sayfa 120 ---
104
Games in the Normal Form
the outcome to be as close to 1 as possible and has a utility function
of −(1 −x)2. As earlier, the candidates choose platforms that they
must implement if they win.6 In a tied election, the voters ﬂip a coin,
and the winner implements her platform. Given the candidates’ in-
centives to move policy to extreme positions, it might appear that the
outcomes should no longer be located at the median voter. This is
not the case, and we show again that s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is the unique Nash
equilibrium.
The payoff functions for each candidate are now
u1(s1, s2) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
−s2
1 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5
−.5s2
1 −.5s2
2 if s1 = s2 and s1+s2
2
= .5
−s2
2 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5
and
u2(s1, s2)
=
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
−(1 −s1)2 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5
−.5(1 −s1)2 −.5(1 −s2)2 if s1 = s2 and s1+s2
2
= .5
−(1 −s2)2 if s1 < s2 and s1+s2
2
< .5 or if s1 > s2 and s1+s2
2
> .5
.
We begin with candidate 1’s best response. If s2 < .5, no proposal
less than s2 defeats s2. So candidate 1’s best response is to choose
s2 or a proposal that loses to s2. This implies that b1 (s2 < .5) =
[0, s2] ∪(1 −s2, 1] .
Alternatively, if s2 > .5, candidate 1 wants to
choose the smallest platform that defeats s2. Just as in the last section,
such a platform does not exist so that b1 (s2 > .5) = ∅. Despite this, it
is clear that for any policy s1 that beats s2 the choice of s2 > .5 is sub-
optimal for candidate 2. Similar arguments suggest that b2 (s1 > .5) =
[s1, 1] ∪[0, 1 −s1) and b2 (s1 < .5) = ∅. Similarly, s1 < .5 is suboptimal
for whenever 2 chooses a policy that beats s1. Last, consider the best
response to si = .5. Any proposal by the other candidate loses for sure
– generating a utility of −.25. Responding with a platform of .5 leads to
a lottery over s1 = s2 = .5. This lottery has an expected value of −.25
for both candidates. Thus, the best response is bi (.5) = [0, 1] .
6 We ignore the problem that the candidates prefer to implement their own ideal points
regardless of their electoral platform.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
3. Application: The Hotelling Model of Political Competition
105
From these best response correspondences, it is easy to see that s∗
1 =
s∗
2 = .5 is a Nash equilibrium because .5 ∈bi (.5) for both candidates.
Now we show uniqueness. Because b1 (s2 > .5) = ∅and b2 (s1 < .5) =
∅, the only possible candidates for Nash equilibria are s∗
1 > .5 > s∗
2.
This inequality in conjunction with b1 (s2 < .5) = [0, s2] ∪(1 −s2, 1]
and b2 (s1 > .5) = [s1, 1] ∪[0, 1 −s1) implies that s∗
1 > 1 −s∗
2 and s∗
2 <
1 −s∗
1. Because these last two inequalities cannot be simultaneously
satisﬁed, s∗
1 = s∗
2 = .5 is the only possible Nash equilibrium.
3.3. Ideological Candidates with Uncertainty. The reason why even
ideological candidates gravitate to the median voter is that no candi-
date can win without the median’s support. But we now consider what
happens when the candidates do not know which platform obtains that
support.7
Now the policy-motivated candidates are uncertain about the lo-
cation of the median voter. Instead of knowing that the voters are
arranged uniformly on the unit interval, the candidates believe that
the median voter’s location is randomly drawn from the uniform dis-
tribution on [0, 1]. This model is an example of models developed
by Wittman (1977) and Calvert (1985). Let  = [0, 1] denote the set
of possible locations of the median voter. Because candidate prefer-
ences are common knowledge, all of the uncertainty in the game is
captured by the probability distribution F(ω) = ω on [0, 1]. Once we
express the candidates’ expected utility as a function of the candidate
strategies, we can model this as a normal form game. Again candi-
date preferences over policy are quadratic so that u1(x) = −x2 and
u2(x) = −(1 −x)2. For any two platforms, candidate 1 wins if the re-
alization of the median voter is closer to s1 than s2. If s1 < s2 candi-
date 1 wins, therefore, if the median is less than (s1 + s2)/2. Because
the median is uniformly distributed, candidate 1 wins with probabil-
ity (s1 + s2)/2. We use this fact to express the expected utilities of the
candidates as
Eu1(s1, s2) =
 −s2
1
 s1+s2
2

−s2
2(1 −s1+s2
2 ) if s1 < s2
−s2
2
 s1+s2
2

−s2
1(1 −s1+s2
2 ) if s1 > s2
7 Students may want to review the material on optimization in the Mathematical
Appendix before tackling this section.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
106
Games in the Normal Form
and
Eu2(s1, s2) =
−(1 −s1)2  s1+s2
2

−(1 −s2)2(1 −s1+s2
2 ) if s1 < s2
−(1 −s2)2  s1+s2
2

−(1 −s1)2(1 −s1+s2
2 ) if s1 > s2
.
To construct a Nash equilibrium, suppose that candidate 1 knows that
candidate 2 locates at z ≥1/2. Then candidate 1 chooses s1 ∈[0, z] to
maximize
max
s1

−s2
1

s1 + z
2

−z2

1 −s1 + z
2

.
We can ignore the possibility of choosing s1 > z because this strategy
is always dominated by s1 = z.8 To ﬁnd the optimal choice of s1, we
can differentiate the objective function with respect to s1 and set this
derivative to 0. This ﬁrst-order condition is
−3
2s2
1 −zs1 + z2
2 = 0.
Solving for s1 yields two solutions, but only one lies in the appropriate
range [0, 1]. This solution then generates the best response function
s1(s2) = s2
3 .
To ensure that this solution characterizes a local maximum (as op-
posed to a local minimum or saddle point), we check that the second
derivative of the objective function is negative when evaluated at the
solution. Differentiating the objective function with respect to s1 and
treating zas a constant yield the second-order condition that simpliﬁes
to −2z and is negative for any value of z ∈(0, 1].
Similarly,treatings1 asaﬁxedparameter z ≤1/2wecandifferentiate
candidate 2’s objective function
max
s2

−(1 −z)2
z + s2
2

−(1 −s2)2

1 −z + s2
2

8 Indeed if candidate 1 chose s1 > z, she would prefer candidate 2 to win.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
4. Existence of Nash Equilibria
107
to ﬁnd an optimal s2 ∈[z, 1]. The solution is
s2(s1) = 2
3 + 1
3s1.
We leave veriﬁcation of the second-order condition to the reader. A
Nash equilibrium is then a strategy combination (s∗
1, s∗
2) that solves the
following system of equations:
s∗
1 = 1
3s∗
2
s∗
2 = 2
3 + 1
3s∗
1.
The unique solution to this system is s∗
1 = 1/4 and s∗
2 = 3/4. With
policy-motivated candidates and uncertainty about voter preferences,
the two candidates choose divergent platforms. In the model with cer-
tainty moving from .5 leads to a certain electoral loss. Such a movement
in the current model only results in a smaller probability of winning.
Ideological candidates are generally willing to trade small losses in the
probability of winning for policy platforms closer to their own ideal
point. As a result, both candidates move their platforms away from
the median in accord with their own preferences. Because both can-
didates behave this way, however, each still wins with a 50 percent
probability.
4. Existence of Nash Equilibria
As demonstrated by the Colonel Blotto model, there is no guarantee
that a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies exists. In this section, we
explore conditions for the existence of Nash equilibria.
We begin with a set of sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of equi-
libria in pure strategies. The ﬁrst is a concavity condition on the utility
functions.
DEFINITION 5.8 A function f (x) : X →R1 (where X is convex) is
strictly quasi-concave if f (λx + (1 −λ)y) > t for x̸ = y ∈X, λ ∈(0, 1),
and any t ∈R1such that f (x) ≥t and f (y) ≥t.
Alternatively, a function is strictly quasi-concave if its upper contour
sets are convex. Because strictly convex preferences produce singleton

--- Sayfa 124 ---
108
Games in the Normal Form
maximal sets (see Chapter 1), a game with a convex strategy space S
and utility functions ui(si, s−i) that are strictly quasi-concave in si for
each s−i ∈S−i have best response correspondences that are functions
(i.e., single-valued correspondences). In the next subsection we prove
the following result.
THEOREM 5.3 A Nash equilibrium to the normal form game ⟨N, S, u⟩
exists if the following conditions are satisﬁed.
(1) Si is a convex and compact subset of a Euclidean space for each
i ∈N.
(2) ui(si, s−i) : S →R1 is a continuous function for each i ∈N.
(3) for every i ∈N and every s′
−i ∈S−i the function ui(si, s′
−i) : Si →
R1 is strictly quasi-concave in Si.
Although useful, this theorem is obviously restrictive in that many
games do not satisfy its assumptions. The Colonel Blotto game, for
example, does not satisfy condition 1 as its strategy set is not convex
(a linear combination of M and P is not an available strategy). Even
though unique Nash equilibria exist, the payoffs in many versions of
the Hotelling game are not strictly quasi-concave as there are a number
of regions in which the payoffs are “ﬂat” in the candidate’s platform
choice (a losing platform is still a losing platform as it moves away from
the median voter).
One solution for games with nonconvex strategy spaces is to allow
agents to use mixed strategies. A mixed strategy, denoted by σ i, is a
randomization over a combination of pure strategies. The notation
σ i (si) denotes the probability that agent i chooses strategy si. The set
of mixed strategies for player i is the set of probability distributions
over Si and is denoted i = (Si).
A game in mixed strategies is similar to a game in pure strategies
with the exception that each agent chooses σ i ∈i rather than si ∈Si
and the players evaluate strategies by the expected utility of the lottery
inducedbyσ i.Aformaldeﬁnitionofagameinmixedstrategiesfollows.
DEFINITION 5.9 For a normal form game  = ⟨N, S, u⟩, the mixed ex-
tension game is denoted m = ⟨N, , um⟩; the set of strategy proﬁles is
denoted i = (Si). An arbitrary strategy is denoted as σ i ∈i for all
i ∈N and  = ×i∈Ni and σ i(si) denotes the probability that σ i assigns
to pure strategy si. The expected utility function, Ui(σ i, σ −i) :  →R1,

--- Sayfa 125 ---
4. Existence of Nash Equilibria
109
is deﬁned as
ui(σ i, σ −i) =

s−i∈S−i

si∈Si
ui(si, s−i)σ i(si), σ −i(s−i) for all i ∈N.
Because the mixed extension of a normal form game is itself a normal
form game, the deﬁnition of Nash equilibrium applies directly to mixed
extensions.
To understand how agents use mixed strategies, recall the Colonel
Blotto game. Each side now chooses lotteries over its strategies. Let
σ 1 = σ 1 (M) be the probability that the defender protects the moun-
tains and σ 2 = σ 2 (M) be the probability that the invader attacks the
mountains. The expected utilities for each player for each action are
given by the following equations.
u1 (M, σ 2) = σ 2 −(1 −σ 2) = 2σ 2 −1
u1 (P, σ 2) = −σ 2 + (1 −σ 2) = 1 −2σ 2
u2 (σ 1, M) = −σ 1 + (1 −σ 1) = 1 −2σ 1
u2 (σ 1, P) = σ 1 −(1 −σ 1) = 2σ 1 −1.
It is now straightforward to compute b1 (σ 2) and b2 (σ 1) . The defender
prefers to protect the mountains (e.g., u1 (M, σ 2) > u1 (P, σ 2)) when
σ 2 > 1/2. The defender is indifferent if σ 2 = 1/2 and prefers to pro-
tect the plains if σ 2 < 1/2. Thus, the defender’s best response to the
invader’s mixed strategy, σ 2, is
b1 (σ 2) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
M if σ 2 > 1
2
P if σ 2 < 1
2.
{M, P} if σ 2 = 1
2
Because b1 (σ 2) = {M, P} when σ 2 = 1/2, any randomization over
{M, P} is also a best response. The invader’s best response is gener-
ated the same way. Given that
u2 (σ 1, M) > u2 (σ 1, P) if σ 1 < 1
2
u2 (σ 1, M) < u2 (σ 1, P) if σ 1 > 1
2
u2 (σ 1, M) = u2 (σ 1, P) if σ 1 = 1
2

--- Sayfa 126 ---
110
Games in the Normal Form
the invader’s best response correspondence is
b2 (σ 1) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
M if σ 1 < 1
2
P if σ 1 > 1
2 .
{M, P} or σ 2 if σ 1 = 1
2
We saw earlier that there are no Nash equilibrium where one agent
plays either of its pure strategies. So in constructing a Nash equilibrium,
we need only check whether there exists a combination of σ 1 and σ 2
that satisﬁes Nash’s criteria. The mixed strategy σ 1 is a best response
by the defender only if σ 2 = 1/2, and σ 2 is a best response only if
σ 1 = 1/2. Consequently, σ 1 = 1/2 and σ 2 = 1/2 is the unique Nash
equilibrium in mixed strategies.
For a two-player, two-strategy game, plotting best response func-
tions is often useful for ﬁnding mixed strategy equilibria. Consider
Figure 5.1. The horizontal axis plots the defender’s mixed strategy,
which ranges from σ 1 = 0 (plains) to σ 1 = 1 (mountains). The vertical
axis plots the invader’s mixed strategy from σ 2 = 0 (plains) to σ 2 = 1
(mountains). The solid line represents the defender’s best response
to σ 2 and the dotted line represents the invader’s best response to
σ 1. The only intersection of these best response curves is at the Nash
equilibrium σ 1 = 1/2 and σ 2 = 1/2.
1
1
Defender
Invader
0
.5
.5
1
σ
2
σ
Nash
Equilibrium
Figure 5.1. Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium to Colonel Blotto Game.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
4. Existence of Nash Equilibria
111
Mixed strategy equilibria may also exist in games with pure strategy
equilibria. Consider the two-agency Terrorist Hunt game represented
in Table 5.2. Now let σ 1 and σ 2 be the probabilities that the FBI and
the CIA hunt the kingpin, respectively. The expected utilities of each
agency for each action follow:
u1(kingpin, σ 2) = 2σ 2
u1(operative, σ 2) = 1
u2(σ 1, kingpin) = 2σ 1
u2(σ 1, operative) = 1.
As before we compare these utilities to generate the best response
functions.
b1 (σ 2) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
kingpin if σ 2 > 1
2
operative if σ 2 < 1
2
σ 1 ∈[0, 1] if σ 2 = 1
2
b2 (σ 1) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
kingpin if σ 1 > 1
2
operative if σ 1 < 1
2
σ 2 ∈[0, 1] if σ 1 = 1
2
.
Figure 5.2 plots these best response functions. Now there are three
1
FBI
CIA
0
.5
.5
1
σ
2
σ
1
Figure 5.2. Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibria to Terrorist Hunt.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
112
Games in the Normal Form
intersections of of the best responses: {0, 0}, {1, 1}, and {1/2, 1/2}. The
ﬁrst two correspond to the pure strategy equilibria computed earlier,
but the third is an additional mixed strategy equilibrium.
A feature of mixed strategy equilibria is that the probability that an
agent plays a particular strategy is not a function of her own prefer-
ences but those of her opponent. This feature arises because an agent
plays mixed strategies only if she is indifferent among a set of pure
strategies. Consequently, her opponent chooses his own mixed strat-
egy to ensure that she is indifferent. It is, therefore, the preferences
of the opponent that determine the mixing probabilities. Occasionally,
this fact leads to counterintuitive predictions. For example, suppose we
modify the Terrorist Hunt so that the CIA receives a much higher pay-
off than the FBI for capturing the kingpin. The new payoffs follow in
Table 5.10.
A naive prediction, based on simple decision theory, is that because
the CIA receives a higher payoff from the kingpin in the new game it
is increasingly likely to hunt him. This prediction is wrong. The best
response functions are now
b1 (σ 2) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
kingpin if σ 2 > 1
2
operative if σ 2 < 1
2
σ 1 ∈[0, 1] if σ 2 = 1
2
b2 (σ 1) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
kingpin if σ 1 > 1
4
operative if σ 1 < 1
4.
σ 2 ∈[0, 1] if σ 1 = 1
4
We plot these responses in Figure 5.3. The mixed strategy equilibrium
is now {1/4, 1/2} . The change in the CIA’s preferences did not lead it to
Table 5.10. Modiﬁed Terrorist
Hunt
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 4
0, 1
Operative
1, 0
1, 1
hunt the kingpin with a higher prob-
ability – it still hunts him 1/2 of the
time. Alternatively, the change actu-
ally decreases the likelihood that the
FBI hunts the kingpin. Somewhat per-
versely, the probability that the king-
pin is caught in the mixed strategy
equilibrium declines. The logic behind
this result is not difﬁcult to grasp. In the mixed strategy equilibrium, the

--- Sayfa 129 ---
5. Dominance and Mixed Strategies
113
1
FBI
CIA
0
.5
.25
1
σ
2
σ
1
Figure 5.3. Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium to Terrorist Hunt (Modiﬁed
Payoffs).
CIA chooses σ 2 to make the FBI indifferent between hunting the king-
pin and the operative. Because the FBI’s preferences do not change,
σ 2 does not change. Because the FBI chooses σ 1 to make the CIA
indifferent, an increased utility for the kingpin means that the FBI
must lower the probability of searching for the kingpin to maintain
this indifference.
Although mixed strategy equilibria have these undesirable proper-
ties, they are guaranteed to exist in games with ﬁnite strategy sets. This
is the result of Nash’s famous theorem.
THEOREM 5.4 (Nash)Givenanormalformgame = ⟨N, S, u⟩inwhich
S is ﬁnite, the mixed extension m = ⟨N, , um⟩has at least one Nash
equilibrium. In other words every ﬁnite game has a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium.
The proof of this theorem utilizes some advanced mathematics so
we relegate it to a later advanced section. That is to say, all readers
should know the result, but for a ﬁrst reading the details of the proof
may be skipped.
5. Dominance and Mixed Strategies
We can extend the deﬁnition of dominance to include mixed strategies.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
114
Games in the Normal Form
DEFINITION 5.10 A pure strategy si ∈S is strictly dominated if there
exists a σ ′
i ∈(Si) such that
ui(σ ′
i, s−i) > ui(si, s−i) for every s−i ∈S−i.
The strategy si is weakly dominated if there is a σ ′
i for which the inequal-
ity holds weakly for every s−i ∈S−i and strictly for some s′
−i ∈S−i.9
Table 5.11
1\2
L
M
R
U
3, 1
4, 2
1, 4
D
2, 4
1, 2
3, 1
This extension is straightforward. Now
we ask whether a strategy is dominated by
a mixed strategy. The following example
shows that this extended deﬁnition is much
stronger than dominance in pure strategies
as some strategies are dominated by mixed
strategies that are not dominated by pure
strategies.10 Consider the game in Table 5.11.
Neither player has any strategies that are dominated by pure strate-
gies. But consider a mixed strategy by player 2 of σ 2 (L) = 1/2 and
σ 2 (R) = 1/2. This mixture has an expected value of 2.5 when played
against both U and D – a higher utility than player 2’s pure strategy of
M. Thus, the mixture strictly dominates M.
The following theorem establishes an important relationship be-
tweenmixedstrategyNashequilibriaanditeratedeliminationofstrate-
gies that are strictly dominated by mixed strategies.
THEOREM 5.5 Let m = ⟨N, , um⟩be a ﬁnite normal form game with a
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium σ ∗. If the strategy si is played with pos-
itive probability under σ ∗
i then it survives iterated deletion of strategies
that are strictly dominated by mixed strategies.
Weleavetheproofasanexercise.Thistheoremisquiteusefulincom-
puting mixed strategy equilibria. Instead of computing best responses
to lotteries over all strategies, we need only compute best responses
for mixtures of the strategies that survive iterated dominance.
9 Recall that ui(σ ′
i, s−i) =
s′
i ∈Si ui(s′
i, s−i)σ i(si).
10 Obviously, the converse cannot be true as any strategy dominated by a pure strategy
is dominated by a mixed strategy placing probability 1 on the dominating strategy.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
6. Calculating Nash Equilibria
115
6. Calculating Nash Equilibria
Although we can specify sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of Nash
equilibria, computing the equilibria of a game is often more art than
science. In fact, games like chess are known to have Nash equilibria
despite the fact that the actual equilibrium strategies have never been
calculated. Nevertheless, there are a few tricks and algorithms that can
facilitate computation.
6.1. Pure Strategy Nash Equilibria in Finite Games. We now outline
a process for checking whether a given strategy proﬁle is an equilib-
rium. For a ﬁnite game, one way to characterize all of the pure strategy
Nash equilibria is to test whether each proﬁle s′ ∈S is a Nash equilib-
rium. One begins with a proﬁle s′ = (s′
1, . . . , s′
n) and asks the following
sequence of questions:
(1) If one holds s′
2, . . . , s′
n ﬁxed, is there a strategy s′′
1 such that
u1(s′′
1, s′
−1) > u1(s′
1, s′
−1)? If so, s′ is not a Nash equilibrium. If
not, continue.
(2) If one holds s′
1, s′
3, . . . , s′
n ﬁxed, is there a strategy s′′
2 such that
u2(s′′
2, s′
−2) > u2(s′
2, s′
−2)? If so, s′ is not a Nash equilibrium. If
not, continue.
...
(i) If one holds s′
1, . . . , s′
i−1, s′
i+1 . . . , s′
n ﬁxed, is there a strategy s′′
i
such that ui(s′′
i , s′
−i) > ui(s′
i, s′
−i)? If so s′ is not a Nash equilib-
rium. If not continue.
...
(n) If one holds s′
1, . . . , s′
n−1 ﬁxed, is there a strategy s′′
n for which
un(s′′
n, s′
−n) > un(s′
n, s′
−n)? If so s′ is not a Nash equilibrium. If
not s′ is a Nash equilibrium.
This algorithm is then repeated for each proﬁle in S.
In two-player ﬁnite games – those representable by matrices – the
algorithm is particularly straightforward. Start with a matrix entry and
verify whether there is an entry in the same column that makes the row
player better off. If so, the original proﬁle is not a Nash equilibrium. If
not, repeat the exercise interchanging row and column. Consider the
example in Table 5.12.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
116
Games in the Normal Form
Table 5.12
1\2
l
c
r
t
5, 4
2, 3
6, 2
m
2, 5
3, 6
5, 5
b
5, 2
0, 3
7, 4
Consider a conjecture that (t,l) is a pure strat-
egy Nash equilibrium. Given s2 = l, player 1
chooses between u1(t,l) = 5, u1(m,l) = 2 and
u1(b,l) = 5. Accordingly b1(l) = {t, b}. Given
s1 = t player 2 chooses between utilities of 4, 3,
and 2 so b2(t) = {l}. Accordingly (t,l) is a Nash
equilibrium. Because b2(l) has a single element,
(t,l) is the only pure strategy Nash equilibrium
involving play of t. Recall that b1(l) = {t, b} so
(m,l) is not a Nash equilibrium as player 1 would deviate to either t
or b if she conjectures that player 2 selects l. Next we conjecture that
(m, c) is a Nash equilibrium. Because b1(c) = {m} and b2(m) = {c}, our
conjecture is correct. Given that r /∈b2(m), the only pure strategy Nash
equilibrium that m is played is (m, c). A conjecture that (b,l) is a Nash
equilibrium is refuted by b2(b) = {r}. Similarly a conjecture that (b, c)
is a Nash equilibrium is inconsistent with b1(c) = {m}. Finally, a conjec-
ture that (b,r) is a Nash equilibrium is correct because neither player
can gain from deviating. Through this tedious process, we conclude
that the set of pure strategy Nash equilibria is {(t,l), (m, c), (b,r)}.
6.2. Pure Strategy Nash Equilibria in Games with Continuous
Strategy Spaces. Unless the strategy space is ﬁnite, the algorithm dis-
cussed earlier does not work.11 Sometimes, however, we can use the
techniques of optimization to compute equilibria. If the utility func-
tions ui(s) are twice differentiable, calculus may be used to characterize
the best response correspondences. Because a best response to s−i is
the maximizer of u(si, s−i) over Si, a sufﬁcient condition for si ∈bi (s−i)
is that ∂ui(si, s−i)/∂si = 0 and ∂2ui(si, s−i)/∂s2
i < 0. The ﬁrst of these
conditions is the ﬁrst-order condition (FOC) whereas the second is
the second-order condition (SOC).12 If the FOC and SOC hold, the
solutions to ∂ui(si, s−i)/∂si = 0 provide each of the best response cor-
respondences. Further, if ui(s) is strictly concave, the solution satisfying
the FOC and SOC is unique and the best responses are functions. In
11 The reader may want to review the discussion of optimization in the Mathematical
Appendix before reading this section.
12 If Si has more than one dimension, the term ∂ui(si, s−i)/∂si is a vector where each
coordinate is the partial derivative with respect to one coordinate of si. The quantity
0 denotes the vector of 0s. The second-order condition is the requirement that the
matrix of second derivatives be negative deﬁnite.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
7. Application: Interest Group Contributions
117
such a case, every solution to the system
s∗
1 = b1(s∗
−1)
·
s∗
i = bi(s∗
−i)
·
s∗
n = bn(s∗
−n)
is a Nash equilibrium. Often this procedure is unnecessarily cumber-
some – it requires solving both for each best response function and
the system of equations. Generally it is more convenient to solve the
system of ﬁrst-order conditions directly:
∂u1(s1, s−1)
∂s1
= 0
·
∂ui(si, s−i)
∂si
= 0
·
∂un(sn, s−n)
∂sn
= 0.
To guarantee that the solution is a Nash equilibrium, one must check
the second-order conditions for each agent at the solution.
If either system of equations has multiple solutions, there is more
than one equilibrium in pure strategies. The absence of a solution,
however,doesnotimplythattherearenopurestrategyNashequilibria.
The FOCs and SOCs are sufﬁcient, but not necessary conditions, and
there are many games for which the best responses do not satisfy them.
These situations arise for a variety of reasons. If the payoffs against
s−i are not quasi-concave or if they are monotonically increasing or
decreasing over Si, agent i’s best response is at the boundary of Si. Such
best responses, known as “corner solutions,” typically violate the ﬁrst-
order conditions. The FOC approach also fails if the payoff functions
are discontinuous in s−i; at the discontinuities, we cannot compute the
ﬁrst- or second-order conditions.
7. Application: Interest Group Contributions
Two interest groups N = {1, 2} seek to inﬂuence a government policy.
Both groups know the ﬁnal policy is a function of how much campaign

--- Sayfa 134 ---
118
Games in the Normal Form
support they give to the government. Group 1’s most preferred policy
is 0 and group 2’s most preferred policy is 1. The government favors
the policy 1/2 but may be inﬂuenced by the campaign contributions.
Each group chooses to contribute an amount si ∈[0, 1], and the ﬁnal
policy is x(s1, s2) = 1/2 −s1 + s2. The groups make their choices simul-
taneously, and the government keeps all of the contributions to buy
advertisements for the next election.13 The interest groups each have
utility functions over their contribution and the ﬁnal policy of the form
u1(s1, s2) = −(x(s1, s2))2 −s1
u2(s1, s2) = −(1 −x(s1, s2))2 −s2.
If we substitute the policy function into the utility functions we obtain
u1(s1, s2) = −

1
2 −s1 + s2
2
−s1
u2(s1, s2) = −

1 −

1
2 −s1 + s2
2
−s2.
Differentiation generates the ﬁrst-order conditions
FOC1 : 2

1
2 −s1 + s2

−1 = 0
FOC2 : 2

1 −

1
2 −s1 + s2

−1 = 0.
Solving FOC1 for s1 as a function of s2 yields the best response
b1(s2) = s2.
From FOC2 we obtain
b2(s1) = s1.
Clearly, the Nash equilibria are not unique. Any pair of contributions
such that s1 = s2 is a Nash equilibrium. We write the set of pure strategy
13 This game is closely related to the all-pay auction from economics. We return to
auctions later in the book.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
8. Application: International Externalities
119
Nash equilibria to this game as
{(s1, s2) ∈[0, 1]2 : s1 = s2}.
This result has a straightforward interpretation. Any pair of equiva-
lent contributions is a Nash equilibrium and in all of these equilibria
the policy outcome is 1/2. No contributor wants to deviate unilater-
ally because the marginal gain of an additional unit of contribution
(in terms of pulling policy in the desired direction) is exactly offset
by the marginal cost of losing another unit of resources. As in the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, the Nash equilibria of this game are inefﬁcient.
That is, the contributors would rather commit to not giving any money
to the government. But because no such commitment is possible, there
are equilibria with positive contributions.
8. Application: International Externalities
Two countries must decide how much to invest in pollution abatement.
Their strategies are levels of investment s1 > 0 and s2 > 0. Each coun-
try pays a cost c(si) = kisi. Let k1 < k2 so that country 1 abates a given
amount of pollution at a lower cost than country 2. The total amount of
pollution affects citizens of both countries so that the utility of abate-
ment is based on the total investment, ui (s1, s2) = √s1 + s2. The payoff
for each country depends on the utility and costs of abatement and is
given by
√s1 + s2 −kisi.
From these payoffs, it is straightforward to generate the FOC condi-
tions:
1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2 −k1 = 0
1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2 −k2 = 0.
The SOCs for both countries, −1/4 (s1 + s2)−3/2 < 0, are satisﬁed.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
120
Games in the Normal Form
1s
1s
1s
(
)
2
1
2
,
u
s s
0
2s
1
1
1s
s
s
>
>
″
″
′′′
′
′′′
′
Figure 5.4. Country 2 Payoffs as a Function of Country 1’s Investment.
There is no solution to the system of FOCs because k1 < k2. Sup-
pose that s1 > (2k2)−2; the left-hand side of country 2’s FOC is always
negative. This implies that country 2’s payoff is always decreasing in
its investment. Figure 5.4, where country 2’s payoffs are plotted as
a function of country 1’s investment, shows this graphically for val-
ues of s′′′
−1 > (2k2)−2. Because investments are nonnegative, country
2’s best response to this level of country 1 investment is 0. Similarly, if
s2 > (2k1)−2, country 1’s best response is 0 investment. These “corner
solutions” are part of each country’s best response functions, and we
cannot use the FOC approach.
It is easy, however, to see the solution graphically. In Figure 5.5 we
plot the best response functions for both countries. The vertical axis
represents both country 2’s strategy and its best response to country 1.
Similarly, the horizontal axis represents country 1’s strategy and best
response. The dotted line represents country 2’s best response function.
It declines in s1 until s1 > (2k2)−2, where it is 0. The solid line is the
country 1’s best response, which also declines to 0 at s2 = (2k1)−2 .
Clearly, the only intersection of the best responses is s1 = (2k1)−2 and
s2 = 0.
If k2 < k1 so that country 2 is the low-cost country, it is easy to check
that the Nash equilibrium strategies would be s1 = 0 and s2 = (2k2)−2.
The unique Nash equilibrium of this game is one where the high-cost
country free-rides completely on the low-cost country. The low-cost

--- Sayfa 137 ---
9. Computing Equilibria with Constrained Optimization
121
(
)
1
1
2
,
s b s
( )
2
1
2
,
b
s
s
(
)
1
2
b s

(
)
2
2
1
2k

(
)
1
2
1
2k

( )
2
1
b
s

NE = (
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
, 0
k
(
)
1
2
1
2k

(
)
2
2
1
2k
Figure 5.5. Best Response Functions for Externality Game.
country base is its optimal investment on the knowledge that the high-
cost county is investing nothing.
9. Computing Equilibria with Constrained Optimization
When a game has best response functions that map onto the bound-
ary of the strategy space, the techniques of constrained maximization
such as Kuhn-Tucker programming can be used to compute necessary
conditions for Nash equilibria.14 To illustrate, reconsider the external-
ity game. Now we explicitly impose the constraints s1 ≥0 and s2 ≥0.
We incorporate these constraints into the optimization problem with
Lagrange multipliers λ1 and λ2. Now agent i chooses si to maximize
√s1 + s2 −kisi + λisi.
The necessary conditions for a Nash equilibrium are the ﬁrst-order
conditions
1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2 −k1 + λ1 = 0
1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2 −k2 + λ2 = 0
14 Readers may wish to review the section on constrained optimization in the Mathe-
matical Appendix.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
122
Games in the Normal Form
along with the “slackness” conditions
λ1s1 = 0
λ2s2 = 0
and the constraints
λi ≥0 for all i
si ≥0 for all i.
A Nash equilibrium is a solution to the four equations that sat-
isﬁes the constraints. The ﬁrst two equations imply that λi = ki −
(1/2) (s1 + s2)−1
2 . We can use this result to rewrite the slackness con-
ditions as
s1

k1 −1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2

= 0
s2

k2 −1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2

= 0
and the constraints on λ as
k1 ≥1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2
k2 ≥1
2 (s1 + s2)−1
2 .
As before, we see that there is no solution where both countries make
positive investments. Such a solution requires the bracketed terms of
each FOC to be 0 – an impossibility. The proﬁle s1 = s2 = 0 is also
not an equilibrium, because the condition that ki ≥(1/2) (s1 + s2) is
violated. Further, suppose that s1 = 0 and s2 > 0. The second ﬁrst-
order condition implies that k2 = (1/2) (s1 + s2) k, a result that vio-
lates the nonnegativity constraints on λ1.
Consequently, the only
possible Nash equilibrium involves s1 > 0 and s2 = 0. The ﬁrst FOC
implies that s∗
1 = (2k1)−2. This is exactly the result we derived in the last
section.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
10. Proving the Existence of Nash Equilibria∗∗
123
10. Proving the Existence of Nash Equilibria∗∗
We now provide a rigorous proof of Nash’s Theorem. First we present
some related mathematical concepts. The most important of these is
the idea of a ﬁxed point. Intuitively, a ﬁxed point of a function (or
correspondence) is a point in the domain that maps into itself in the
range. Formally, for a correspondence c : A→→A, a ﬁxed point
x∗∈Ais a point such that x∗∈c(x∗). If c(·) is a function, a ﬁxed point
is a point x∗such that x∗= c(x∗). Because a Nash equilibrium is a
strategy proﬁle s∗such that s∗
i ∈bi(s∗
−i) for every i ∈N, it is a ﬁxed
point of the the best response correspondence
b(s) = (b1(s−1), . . . , bi(s−i), . . . , bn(s−n)).
Proving the existence of a Nash equilibrium, therefore, is simply a
matter of determining whether or not a ﬁxed point exists for the best
response correspondence. Fortunately, a body of mathematics is ded-
icated to determining sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of ﬁxed
points. A speciﬁcation of such conditions is a ﬁxed point theorem. If
the properties of a game’s best response correspondence match the
conditions for a ﬁxed point theorem, a Nash equilibrium exists.
A number of conditions are useful in establishing the existence of a
ﬁxed point. The ﬁrst is that the correspondence is convex valued.
DEFINITION 5.11 A correspondence c : A→→A is convex valued if
c(a) is a convex subset of A for every a ∈A.
A correspondence c(·) is convex valued if for each x ∈X the point
λy + (1 −λ)z ∈c(x) whenever y, z ∈c(x) and λ ∈[0, 1].
Another useful deﬁnition is the upper inverse of a set. For a set B, the
upper inverse is the set of points in the domain that the correspondence
maps into subsets of B.
DEFINITION 5.12 For a correspondence c : A→→A, the upper inverse
of a set B ⊆Ais c+(B) = {x ∈A: c(x) ⊂B}.
Upper inverse sets play an important role in deﬁning a notion of
continuity for correspondences, upper hemicontinuity.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
124
Games in the Normal Form
DEFINITION 5.13 A correspondence c : A→→Ais upper hemicontin-
uous if the upper inverse set c+(O) is open for every open set O ⊆A.
Deﬁnition 5.13 is often hard to verify. The existence of a closed graph
is easier to check.
DEFINITION 5.14 A correspondence c : A→→Ahas a closed graph if
for any two sequences xn →x ∈A and yn →y ∈A with xn ∈A and
yn ∈c(xn) for every n we have y ∈c(x).
The following theorem (we leave its proof as an exercise) establishes
that correspondences with closed graphs are upper hemicontinuous.
THEOREM 5.6 If Ais compact a correspondence c : A→→Ais upper
hemicontinuous if it has a closed graph.
The intuition behind the closed-graph condition is not difﬁcult. Sup-
pose that there are two sequences of points in A, xn and yn, such
that yn ∈c(xn) for each n and that these sequences converge to x
and y in A, respectively. If c has a closed graph, it must be the case
that y ∈c(x). Also for a correspondence with a closed graph, the set
{(x, y) ∈A2 : y ∈c(x)} is closed in the space A2. For a more complete
treatment of these concepts see Border (1989).
Recall that if a correspondence c : A→→A is single valued for
every a ∈A, it is a function. If a single-valued correspondence is upper
hemicontinuous then it is a continuous function.
To establish Theorem 5.3, we use Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem.
THEOREM 5.7 (Brouwer) Suppose A⊂Rd is a compact and convex set.
If f : A→Ais a continuous function then f (·) has a ﬁxed point in A.
To establish Theorem 5.4, we use Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem.
THEOREM 5.8 (Kakutani) Suppose that A⊂Rd is a compact and convex
set with c : A→→Aa correspondence satisfying the conditions
(1) c(x) is nonempty for every x ∈A
(2) c(·) is convex valued
(3) c(·) is upper hemicontinuous
then c(·) has a ﬁxed point in A.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
10. Proving the Existence of Nash Equilibria∗∗
125
Various proofs of these results appear in Border (1989). To establish
the existence of Nash equilibria, we show that in the case of Theorem
5.7 b(s) is a continuous function and in the case of Theorem 5.8 b(s)
is a correspondence that satisﬁes the conditions 1–3. A result useful in
demonstrating that b(s) is nonempty and upper hemicontinuous is due
to Berge (1997).
THEOREM 5.9 (Berge’s Theorem of the Maximum) Let X ⊂Rd, M ⊂
Rz be compact and convex sets. Let the function f (x, m) : X × M →R1
be continuous in x and m. The correspondence c : M →→Xdeﬁned as
c(m) = arg max
x∈X { f (x, m)}
is nonempty for every m ∈M and upper hemicontinuous.
That c(·) deﬁned in Theorem 5.9 is upper hemicontinuous has the
following interpretation: let the vector m be a parameter vector of the
optimization problem. If we consider a sequence of parameter vectors
mn converging to m, then x ∈c(m) for any selection of optimal policies
xn ∈c(mn) that converge to x.
We now prove Theorem 5.3.
Proof of Theorem 5.3 Assume that Si is a convex subset of Rd for
each i ∈N and for each i ∈N. Let ui(s) : S →R1 be continuous and
strictly quasi-concave in si for each s′
−i ∈S−i. From Theorem 5.9, the
correspondence bi(s−i) : S−i →→S deﬁned by
bi(s−i) = arg max
si∈Si

ui(si, s−i)

is nonempty for each s−i ∈S−i and upper hemicontinuous. Because
strictly quasi-concave utility functions can be represented by strictly
convex preferences orders, Theorem 2.4 implies that bi(s−i) is a sin-
gleton for every s−i ∈S−i. That a single-valued upper hemicontinuous
correspondence is a continuous function (see Exercise 5.15) implies
that bi(s−i) is a continuous function from S−i into Si for each i ∈N.
We now construct the function
b(s) : S →S

--- Sayfa 142 ---
126
Games in the Normal Form
by deﬁning b(s1, . . . , sn) = (b1(s−1), . . . , bn(s−n)). The vector s−i is a
continuous function of s (a projection) and we can form the composite
functionbi(s) = bi(s−i(s)). The function b(s) is, therefore, continuous
because (1) bi(·) is continuous, (2) the composition of continuous func-
tions bi(s) is continuous, and (3) the product of continuous functions
(b1(s), . . . ,bn(s)) is continuous. Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem implies
this mapping has a ﬁxed point, s∗= b(s∗). Consequently, bi(s∗
−i) = s∗
i
for every i ∈N so that s∗is a Nash equilibrium.
□
The proof of Theorem 5.4 is similar. It establishes that in any mixed
extension of a ﬁnite game, the best response correspondence satisﬁes
the conditions of Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem.
Proof of Theorem 5.4 For normal form game , let Si be ﬁnite for each
i ∈N. Thus, in the mixed extension m i is a compact and convex
subset of a ﬁnite-dimensional Euclidean space. From deﬁnition 5.9
we know that u(σ i, σ −i) is linear and therefore continuous in σ. Let
bi(σ −i) : −i →→i be deﬁned as
bi(σ −i) = arg max
σ i∈i

u(σ i, σ −i)

.
Theorem 5.9 implies that bi(σ −i) is nonempty for every σ −i ∈−i
and upper hemicontinuous. Because u(σ i, σ −i) is linear for any σ −i, if
u(σ ′
i, σ −i) = u(σ ′′
i , σ −i) then u(λσ ′
i + (1 −λ)σ ′′
i , σ −i) = u(σ ′
i, σ −i) for
any λ ∈(0, 1). Thus, bi(σ −i) is convex valued. These results establish
that the correspondence
b(σ) :  →
deﬁned as b(σ 1, . . . , σ n) = (b1(σ −1), . . . , bn(σ −n)) satisﬁes the require-
ments of Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem. So there is a mixed strategy
proﬁle satisfying the condition σ ∗∈b(σ ∗). Such a proﬁle is a Nash
equilibrium to m and a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium to .
□
11. Comparative Statics
One feature of game theoretic models that makes them particularly
useful for applied research is that they generate explanations for

--- Sayfa 143 ---
11. Comparative Statics
127
how exogenous features of political problems affect endogenous fea-
tures. These relationships are called comparative statics.15 We begin
with a simple example. Consider a model of electoral campaigns in
which candidates compete for ofﬁce by simultaneously selecting ex-
penditure levels for political advertisements. There are two candi-
dates, called 1 and 2. Each candidate i ∈{1, 2} selects a nonnega-
tive real-valued spending level si ∈R+. The cost of si is incurred by
i regardless of who wins the election. By ci(si) denote the cost to
candidate i from spending level si. The value of winning the elec-
tion is normalized to 1 and the value of not winning the election
is 0.
Let p(s1, s2) denote the probability that candidate 1 wins,
given the spending levels s1, s2. The payoffs to the candidates are
thus
u1(s1, s2) = p(s1, s2) −c1(s1)
u2(s1, s2) = 1 −p(s1, s2) −c2(s2).
First, assume that ci(si) = ks2
i and p(s1, s2) = (max{0, min{1, 1/2 +
β(s1 −s2)}}) where k and β are strictly positive parameters. To focus
the analysis on interior solutions we assume that β2 < 2k. Differenti-
ating yields the ﬁrst-order conditions for an equilibrium with values of
s∗
1, s∗
2 that satisfy the condition that p(s∗
1, s∗
2) ∈(0, 1). The ﬁrst-order
conditions are
β = 2ks1
β = 2ks2.
Rearranging yields the equilibrium solutions
s∗
1 = β
2k
s∗
2 = β
2k.
To emphasize the relationship between parameters and equilibrium
behavior we can write s∗
i (β, k) = β/(2k). To see how this solution varies
15 Readers unfamiliar or rusty with calculus should consult the review of calculus in the
the Mathematical Appendix before continuing.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
128
Games in the Normal Form
with the exogenous parameters we differentiate and attain
∂s∗
i (β, k)
∂β
= 1
2k
∂s∗
i (β, k)
∂k
= −β
2k2 .
So the equilibrium advertisement levels are increasing in the marginal
productivity of ads and decreasing in the marginal cost of ads. In this
example the ﬁrst-order conditions yield best response functions that
do not depend on the other player’s choice variable; in general this is
not the case. Given this, the comparative statics exercise is very easy.
In general, however, ﬁrst-order conditions implicitly characterize the
individual best response correspondences and then an equilibrium is a
ﬁxed point of the best response correspondence. In principle we might
not be comfortable making strong assumptions about the functional
forms of p(·, ·) and c(·). How could we learn about the comparative
statics of equilibria to this game when the functional forms are not
speciﬁed? Similarly how do we proceed if we chose functional forms
that do not allow a closed form solution for s∗
i as an explicit function
of parameters? The implicit function theorem provides a framework
for answering these types of questions. In a more general advertising
game we can let p(s1, s2; β) denote the probability of victory for candi-
date 1 as a function of the choice variables and a parameter. Similarly
let c1(s1; k1) and c2(s2; k2) denote the costs as functions of the choice
variables and parameters k1 and k2. It is common to use a semicolon
to separate endogenous variables from exogenous ones. The preced-
ing example is a special case of this class of models. The ﬁrst-order
conditions are
∂p(s1, s2; β)
∂s1
−∂c1(s1; k1)
∂s1
= 0
(5.1)
∂p(s1, s2; β)
∂s1
+ ∂c2(s2; k2)
∂s2
= 0.
To avoid some technical issues we, ﬁrst, assume that the system 5.1
yields best responses that are single valued; thus we assume that best
response functions exist.16 Before considering equilibria, we can ana-
lyze how the best responses vary with the exogenous parameters and
16 The reader is now in a position to provide sufﬁcient conditions on the primitive
functions for this assumption to hold. Review the results associated with Theorem 5.3.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
11. Comparative Statics
129
the other player’s strategy – treated for the moment as exogenous.
The implicit function theorem states that as long as a certain condi-
tion is satisﬁed we can use differential calculus to characterize how
candidate 1’s optimal choice varies in response to small changes in the
values of s2, β, or k1. A general statement of the theorem appears in
the Mathematical Appendix. In the context of this problem the appli-
cation is as follows. Let b1(·; ·, ·, ·) mapping (s2; β, k1, k2) into s1 denote
the best response for player 1. Assume that at the parameter vector
(s2, β, k1, k2) the functions p(·, ·; ·), c1(·; ·), and c2(·; ·) are continuously
differentiable and that ∂2 p(s1, s2; β)/(∂s1∂s1)̸ = ∂2c1(s1; k1)/(∂s1∂s1)
when s1 = b1(s2; β, k1). The implicit function theorem says that on a
neighborhood of the vector (s2, β, k1) the function b1 is differentiable
and has the following partial ﬁrst derivatives
∂s1
∂s2
= −
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s2
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂s1
∂β = −
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂β
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂s1
∂k1
=
∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂k1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
.
The requirement that ∂2 p(s1, s2; β)/(∂s1∂s1)̸ = ∂2c(s1; k1)/(∂s1∂s1)
when s1 = b1(s2; β, k1) ensures that the denominators are not equal
to 0. The implicit function theorem allows us to characterize how pa-
rameters affect the ﬁrst-order conditions. We leave it as an exercise to
derive the relevant comparative statics for b2(·; ·, ·, ·). Relaxing the as-
sumption that the ﬁrst-order conditions yield unique best responses is
not difﬁcult. As long as ∂2 p(s1, s2; β)/(∂s1∂s1)̸ = ∂2c(s1; k1)/(∂s1∂s1) a
solution to the ﬁrst-order condition is locally unique; in a neighborhood
of any FOC solution no other solution exists. Thus, the comparative
statics characterize local changes at each element of the best response
correspondence.
An important caveat is warranted. The preceding analysis character-
izes how the best response varies across parameter values; it does not
express how equilibrium behavior varies. The next section addresses
this issue.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
130
Games in the Normal Form
11.1. Equilibrium Effects*. An equilibrium pair s∗
1, s∗
2 solves system
5.1.17 To see how changes in the parameters (β, k1, k2) affect an equi-
librium, we apply the implicit function theorem to the system of equa-
tions. In the last section we only applied the implicit function theorem
to each best response. To analyze the equilibrium comparative statics,
it is necessary to use the tools of matrix algebra. The Jacobian matrix
is given by
⎡
⎣
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s2
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s2
−∂2c2(s2;k2)
∂s2∂s2
⎤
⎦.
Theanalogtotheconditionthat∂2 p(s1, s2; β)/(∂s1∂s1)̸ = ∂2c(s1; k1)/
(∂s1∂s1) is that the determinant of this matrix is nonsingular (i.e., its
determinant is not equal to 0).18 Consider continuously differentiable
functions p(·, ·; ·), c1(·; ·), c2(·; ·) and assume that at the parameter vec-
tor (β, k1, k2) the vector s∗
1, s∗
2 is a solution to system 5.1. Further as-
sume that at this solution the Jacobian is nonsingular. The implicit
function theorem states that there exists a neighborhood of the vec-
tor (β, k1, k2), B, and a neighborhood of the solution s∗
1, s∗
2, A, upon
which solutions to system 5.1 are given by a differentiable function of
the parameters s : B →Aand the ﬁrst derivatives of this function are
given by
 ∂s1
∂β
∂s2
∂β

= −
⎡
⎣
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s2
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s2
−∂2c2(s2;k2)
∂s2∂s2
⎤
⎦
−1 ⎡
⎣
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂β
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂β
⎤
⎦
 ∂s1
∂k1
∂s2
∂k1

=
⎡
⎣
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s2
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s2
−∂2c2(s2;k2)
∂s2∂s2
⎤
⎦
−1  ∂c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂k1
0

 ∂s1
∂k2
∂s2
∂k2

= −
⎡
⎣
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s1
−∂2c1(s1;k1)
∂s1∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s1∂s2
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s1
∂2 p(s1,s2;β)
∂s2∂s2
−∂2c2(s2;k2)
∂s2∂s2
⎤
⎦
−1 
0
∂c2(s2;k2)
∂s2∂k2

.
17 This section utilizes concepts from linear algebra and multidimensional differential
calculus.
18 This matrix is a 2 by 2 matrix. For a 2 by 2 matrix,
 a b
c d

the determinant is given by
det = ad −cb. In the 2 by 2 case the inverse is given by 1/det
 d −a
−b a

. For larger
matrices the calculations are quite tedious.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
11. Comparative Statics
131
A few comments are in order. First, the fact that ∂s1/∂k2 can be
nonzero indicates the relevance of equilibrium effects. Recall that
k2 does not affect the best response for candidate 1. A change in k2
can move the best response b2(·; ·, ·); a change in this best response
can change the equilibrium solution for s1. Second, determining the
sign of the comparative statics can be tedious, especially for problems
with higher-dimensional strategy spaces. Third, multiple solutions to
the ﬁrst-order conditions create some difﬁculties. When dealing with
best response correspondences, comparative statics can be ambiguous.
Each equilibrium for which the Jacobian is nonsingular has a conve-
nient property, however. It is locally isolated: on a neighborhood of the
equilibrium there are no other equilibria. Moreover, for small enough
changes in the parameters, any new equilibrium is also locally isolated.
A problem that analysts confront when there are multiple equilibria is
that for a ﬁxed parameter vector, ∂si/∂β may have opposite signs in two
different equilibria. In the following two sections we present results for
games in which this problem can be addressed straightforwardly.
11.2. Strategic Complementarity. Again, suppose that candidates 1
and 2 run for ofﬁce by choosing spending levels si > 0. For simplic-
ity assume that the opportunity cost of this spending is ci(si) = cisi
where ci > 0. The probability that 1 wins, p(s1, s2), is increasing in s1
and decreasing in s2. In formulating a model of campaigns, we confront
an important question. Do the primitives of the problem result in a set-
ting in which candidate 1’s best response is increasing or decreasing in
candidate 2’s spending? It seems natural that candidate 1 would select
higher levels of s1 in response to higher levels of s2, and vice versa.
If this is the case, the two choice variables are strategic complements.
Games with strategic complementarity are known as supermodular.
Such games are particularly amenable to equilibrium and comparative
static analysis. In this section we sketch the intuition behind the anal-
ysis of such games by using an example, we leave the technical details
for the subsequent section.
Kahn and Kenney’s (1999) study of Senate elections posits that
competitiveness is an important factor in determining how much me-
dia coverage campaign activities generate. Competitiveness shapes
the way that voters respond to campaigns while campaigns inﬂu-
ence the competitiveness of a race. Absent a competitive election, the
media and voters tune out, and the marginal value of campaign ad-
vertisements is low. On the other hand, when competitiveness is high,

--- Sayfa 148 ---
132
Games in the Normal Form
2s
( )
2
1
b
s
1
2
(
)
b s

*2s
( )
1
2
b s
( )
2
1
b
s
*
2s
1s
*1s
*
1s
′
′
′
′
Figure 5.6. Strategic Complementarity.
campaign messages have large effects. Kahn and Kenney’s theory por-
trays the media as a mechanism that determines competitiveness as
a function of campaigning. Consistent with this interpretation, higher
levels of campaigning are likely to result in more competitiveness. In
highly competitive races advertising and spending are more inﬂuential.
This feedback loop suggests that candidate advertising levels are strate-
gic complements. Consequently, both of the best responses are strictly
increasing functions of the other candidate’s strategy. In Figure 5.6,
we depict the best responses for a game of this form with a unique
equilibrium point, (s∗
1, s∗
2).
Whereas pictures with multiple equilibria could be drawn, it is not
difﬁcult to see that the equilibria would be completely ordered such
that if (s∗
1, s∗
2) and (s∗∗
1 , s∗∗
2 ) are two Nash equilibria and s∗
1 > s∗∗
1 then
s∗
2 > s∗∗
2 (and if s∗
2 > s∗∗
2 then s∗
1 > s∗∗
1 ). To see that this must be true,
try drawing a counterexample while maintaining the assumption that
the best responses are strictly increasing.
We can take Kahn and Kenney’s hypothesis about competitiveness
further. Suppose at the beginning of a campaign, there is an exogenous
level of competitiveness. Sources of variation in competitiveness might
include the importance of the ofﬁce, the media environment, and the
attentiveness of the voters. Consider two electoral environments where
one is more competitive than the other. For a ﬁxed level of si, we would
expect that b−i(si) is higher in the more competitive race. In Figure 5.6,
b′
i(s−i) denotes the best responses for the more competitive election
while bi(s−i) represents those of the less competitive one. The ﬁgure

--- Sayfa 149 ---
11. Comparative Statics
133
demonstrates that equilibrium campaign spending of the more com-
petitive race, (s′∗
1 , s′∗
2 ), is higher than equilibrium spending in the less
competitive race, (s∗
1, s∗
2). We conclude therefore that competitiveness
generates more campaign spending.
This comparative static result is generated by nothing more than
the assumption of strategic complementarity. As long as both best re-
sponses are increasing, a common upward shift in the best responses
leads to a higher intersection point. It is easy to see, however, that
the effect of competitiveness is ambiguous if one of the players has a
downward sloping best response. As long as candidate spending levels
are strategic complements, the result does not hinge on any assump-
tions about functional forms or player preferences. The need for the
continuous and differentiable best response functions required for use
of the implicit function theorem is obviated.
The trick, of course, is to determine model primitives that are con-
sistent with complementarity. In the following technical section, we
present the underlying theory of supermodular games and present
some sufﬁciency conditions for the existence of equilibria exhibiting
monotone comparative statics.
11.3. Supermodularity and Monotone Comparative Statics∗. Nash’s
Theoremreliesoncontinuousbestresponsecorrespondencesandcom-
pact strategy sets so that Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem establishes
the existence of equilibria. Unfortunately, these requirements often
necessitate strong assumptions about the primitives of the model. A
different ﬁxed point theorem, however, establishes existence of Nash
equilibria if the best responses satisfy monotonicity conditions like the
ones discussed in the previous section. As an analytical bonus, the com-
parative statics analysis of the equilibrium set is immediate when the
best responses satisfy these conditions. Analyses of such equilibria are
much simpler and more straightforward than those based on the im-
plicit function theorem. In this section, we summarize several results
for supermodular games. The payoff is the ability to prove the exis-
tence of equilibria with discontinuous best response correspondences
and the availability of direct comparative static results.
The concepts of this section can be developed on the basis of mono-
tonicity for any partial ordering. To keep matters concrete, however,
we consider only the natural partial ordering ≥on sets contained in Rn.
Some important deﬁnitions follow. For any two numbers x, y ∈R1, the

--- Sayfa 150 ---
134
Games in the Normal Form
join is x ∨y = max{x, y} and the meet is x ∧y = min{x, y}. These deﬁ-
nitions are extended to vectors element by element. Consequently, for
any two vectors in x, y in Rn , x ∨y = (max{x1, y1}, . . . , max{xn, yn})
and x ∧y = (min{x1, y1}, . . . , min{xn, yn}). A set that contains all of
the joins and meets of its elements is called a lattice.
DEFINITION 5.15 A set Ais a lattice if x ∨y ∈Aand x ∧y ∈Afor each
x, y ∈A
The intervals and the products of intervals are lattices, but sets like
{x ∈R3 : x1 + x2 + x3 ≤1} – the simplex – are not lattices.19 Intuitively,
squares (products of intervals) are lattices but triangles are not.20
In this section we are interested in single-agent or multiagent deci-
sion theoretic problems deﬁned by a set of choice variables X and
a set of exogenous parameters P. Both of these sets are lattices.
The agents’ objective function depends on both types of variables,
f (x, p) : X × P →R1.
DEFINITION 5.16 The function f (·, ·) : X × P →R1 is supermodular in
(x, p) if f (z) + f (z′) ≤f (z ∨z′) + f (z ∧z′) for all z, z′ ∈X × P.
Although veriﬁcation of this condition is often difﬁcult, a more in-
tuitive condition, increasing differences, is often easily veriﬁed.
DEFINITION 5.17 The function f (·, ·) : X × P →R1 has increasing dif-
ferences in (x, p) if f (x′, p′) −f (x, p′) ≥f (x′, p) −f (x, p) for all
p ≤p′ and x ≤x′.
For a function with increasing differences the marginal effect of
changes in x is increasing in p. In other words, increasing difference
formalizes the idea of complementarity. Increasing differences is often
easier to interpret in terms of the substance of models than is super-
modularity. Therefore it is convenient that increasing differences is
equivalent to supermodularity.
19 See Topkis (1998) for a dicusssion of translations that convert nonlattices into lattices.
20 Although we do not consider examples where the sets are discrete or other nonconvex
sets, the deﬁnition of a lattice and subsequent results can be readily applied to non-
convex sets.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
11. Comparative Statics
135
THEOREM 5.10 (Topkis)Thefunction f (·, ·) : X × P →R1 hasincreas-
ing differences in (x, p) if and only if it is supermodular in (x, p).
In the case of a twice-differentiable function f (·, ·) : X × P →
R1, supermodularity (and increasing differences) is equivalent to
∂2 f /(∂z1∂z2) ≥0 for any coordinates z1 and z2 of X or P or both.
The tractability of supermodular models is further facilitated be-
cause supermodularity is preserved under several types of mathemat-
ical operations.
THEOREM 5.11 Let X be a lattice. The following statements are true.
(1)
If f (x) is supermodular on X and α > 0 then α f (x) is supermod-
ular on X.
(2) If f (x) and g(x) are supermodular on X then f (x) + g(x) is
supermodular on X.
(3) If ft(x) is a sequence of supermodular functions on X for t =
1, 2, . . . , and f (x) = limk→θ fk(x) for each x ∈X then f (x) is su-
permodular in X.
(4) If F(ω) is a distribution function on a set  and g(x, ω) is su-
permodular on X for each ω ∈ then f (x) =

 g(x, ω)dF(ω) is
supermodular on X.
Now we consider the implications of supermodularity for the sim-
ple case of an individual optimization problem. Most importantly, su-
permodularity implies that the optimal solution has monotone com-
parative statics: each element of arg maxx∈X f (x, p) is an increasing
function of p.
THEOREM 5.12 (Topkis) If f (·, ·) : X × P →R1 is supermodular in
(x, p) and g(p) = arg maxx∈X f (x, p) then each component of g(p) is
increasing in p on every subset B ⊂P of parameters for which g(p) is
nonempty.
The theorem does not establish that an optimal solution exists. Re-
call that Theorem 2.3 establishes the nonemptiness of the maximal
set for lower continuous orderings on compact sets. Lower continuity
of preferences corresponds to what is called upper semicontinuity of
objective functions.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
136
Games in the Normal Form
DEFINITION 5.18 A function f (x) : X →R1 is upper semicontinuous
at x0 ∈X if for all ε > f (x0) there is some δ > 0 such that for all x ∈
B(x0, δ) (an open ball around x0 with radius δ) ε ≥f (x). A function
is upper semicontinuous on X if it is upper semicontinuous at every
x0 ∈X.
Upper semicontinuity at x0 requires that lim infx→x0 f (x) ≤f (x0).
Using the result of exercise 5.21, Theorem 2.3, and a restatement of
Topkis’s result lead to the following conclusion.
THEOREM 5.13 If f (·, ·) : X × P →R1 is supermodular in (x, p) and
upper semicontinuous in x for each p then g(p) = arg maxx∈X f (x, p)
is nonempty for every p ∈P and each component of g(p) is increasing
in p.
In the proof of Theorem 5.4, we highlighted properties of objective
functions that generated the properties of the best responses required
to apply a speciﬁc ﬁxed point theorem. Analogously, Tarsky’s ﬁxed
point theorem allows us to use monotonicity of best responses to es-
tablish existence of Nash equilibria. Theorem 5.13 thus leads to the
conclusion that a game with supermodular and upper semicontinuous
utility functions has at least one Nash equilibrium. We now present
Tarsky’s theorem.
THEOREM 5.14 (Tarsky) If f (x) is an increasing function from a com-
pact lattice X into itself then there exists at least one ﬁxed point x∗such
that f (x∗) = x∗.
In Figure 5.7 we demonstrate the case in which Xis one-dimensional.
As long as the function f (x) is increasing, the presence of discontinu-
ities does not enable us to skip all of the crossings of f (x) and the
dotted 45◦line. Just as Kakutani’s theorem generalized Brouwer’s to
the case of correspondences, Zhou (1994) represents a generalization
of Tarsky to the case of correspondences. We do not present this re-
sult because it requires much additional notation. Instead we present
directly the result for supermodular games.
DEFINITION 5.19 A regular supermodular game is a normal form game

N, {Si, u(·, . . . , ·)}i∈n

in which Si is a compact lattice for each i ∈N and
u(·, . . . , ·) is supermodular and upper semicontinuous for each i ∈N.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
11. Comparative Statics
137
f(x)

x
Figure 5.7. Tarsky’s Fixed Point Theorem.
f(x)

x
Figure 5.8. Comparative Statics of Extreme Fixed Points.
The main result for regular supermodular games can now be stated.
THEOREM 5.15 A regular supermodular game has at least one pure strat-
egy Nash equilibrium, and the set of such equilibria is a lattice with a
smallest and biggest equilibrium proﬁle.
Why do we care about the existence of a smallest and largest equilib-
rium? The second important result for supermodular games deals with
comparative statics of the smallest and largest equilibria. To motivate
this result we return to the case of a function f (x) on R1.
Figure 5.8 depicts an increasing function with four ﬁxed points
f (x) = x. The dotted curve f ′(x) represents the result of shifting f (x)

--- Sayfa 154 ---
138
Games in the Normal Form
up. The largest and smallest ﬁxed points shift to the right (get larger)
when the function is shifted up. In contrast some ﬁxed points move the
other way. The smallest and biggest ﬁxed points are generally the result
of the function’s crossing the 45◦line from above and behave the same
way. This intuition forms the basis for the following comparative static
result.
THEOREM 5.16 In a regular supermodular game the smallest and largest
equilibrium proﬁles are increasing in p.
Figure 5.8 suggests that other equilibria can behave differently.
Echenique (2002) shows that in games with complementaries any equi-
librium without the comparative statics of the biggest and smallest
equilibria is unstable. In other words there are clear reasons to select
equilibria that exhibit monotone comparative statics.
Returning to Kahn and Kenney’s competitiveness hypothesis, sup-
pose that candidate 1 maximizes p(s1, s2, c) −c1s1 and candidate 2
maximizes 1 −p(s1, s2, γ ) −c2s2 where p(s1, s2, γ ) depends on an ex-
ogenous level of competitiveness γ ∈R1. If campaign spending inﬂu-
ences competitiveness and voters pay closer attention in more compet-
itive races, the incremental effect of s1 on p(s1, s2, γ ) is higher when s2
or γ is higher. A symmetric argument applies for the incremental ef-
fect of s2. Accordingly, the assumption that payoffs are supermodular
is consistent with Kahn and Kenney’s claim. Assuming compactness
of the choice sets and upper semicontinuity of p(s1, s2, γ ) in s1 and
−p(s1, s2, γ ) in s2 allows us to conclude (from Theorems 5.16 and 5.17)
that equilibria exist. Moreover, si is increasing in γ in the biggest and
smallest equilibria. This is a strong conclusion; it is robust to the par-
ticular speciﬁcation of p(·, ·, ·). The power of monotone comparative
statics is that it enables analysts to identify the minimal structure gen-
erating a particular prediction.21
12. Reﬁning Nash Equilibria
In the majority-rule voting game of Section 2.2, any proﬁle in which
no single voter is pivotal is a Nash equilibrium. We justify ignoring
21 For a thorough review of results for supermodular games and monotone comparative
statics see Topkis (1998). A focused summary of results and applications to political
science appear in Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2006).

--- Sayfa 155 ---
12. Reﬁning Nash Equilibria
139
these equilibria because they involve weakly dominated strategies.
The elimination of weakly dominated strategies, however, is not the
only way that we can justify reﬁning the set of Nash equilibria in this
game. Instead of assuming that every agent plays her best response
with probability 1, suppose that each player trembles with some small
probability and plays another strategy. To keep matters very simple,
consider a three-player version of the game in which two voters prefer
D and one prefers R. Formally, each player is constrained to play each
pure strategy with at least probability ε that is assumed to be a small
positive number less than 1/2.22 This assumption captures the idea that
mistakes ensure that all strategies are played with at least a minimal
probability.
Clearly maximizing the probability that their preferred candidate
wins is a best response. This goal is identical to minimizing the proba-
bility that the least desired candidate wins. So we need only compute
the probability that each candidate wins under various combinations
of strategies. The probabilities of a R victory are as follows:
Pr (R|3 attempted votes for R) = (1 −ε)3 + 3 (1 −ε)2 ε
Pr (R|2 attempted votes for R) = (1 −ε)3 + (1 −ε)2 ε + 2 (1 −ε) ε2
Pr (R|1 attempted votes for R) = ε2 (1 −ε) + 2 (1 −ε)2 ε + ε3
Pr (R|0 attempted votes for R) = ε3 + 3ε2(1 −ε).
One can verify that ε < 1/2 implies the probability that a Republican
wins is strictly increasing in the number of intended votes.
First, consider the “bad” equilibrium of the original game where R
wins unanimously. Does this outcome survive in the presence of trem-
bles (i.e., does each voter vote R with the maximal probability 1 −ε)?
Clearly, the R voter maximizes the probability of an R victory by vot-
ing R with probability 1 −ε. Consider the choice of a Dvoter. She can
conform with the equilibrium by intending to vote R, in which case R
wins with probability (1 −ε)3 + 3 (1 −ε)2 ε. Conversely, she can de-
fect by intending to vote for D. In this case R wins with probability
(1 −ε)3 + (1 −ε)2 ε + 2 (1 −ε) ε2. This defection reduces the proba-
bility that R wins by 2 (1 −ε)2 ε −2 (1 −ε) ε2 > 0. Thus, the D voter
22 The idea that voters might not vote for the candidate whom they intended to support
hastakenonrenewedsubstantiveimportancesincethe2000U.S.presidentialelection.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
140
Games in the Normal Form
prefers the defection. It is easy to show that the equilibrium that cor-
responds to all voters’ choosing D also does not survive trembles.
This idea of reﬁning the set of equilibria by focusing on equilibria
that are robust to small mistakes by the agents is due to Reinhardt
Selten (1965), who named such equilibria perfect. A formal deﬁnition
of perfect equilibria follows:
DEFINITION 5.20 For a ﬁxed ε > 0 an “ε -constrained” equilibrium is a
totally mixed strategy proﬁle σ ε such that for each player i, σ ε
i solves
maxσ iui(σ i, σ ε
−i) subject to σ i(si) ≥ε for each si. A perfect equilibrium
is the limit of some sequence of ε-constrained equilibrium as ε goes to 0.
It is easy to see how unanimous voting equilibria fail to meet this
deﬁnition. In the ε-constrained equilibria, all players vote for their
least preferred candidate with probability ε. Consequently, the limit of
these equilibria are strategy proﬁles that place 0 probability on voting
for the less preferred candidate. Indeed, the only perfect equilibrium
is the one where all voters vote for their favorite candidate.
Perfect equilibria have a number of desirable properties. First, all
perfect equilibria are Nash equilibria of the game without the ε con-
straints. Thus, the set of perfect equilibria is a proper subset of the
set of Nash equilibria. Second, using arguments similar to ones used
to establish the existence of Nash equilibria, ﬁnite game normal form
games have at least one perfect equilibrium.23
13. Application: Private Provision of Public Goods
Since the publication of Mancur Olson’s The Logic of Collective Action
in 1965, the conditions under which individually rational agents will-
ingly incur private costs to contribute to the public good have been
a central question in political science. In this section, we present one
such model based on the work of Palfrey and Rosenthal (1984).
A group of n agents decide whether to make private contributions to
the provision of a public good. Provision requires the contribution of
at least one agent. If the good is provided, each agent obtains a gain of
one unit of utility. Any contributor pays a cost c < 1. The strategy set
23 Theprooffollowsfromthefactthattheε-constrainedmixedstrategyspaceiscompact,
convex, and nonempty. Of course after establishing the existence of an ε-constrained
equilibrium, one must show it converges to a Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
13. Application: Private Provision of Public Goods
141
for each agent is {contribute, don’t contribute}. We deﬁne contribute as
si = 1 and don’t contribute as si = 0. Because we also consider mixed
strategyequilibria,letσ i betheprobabilitythatagenti contributes.The
payoff for each agent is 1 −c if she contributes, 1 if she does not con-
tribute but some other agent does, and 0 otherwise. Consequently, the
model captures the incentive to free-ride. Each agent prefers someone
else to contribute so that she may capture the gains without incurring
the costs.
First, we consider the set of pure strategy equilibria. It is easy to
verify that for each agent i there is a pure strategy Nash equilibrium
where si = 1 and s−i = 0. In each of these equilibria, agent i receives
1 −c, and all other agents receive a utility of 1. Clearly, agent i does not
defect because failing to contribute lowers her payoff to 0. Similarly,
no other agent defects to contributing because defection lowers his
payoff from 1 to 1 −c. Now we check that no other combination of
strategies is a pure strategy Nash equilibrium. First, consider si = 0 for
all i. In this case, any agent does better by contributing so this proﬁle
cannot be an equilibrium. Next consider a strategy combination where
more than one agent contributes. Clearly, any contributor increases
her utility by unilaterally withholding the contribution – the good is
provided by a contribution from another agent.
The implications of these equilibria are quite different from those
of Olson’s decision theoretic analysis. In particular, Olson’s analysis
predicts that free-riding leads to inefﬁcient levels of public goods pro-
vision. In the Palfrey-Rosenthal game, however, all of the pure strategy
equilibria are Pareto efﬁcient – the public good is provided by the min-
imal required contributions. Nevertheless, there are reasons to doubt
that the pure strategy equilibria are valid descriptions of how this game
is actually played. First, because there are so many Nash equilibria,
how do the agents coordinate on one of them? Second, each of the
pure strategy Nash equilibria involves ex ante identical agents’ play-
ing different strategies. An equilibrium where identical agents play
identical strategies seems more plausible. Consequently, we consider
symmetric mixed strategy equilibria where σ i = σ for all i. This re-
striction is consistent with our criticism of the asymmetry inherent in
the pure strategy Nash equilibria.
Recall that agent i only plays a mixed strategy if she is indifferent
among the pure strategies in the support of the mixture. Thus, agent i
is willing to play 0 < σ i < 1 when n −1 players each contribute with
probability σ if and only if ui (contribute, σ) = ui (not contribute, σ).

--- Sayfa 158 ---
142
Games in the Normal Form
Because the probability that at least one other agent contributes is
1 −(1 −σ)n−1, the indifference condition is
1 −c = 1 −(1 −σ)n−1 .
From this condition, we solve for the equilibrium value of the contribu-
tion probability σ = 1 −c1/(n−1). This equilibrium is more consistent
with Olson’s prediction. As n gets large, σ goes to 0. If c goes to 0,
however, σ goes to 1.
13.1. Multiple Contributions. Now we consider an extension of this
model in which the public good is provided if at least k of the n agents
contribute. Because more than one contribution is necessary for pro-
vision, abstaining by all n agents is now a Nash equilibrium. From
this proﬁle a single contributor gains nothing from contributing and
loses c. There are, however, many pure strategy equilibria in which
exactly k agents make contributions. Clearly, in such an equilibrium,
noncontributors have no incentive to defect (i.e., make a contribution);
it costs c without changing the probability of obtaining the public good.
Conversely, any contributor who defects prevents the provision of the
good. Because saving the contribution cost is less valuable than los-
ing the public good, such a defection is not desirable. In summary,
there is an equilibrium corresponding to contributions by every pos-
sible combination of k agents. From a basic result in combinatorics,
there are exactly
n
k

distinct Nash equilibria where k contributions are
made.24
These pure strategy equilibria are even less compelling than the pure
strategy equilibria of the one-contribution game. Again we compute
the symmetric mixed strategy equilibria for this game and let σ denote
the probability that an individual contributes. Given that the players
N\{i} each randomize, let x−i be the random variable representing the
number of contributions made by agents other than i. The payoff to
agent i from contributing is
Pr (x−i < k −1) · 0 + Pr (x−i ≥k −1) · 1 −c
24 The notation
n
k

≡n!/(k! (n −k)!), known as the binomial coefﬁcient, represents the
number of combinations of k elements drawn from n objects.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
13. Application: Private Provision of Public Goods
143
whereas the payoff from abstaining is
Pr (x−i < k) · 0 + Pr (x−i ≥k) · 1.
As before, the mixed strategy equilibrium requires indifference be-
tween contributing and abstaining. Equating these payoffs and doing
a bit of algebra, the necessary condition for choosing a mixed strategy
is
Pr (x−i = k −1) = c.
This condition has a nice intuitive interpretation. Contributing only
has a positive beneﬁt if exactly k −1 other agents contribute. Thus, the
payoff from the contributing to the public good is discounted by the
probability that a contribution is pivotal. Because agents are mixing,
this expected beneﬁt must be equated to the contribution costs c.
Because all agents independently play the same mixed strategy, we
can compute the exact value of Pr (x−i = k −1): it equals the proba-
bility of obtaining exactly k −1 successes in n −1 trials with a success
probability of σ. A standard result of probability theory is that
Pr (x−i = k −1) =

n −1
k −1

σ k−1 (1 −σ)n−k .
Computing the symmetric, mixed strategy equilibrium involves ﬁnding
the values of σ that solve

 n −1
k −1

σ k−1 (1 −σ)n−k = c.
This condition simpliﬁes to
σ k−1 (1 −σ)n−k = (k −1)! (n −k)!
(n −1)!
c.
Before characterizing the solution set, it is worthwhile to look at a
couple of examples. First, suppose that n = 5 and k = 3. Then the
equilibrium condition reduces to σ 2 (1 −σ)2 = c/6. The solid lines
of Figure 5.9 represent the left and right sides of the condition. As
long as c is sufﬁciently low, there are two solutions to the equation,
σ ∗
L < 1/2 < σ ∗
H. Each represents a distinct mixed strategy equilibrium.
The comparative statics depends on whether an equilibrium is the low

--- Sayfa 160 ---
144
Games in the Normal Form
σ
6
c

(
)
2
2 1 –
σ
σ
c
4
c

(
)
3 1 – σ
σ
4
σ
Figure 5.9. Equilibria to Palfrey-Rosenthal Contribution Game.
solution or the high solution. It is easy to see how the equilibrium mix-
tures change as a function of c. The effect of increasing c is to raise σ ∗
L
and lower σ ∗
H.
In Figure 5.9 we also plot the conditions for k = 4 and k = 5:
σ 3 (1 −σ) = (1/4)c, and σ 4 = c, respectively. The case of k = 4 is sim-
ilar to that of k = 3: it also has two mixed strategy equilibria. Note that
σ 3 (1 −σ) > σ 2 (1 −σ)2 if σ > 1/2. This effect plus (1/4)c > (1/6)c
implies that σ ∗
H increases in k. Because σ 3 (1 −σ) < σ 2 (1 −σ)2 if
σ < 1/2, σ ∗
L also increases in k. For the case of k = 5, that σ 4 increases
monotonically for 0 ≤σ ≤1 implies that there is one mixed strategy
equilibrium. It has a higher contribution probability than σ ∗
Ldoes when
k = 4 and also increases in c.
Manyoftheimplicationsoftheexamplesgeneralize.First,regardless
of n and k, there can be at most two mixed strategy equilibria. To see
this, let c(σ) be the level of costs that supports σ as the equilibrium
mixing strategy or
c (σ) =

n −1
k −1

σ k−1 (1 −σ)n−k .

--- Sayfa 161 ---
14. Exercises
145
Differentiating with respect to σ, we ﬁnd that
c′ (σ) =

 n −1
k −1

[(k −1) (1 −σ) −(n −k) σ] σ k−2 (1 −σ)n−k−1
It is easy to see that if k < n the function c (σ) is single peaked (in-
creasing to the left of a global maxima and decreasing to the right of
the maxima) because
c′ ⪌0 if σ ⪋k −1
n −1.
If 1 < k < n and c is less than the value c((k −1)/(n −1)) ≡cmax, there
are two symmetric mixed strategy equilibria. But if c > cmax, there
are none.25 If k = n or k = 1, there is one symmetric mixed strategy
equilibrium so long as c < 1.
For the high-contribution equilibria where σ ∗
H > (k −1)/(n −1),
contribution probabilities decrease in c and n and increase in k. For the
low-contribution equilibria where σ ∗
L < (k −1)/(n −1), the contribu-
tion probabilities increase in c and n. For low-contribution equilibria
where σ ∗
L < (k −1)/n, contributions are falling in k, but they increase
in k for equilibria where σ ∗
L ∈
 k−1
n , k−1
n−1

.26 As in the case of k = 1,
contribution probabilities go to 0 as n gets very large.27
14. Exercises
EXERCISE 5.1 Verify that the two deﬁnitions of Nash equilibrium are
equivalent. Hint: First show that if a strategy proﬁle satisﬁes the ﬁrst
deﬁnition then it must satisfy the second. Then show that if it satisﬁes the
second it must satisfy the ﬁrst.
EXERCISE 5.2 Show that the Prisoner’s Dilemma has no Nash equilibria
in which players use nonpure strategies.
25 Of course in the unlikely event that c = cmax, there is a single symmetric mixed
strategy equilibrium.
26 Some derivations useful in proving these claims appear in the appendix to Palfrey
and Rosenthal (1988).
27 The proof of this last statement is closely related to the law of large numbers. Be-
cause c(σ) is the probability function of the binomial distribution, it goes to zero
everywhere except (k −1)/(n −1) as n gets large. Thus, σ ∗
L and σ ∗
H must converge to
(k −1)/(n −1), which itself is converging to 0.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
146
Games in the Normal Form
EXERCISE 5.3 Consider the normal form game
1\2
a
b
c
d
w
1, 2
1, 3
2, 1
5, 1
x
4, 2
2, 4
3, 4
4, 3
y
3, 2
2, 3
4, 5
2, 2
z
3, 2
1, 2
2, 2
1, 4
EXERCISE 5.4
(1) What strategies survive iterative deletion of strictly dominated
strategies (check for dominance by mixed strategies)?
(2) What are the pure strategy Nash equilibria?
(3) What are the mixed strategy Nash equilibria?
EXERCISE 5.5 Find the mixed strategy Nash equilibria of the following
game:
1\2
L
R
T
2, 1
0, 2
B
1, 3
3, 0
EXERCISE 5.6 Consider the normal form game
1\2
a
c
c
d
u
2, 0
3, 1
4, 0
6, 1
m
3, 4
4, 2
6, 3
4, 1
d
4, 4
3, 3
5, 6
6, 2
EXERCISE 5.7
(1) Are any strategies weakly dominated?
(2) What strategies survive iterated deletion of strictly dominated
strategies (check for dominance by mixed strategies)?
(3) Find the mixed and/or pure strategy Nash equilibria.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
14. Exercises
147
EXERCISE 5.8 Consider a three-member legislature that operates under
majority rule. There are a status quo y and an alternative x. A lobbyist
L1 wants to have x enacted and a lobbyist L2 wants to have y retained.
Each lobbyist can“bribe” a legislator to vote for his preferred policy. For
simplicity assume that only bribes of exactly p can be made (with p > 0
a ﬁxed number). If a legislator receives a bribe from only L1 she votes
for x; if she receives a bribe from only L2 she votes for y. If a legislator
receives a bribe from both lobbyists or no lobbyists she votes for y. The
preferences of the two lobbyists are given by the utility functions
UL1(x) = u∗−pBL1
UL1(y) = −pBL1
UL2(x) = −pBL2
UL2(y) = u∗−pBL2
where BL1 is the number of legislators L1 bribes (either 0, 1, 2, or 3), and
BL2 is the number of legislators L2 bribes (either 0, 1, 2, or 3). Assume
that u∗≥3p. A pure strategy for each lobbyist indicates which legislators
(if any) she bribes. For example, (b, 0, b) indicates that bribes were made
to legislators 1 and 3 but not 2. A mixed strategy is then a probability
distribution (lottery) over the eight possible pure strategies.
(1) Characterize the Nash equilibria (mixed or pure) of this game.
Hint: First delete strictly dominated strategies.
(2) What is the probability that x will be enacted in equilibrium?
How does this probability respond to changes in the parameters
p and u∗?
EXERCISE 5.9 Consider two candidates a and bcompeting for ofﬁce. Let
the policy space consist of the three points {−1, 0, 1} and assume that
voters have symmetric tent-shaped utility functions. Moreover, assume
thatthecandidatesdonotknowthelocationofthemedianvoter.Suppose
their beliefs are that she is located at −1 with probability π < 1/2, located
at1withprobabilityπ,andlocatedat 0withprobability1 −2π.Suppose
that candidate a is better than b. (She has a distinguished service record,
is more attractive, or is from a popular party.) This quality difference is
small, though, so if a and b locate equidistantly from the median voter
(or a is closer to the median voter) then a wins, but if b is closer to
the median voter then b wins. Analyze the normal form game where

--- Sayfa 164 ---
148
Games in the Normal Form
candidates simultaneously select a policy position in the policy space
{−1, 0, 1}.
(1) Are there any pure strategy Nash equilibria? If so, characterize
them.
(2) Are there any mixed strategy Nash equilibria? If so, characterize
them.
EXERCISE 5.10 Consider a modiﬁcation of the Downsian/Hotelling
model in which candidates have policy preferences and the median
voter’s ideal point is uniformlydistributed on [0, 1]. Now assumethatone
candidate’s ideal point is distributed uniformly on [0, 1/3] and the other
candidate’s ideal point is distributed uniformly on [1/2, 1]. Characterize
the Nash equilibria.
EXERCISE 5.11 In the each of Hotelling models, show that there are no
equilibria in pure strategies if there are three parties. What is the Nash
equilibrium with four parties if parties maximize vote share?
EXERCISE 5.12 Prove Theorem 5.5.
EXERCISE 5.13 Characterize the pure strategy Nash equilibria to the
International Externality game when k1 = k2.
EXERCISE 5.14(∗) Prove Theorem 5.6.
EXERCISE 5.15(∗) Show that an upper hemicontinuous correspondence
that is single valued is a continuous function.
EXERCISE 5.16 Assume that s∗
1 solves the ﬁrst-order condition β −
2ks1 = 0. Use the implicit function theorem to ﬁnd ∂s∗
1/∂β and ∂s∗
1/∂k.
EXERCISE 5.17 Find the derivatives of b2(·, :, ·) from system 5.1.
EXERCISE 5.18 Find the second- (and cross-) partial derivatives of the
best responses from system 5.1.
EXERCISE 5.19 Verify that if f (·, ·) has increasing differences in (x, p)
then for all p ≤p′and x ≤x′ f (x, p′) −f (x, p) ≥f (x′, p′) −f (x′, p).
EXERCISE 5.20(∗) Prove parts a–c of Theorem 5.11.
EXERCISE 5.21(∗) Assume that X is a compact subset of Rn and R is
a lower continuous partial order on X. Show that if u(x) is a utility
function that represents Ron Xthen u(·) is upper semicontinuous on X.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
14. Exercises
149
Now show that if u(x) is upper semicontinuous on Xthen any preference
relation that it represents is lower continuous.
EXERCISE 5.22(∗) Show that every ﬁnite game has at least one perfect
equilibrium.
EXERCISE 5.23 For the Palfrey-Rosenthal contribution game, construct
an asymmetric Nash equilibrium where l agents contribute (σ i = 1), m
agents do not contribute (σ i = 0), and n −m −l agents choose a mixed
strategy σ i = q ∈(0, 1). Show that if l > 0 or m > 0, q∗is unique.
EXERCISE 5.24 Consider an extension of the Palfrey-Rosenthal model
where contributions are refunded if the public good is not provided (i.e.,
fewer than kcontributions are made). Characterize the pure strategy and
mixed strategy equilibria of this game.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
6 Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
The normal form games of the previous chapter assume that agents
have complete information or, if there is uncertainty, the same beliefs.
But this assumption is often unreasonable. Candidates for ofﬁce may
know more about their policy preferences than voters; interest groups
may know more about the relationship between policies and outcomes
than legislators; a nation may know more than its rivals about its own
military capacity. In many settings ignoring asymmetric information
misses many important strategic incentives. Recall the Terrorist Hunt
game, which is reproduced in Table 6.1.
The CIA knows that the FBI prefers arresting operatives to mak-
ing no arrests. The FBI knows that the CIA knows this fact, and so
on. The game changes in important ways, however, if the CIA is un-
certain whether the FBI prefers arresting operatives to not arresting
anyone. Perhaps the FBI feels that the homeland security beneﬁts
of capturing the operative do not exceed the costs. If the CIA be-
lieved this were the case, it would perceive the game as that in
Table 6.2.
The CIA could even believe that the FBI might have yet another
preference ordering valuing operatives over kingpins. Perhaps op-
eratives usually fold under pressure, providing lots of information,
whereas kingpins remain silent. In this case, the CIA might believe
that the game is Table 6.3.
If the CIA is unsure how the FBI evaluates the outcomes, the CIA’s
calculation of which strategy to play is more complicated. In the origi-
nal game the pure strategy Nash equilibria are (kingpin, kingpin) and
(operative, operative). But if the CIA thinks that the FBI is playing
one of the modiﬁed games, it is less clear which strategy the CIA
150

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
151
Table 6.1. The Terrorist Hunt
FBI\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 2
0, 1
Operative
1, 0
1, 1
prefers. It is not clear how to com-
pute a Nash equilibrium or elimi-
nate dominated strategies. Even if
the modeler knows the FBI’s payoffs
and can determine which strategies
are best responses or are dominated
for the FBI, these solution concepts
require that the CIA also have a clear understanding of the FBI’s
payoffs.
In this section we develop the tools necessary to analyze models in
which agents do not know the payoffs of the other players. This fea-
ture is called incomplete information. The standard practice (originated
Table 6.2. Modiﬁed Hunt 1
FBI′\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
2, 2
0, 1
Operative
0, 0
0, 1
by Harsanyi 1967–1968) is to convert
such a game into one where a ﬁctional
player (usually called Nature) moves
ﬁrst, drawing the utility functions of
the agents from a probability distri-
bution. The agents know this proba-
bility distribution but do not observe
Nature’s draw. Typically, agents ob-
serve some aspects of the draw such
as their own payoffs. Following Nature’s move, agents simultaneously
select their actions. This modiﬁed game form is one of complete but im-
perfect information. As applied to the modiﬁed Terrorist Hunt, Nature
randomly selects the preferences (or type) of the FBI from a known
probability distribution. The FBI knows its type and chooses an ac-
tion. When it chooses its action, the CIA does not know the FBI’s
Table 6.3. Modiﬁed Hunt 2
FBI′′\CIA
Kingpin
Operative
Kingpin
1, 2
0, 1
Operative
2, 0
2, 1
type but knows the likelihood of each
type. Specifying strategies for the CIA
is somewhat complicated. In evaluat-
ing its own strategies, the CIA must
form a conjecture about the strategy
played by each of the three possible
FBI types. Given such a conjecture, the
CIA can compare the expected util-
ity of choosing kingpin or operative. Conversely, given a conjecture
about the CIA’s strategy, each of the possible FBI types chooses a
best response. In essence Harsanyi’s maneuver translates a model
in which the CIA does not know the preferences of the FBI to a
new game in which the CIA is playing one of three possible FBI

--- Sayfa 168 ---
152
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
players drawn from a known distribution. In this translated game,
each player type (e.g., three FBI types and the CIA) chooses a
strategy.
A comment is in order about the role of common knowledge in
games of incomplete information. As indicated at the beginning of this
chapter, games of complete information assume that all elements of
the game – players, strategies, and payoffs – are known to all players
and all players know this, and so on. Games of incomplete information
also maintain the common knowledge assumption: all players know
the probability distribution that Nature uses in selecting player types.
Moreover, all players know how much information about Nature’s
draw is revealed to the other players. All players know that all players
know these details, and so on.
1. Formal Deﬁnitions
We now modify the basic normal form structure, , to account for
imperfect information about player types.1 To , we add player types,
additional state variables, and lotteries over these random variables.
(1) Types: For each player i ∈N, there is a ﬁnite set i of possible
types. Player i’s type is θi ∈i, and the proﬁle of n types is
θ ∈ = ×i∈N i. By θ−i and −i we denote a proﬁle and the
set of such proﬁles of types for all players other than i. In the
ﬁrst example of this section, the CIA’s type set is a singleton,
and the FBI’s contains three elements.
(2) Random state variables:  may contain an additional random
state variable ω ∈ where  is ﬁnite.2
(3) Nature’s randomization: At the beginning of the game, Nature
selects the vector of player types θ = (θ1, . . . , θn) ∈ =

i∈N i and ω ∈ from a joint probability distribution where
1 Some readers may want to review probability theory in the Mathematical Appendix
before proceeding.
2 Strictly speaking, the random state ω does not need to be included in our deﬁnition of
a Bayesian game. We could deﬁne expected utilities over payoffs that depend on just
θ and assume that agents maximize these expected utilities. By explicitly including
the state vector, we deﬁne utilities over θ and ω. Just as in the previous chapter we
showed that normal form games allow for random payoffs, these two constructions are
equivalent. We make the random state explicit to clarify the two ways that uncertainty
can enter the game (uncertainty about what others know, θ, and persistent uncertainty
about how actions affect payoffs, ω).

--- Sayfa 169 ---
1. Formal Deﬁnitions
153
each pair (θ, ω) occurs with probability p(θ, ω). The function
p(θ−i, ω | θi) is the conditional probability of θ−i, ω given θi.
(4) Strategies: Each player selects an action si from the strategy set
Si.
(5) Expected utilities: For each possible strategy proﬁle s, type θ,
and state ω, agent i’s utility function is ui(si, s−i, θ, ω). Given
type θi, agent i’s conditional expected utility from strategy pro-
ﬁle s is
EUi(s; θi) =

θ−i∈−i

ω∈
p(θ−i, ω | θi)ui(s, θi, θ−i, ω).
Accordingly a normal form Bayesian game is the collection

N, , {Si, i, u(·, . . . , ·)}i∈n, p(·, ·)

, which we can abbreviate
as ⟨N, , S, , u, p⟩. Just as normal form games can be deﬁned
with inﬁnite strategy spaces, Bayesian games can be deﬁned
with inﬁnite type and action spaces.3 We provide several such
examples later.
In a Bayesian game, strategy proﬁles must include a strategy for
each player type. Accordingly a strategy for player i is a func-
tion φi(θi) : i →Si that selects a strategy si ∈Si for each possible
type θi ∈i. In the uncertainty version of Terrorist Hunt, the FBI’s
typesaredesignatedasFBI = {standard, pro-kingpin, pro-operative}.
An example of a strategy for the FBI is φFBI(standard) = kingpin,
φFBI(pro-kingpin) = kingpin, φFBI(pro-operative) = operative.
In a Bayesian normal form game the analog of Nash equilibria is
Bayesian Nash equilibria. Because strategies are now functions of
types, evaluation of best responses is somewhat complicated. Thus, it is
easiest to deﬁne Bayesian Nash equilibria by generalizing the second
deﬁnition of Nash equilibria.
DEFINITION 6.1 For a normal form Bayesian game ⟨N, , S, , u, p⟩, a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium is a proﬁle of strategies, (φ∗
1(·), . . . . , φ∗
n(·))
such that
EUi(φ∗
i (θi), φ∗
−i(·); θi) ≥EUi(s′
i, φ∗
−i(·); θi)
(6.1)
for every i ∈N, for every s′
i ∈Si, and for every θi ∈i.
3 If the type and action spaces are nonﬁnite, the mathematics involved in characterizing
equilibria is more complicated.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
154
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
Thus, in a Bayesian Nash equilibrium, each player type chooses a
strategy that maximizes her expected utility given the strategies of
all the other player types and the probability distribution over the
types.
We now solve for a Bayesian Nash equilibrium to the multiple-
type Terrorist Hunt. For simplicity, assume that each of the
three
FBI
types
is
equally
probable.
Suppose
that
the
FBI
strategy is φFBI(standard ) = kingpin, φFBI(pro-kingpin) = kingpin,
φFBI(pro-operative) = operative. In this game the CIA has only one
possible type, and there is no uncertainty other than that over FBI
types. So we suppress ω. Given the strategy of the FBI types, the
expected utilities of the CIA are
EUCI A(kingpin, φFBI(·)) = 2
32 + 1
30 = 4
3
EUCI A(operative, φFBI(·)) = 2
30 + 1
31 = 1
3.
Thus, the CIA’s best response to φFBI(·) is to select kingpin. Now
we must verify whether any of the FBI types wishes to deviate. For
the standard-type FBI matching the CIA is a best response. Thus,
φFBI(standard) = kingpin is a best response. For the pro-kingpin type
selecting kingpin when the CIA selects kingpin results in the high-
est possible payoff (2) so that no desirable deviation exists. Finally,
for the pro-operative FBI, selecting operative when the CIA se-
lects kingpin results in utility of 2 whereas a deviation to kingpin
results in utility 1. No proﬁtable deviation exists for this type, ei-
ther. Consequently, these strategies characterize a Bayesian Nash
equilibrium.
2. Application: Trade Restrictions
Two nations contemplate restrictive trade policies. Let N = {1, 2} and
suppose that each country has two possible types i = {u, b}. A type u
country wishes to limit its imports from the other country unilaterally,
and a type bcountry wishes to pursue a bilateral policy of limiting trade
only if the other country does so. The country types are independently
drawn, and type u occurs with probability p ∈(0, 1). The strategy space
for each country is S = {l, f } where l denotes enacting an import limit

--- Sayfa 171 ---
2. Application: Trade Restrictions
155
and f denotes a free-trade policy. The payoffs for country i are
ui(si, s−i; θi) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
3 if si = l, s−i = f and θi = u
2 if si = f, s−i = f and θi = u
1 if si = l, s−i = l and θi = u
0 if si = f, s−i = l and θi = u
3 if si = f, s−i = f and θi = b
2 if si = l, s−i = f and θi = b
1 if si = l, s−i = l and θi = b
0 if si = f, s−i = l and θi = b
.
A strategy in this game is a mapping si(θi) : {u, b} →{l, f }. A key
feature of this game is that a u-type country always receives a higher
payoff from l independently of the actions of the other country. If it
is common knowledge that both countries are type u, the game is a
Prisoner’s Dilemma; each country has a dominant strategy to choose l.
Alternatively, if it is common knowledge that both countries are type
b, there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria, ( f, f ) and (l,l).
To compute Bayesian Nash equilibria, we begin with conjectures
about equilibrium strategies and check to see whether they satisfy the
equilibrium requirements. Because a type u country has a dominant
strategy of selecting l, every equilibrium involves si(u) = l. Thus, the
only possible symmetric pure strategy equilibria are (si(u), si(b)) =
(l,l) and (si(u), si(b)) = (l, f ). Thus, we ﬁrst investigate the possibility
that si(u) = l and si(b) = f for both i = 1, 2. If country 2 uses this
strategy, then s2 = l with probability p and s2 = f with probability
(1 −p). Thus, country 1’s expected utilities are
Eu1(s1, θ1 = u) =

 p + (1 −p)3 if s1 = l
2(1 −p) if s1 = f
Eu1(s1, θ1 = b) =

2(1 −p) + p if s1 = l
3(1 −p) if s1 = f
for types u and b, respectively. Is the conjectured strategy a best re-
sponse? The strategy si(u) = l is a best response because type u has
a dominant strategy to erect trade barriers. Alternatively, si(b) = f
is a best response if 3(1 −p) ≥2(1 −p) + p. This condition holds so
long as p ≤1/2. Because the calculations for country 2 are identical,

--- Sayfa 172 ---
156
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
the proﬁle si(u) = l and si(b) = f is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium for
p ≤1/2.
Now we check to see whether and when si(b) = l for both countries
is a best response. If country 2 uses the strategy s2(θ2) = l regardless
of θ2 then country 1 with type b has the expected utility function
Eu1(s1, θ1 = b) =

1 if s1 = l
0 if s1 = f .
Independently of the value of p, the strategy combination si(b) =
l, si(u) = l for both countries is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium. So there
is always a Bayesian Nash equilibrium in which bilateral limits (l,l) oc-
cur. Moreover, if p ≤1/2 there is a second equilibrium with si(u) = l
and si(b) = f . In this equilibrium free trade occurs if both countries
are type b. This outcome occurs with an ex ante probability of (1 −p)2.
So bilateral free trade policies emerge when each country is a bilateral
type and believes that its opponent is likely to be a bilateral type.
3. Application: Jury Voting
Suppose that three jurors N = {1, 2, 3} are responsible for deciding
whether to convict or acquit a defendant.4 Collectively they choose
an outcome x ∈{c, a}. The jurors simultaneously cast ballots vi ∈Si =
{c, a}, and the outcome is chosen by majority rule. Each juror is uncer-
tain whether or not the defendant is guilty, G, or innocent, I. So the
set of state variables is  = {G, I}. Each juror assigns prior probability
π > 1/2 to state G. If the defendant is guilty, the jurors receive 1 unit
of utility from convicting and 0 from acquitting. Alternatively, if the
defendant is innocent, the jurors receive 1 unit from acquitting and 0
from convicting.
Absent any additional information, each juror receives an expected
utility of π from a guilty verdict and 1 −π from an acquittal. Because
π > 1/2, the Nash equilibrium that survives the elimination of weakly
dominated strategies is the one where each juror votes guilty.
Now, before voting, each juror receives a private signal about the
defendant’s guilt θi ∈{0, 1}. The signal is informative so that a juror is
more likely to receive the signal θi = 1 when the defendant is guilty
4 This is a simple example of the jury model developed by Austen-Smith and Banks
(1996).

--- Sayfa 173 ---
3. Application: Jury Voting
157
than when the defendant is innocent. To keep matters simple, the prob-
ability of receiving a guilty signal (θi = 1) when the defendant is guilty
is the same as that of receiving the innocent signal (θi = 0) when the de-
fendantisinnocent.Formally,letPr(θi = 1 | ω = G) = Pr(θi = 0 | ω =
I) = p > 1/2 so that Pr(θi = 0 | ω = G) = Pr(θi = 0 | ω = I) = 1 −p.
After receiving her signal, voter i selects her vote v (θi) to maximize
the probability of a correct decision – conviction of the guilty and
acquittal of the innocent. Suppose that each voter uses the sincere
strategy, vi(1) = c and vi(0) = a. The sincere strategy calls for a vote
to convict upon receipt of a guilty signal and a vote to acquit upon a not-
guilty signal. Sincere strategies constitute a Bayesian Nash equilibrium
only if voter 1 is willing to use this strategy when she believes that
voters 2 and 3 also use it. Given these conjectures, the expected utility
of voting to convict is
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = G | θ1)+
Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = G | θ1)+
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ2 = 1 and ω = G | θ1)+
Pr(θ2 = 0 and θ2 = 0 and ω = I | θ1).
The expected utility of voting to acquit is
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = I | θ1)+
Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = I | θ1)+
Pr(θ2 = 0 and θ2 = 0 and ω = I | θ1)+
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ2 = 1 and ω = G | θ1).
The last two terms of each sum are the same. Consequently, these
terms cancel out when comparing the utilities. Accordingly, voting to
convict is a best response if and only if
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = G | θ1)
+ Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = G | θ1)
≥Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = I | θ1)
+ Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = I | θ1).
Because these expressions depend on the conditional probabilities of
observing combinations of the state variable and the signals of the
other jurors, juror 1 uses Bayes’ rule to evaluate each term. Suppose

--- Sayfa 174 ---
158
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
that juror 1 receives θ1 = 1. In this case, Bayes’ rule yields
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = G | θ1 = 1)
= Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = G | θ1 = 1)
=
π p2 (1 −p)
π p + (1 −π)(1 −p)
and
Pr(θ2 = 1 and θ3 = 0 and ω = I | θ1 = 1)
= Pr(θ3 = 1 and θ2 = 0 and ω = I | θ1 = 1)
=
(1 −π) p(1 −p)2
π p + (1 −π)(1 −p).
Thus, vi (1) = c is optimal for juror 1 if
2
π p2(1 −p)
π p + (1 −π)(1 −p) ≥2
(1 −π)p(1 −p) 2
π p + (1 −π)(1 −p).
After simplifying and rearranging, this inequality becomes
π p2(1 −p)
π p2(1 −p) + (1 −π)p(1 −p) 2 ≥1
2.
The left-hand side is simply the conditional probability of guilt given
two signals of θ = 1 and one signal of θ = 0. In other words, agent 1
wants to vote to convict if she believes that the defendant is more likely
to be guilty than innocent, conditional, on her signal and the belief
that she is pivotal. Similarly, the requirement for a vote of innocence
conditional on a signal of 0 is
π p(1 −p) 2
π p(1 −p) 2 + (1 −π)p2(1 −p) ≤1
2.
To summarize, in any Bayesian equilibrium in which voting corre-
sponds to the private signals, the following statements must be true
(1) conditional on the supposition that i is pivotal and observes θi = 1,
the posterior probability of guilt is greater than 1/2 (2) conditional
on the supposition that i is pivotal and observes θi = 0, the posterior
probability of guilt is less than 1/2.

--- Sayfa 175 ---
4. Application: Jury Voting with a Continuum of Signals
159
Austen-Smith and Banks (1996) show that in many cases the sincere
strategy is inconsistent with equilibrium behavior. It is easy to ﬁnd
parameters π and p for which one of the necessary conditions does
not hold. There are alternative strategies jurors might choose. Jurors
can randomize for some signals, vote the same way regardless of their
signal, or use different strategies than other jurors use. Fedderson and
Pessendorfer (1998) consider the properties of equilibria of this game
when one varies the voting rule and number of jurors.
4. Application: Jury Voting with a Continuum of Signals
Instead of receiving a binary signal, each juror now receives a signal
θi ∈[0, 1] where θi is drawn from a conditional distribution F(θi|ω).
This distribution function is associated with a differentiable density
function f (θi|ω) that satisﬁes the monotone likelihood ratio condition.5
DEFINITION 6.2 A conditional density function satisﬁes the strict mono-
tonelikelihoodratiocondition(SMLR)if f (θi | G)/ f (θi | I)isastrictly
monotone function of θi on [0, 1].
Toseewhythisassumptionisimportant,notethatBayes’ruleimplies
that
Pr(G|θi) =
f (θi | G)π
f (θi | G)π + f (θi | I)(1 −π)
=
f (θi|G)
f (θi|I) π
f (θi|G)
f (θi|I) π + (1 −π)
.
Accordingly, Pr(G|θi) is increasing in θi if and only if
f (θi | G)/f (θi | I) is increasing in θi. Thus, the SMLR condition im-
plies that higher signals correspond to higher posterior probabilities
that ω = G.
To keep matters simple, we focus exclusively on symmetric strate-
gies where voters who receive the same signal choose the same
strategy. A symmetric strategy proﬁle is, therefore, a mapping
vi(θi) : [0, 1] →{c, a}. As in the binary signal case, Bayesian Nash
equilibrium strategies are those that are optimal when each agent acts
conditionally on her private information and the conjecture that she
5 Duggan and Martinelli (2001) and Meirowitz (2002) pursue this extension.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
160
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
is pivotal. An agent votes to convict if she thinks the probability of
guilt is no less than 1/2 and she votes to acquit if she thinks the prob-
ability of guilt is no more than 1/2. Because higher signals are better
indicators of guilt, a natural conjecture is that the strategy must be
weakly increasing. For low values of θi an acquittal vote is cast and for
high values of θi a conviction vote is cast. A monotone strategy of this
form can be characterized by a cut pointθ ∈[0, 1]. Assume that agents
i ∈N\i use the monotone strategy
vi(θi) =

 c if θi ≥θ
a if θi < θ .
If all players other than i use this cut point strategy, the posterior
probability of {ω = G} given signal θi and the event that i is pivotal is
given by
Pr(G | piv, θi;θ) =
π fGF
n−q−1
G

1 −FG

q−1
π fGF
n−q−1
G

1 −FG

q−1 + (1 −π) fI F
n−q−1
I

1 −FI

q−1
(6.2)
where fω = f (θi | ω) and Fω = F(θ | ω). We leave the derivation of
this expression as an exercise. This probability is a function of the
parameterθ. In this model the existence of a symmetric equilibrium in
which voters use a cut point hinges on ﬁnding a value ofθ such that
Pr(G | piv,θ;θ) = 1
2
and demonstrating that Pr(G | piv, θi;θ) ≤1/2 if θi < θ and Pr(G |
piv, θi;θ) ≥1/2 if θi > θ. Although analysis of examples is cumber-
some, it is easy to derive conditions on the primitives of the game to
ensure that such aθ ∈(0, 1) exists. First, Pr(G | piv, θi;θ) ≥1/2 if and
only if
π f (θi | G)F(θ | G)n−q−1 
1 −F(θ | G)

q−1
(1 −π) f (θi | I)F(θ | I)n−q−1 
1 −F(θ | I)

q−1 =
f (θi | G)
f (θi | I)
π F(θ | G)n−q−1 
1 −F(θ | G)

q−1
(1 −π)F(θ | I)n−q−1 
1 −F(θ | I)

q−1 ≥1.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
5. Application: Public Goods and Incomplete Information
161
The strict monotone likelihood ratio condition then implies that if
Pr(G | piv,θ;θ) = 1/2 then θi < θ implies Pr(G | piv, θi;θ) ≤1/2
and θi >θ implies Pr(G | piv, θi;θ) ≥1/2. If Pr(G | piv, 0; 0) ≤1/2 ≤
Pr(G | piv, 1; 1) then the intermediate value theorem implies that such
a cut point exists because the function Pr(G | piv, ·; ·) is continuous.
For a large class of games these boundary conditions are satisﬁed.
In the simple binary type model, equilibria where everyone uses the
same rule and voting is determined by private information may not ex-
ist. This type of equilibrium generally exists in the continuum model,
however. In the case of unanimity rule, the choice of models is con-
sequential for the conclusions about its desirability. Using the binary
model, Fedderson and Pesendorfer (1998) show that the unanimity
rule is a uniquely bad way to aggregate information for large popula-
tions because in equilibrium voters condition on the assumption that
everyone else is voting to convict. In the continuum model, Meirowitz
(2002) shows that the unanimity rule often turns out to be as good as
the other voting rules.
5. Application: Public Goods and Incomplete Information
In this section, we present a version of the Palfrey-Rosenthal contribu-
tion game in which potential contributors are uncertain about the con-
tribution costs of other players. To keep the model as close as possible
to the one analyzed in Chapter 4, every agent receives a utility of 1 if at
least k agents contribute and 0 otherwise. Agent i pays a cost ci to con-
tribute, but now ci is distributed uniformly on [0, 1]. Each agent learns
her own cost but remains uncertain about the other players’ costs.
5.1. The Case of k = 1. First, we consider the case where a single
contribution is necessary and sufﬁcient for the provision of the good.
Because ci ≤1 for all i , there are always n Bayesian Nash equilib-
ria corresponding to agent i’s contributing with certainty. As before,
however, we concentrate on symmetric equilibrium where all player
types with the same cost play the same strategy. We, therefore, focus
on equilibria in cut point strategies. In such equilibria, agent i con-
tributes if and only if ci <cn where cn is an equilibrium cut point for
the game with n players.6 If all of agent i’s opponents choose this cut
6 All equilibria involve cut point strategies. Given any strategy by −i, let p−i be the
probability that at least one other player contributes. Given, p−i, player i′s expected

--- Sayfa 178 ---
162
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
point strategy, her utility from contributing is 1 −ci. If she does not
contribute, she receives 1 if there is at least one contributor and 0 oth-
erwise. Because c is distributed uniformly on [0, 1], other contributors
contribute with probability c so that the probability of no other con-
tributions is [1 −cn]n−1. Thus, agent i’s utility from not contributing is
1 −[1 −cn]n−1. Accordingly, agent i contributes so long as
[1 −cn]n−1 ≥ci.
Because an agent with costcn must be indifferent over her choices, a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium requires
[1 −cn]n−1 =cn.
The cut pointcn is declining in n. Suppose this were not true so that
cn+1 ≥cn. The cut point conditions imply that [1 −cn+1]n ≥[1 −cn]n−1.
But becausecn andcn+1 are between 0 and 1, this statement requires
thatcn >cn+1 – a contradiction. Becausecn is declining in n the prob-
ability that any agent contributes goes to 0 as the group expands. It is
also the case that the probability that no agents contribute [1 −cn]n
also converges to 0. So in this model, although the probability that any
particular agent contributes vanishes as n gets large, the probability of
provision, 1 −[1 −cn]n, converges to 1.
5.2. The Case of k > 1. Now multiple contributions are required for
the provision of the good. Again we assume that agents use cut point
strategies and contribute only if ci ≤cn. Let x−i be the realized number
of contributions from agents other than i. From arguments identical
to those of the last chapter, we know that agent i’s net utility from
contributing is
Pr (x−i = k −1) −ci.
Because each agent contributes with an ex ante probability ofcn,
Pr (x−i = k −1) =
n −1
k −1

ck−1
n
(1 −cn)n−k .
utility from contributing is 1 −ci, and her expected utility from not contributing is
p−i. Accordingly, player i’s best response is to contribute if ci < 1 −p−i and not to
contribute if ci > 1 −p−i. This best response is a cut point strategy.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
5. Application: Public Goods and Incomplete Information
163
Because agent i must be indifferent if her cost is ci =cn , we again
generate an implicit solution forcn:
 n −1
k −1

ck−1
n
(1 −cn)n−k =c.
This solution is very similar to that of the mixed strategy equilibrium
with complete information. The main difference is that cn plays the
role of σ ∗. Thus, many of the implications of our previous analysis
carry over.
To reduce notation let

(cn) =
n −1
k −1

ck−2
n
(1 −cn)n−k ,
so that our equilibrium condition is
(cn) = 1. Differentiating
(cn)
yields
∂
(cn)
∂cn
=
n −1
k −1

(k −2)ck−3
n
(1 −cn)n−k −ck−2
n
(n −k)(1 −cn)n−k−1
.
This term has the same sign as −(cnn −k −2cn + 2). This implies that

′ ⪌0 ifcn ⪋k −2
n −2.
Thus, so long as 2 < k < n,
(cn) increases to a unique maximum
at cn = (k −2)/(n −2) and then decreases for cn > (k −2)/(n −2).
At cn ∈{0, 1},
(cn) = 0. These features of
(cn) suggest that if 2 <
k < n and max
 > 1, there are two equilibrium cut points cH and
cL. If max
 < 1, there are no symmetric equilibria with cut points in
(0, 1).7
As before, it is easy to demonstrate that the cut point equilibria
disappear as n gets very large. Rewriting the equilibrium condition
yields
n −1
k −1

ck−1
n
(1 −cn)n−k =cn.
7 In the unlikely event that max
 = 1, there is a unique cut point equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
164
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
For anycn the left-hand side,
P(n,cn) =
n −1
k −1

ck−1
n
(1 −cn)n−k ,
is the probability of k −1 successes from n −1 trials with probability of
success given bycn. A useful fact about this probability function is that
P(n,cn) converges to 0 as n goes to inﬁnity unlesscn converges to the
expected proportion of successes (k −1)/(n −1).8 Ifcn does not con-
verge to (k −1)/(n −1) and P(n,cn) converges to 0, the equilibrium
condition requires that cn converge to 0. Alternative if cn converges
to (k −1)/(n −1), it must also converge to 0 because (k −1)/(n −1)
converges to 0.
We leave it to the reader to verify that the effects of n and k oncH
andcL are essentially the same as the effects of n and k on σ ∗
L and σ ∗
H
in the symmetric mixed strategy equilibrium of the previous chapter.
6. Application: Uncertainty About Candidate Preferences
Recall the Hotelling model of candidate competition with policy-
motivated candidates and uncertainty about the location of the me-
dian voter. Now in addition to uncertainty about the location of the
median voter, candidates have private information about their own
policy preferences. Candidate 1 has an ideal point θ1 ∈{0, 1/2} and
candidate 2 has an ideal point θ2 ∈{1/2, 1}. Consequently, candidate
i ’s utility of policy location x is u(x) = −(θi −x)2. For simplicity, all
types are drawn with equal probability, and the candidates’ types are in-
dependent. As before the median voter’s ideal point is randomly drawn
from a uniform distribution over [0, 1]. A strategy for candidate 1 is
a mapping s1(θ1) : {0, 1/2} →[0, 1/2], and a strategy for candidate 2
is a mapping s2(θ2) : {1/2, 1} →[1/2, 1]. For simplicity, we ignore the
possibility that a candidate chooses a strategy outside the interval of
its possible types. We begin by conjecturing that candidate 2 uses the
strategy s2(1/2) = a and s2(1) = b. In considering the optimal location
for candidate 1 with type θ1 = 1/2, it is easy to see that any location
s1 < 1/2 is dominated by the location 1/2. This is true because for ﬁxed
8 This result is closely related to the law of large numbers. This law implies that the
limiting distribution of the sample mean places positive weight only on the expected
value of the random variable.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
6. Application: Uncertainty About Candidate Preferences
165
a and bthe location 1/2 is more likely to win than a location of s1 < 1/2.
Moreover, conditional on winning a location of s1 < 1/2 is less desir-
able than a location of 1/2 to candidate 1 with type θ1 = 1/2. Accord-
ingly, we know that s1(1/2) = 1/2 and s2(1/2) = 1/2 strictly dominate
all other platforms.
The best response for candidate 1 of type θ1 = 0 solves
max
s1

−s2
1

s1 + 1
2
4
+ s1 + b
4

−( 1
2)2
2

1−s1 + 1
2
2

−b2
2

1−s1 + b
4

.
Differentiating with respect to s1 and setting this term equal to 0
yield the ﬁrst-order condition
1
8b2 −1
2bs1 −1
4s1 −3
2s2
1 + 1
16 = 0.
In the appropriate range of [0, 1
2], the solution is
s1(0; b) = 1
12

4b + 16b2 + 7 −1
6b −1
12.
Candidate 2’s problem is the mirror image of candidate 1’s. This means
that we can ﬁnd the equilibrium values of s2(1) = b and s1(0) = 1 −
b that solve the relevant ﬁrst-order conditions by solving for b that
satisﬁes the equality
1 −b = 1
12

4b + 16b2 + 7 −1
6b −1
12.
The solution is b = 11/7 −
√
106/14 ≃0.836. Thus, the Bayesian Nash
equilibrium is s1(0) = 0.164, s1(1/2) = 1/2, s2(1/2) = 1/2, s2(1) =
0.836. It is interesting to compare the platforms of θ1 = 0 and θ2 = 1
types with the outcomes of the game where candidate ideal points are
knowntobe0and1.Onemightexpecttheplatformstobemoreconver-
gent because each candidate believes that she might be campaigning
against a moderate candidate. This intuition is incomplete. Because
they are policy-motivated, candidates prefer to lose to moderate op-
ponents rather than to extreme opponents. This condition dampens
the incentives for extreme candidates to moderate. Indeed, we ob-
serve platforms in the candidate uncertainty game that are even more
divergent than those when candidate preferences are known.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
166
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
7. Application: Campaigns, Contests, and Auctions
In the models of campaigns reviewed so far candidates’ are restricted
to choosing policies on a continuum. Such a restriction, however, ne-
glects many of the strategic choices available in real campaigns. In
this section, we consider an alternative based on economic models
of contests. In these models, candidates choose levels of costly effort.
The more effort a candidate exerts the greater the likelihood that she
wins. One example of this approach focuses on the role of money in
campaigns. Consider a set N = {1, . . . , n} of candidates running for
ofﬁce. Candidates compete by raising money and spending it on ad-
vertisements. Let ai ∈R1
+ denote the level of advertising by candidate
i. Given a = (a1, . . . , an), the winner is determined by p(a) : Rn
+ →N
where p is a weakly increasing function. One example is the mapping
p(a) = arg maxi∈N ai that awards the ofﬁce to the candidate adver-
tising the most.9 Candidate i’s utility depends on the identity of the
winner; the level of advertising ai; and the candidate’s value of win-
ning ofﬁce θi ∈[0, 1]. Each candidate’s value of winning ofﬁce is pri-
vate information that is independently drawn from a uniform distribu-
tion on [0, 1]. Speciﬁcally, candidate i’s utility takes the form ui(a) =
θi1{p(a)=i} −ai where 1{p(a)=i} is an indicator function that takes the
value 1 if p(a) = i and 0 otherwise. All candidates simultaneously se-
lects their level of ai and then the payoffs are realized.10 A Bayesian
Nash equilibrium is a function for each candidate that maps θi ∈[0, 1]
into ai ∈Rn
+. Again we focus on symmetric equilibria where any two
candidates with the same type select the same levels of advertising.
Directly solving for continuous strategy functions is often quite dif-
ﬁcult. Therefore, we use a trick. We assume that the strategy function
has a speciﬁc functional form. Then we solve for any free parameters
and verify that the solution constitutes an equilibrium. Here we conjec-
ture that players j̸ = i use a strategy of the form, a j(θ j) = bθc
j, where
b and c are parameters to be determined. If players 2, . . . , n use the
conjectured strategy, and candidate 1 selects a1 then the probability
that 1 wins is Pr{max j̸=i bθc
j < a1}. This probability is
Pr

max
j̸=i θ j <
a1
b
 1
c 
=
a1
b
 n−1
c .
9 An alternative interpretation of this model is to treat ai as the level of effort or time
that the candidate spends running for ofﬁce.
10 This model is also equivalent to a ﬁrst-price all-pay auction with independent types.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
7. Application: Campaigns, Contests, and Auctions
167
Accordingly, the expected utility to player 1 with type θ1 from action
a1 is
a1
b
 n−1
c θ1 −a1.
Differentiating with respect to a1 yields the ﬁrst-order condition
θ1
n −1
cb
a1
b
 n−1−c
c
= 1,
and solving for a1 yields
a1 = b

cb
(n −1)θ1

c
n−1−c
.
(6.3)
Note we began by conjecturing that players j = 2, . . . , n use a strategy
of the form a j(θ j) = bθc
j and have found that player 1’s best response
is to use a strategy of exactly that form. Consequently, an equilibrium
can then be found by solving for values of b and c such that
bθc
1 = b

cb
(n −1)θ1

c
n−1−c
.
The solution is b = (n −1)/n and c = n. Substituting it into the right-
hand side of equation 6.3 and simplifying yield
a1 = n −1
n
θn
1.
This result conﬁrms that b = (n −1)/n and c = n correspond to an
equilibrium. Thus, a symmetric Bayesian Nash equilibrium is for each
candidate to select
ai(θi) = n −1
n
θn
i .
Several implications follow. First, in equilibrium, candidate advertising
is positively related to the candidate’s valuation of ofﬁce. Second, the
connection between advertising and the value of ofﬁce depends on the

--- Sayfa 184 ---
168
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
number of candidates. Differentiating yields
∂ai(θi)
∂θi
= θn−1
i
(n −1)
∂2ai(θi)
∂θi∂n
= θn−1
i
(n ln θi −ln θi + 1) .
The cross-partial derivative is negative (because ln(θi) < 0 for θi ∈
(0, 1)). So as the number of candidates increases equilibrium strategies
become ﬂatter. Similarly, as n gets large, the upper bound of candidate
advertising converges to 0 (i.e., ai(1) goes to 0 as n gets large). This
ﬁnding reﬂects the fact that when many candidates are in the race, the
probability that a particular candidate has the highest value of θ tends
to 0; a candidate is not willing to exert much effort in a contest she is
unlikely to win.11
The relationship between this model and other auctions can easily
be seen. In this game, a candidate suffers disutility ai regardless of
whether or not she wins. An alternative model might involve all agents’
announcing promises to pay if they win. Another example of this form
would involve interest groups’ promising contributions to a committee
chairman if their preferred nominee is conﬁrmed. In our later chapter
on mechanism design we consider many such auctions.
8. Existence of Bayesian Nash Equilibria
Can we guarantee that a Bayesian Nash equilibrium exists? Bayesian
normal form games are generally special cases of normal form games:
all player types simultaneously select a strategy and the payoffs are
deﬁned as the agents’ expected utility over strategy proﬁles. Conse-
quently, the existence requirements are very much like those for Nash
equilibrium. We can apply our previous results to establish the exis-
tence of Bayesian Nash equilibria in mixed strategies for games with
ﬁnite type and action spaces.
Consider a Bayesian game ⟨N, S, , u, p⟩where N, S,  are all
ﬁnite sets. Thus, without loss of generality we denote types in the
following manner: i = {θ1
i , . . . , θki
i }. We deﬁne a new normal form
11 An analog to this ﬁnding is the claim that in the popular parlor game of Texas Hold’em
players should become more aggressive as the number of players at the table de-
creases. Any particular hand is more likely to be the best hand when the number of
other hands is smaller.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
9. Exercises
169
game ′ as follows: Let N′ = {θ1
1, . . . , θk1
1 , θ1
2, . . . , θkn
n }. In this normal
form game all agents with subscript i have strategy space S′
i = Si.
Let −i = × j=N\i j denote the set of possible type proﬁles for the
agents N\i in the original Bayesian game. Given a strategy proﬁle
s+ = (s1
1, . . . , s j
i , . . . , skn
n ) ∈×n
i=1S′
i to the game ′ we can identify this
strategy with one in  by letting s+
i (θi = θ j
i ) = s j
i . The utility to agent
θ j
i is then deﬁned by using the notion of expected utility from the
original Bayesian game,
v j
i (s+) = EUi(s+
i (θi), s+
−i(·); θ j
i ).
Thenewﬁnitenormalformgame′ =

N′, S′, v

iswelldeﬁned,leading
to the existence result.
PROPOSITION 6.1 Given the Bayesian game ⟨N, S, , u, p⟩with N, S, 
all ﬁnite sets, a Bayesian Nash equilibrium exists in mixed strategies.
Proof Given Nash’s Theorem (Theorem 5.4), the ﬁnite game

N′, S′, v

has a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies. Let σ j
i denote the lot-
tery over Si that such a mixed strategy equilibrium speciﬁes. Because
the proﬁle σ satisﬁes the condition for a Nash equilibrium, the
strategy in which φi(θi) = s′ with probability σ j
i (s′) satisﬁes the
condition 6.1.
□
9. Exercises
EXERCISE 6.1 Consider the jury voting game where p = 3/4 and π =
2/3. Characterize the set of Bayesian Nash equilibria to the game. Now
instead of using of majority rule, a version of unanimity rule is used – if
all agents vote to convict, the defendant is convicted, if at least one agent
votes to acquit, the defendant is acquitted. Characterize the Bayesian
Nash equilibria to this game (again assuming that p = 3/4 and π = 2/3).
EXERCISE 6.2 Consider the Jury Voting game with a continuum of types.
Prove equation 6.2.
EXERCISE 6.3 Consider a version of the Palfrey-Rosenthal model where
k contributions are required for the provision of the public good. Now

--- Sayfa 186 ---
170
Bayesian Games in the Normal Form
contributions are refunded if there are fewer than k. How does this mod-
iﬁcation affect the value of the cut pointc? Now suppose that contribu-
tions in excess of k are returned randomly to the agents. What happens?
EXERCISE 6.4 Consider a version of the Palfrey-Rosenthal model where
k contributions are required for the provision of the public good. Con-
duct a comparative statics analysis of the effects of changes in n and k
on the endogenous valuescH andcL.
EXERCISE 6.5 Consider the candidate location game with private infor-
mation about candidate preferences. Suppose that the location of the
median voter were known to be 3/4. Characterize the Bayesian Nash
equilibria.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
7 Extensive Form Games
Because all players choose their strategies simultaneously, normal
form representations of games are static. Many applications in politi-
cal science, however, involve players choosing strategies sequentially.
Although it is possible to model these situations as games in the normal
form, it is often easier and more satisfying to use the extensive form,
which treats time explicitly.
To motivate the extensive form, consider the following application.
A is a colony controlled by B. Country B generates revenue from
control of A’s oil ﬁelds and from direct taxes on A’s residents.
In the ﬁrst stage, A decides whether to Revolt or Consent to the
status quo. If Arevolts, B decides whether to Grant independence or
to Suppress the revolution. If B suppresses, the situation escalates into
a war. In the event of war, Awins with probability p. At stake is control
of the lucrative oil ﬁeld, which generates a payoff of 4 to the side that
controls it.
Starting a revolution costs A one unit if B does not suppress. Sup-
pressionby Bcostseachside6units.If Adoesnotrevolt, Bcancontinue
to Tax A’s residents at 2 units or it can Eliminate these taxes. Table 7.1
gives the payoffs from each of the possible outcomes. A’s payoff is
listed ﬁrst.
If we modeled this game in the normal form, we would ignore that
B knows A’s choice when B makes its decision. A better way of repre-
senting this game is by using a game tree as in Figure 7.1. A game tree
consists of nodes representing all previous decisions. Alternatively, the
nodes represent the histories of play. There is an initial node at the be-
ginning of the game. At each node there are branches representing the
actions available to the player who chooses at that node. Each of these
branches leads to the nodes of the next stage. The end of the game is
171

--- Sayfa 188 ---
172
Extensive Form Games
Table 7.1. Revolution Game
If A does not revolt and B eliminates the tax, (0, 4)
If A does not revolt and B continues the tax, (−2, 6)
If A revolts and B grants independence, (3, 0)
If A revolts and B suppresses (4p−6 −2(1 −p), 6(1 −p) −6)
represented by terminal nodes that specify the payoffs for each player
of the game.
Colony A makes its decision at the initial node, from which there
are two branches corresponding to R and C. Following a decision to
revolt, B chooses between G or S. Following a decision by A of C,
B chooses between T and E. At each of the four terminal nodes, the
corresponding payoffs are denoted.
Just as a matrix is used to represent a normal form game, the game
tree is a representation of the extensive form. The elements of the
extensive game follow.
(1) The set of agents N.
(2) A set of histories H. The elements of H correspond to nodes of
the game tree. HT is the set of terminal histories. By convention,
the initial node is represented as H0 = ∅, the empty set.
(3) A mapping p(h) : H\HT →N assigns to each nonterminal his-
tory h an agent who must make a decision at h.
(4) For each h a set of actions A(h) that p(h) may take after history
h. These may involve randomizations over actions.
A
B
B
3, 0
4p−6−2(1−p),
         6(1−p)−6
−2, 6
0, 4
R
C
G
S
T
E
Figure 7.1. Revolution Game.

--- Sayfa 189 ---
Extensive Form Games
173
(5) Information sets I ⊆H\HT that form a partition of the set of
histories. If h ∈I, p(h) is uncertain whether she is at node h or
some other node h′ ∈I. If h and h′ are in the same informa-
tion set, then p(h) = p(h′). In the preceding game, each player
knows the history when it is called upon to play so that each in-
formation set contains a single element. When all information
sets are singletons, the game is said to have complete and perfect
information (or simply perfect information). Later we relax this
assumption so that players do not observe all actions preceding
their moves. Consequently, some information sets may contain
multiple elements. These are games of complete but imperfect
information (or simply imperfect information). We require that
histories satisfy certain conditions to ensure that they constitute
well-behaved trees.1
(6) Payoffs U that are a list of Bernoulli utility functions ui(h) :
HT →R1 for each i ∈N.
In summary, a ﬁnite extensive from game E is a collection

N, H, p(·), U

. In the extensive form, a strategy is a complete plan
of action. Therefore, it speciﬁes for each player a feasible action in
every history that the player might be called upon to act. A formal
deﬁnition of a strategy follows.
DEFINITION 7.1 For an extensive form game E, a strategy proﬁle for
player i ∈N is a mapping si(h) : Hi →A(h) where si(h) = si(h′) if h
and h′ are in the same information set and Hi is the set of histories h ∈H
forwhich p(h) = i.Astrategyproﬁleisamappings(h) : H\HT →A(h)
with S(h) = Si(h) if h ∈Hi.
Using this deﬁnition, we can specify the strategy sets for both players
in our revolution example. Because Amoves only at the initial node,
its strategy set is simply {R, C}. For B, a strategy must specify an action
at each information set. So its strategy set is {G and T, G and E, S and
1 Speciﬁcally, the set of nodes uses the weak order precedes. We write a →b if node a
precedes node b. Recall that weak orders are transitive, so that in our extensive form
games there are no cycles. In addition, to avoid the case where multiple nodes lead
to a single node, we assume that if h →h′ and h′′ →h′ then either h →h′ or h′ →h.
Finally, there exists exactly one node (called the initial node) H0 for which H0 →h
for every h ∈H, and at any terminal history h ∈HT it is the case that there are no
histories h′ with h →h′.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
174
Extensive Form Games
Table 7.2. Escalation Game in Normal Form
B\A
R
C
G and T
0, 3
6, −2
G and E
0, 3
4, 0
S and T
4p−6 −2(1 −p), 6(1 −p) −6
6, −2
S and E
4p−6 −2(1 −p), 6(1 −p) −6
4, 0
T, S and E} where “G and T” means grant independence following R
and T following C.
Now that we have speciﬁed the strategies, it is easy to see that we
can represent this game in the normal form, see Table 7.2.
From this representation, it is easy to verify that there are three
Nash equilibria. The ﬁrst two are the strategy proﬁles (R , G and T)
and (R, G and E) . Each of these predicts that Arevolts and B grants
independence. The third Nash equilibrium is the proﬁle (C, S and T).
It predicts that the threat that B escalates deters a revolt by A.
This example shows some of the limitations of the Nash equilibrium
concept in dynamic games. In particular, the predictions of the second
and third equilibria are somewhat implausible. Consider the second
equilibrium. This equilibrium calls for B to eliminate the taxes after
a decision by A to consent to B’s rule. B, however, has no incentive
to decrease taxes at this information set. In other words, Nash equi-
libria allow for behavior that is not rational at histories that are “off
the equilibrium path.” In the case of equilibrium 2, this problem seems
small as it produces identical behavior to that produced by equilibrium
1, in which all behavior is rational at all information sets. Consider the
third equilibrium, however. Suppose that A defects from the conjec-
tured equilibrium by revolting. Following the deviation, B is clearly
better off choosing G for any value of p. Thus, B’s threat to suppress is
not credible because it would never be rational to do so. This peaceful
outcome is supported by expected behavior that is not sequentially
rational because it does not maximize the agent’s utility at every infor-
mation set.
In the next couple of sections, we discuss reﬁnements of Nash equi-
libria appropriate for dynamic games that eliminate strategies that are
not sequentially rational.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
1. Backward Induction
175
1. Backward Induction
The most common way of solving dynamic games of perfect informa-
tion is through backward induction. In this procedure, the last player
to act at each node chooses the action that maximizes her utility. The
second to last player then chooses his actions optimally, knowing that
the last player chooses optimal actions at each node. This process con-
tinues until each player has chosen optimally under the assumption
that all future players make optimal choices.
It is easy to apply backward induction in the revolution game. First,
we require that B make optimal choices at each node. At the R node,
Bclearly gets more utility from granting independence. At the C node,
B maximizes its utility with continued taxation. Given the expectation
that B makes rational choices, A choose to revolt. Thus, the solution
from backward induction is (R, G and T) – the Nash equilibrium that
does not involve sequentially irrational behavior.
This procedure is straightforward, but cumbersome to formalize. So
we focus on some examples.
1.1. Example: The Centipede Game. Figure 7.2 presents a game tree
used extensively in experimental economics – the Centipede game.
Two players take turns choosing between Down and Left. The choice
of Dends the game, but Lcontinues it until stage 5. One of the reasons
experimentalists ﬁnd this game interesting is that a naive player 1 may
attempt to continue to play L in order to get the large payoff of 6 at
stage 5. Such a strategy, however, is not sequentially rational and does
not survive backward induction. We begin the analysis at stage 5 where
player 1 clearly chooses D. Backing up to stage 4, player 2 knows that
player 1 plays Din the last stage, leaving her a payoff of 4 instead of the
5 she can obtain from playing D. Backing up one more stage, player 1
knows that L generates 2 while D guarantees 3. Thus, he chooses D.
Clearly, if we continue this process back to the ﬁrst stage, we see that
1
2
1
 2                   1
Left                L                  L
 L                L
               (5, 5)
Down
 D                D                D                 D
(1,1)          (0, 2)          (3, 1)
  (2, 5)
        (6, 4)
Figure 7.2. The Centipede Game.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
176
Extensive Form Games
in fact player 1 rationally chooses D. Indeed, the only strategy proﬁle
that survives backward induction is {D, D, D, D, D}.
1.2. Example: Sequential Bargaining. The application of bargaining
models is increasingly important in political game theory. Indeed, we
dedicate an entire chapter to it later in the book. Here we consider
one of the simplest versions of these models. There are two players, 1
and 2, who bargain over the allocation of $1. In the ﬁrst period, player
1 proposes a division of the dollar in which she keeps x1 and offers
x2 = 1 −x1 to player 2. If player 2 accepts this proposal, the dollar is
divided accordingly, and the game ends. Alternatively if player 2 rejects
the offer, the value of the dollar decreases to δ where 1 > δ > 0. This
assumption captures the impatience of the players – they prefer to
settle sooner than later. In round 2, player 2 makes an offer where
she keeps x2 and gives x1 = δ −x2 to player 1. If player 1 accepts, the
remaining δ is divided accordingly. If she rejects, however, the dollar
disappears and both players receive 0. For simplicity, the payoffs to
each player are ui(xi) = xi.
There are lots of Nash equilibria to this game. In fact any alloca-
tion can be supported with Nash equilibrium strategies. Consider the
following strategy combination:
Player 1: Propose x2 = z. If the offer is rejected, reject any offer in
round 2.
Player 2: Accept in round 1 if x2 ≥z; reject otherwise and then pro-
pose x2 = δ in round 2.
Clearly, for a ﬁxed z ≤1, the best response of player 1 is to propose
x2 = z in round 1. Otherwise, player 1 receives 0. Similarly, player
2’s best response is to accept z. These strategies, however, are not
sequentially rational. It is not rational for player 1 to reject all second-
period proposals. He should accept any proposal that gives him at least
0, his payoff from rejection. Thus, in round 2 player 2 can propose to
keep nearly the entire δ. Consequently player 1 needs to offer player 2
at least as much as player 2 gets from her second-period proposal. The
following strategy is consistent with backward induction.
Player 1: Propose x2 = δ. If the offer is rejected, accept any offer in
round 2.
Player 2: Accept in round 1 if x2 ≥δ; reject otherwise. Propose x2 = δ
in round 2.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
2. Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
177
Clearly in period 2 accepting 0 is no worse for player 1 than reject-
ing the offer. Therefore, the optimal proposal for player 2 is x2 = δ.
Backing up to period 1, it is clear that player 1 must offer player 2 at
least δ to prevent her rejecting it. The equilibrium offers in period 1
are, therefore, x1 = 1 −δ and x2 = δ.
2. Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
In the models considered so far, the player who moves at each history
recalls all of the previous moves and, therefore, can infer from which
node she is moving. In other words, each information set contains a
single element. Now we consider models in which information sets
containmultiplehistories.Gamesofthisformaresaidtohaveimperfect
information. Such a situation occurs when some moves either are not
observed or are taken simultaneously.
Consider a simple game between a bureaucrat B and a politician
P where some actions are not observable. The bureaucrat chooses a
regulatory enforcement level from {H, L} representing high and low,
respectively. High enforcement costs c > 0 to B, but low enforcement
is costless. To keep matters simple, B gets no utility from enforcement.
Therefore, it receives −c for choosing H and 0 for choosing L. The
politician, however, prefers H to L. Her utility function is uP(H) =
1 and uP(L) = 0. P cannot observe B’s enforcement level unless it
chooses to conduct oversight at a cost 1 > k > 0. If B is found to have
chosenlaxenforcement,itsuffersapenalty f andisforcedtochoose H.
At the point she decides whether to conduct oversight, P does not
know whether the history is H or L. The extensive form given in
Figure 7.3 uses dotted lines connecting H and L to show that they
are in the same information set.
Because P doesnotobserve B’saction,shemustplaythesameaction
at each node. A strategy for B is simply a choice at the ﬁrst node so we
can write this game in the normal form in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3. Oversight Game
B\P
Oversight
No Oversight
H
−c, 1 −k
−c, 1
L
−f −c, 1 −k
0, 0

--- Sayfa 194 ---
178
Extensive Form Games
B
H
L
P
P
Oversight
No oversight
Oversight
No oversight
, 1−k
−
−
−
c
, 1
c
, 1−k
f
0, 0
Figure 7.3. Regulatory Enforcement Game.
There are no pure strategy Nash equilibria in this game. If Bchooses
H , P’s best response is not to conduct oversight, but the best response
to no oversight is low enforcement, leading P to prefer oversight. The
mixed strategy equilibrium of this game involves B’s choosing the high
enforcement level with probability 1 −k and P’s conducting oversight
with probability c/f.
This example suggests that games with sequential moves unobserved
by the second player are identical to games with simultaneous moves.
We return to a familiar example to illustrate exactly how the exten-
sive form accommodates simultaneous action. Consider the Prisoner’s
Dilemma where two crooks have to decide whether or not to confess.
We can model this game in extensive form by letting player 1 move
ﬁrst and then putting both confess and don’t confess in the same infor-
mation set for player 2 as we have in Figure 7.4.
Finally to show the ﬂexibility of the extensive form, consider the
following game with three stages in Figure 7.5. Each player has three
available moves: Left, Middle, Right. If player 1 plays L, the move is
observed by all. But if player 1 plays Ror M, player 2 does not observe
1’s action. Player 2 therefore has two information sets {L}, {M, R}.
Player 3 also does not perfectly observe the actions of players 1 and 2
and has four information sets, {LL, LM}, {LR}, {ML, MM, RL, RM},
and {MR, RR}.
The difﬁculty with games of imperfect information is that we can no
longer easily apply backward induction because players do not always
know which history has been reached. One solution to this problem

--- Sayfa 195 ---
2. Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
179
Player 1
Confess
Don’t confess
Player 2
Confess
Confess
Don’t confess
Don’t confess
−8, 8
−1, −25
−4, −4
−25 , −1
Figure 7.4. Prisoner’s Dilemma in Extensive Form.
1
L
 M              R
2
3
Figure 7.5. Complex Information Sets. In stage 1, player 1 has one information
set that is a singleton. In stage 2, player 2 has two information sets. In stage 3,
player 3 has four information sets.
hinges on the observation that sometimes parts of an extensive form
game can be conceptualized as distinct games. A notion of sequential
rationality then requires that all the players play Nash equilibrium
strategies in each of these smaller games. These games within a game
are known as subgames. A subgame is a subset of an extensive form
that satisﬁes the following criteria.
(1) It begins at a node that is in a singleton information set. In other
words, at the initial or ﬁrst node of any subgame the player who
moves knows exactly which node she is at.
(2) It includes all nodes following this initial node and no others.
(3) It does not cut any information sets. If histories h and h′
are in the same information set, they are part of the same
subgames.

--- Sayfa 196 ---
180
Extensive Form Games
The example in Figure 7.5 has three subgames: the original game, a
subgame following L, and a subgame following the history LR. Strat-
egy proﬁles that constitute Nash equilibrium behavior in all of the
subgames are known as subgame perfect Nash equilibria, sometimes
denoted by the acronym SPNE. In deﬁning a SPNE it is convenient to
use the idea of a restricted strategy proﬁle. Given a strategy proﬁle s(·)
and a subgame with histories H′, the restriction of s(·) to the subgame
is the mapping s′ that has as its domain H′ and satisﬁes the condition
s′(h) = s(h) for every h ∈H′.
DEFINITION 7.2 Given an extensive form game E, a strategy proﬁle s(·)
is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE) if in every subgame to E
the restricted strategy proﬁle s(·) to the subgame is a Nash equilibrium
of the subgame.
An important result establishes the existence of SPNE for ﬁnite
games.
THEOREM 7.1 Every ﬁnite extensive form game has a SPNE. Moreover,
if no player is indifferent between any two terminal histories then the
SPNE is unique.
As an example, consider a problem of sequential voting by three
players N = {1, 2, 3}. Suppose that the choices x, y, z are to be voted
using the following agenda: ﬁrst choose between x and y under simple
majority rule, then vote the winner against z by majority rule. The
winner of this last vote is enacted. At each stage of voting ballots are
cast simultaneously. Figure 7.6 (pp. 182–183) depicts the game.
Players have the following preferences over the enacted policy
xP1yP1z; yP2zP2x; zP3xP3y. If we apply the criterion of subgame per-
fection and require that strategies are weakly undominated, players 2
and 3 vote for zagainst x in the ﬁnal stage. Alternatively, players 1 and
2 vote for y against z.
Accordingly, when agents vote over x and y in the ﬁrst period, they
understandthattherealchoiceisbetweenthesophisticatedequivalents,
z and y.2 Accordingly players 1 and 2 vote for y over x. Although
player 1 prefers x to y, she casts a strategic vote for y over x because
2 Richard McKelvey and Richard Niemi (1978) coined the term sophisticated equiva-
lents in the study of strategic voting in agendas.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
2. Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
181
she realizes that a vote for x is really a vote for z, an unappealing
outcome.
If voters use weakly dominated strategies, the set of SPNEs can be
quite large. Recall that any unanimous vote is a Nash equilibrium in
any of the subgames at the second stage of the agenda. Thus, a large
number of SPNEs can be constructed by specifying different Nash
equilibrium strategies for each second-stage subgame.
As a second example of SPNE, consider a model similar to one
used by Weingast (1997) to explain the development of the rule of
law. This game consists of a ruler R who chooses whether or not to
expropriate wealth x from one of two social groups, A or B. After
observing which group is expropriated, Aand Bdecide simultaneously
whether or not to challenge him. Each incurs cost c from challenging.
If both challenge, the attempted expropriation fails and each receives
a beneﬁt b. A successful challenge also costs the ruler k. If one or zero
groups challenge, the expropriation succeeds. The extensive form is
shown in Figure 7.7 (p. 183).
We begin our analysis by computing the Nash equilibria of the sub-
game following the decision to expropriate from A. From the per-
spective of agents A and B, the normal form for this subgame is
Table 7.4.
There are two pure strategy Nash equilibria to this subgame: one
where both groups challenge and one where neither group challenges.
There is also a mixed strategy equilibrium, but we ignore it to keep
the example simple. Because the subgame following an attempted ex-
propriation of B is symmetric, there are the same two pure strategy
equilibria.
Now consider the ﬁrst stage of the game where R anticipates that
some Nash equilibrium is played in each of the subgames of the second
stage. If he anticipates that both groups challenge in both subgames,
R’s best response is not to expropriate. If a group challenges in one of
the subgames but not in the other, R expropriates from the group that
Table 7.4. Expropriation Subgame
B\A
Challenge
Don’t Challenge
Challenge
b, b
−c, −x
Don’t Challenge
0, −x −c
0, −x

--- Sayfa 198 ---
182
Extensive Form Games
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x wins
x wins
x wins
x wins
y wins
y wins
y wins
y wins
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
x
z
x
z
x
z
x
z
x
z
x
z
x
z
x wins
x wins
x wins
x wins
z wins
z wins
z wins
z wins
X  Wins  Subgame
Figure 7.6. Sequential Voting Game.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
2. Dynamic Games of Complete but Imperfect Information
183
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y wins
y wins
y wins
y wins
z wins
z wins
z wins
z wins
Y  Wins  Subgame
Figure 7.6. (Continued )
does not challenge. If there is no challenge in either subgame, the ruler
expropriates from either group. Consequently, there are ﬁve SPNEs in
pure strategies. Weingast argues that the key to establishing the rule
of law is that Aand B coordinate on the Nash equilibrium where both
groups challenge any attempted expropriation by the ruler.
R
A
A
Expropriat
e A
 Expropriate
B
C
DC
No expropriation
0, 0 , 0
C
DC
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
DC
DC
DC
DC
−k, b, b
−k, b, b
x, −x −c, 0
x, −c, −x
x, 0, −x−c
x, 0, −x
x, −x −c,
x, −x, 0
Figure 7.7. Rule of Law Game.

--- Sayfa 200 ---
184
Extensive Form Games
The solution via backward induction is a special case of SPNE. In a
game of perfect information all information sets are singletons so that
eachnodebeginsanewsubgameoftheextensiveform.Optimizationat
every node constitutes a Nash equilibrium of all subgames. Therefore,
any solution using backward induction is a SPNE.
3. The Single-Deviation Principle
Subgameperfectioninﬁnitegameshasaveryusefulproperty.Incheck-
ing whether a strategy proﬁle s(·) is subgame perfect, it is sufﬁcient to
verify that no player has an incentive to deviate at any single infor-
mation set. We need not be concerned with defections from multiple
information sets. This property is called the single-deviation principle.
The intuition behind the result is as follows. If a proﬁtable deviation
involves changes at multiple histories, just making one of the last devia-
tions is proﬁtable in the subgame that starts at that history. Accordingly,
if a strategy proﬁle is not subgame perfect, there may be lots of devia-
tions that are desirable. At least one of them involves a deviation in a
single period.
As an exercise, we ask for a direct proof for a single-agent extensive
form game. We now provide the result and proof for general ﬁnite
games. One way to provide a formal statement of the principle is to
deﬁne a single-stage deviation. Let H denote the set of nonterminal
histories in an extensive form game and let h′ denote an element of H.
Given the strategy s(·) the strategy sh′(·) involves a single deviation if
s(h) = sh′(h) for all h ∈H\{h′}.
THEOREM 7.2 (Single-DeviationPrinciple)Givenaﬁniteextensiveform
game with nonterminal histories H, the strategy proﬁle s(·) is a subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium if and only if for each h′ ∈H the payoff to
p(h′) from s(·) is at least as good as the payoff to p(h′) from the single-
deviation sh′(·).
Proof Because every SPNE is a Nash equilibrium, no agent has a uni-
lateral incentive to change her strategy. Thus, for each h′ ∈H the pay-
off to p(h′) from s(·) is at least as good as the payoff to p(h′) from
sh′(·). This implies that in any SPNE no single-stage deviations are de-
sirable. To establish the sufﬁciency of the single-deviation principle,
assume there is a strategy proﬁle s(·) that is not a SPNE, but that no

--- Sayfa 201 ---
4. Subgame Perfection and Perfect Equilibria
185
proﬁtable single deviations exist. Because s(·) is not a SPNE, there
exists a subgame for which the restriction of s(·) is not a Nash equi-
librium. Let H′ denote one of the smallest collections of histories that
form such a subgame. Because the game is ﬁnite such a collection exists.
Let h1 ∈H′ denote the initial node of this subgame and let i = p(h1)
denote the player who moves at h1. By construction there is a proﬁtable
deviation from the restriction of s(·) to this subgame for player i who
starts with a deviation at history h1. Because we have assumed that no
single deviation is desirable, there must be a nonterminal history, h2,
following h1 for which deviating at h1 and h2 yields a higher payoff for
i than the equilibrium. But this implies that in the subgame starting at
h2 player i has a proﬁtable deviation. This contradicts the fact that H′
is one of the smallest collections of histories for which the restriction
to s(·) is not a Nash equilibrium.
□
The single-deviation principle also applies to nonﬁnite games as long
as a continuity assumption is satisﬁed. We defer this discussion until
the chapter on repeated games.
4. A Digression on Subgame Perfection
and Perfect Equilibria
Although subgame perfection is generally used to solve extensive form
games, it is closely related to the idea of perfection discussed in Chap-
ter 5. Recall that a strategy proﬁle is perfect if it is the limit of a sequence
of mixed strategy proﬁles that form best responses when agents are
constrained to play completely mixed strategies. We demonstrate the
connection between perfection and subgame perfection by returning
to the normal form representation of the revolution game. Consider
the Nash equilibrium proﬁle (C, S and T). Suppose each side must as-
sign at least probability ε to each of its pure strategies. This captures the
idea that agents may make mistakes in implementing their preferred
strategies.
We now show that S and T cannot be B’s best response when agent
Aplays both of her strategies with at least probability ε. If Achooses
R with probability ε, B’s expected utility of S and T is
ε(4p −6 −2(1 −p)) + (1 −ε)6, but the expected utility of G and T is
(1 −ε)6. Because 4p −6 −2(1 −p) < 0, Bwants to play Gand T with
the highest possible probability. As a result (C, S and T) cannot be the

--- Sayfa 202 ---
186
Extensive Form Games
limit as ε converges to 0 of completely mixed Nash equilibria. Thus, it
fails the requirements of SPNE and is not a perfect equilibrium in the
normal form. We leave as exercises for the reader the argument that
only (R, G and T) is a perfect equilibrium.
Although all subgame perfect Nash equilibria are perfect, there are
perfect equilibria that are not subgame perfect. This problem arises
because extensive form games represented in the normal form often
generate correlation in the trembles when the same player moves more
than once in the extensive form. One approach is to relabel the play-
ers so that no player moves at more than one information set. This
approach yields what is sometimes called the agent form. In this repre-
sentation the sets of perfect and subgame perfect equilibria coincide.
This argument is left as an exercise for the motivated student.
5. Application: Agenda Control
5.1. The Romer-Rosenthal Model. In many localities in the United
States, local school budgets must be approved by the voters. Generally,
only the school board can place the budget on a referendum ballot.
Consequently, the board has monopoly agenda control over proposals
for school spending. Romer and Rosenthal (1978) were the ﬁrst to
develop a model of this form of agenda control.
We reproduce the Romer-Rosenthal model here. Let spending be
denoted by s ∈[0, ∞) and let q denote the status quo level of spending.
The school board wants to maximize the amount of spending so that
the board’s utility function uB (s) is strictly increasing in s. In the ﬁrst
stage of the game, the board makes a proposal of s. Once this referen-
dum is on the ballot, citizens (an odd number) vote whether to approve
it by majority rule. We assume that all voters turn out so that available
strategies are {Y, N}. If a majority chooses Y, then s becomes the new
level of spending. If a majority chooses N, then the reversion (or sta-
tus quo) spending level, q, is adopted. Voters have single-peaked and
symmetric preferences over school spending represented by the utility
functions ui(s). Let vi be the ideal point of voter i. As in Chapter 2,
such preferences take the form ui(s) = h (−|s −vi|), where h(·) is a
strictly increasing function.
We are interested in identifying a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Because the last stage of the game is a majority-rule voting game,
there are Nash equilibria of the last stage that support accepting or
rejecting any s. Consequently, we assume voters do not use weakly
dominated strategies in any voting subgames. Given any proposal s,

--- Sayfa 203 ---
5. Application: Agenda Control
187
each voter votes Y if ui(s) ≥ui(q). Single-peakedness implies that if
the median voter prefers s to q then the proposal passes under weakly
undominated voting. Similarly, if the median voter prefers q to s then
the proposal fails under weakly undominated voting.
Given the equilibria of the voting subgames, the school board’s best
responseistochoosethelargests thatisacceptabletothemedianvoter.
Let vm be the ideal point of the median voter. Given vm and q, we can
compute which policies the median prefers to q. Such policies, s, satisfy
the condition um(s) ≥um(q). Because h is an increasing function, this
inequality requires that
|s −vm| ≤|q −vm| .
Therefore, if q < vm, this inequality holds for s ∈[q, 2vm −q].
Conversely, if q > vm, a successful proposal requires s ∈[2vm −q, q].
Thus, the highest obtainable budget is the maximum of 2vm −q and q.
Because the board wants to maximize s, it chooses max {q, 2vm −q}.
Figure 7.8 plots the equilibrium value of s∗as a function of
vm and q.
This simple model produces some clear predictions about the re-
lationships among voter preferences, statutory reversions, and policy
v
v
Status quo  (q)
Outcome
Figure 7.8. Equilibrium Policies from Romer-Rosenthal Game.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
188
Extensive Form Games
outcomes. First, the board uses its agenda control to generate higher
spending outcomes when the statutory reversion is low and the median
voter prefers to spend more than the reversion amount. Because the
voter’sthreattorejectlargespendingproposalsisnotcrediblewhenthe
reversion is bad, the board is able to extract more spending. A second
important implication is that although spending outcomes are respon-
sive to changes in voter preferences (at least when q < vm), spending
grows twice as fast as the median voter’s preferred spending level.
5.2. The Presidential Veto. In the United States and many other pres-
idential systems, the executive has veto power over legislative enact-
ments. Presidency scholars often use a version of the Romer-Rosenthal
model to explore how the veto enhances the executive’s inﬂuence over
legislation.
To keep matters as simple as possible, we model the legislature as
a single actor L with single-peaked symmetric preferences on a single
dimension. Its ideal point is l. Consequently, the legislature’s utility
function is ul (x) = h (−|x −l|) for policy outcomes x ∈R where h(·)
is a strictly increasing function. Similarly, the president has ideal point
p and utility function up (x) = h (−|x −p|).
The game form is very simple. In the ﬁrst stage, Lproposes a bill b to
change the status quo policy q. Subsequently, the president P decides
either to accept b or to veto the bill. A veto results in the status quo q.
For now we ignore the legislature’s ability to override vetoes.
We solve this game by backward induction. In the last stage, the pres-
ident’s best response is to accept any bill for which up (b) ≥up (q) or
−|b −p| ≥−|q −p|. Thus, if p > q, she accepts any b ∈[q, 2p −q].
Alternatively, if p < q, she accepts b ∈[2p −q, q]. Let P(q) denote
the set of bills that the president accepts over the status quo. Now
we back up to the legislature’s decision node. Because the legislature
knows which policies are acceptable, it chooses its most preferred pol-
icy from P(q). If l ∈P(q), then clearly b∗= l. If c is below minP(q),
then b∗= min P(q). If l > max P(q), then b∗= max P(q).
Suppose that l > p. Then, given our derivations of P(q), the equi-
librium policy outcome is
b∗=
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
2p −q if p > q and l > 2p −q
l if p > q and l < 2p −q
l if l < q
q if l > q > p
.

--- Sayfa 205 ---
5. Application: Agenda Control
189
If p > l, the equilibrium outcomes are
b∗=
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
2p −q if p < q and l < 2p −q
l if p < q and l > 2p −q
l if l > q
q if p > q > l
.
Figure 7.9 plots the equilibrium outcomes as a function of l, p, and q.
The comparative statics results are quite similar to those of the origi-
nal Romer-Rosenthal model. In particular, the legislature does better
when the status quo is far from the president’s ideal point. Another
important implication is that the inﬂuence conferred by the veto is not
large. In all of the cases where the veto has an impact (i.e., b∗̸ = l),
the president is indifferent between the equilibrium proposal and the
status quo. Finally, because the model is one of perfect information,
the legislator perfectly predicts the president’s behavior and no vetoes
occur in equilibrium. Although vetoes are not observed on the path,
the possibility of a veto is consequential. In later chapters, we consider
models where vetoes occur as part of equilibrium strategies.
c
p
p
c
Status quo  (q)
2p −c
Figure 7.9. Equilibrium Outcomes from Veto Bargaining.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
190
Extensive Form Games
5.3. The Veto Override. Instead of assuming that q is the outcome fol-
lowinganyveto,weconsideramodelwherethelegislaturecanoverride
the veto with a supermajority. The legislature has n (odd) members and
k > (n + 1)/2 votes are required to override the executive veto. Each
legislator has single-peaked preferences with utility functions of the
form ui (x) = h (−|x −li|), and the ideal points li are ordered such
that li > l j if and only if i > j. Motivated by a model in which legisla-
tive proposals are made according to an open rule agenda process, we
assume that the legislative proposer is the median legislator with ideal
point m ≡l(n+1)/2. We also limit consideration to equilibria in which
voting is weakly undominated in all subgames.
Given these assumptions, a successful override requires that uk (b) ≥
uk (q) and un−k−1 (b) ≥un−k−1 (q). To see that this is true, consider the
case where uk (b) ≥uk (q) and un−k−1 (b) < un−k−1 (q). Because pref-
erences are single peaked, there is some i ∈[n −k −1, k] such that
ui (b) < ui (q) for all legislators with ideal points lower that li. There-
fore,thenumberoflegislatorswhosupporttheoverridemustbestrictly
less than k. The logic of the other possibility is similar. Because their
support is necessary and sufﬁcient, legislators n −k −1 and kare com-
monly referred to as the override pivots.
Because an override is only necessary in case of a presidential veto,
only one of the override pivots is strategically relevant. Consider a
vetoed bill with up(b) < up(q) and um(b) > um(q). If p < m, single
peakedness and lk > m imply that uk(b) > uk(q). Thus, the override
depends solely on n −k −1’s preferences. Similarly, if p > m, single
peakedness and ln−k−1 < m imply that un−k−1(b) > un−k−1(q). The im-
plication is that only the preferences of the pivot that lies on the
same side of the median as the president matters for a successful
override.
We have established the necessity for the proposer to attract the
support of either the president or the override pivot on his side of the
median. Now consider how the proposer chooses her optimal proposal.
First suppose that ln−k−1 < p < m. Appealing again to single peaked-
ness, we know that any bill thatln−k−1 and mprefer to q is also preferred
to q by p. Thus, the proposer does not require the support of ln−k−1. A
similar argument establishes that when p < ln−k−1 < m, the proposer
need only attract n −k −1’s support. The corresponding cases where
p > m are symmetric so that the proposer need only attract the closer
of the president and the override pivot on the president’s side of the
median.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
5. Application: Agenda Control
191
Thus, the pivotal actor’s ideal point is v = max{ln−k−1, p} if p < m
and v = max{lk, p} otherwise. The SPNE proposal is given by
b∗=
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
2v −q if v > q and m > 2v −q
m if v > q and m < 2v −q
m if m < q
q if m > q > v
if v > m, and
b∗=
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
2p −q if p < q and m < 2p −q
m if p < q and m > 2p −q
m if m > q
q if m > q > p
otherwise. Figure 7.10 illustrates the equilibrium outcomes for
different values of k. Not surprisingly, when the number of
m
p
p
m
Status quo  (q)
2p−m
n−k −1
l
kl
n −k−1
l
kl
n−k −1
′
′
′
′
′
l
k>k
Equilibrium outcome for k
Equilibrium outcome for k
Figure 7.10. The Effects of Veto Overrides.

--- Sayfa 208 ---
192
Extensive Form Games
votes needed to override goes down, the effect of veto power is di-
minished.
6. Application: A Model of Power Transitions
Powell (1999) models how dramatic shifts of power in the international
system lead to violent conﬂict. Suppose that there are two countries A
and B. Country Ais making a claim against a region controlled by B.
The total value of the region is normalized to $1 per period. We focus
on a two-period version of this game where each country values the
outcome of each period equally.
First consider country B’s options. It can appease A in the ﬁrst period
by offering it a share of the region’s output 0 ≤x1 ≤1, or it can attempt
to settle the dispute militarily by attacking A. If B chooses to attack
and wins the war, Adrops its claim and the game ends.If B loses the
war, A takes undisputed control of the region and the game ends. In
the event of a war in the ﬁrst period, the victor gets a stream of output
equal to $1 in each of the two periods and the loser gets a stream of
$0 in each of the two periods. Both the winner and loser each pay the
cost c from ﬁghting in a war. If country B makes an offer then country
A’s available choices are either to accept x1 or to refuse it and go to
war. If country B initiates a war, Ahas no choice but to ﬁght. If a war
did not occur in the ﬁrst period, country B has the same choices open
to her in the second period: offering a share of the output 0 ≤x2 ≤1
or going to war. If a second-period offer is made, country Acan either
accept it or go to war. If a war occurs in the second period, the victor
receives $1 and the loser receives $0. Again ﬁghting the second-period
war costs both sides c.
An important feature of the model is that over time country A’s
military capability is increasing relative to B’s. In the ﬁrst period A
wins a war with probability p1 whereas in the second period A wins
with probability p2 > p1. To keep matters interesting, we assume that
p2 > c > p1.
With respect to the incidence of violent conﬂict, there are two types
of equilibria: one in which B appeases A in both periods and one in
which B attacks Ain the ﬁrst period.
First, suppose that 2c > p2 −2p1. In the SPNE, B gives p2 −c to
country A in the second period and max{0, 2p1 −p2} in the ﬁrst period.
Because this is a game of perfect information, we verify that these

--- Sayfa 209 ---
7. Application: A Model of Transitions to Democracy
193
strategies are part of a SPNE using backward induction. In the second
period, A’s expected utility of ﬁghting is p2 −c so B must offer A at
least this much to prevent a conﬂict. This concession leaves B with
a payoff of 1 −p2 + c. Because B’s expected utility of ﬁghting is 1 −
p2 −c, it strictly prefers appeasing. The optimal action for B to take
in the second period is to offer x∗
2 = p2 −c. Now consider period 1. A
receives $1 in each period if it wins a war and $0 if it loses. Therefore, the
expected utility of ﬁghting is 2p1 −c. To appease A, Bmust choose x1 so
that x1 + p2 −c ≥2p1 −c. This inequality is equivalent to x1 ≥2p1 −
p2. Because B rationally offers the minimal amount, her equilibrium
proposal is x∗
1 = max{0, 2p1 −p2}. Now we need only check to see that
Bprefers to pay x∗
1 + x∗
2 . B’s expected utility of war is 2 (1 −p1) −c so
it prefers the payment if and only if 1 −x∗
1 + 1 −x∗
2 ≥2 (1 −p1) −c.
Thisconditionisequivalentto2 −x∗
1 −p2 + c ≥2 (1 −p1) −c or 2c ≥
p2 −2p1 + x∗
1. This condition is satisﬁed if 2c > p2 −2p1.
Now suppose that this condition does not hold so that p2 −2p1 >
2c. Because c > 0, this requires that x∗
1 = 0. Thus, B prefers ﬁght-
ing to making the payments because p2 −2p1 + x∗
1 > 2c. Thus, when
the condition fails, the SPNE predicts that B attacks A in the ﬁrst
period.
The necessary condition for a peaceful resolution only fails when p2
is much greater than p1 so that Ais much weaker in the ﬁrst stage than
it is in the second stage. Thus, B prefers to attack when A is weak to
avoid making large concessions when A becomes more powerful. If
the distribution of power is stable (as in the case of p1 = p2), there is
no war in equilibrium.
7. Application: A Model of Transitions to Democracy
Acemoglu and Robinson (2005) develop a number of models designed
to explore the conditions under which authoritarian polities adopt
democratic institutions. We sketch their framework by considering one
of their models.
Suppose that there are two types of agents: rich and poor. Let λ >
1/2 be the proportion of citizens who are poor so that 1 −λ is the
proportion of rich citizens. Rich citizens each receive income yr and
poor citizens have income yp. The average income in the society is
y = λyp + (1 −λ)yr. Clearly, yr > y > yp. An important parameter in
Acemoglu and Robinson’s analysis is θ, which represents the share of

--- Sayfa 210 ---
194
Extensive Form Games
income held by the poor. This term is implicitly deﬁned by the identities
yp = θ y
λ and yr = (1 −θ) y
1 −λ
.
Thus, an increase in θ represents a decrease in inequality.
The primary policy instrument in this political economy is a linear tax
and transfer scheme whereby the government sets a proportional tax
rate τ and then transfers the tax revenue back to the citizens in a lump
sum. Because the agents differ in their incomes, they have different
preferences over tax rates. Given a tax rate τ, the per capita tax levy
is τ y. As a simple way of capturing the distortionary effects of income
taxation, Acemoglu and Robinson assume that actual revenues are less
than the levy because of transaction costs in the collection of taxes.
Formally, the transaction cost of levying τ y is given by C(τ)y, where
C(τ) is convex and increasing. To keep matters simple and generate
a closed form solution, we set C(τ) = 1
2τ 2. After deducting this dead-
weight loss, the amount of money available for transfers is given by
T = (τ −C(τ))y and the after-tax and transfer income of an agent of
type i ∈{r, p} is
Vi(τ) = (1 −τ) yi +

τ −1
2τ 2

y.
Now we consider the preferred tax rates of rich and poor voters. Differ-
entiating the after-tax income with respect to the tax rate and setting
the derivative equal to 0 yield the ﬁrst-order condition for the optimal
tax rate choice by poor voters,
y −yp −τ y = 0.
After substituting the identity yp = (θ y)/λ , the poor’s most preferred
tax rate is found to be
τ p = λ −θ
λ
.
Because the poor have lower incomes than the rich, their income share
is lower than their share in the population so that λ > θ. Thus, 0 < τ p <
1. Also note that τ p is decreasing in θ so that the poor’s preferred tax
rate is increasing in inequality.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
7. Application: A Model of Transitions to Democracy
195
Now we consider the preferences of the rich. The necessary ﬁrst-
order condition for an interior optimal tax rate is
y −yr −τ y = 0.
This condition can only be satisﬁed at an infeasible negative tax rate.
Thus, the rich’s most preferred feasible tax rate is τ r = 0.
In Acemoglu and Robinson’s model, there is a political shock in
each period that determines the consequences of overthrowing the
regime and replacing it by a dictatorship of the left. When the shock is
S, 1 −μS of the economy’s income is destroyed where S = H, L and
μH > μL. Thus, in state H the costs of overthrowing the regime are
low compared to those in state L. During a revolution the income of
the rich is conﬁscated and evenly divided among the poor. Thus in state
S the payoff to the poor following a revolution is
V p
R, μS
= μSy
λ .
For simplicity, they assume that following the revolution the rich get
no income so that Vr
R, μS
= 0.
To characterize the outcome of Acemoglu and Robinson’s model,
we consider the extent to which revolution is a threat. We say that the
revolution constraint binds in state S if the poor prefer revolution to
an authoritarian outcome at the rich’s ideal tax rate of 0. This is true if
V p
R, μS
> V p (0). After substituting the preceding expressions we
see that this constraint binds when μS > θ.
Given this speciﬁcation of the economy and the costs of revolution,
we turn to one of Acemoglu and Robinson’s extensive form games,
illustrated in Figure 7.11. To simplify the ﬁgure, we show only the
extensive form following the realization of the state S.
First, the state, H or L, is revealed. Then the rich move ﬁrst and
decide whether to move to a democracy D or to maintain control in
an authoritarian system N. If the rich choose N, they also choose a tax
rate τ.
Aftertherichchoose,thepoordecidewhethertoinitiatearevolution
R or to accept the rich’s decision (NR). If they revolt, the payoffs are
V p
R, μS
= (μSy)/λ and Vr
R, μS
= 0. If they do not revolt against
D, the tax rate is chosen by majority rule. Because the median voter
is poor, the equilibrium tax rate is τ p and the payoffs to D are V p(τ p)
and Vr(τ p). By comparing the payoffs of Rand D, it is easy to establish

--- Sayfa 212 ---
196
Extensive Form Games
Rich
D
N
Rich
τ
τ
Poor
p
s
r
s
v (R, μ ), v (R, μ )
p
p
r
p
v  (τ  ),
R
NR
R
NR
p
s
r
s
v (R, μ ), v (R, μ )
ˆ
ˆ
p
rv  (N, τ)
v  (N, τ),
v (τ )
Figure 7.11. The Democratization Game.
that in state S the poor prefer to revolt rather than accept democracy
if and only if μS > θ + τ p (λ −θ) −1/2τ p2λ. This condition simpliﬁes
to μS > θ + (λ −θ)2 /(2λ).
Now suppose the rich choose N and the poor prefer not to revolt.
Acemoglu and Robinson assume that the rich may not be able to com-
mit to maintaining τ > 0 after the revolutionary threat has passed. To
model this commitment problem, they assume that with probability p
the rich maintain the tax rateτ but with probability 1 −p they have the
opportunity to renege and choose τ r = 0. Given the rich’s initial choice
of tax rate and the possibility of reneging, the utilities from N are
V p (N,τ) = (1 −p) yp + p

(1 −τ) yp +

τ −1
2τ 2

y

= yp + p

τ (y −yp) −1
2τ 2y

and
Vr (N,τ) = (1 −p) yr + p

(1 −τ) yr +

τ −1
2τ 2

y

= yr + p

τ (y −yr) −1
2τ 2y

.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
8. Application: A Model of Coalition Formation
197
Given these payoffs, it is easy to see that the poor prefer to revolt
against N if μS > θ + p

τ (λ −θ) −1
2τ 2λ

.
In order to reduce the number of cases, Acemoglu and Robinson
assume μL < θ so that the poor never revolt in state L. This leaves us
with three cases:
(1) Suppose that μH < θ. Then the revolution constraint does not
bind in either case. Thus, the unique SPNE consists of N, a tax
rate of 0, and no revolution.
(2) Suppose that μH > θ + (λ −θ)2/(2λ). Then even democracy
does not deter the poor from revolting, so a revolution occurs.
(3) Supposethatθ + (λ −θ)2/(2λ) > μH > θ.Inthiscase,itmaybe
possible for the rich to prevent a revolution by accommodating
the poor with a tax rate τ. From the preceding we know that
doing so requires that the rich set the tax rate so that
p <
μH −θ
τ (λ −θ) −1
2τ 2λ
.
If p<(μH −θ)/(τ p (λ −θ)−1/2τ p2λ) = 2λ(μH −θ)/(λ −θ)2, how-
ever, the rich prefer D rather than setting of the tax rate high-
er than τ p. Thus, there is a critical value of
p∗= 2λ(μH −θ)/ (λ −θ)2 such that democracy is the outcome
if p∗> p. Thus, when the rich have difﬁculty committing to a
high tax rate, they can prevent revolution by transitioning to
democracy.
To generate some predictions about when democratic transitions
are likely to occur, we can examine how p∗is affected by changes in
the parameters. Not surprisingly, p∗is increasing in μH, suggesting that
when the costs of revolution are low, the rich are more likely to support
democratization. Second, p∗and the likelihood of democracy are de-
creasing in θ. This is true because greater inequality makes revolution
a more attractive option for the poor. In turn, the rich have to make
more concessions to prevent it. If committing to these concessions is
sufﬁciently difﬁcult, a democratic transition occurs.
8. Application: A Model of Coalition Formation
One of the earliest applications of political game theory is the study of
coalition formation (Riker 1962). The earliest models were developed

--- Sayfa 214 ---
198
Extensive Form Games
within the cooperative game theoretic and social choice traditions, but
there have been a number of recent applications using noncooperative
bargaining models.
In this section, we examine a model of coalition governments de-
veloped by Austen-Smith and Banks (1988). There are three parties
α, β , and γ , who have known policy positions pα, pβ, and pγ on
a single dimensional policy space P ⊂R where pα > pβ > pγ . Let
w =

ωα, ωβ, ωγ

be the vector of vote shares for the parties in the last
election. All vote shares are less than 1/2 so that the government must
be a coalition. To simplify matters, these vote shares are exogenous
parameters, whereas Austen-Smith and Banks derive them endoge-
nously from a model of voting. If C ⊂ = {α, β,γ } is a coalition of
parties, the vote share of coalition C is given by
ωC =

k∈C
ωk.
Coalition C is a winning coalition if ωC > 1/2; under the assumption
that all vote shares are less than 1/2 any coalition with at least two
parties is a winning coalition.
The three parties bargain over the formation of a new government.
In doing so, they choose a policy y ∈P and allocate a ﬁxed set of port-
folios G. As in Austen-Smith and Banks, we assume that G is inﬁnitely
divisible and that the allocations g =

gα, gβ, gγ

satisfy 
k∈C gk = G.
Each party has separable utility functions with quadratic payoffs
over policy and additive linear payoffs over portfolios. Therefore, the
payoff to party k from policy y and allocation g is given by
−(y −pk)2 + gk.
The protocol for bargaining is as follows. First, the party with the largest
vote share, say k, is selected as formateur and chooses a coalition.
The formatuer then proposes a policy yk and an allocation gk. If its
coalition partners accept, yk and gk are implemented and the game
ends.Ifoneofthecoalitionpartnersvetoes,however,thesecondlargest
party becomes the formatuer, selects a coalition and proposes yl and
gl. If this is defeated, the smallest party becomes the formatuer. If the
smallest party is unsuccessful, a caretaker government takes ofﬁce and
maintains a status quo policy pq and chooses gc = {0, 0, 0} .

--- Sayfa 215 ---
8. Application: A Model of Coalition Formation
199
We solve this game via backward induction. At each proposal stage,
j ∈{α, β, γ , c},let v j
i be the utility of party i, for i ∈{α, β, γ }. The pay-
offs to party i from a caretaker government are vc
k = −(pq −pk)2 .
To simplify, we assume that vc
k < −(pj −pk)2 for all j and k so
that any party k prefers party j’s ideal point and a 0 share of the
portfolios to a caretaker government. Formally, this requires that
pq /∈[2pγ −pα, 2pα −pγ ].
First, consider vote shares such that ωα > ωβ > ωγ . In the third stage
party γ is the formateur. By assumption, all parties prefer yγ = pγ and
gγ = (0, 0, G) to the caretaker government so this must be party γ ’s
optimal choice.
In stage 2, party β makes the proposal. The utilities of defeating any
proposal by party β and moving to party γ ’s proposal stage are vγ
γ = G
and vγ
α = −(pγ −pα)2. Because γ receives the highest possible utility
from voting against β’s offer, β must make an offer to party α. Because
α prefers yβ = pβ and gβ = (0, G, 0) to a government formed by γ , α
accepts β’s ideal point and requires no portfolios.
In the ﬁrst stage of the game α makes a proposal. The utilities
from defeating party α’s proposal and moving to party β’s proposal
stage are vβ
β = G and vβ
γ = −(pβ −pγ )2. Clearly, α has nothing to of-
fer β and tries to form a coalition with γ . Thus, α chooses yα and
gγ to maximize −(yα −pα)2 + G −gγ subject to −(yα −pγ )2 + gγ ≥
−(pβ −pγ )2 and G ≥gγ ≥0.3 There are three cases depending on
whether or not the corner solutions g∗
γ = G or g∗
γ = 0 are valid.
(1) If pα −pβ ≥pβ −pγ and G ≥1
4 (pα −pγ )2 −(pβ −pγ )2 , y∗
α =
(pα + pγ )/2 and g∗
γ = 1
4 (pα −pγ )2 −(pβ −pγ )2.
(2) If
pα −pβ ≥pβ −pγ
and
G < 1
4 (pα −pγ )2 −(pβ −pγ )2 ,
y∗
α = pγ +

G + (pβ −pγ )2 and g∗
γ = G.
(3) If pα −pβ < pβ −pγ , y∗
α = pβ and g∗
γ = 0.
In the ﬁrst two cases, the distance from α’s ideal point and pβ is
greater than the distance from pβ to γ ’s ideal point. Thus, party α is
willing to give up portfolios and offers a compromise policy. When G
is sufﬁciently large, α offers the compromise policy y∗
α = (pα + pγ )/2,
reﬂecting an optimal trade-off in its policy goals and its desire to hold
portfolios. When G is small, however, α is willing to give up all of the
3 A review of constrained optimization is contained in the Mathematical Appendix.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
200
Extensive Form Games
portfolios in order to move policy in the direction of its ideal point.
Finally, in the last case, α is sufﬁciently well off under pβ compared to
γ that α is unwilling to compensate γ for moving policy toward its ideal
point. An interesting feature of this outcome is that the coalition is a
nonconnected one of the extreme parties. This ﬁnding contrasts with
arguments stressing that policy-motivated parties form coalitions with
ideological allies (Axelrod 1970).
Now consider the case where ωβ > ωα > ωγ . Once again γ chooses
y∗
γ = pγ and gγ = (0, 0, G) in the last period. Now consider α’s choice
in the second period. Clearly, it has nothing to offer γ and there-
fore tries to build a coalition with β. Thus, α chooses yα and gβ
to maximize −(yα −pα)2 + G −gβ subject to −(yα −pβ)2 + gβ ≥
−(pβ −pγ )2and G ≥gβ ≥0. The solution has four distinct cases.
(1) If (pα + pβ)/2 ≥2pβ −pγ and G ≥1
4 (pα −pβ)2 −(pβ −pγ )2,
y∗
α = (pα + pβ)/2 and g∗
β = 1
4(pα −pβ)2 −(pβ −pγ )2.
(2) If (pα+pβ)/2 ≥2pβ−pγ and G < 1/4(pα −pβ)2 −(pβ −pγ )2,
y∗
α = pβ +

G + (pβ −pγ )2 and g∗
β = G.
(3) If pα > 2pβ −pγ > (pα + pβ)/2, y∗
α = 2pβ −pγ and g∗
β = 0.
(4) If pα < 2pβ −pγ , y∗
α = pα and g∗
β = 0.
In the last two cases, the bargaining between α and β is analogous to
the Romer-Rosenthal setter game over policies with a reversion of pγ .
In cases 1 and 2, party α makes portfolio concessions to move policy
further than the Romer-Rosenthal inﬂection point of 2pβ −pγ .
Despite the complexity of these cases, the important point to note
is that y∗
α > pβ and g∗
γ = 0 is predicted. Thus, when party β makes
its offer in the ﬁrst period, it knows that party γ accepts y∗
β = pβ and
g∗
γ = 0. Thus, the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium outcomes are y∗=
pβ and g∗= (0, G, 0). This case generates a connected coalition that
implements the ideal point of the median party.
We leave proofs for the remaining cases as exercises. Table 7.5 sum-
marizes the outcomes for all cases.
A key point of the Austen-Smith and Banks model is that compo-
sition of the government and the policies it implements are driven by
the voting weights that determine the sequence of proposals. Because
these weights are determined by voting behavior, the key to making
predictions is an understanding of how voters behave in anticipation

--- Sayfa 217 ---
9. Exercises
201
Table 7.5. Outcomes of Austen-Smith and Banks’s Model
Case
Governing Coalition
Policy
ωα > ωβ > ωγ
α and γ
pα+pγ
2
ωβ > ωα > ωγ
β and γ
pβ
ωβ > ωγ > ωα
β and α
pβ
ωα > ωγ > ωβ
α and β
pα+pβ
2
ωγ > ωα > ωβ
γ and β
pγ +pβ
2
ωγ > ωβ > ωα
γ and α
pα+pγ
2
of the parliamentary bargaining. We refer the reader to the original for
an analysis of the voting game.
9. Exercises
EXERCISE 7.1 Represent the Centipede game as a normal form game.
Characterize the set of Nash equilibra to this game.
EXERCISE 7.2 Prove that the strategy proﬁle (R, G and T) is the only
perfect equilibrium in the revolution game depicted in Table 7.2.
EXERCISE 7.3 Diane is collecting money for the Center for the Study of
Democratic Politics coffee fund. She needs to collect $2 from at least
three faculty members to operate the fund for the month. No member
can contribute more that $2 and Diane cannot exclude non-contributors
from drinking coffee. Each center member has an estimated $10 beneﬁt
from coffee service. If less than $6 is contributed, Diane keeps the money
and no coffee is provided. If more than $6 is contributed, Diane provides
the coffee and pockets the difference.
(1) Diane decides to ask the faculty members in the following order:
Arnold, Bartels, Lewis, Prior, and Romer. Each faculty member
can observe past contribution choices. What are the set of Nash
equilibria to this game? What is the unique Nash equilibrium that
survives backward induction?
(2) Now modify the game somewhat so that Lewis, Prior, and Romer
do not know whether or not Arnold and Bartels contributed.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
202
Extensive Form Games
Further, suppose that Lewis, Prior, and Romer must decide si-
multaneously. Draw a game tree for this game in extensive form.
Pay particular attention to the information sets. What are the sub-
game perfect equilibria to this game? Does Diane do better or
worse in this game?
(3) Now let Diane choose the information structure of the game (i.e.,
shecanchoosewhichcontributiondecisionsarerevealedatwhich
stage). Suppose she wants to maximize the amount of money she
keeps and does not care about coffee consumption. Which game
should she choose?
EXERCISE 7.4 Consider the sequential bargaining problem. Show that
the strategy
Player 1: Propose x2 = δ. If the offer is rejected, accept any offer in
round 2.
Player 2: Accept in round 1 if x2 ≥δ; reject otherwise and then propose
x2 = δ in round 2.
is the unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. Hint: Start by showing
thatastrategybyplayer1thatacceptsanyperiod2offeronlyifitgivesher
at least ε > 0 cannot involve a Nash equilibrium in subgames following
a failed ﬁrst-period offer.
EXERCISE 7.5 Consider a bargaining problem with two players. Suppose
player 1 makes an offer (x1
1, x1
2) to player 2 where xi
j denotes the amount
that player j would get if the offer made by player i were accepted. In
period 1 player 1 proposes a split of $1 (i.e., the proposals sum to 1 and
are nonnegative). Player 2 then accepts or rejects. If she accepts then
the split is consumed. If she rejects then player 2 makes an offer to split
δ < 1 (so the proposals sum to δ and are nonnegative). Player 1 then
decides to accept or reject the offer. If player 1 accepts, player 2’s split
is consumed. If it is rejected, however, each player consumes δ/2. Both
players want to maximize their own consumption. Find the subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium of this game.
EXERCISE 7.6 This exercise is based on Groseclose (1999). There are
N legislators with policy preferences ui(x) for x ∈R. They vote over a
bill xB and the status quo x0 where xB > x0. So let αi = ui(xB) −ui(x0),
the degree of preference for xB over x0 for legislator i. Each legislator’s
policy payoff for voting for the bill is αi whether or not the bill passes.
There are two vote buyers, L and R, with net preference parameters αL

--- Sayfa 219 ---
9. Exercises
203
and αR, respectively. Vote buyer L wants to defeat xB so that αL < 0
while R wants to pass it as αR > 0. Consider the following model. R
moves ﬁrst and offers zR
i to each legislator who agrees to vote for the bill.
L moves second and offers zL
i to each legislator in exchange for voting
against xB. Thus, the payoff for voting in favor of xB is αi + zR
i whereas
the payoff for voting against is −αi+ zL
i .
(1) Let N= 5andαi = −3 + i fori = 1, . . . , 5.Characterizethesub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium to this game for arbitrary levels
of αL and αR.
(2) Can the winning coalition be larger than a bare majority?
EXERCISE 7.7 Consider a one-player game in which player 1 selects A
or B. If she chooses A then she selects between C and D. If she chooses B
then she selects between E and F. Let the payoffs from each path be as
follows: u(A, C) = u1, u(A, D) = u2, u(B, E) = u3, u(B, F) = u4. For
arbitrary values of u1, u2, u3, u4 provide a direct proof that the single-
deviation principle applies to this game. Speciﬁcally show that if a strat-
egy is not subgame perfect then a proﬁtable single deviation exists.
EXERCISE 7.8 (∗) Consider an extensive form game in which each player
moves at exactly one information set (the mapping p(·) is a bijection).
Moreover, assume that each information set is a singleton. Show that in
any such game the set of subgame perfect Nash equilibria coincides with
the set of Nash equilibria that are perfect in the normal form.
EXERCISE 7.9 Derive the policy outcome and governing coalitions for
the remaining cases of the Austen-Smith and Banks (1988) model.

--- Sayfa 220 ---
8
Dynamic Games of Incomplete
Information
In Chapter 6, we learned that uncertainty about the preferences of
other players fundamentally alters the strategic situation in static nor-
mal form games. In dynamic, multistage games uncertainty leads to
even more interesting strategic possibilities. Reconsider the revolu-
tion game depicted in Figure 7.1. The unique subgame perfect equilib-
rium involves a revolt by the colony and the grant of independence,
(R, (G, T)). Now consider the game depicted in Figure 8.1. In contrast
with the game of Figure 7.1, nation B incurs no cost from using force
to suppress a revolution.
Now the unique subgame perfect equilibrium is (C, (S, T)). This
chapter addresses the following question: How should nation A
behave if it is not sure which ﬁgure accurately describes the
game?
We now consider games in which players face uncertainty about
preferences of other players. Games of this form involve incomplete
information. As in Chapter 6, we model such uncertainty using the
Harsanyi maneuver. Uncertainty about the payoffs of other players is
modeled as a game in which players are uncertain about which node of
the game they are located on. This trick involves the use of a ﬁctitious
player – Nature – who randomly selects players’ types from a known
probability distribution. Not all players, however, observe the realiza-
tion of Nature’s draw. To model a situation in which player i does not
know player j’s preferences, we assume that Nature chooses player
j’s payoffs (type) prior to agent i’s decision, and we model player i
as facing an information set with multiple nodes because she does not
observe the choice by Nature. This trick converts games of incomplete
information – agents do not know the game – to games of imperfect
204

--- Sayfa 221 ---
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
205
A
B
B
3, 0
4p−6 −2(1−p),
6(1 −p)
−2, 6
0, 4
R
C
G
S
T
E
Figure 8.1. Modiﬁed Revolution Game.
information – agents know the game but not exactly where they are in
the game.1
To make these issues more concrete, consider a model of conﬂict
between two nations. Country Aﬁrst chooses whether or not to initiate
a conﬂict. If no conﬂict is initiated, the game ends. On the other hand,
if A initiates conﬂict then nation B decides whether to acquiesce or
escalate. Suppose that the payoffs from this interaction can be given
by either Table 8.1 or Table 8.2.
Table 8.1. Game I
If A does not initiate (0, 0)
If A initiates and B acquiesces (4, −4)
If A initiates and B escalates (−8, −8)
Table 8.2. Game II
If A does not initiate (0, 0)
If A initiates and B acquiesces (4, −4)
If A initiates and B escalates (−8, −3)
1 Games of incomplete information problematize notions of equilibrium. But as
Mertens and Zamir (1985) have shown, subject to some very technical conditions,
any description of incomplete information can be characterized as a Bayesian game.

--- Sayfa 222 ---
206
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Suppose that game I is played with probability p and game II is
played with probability 1 −p. Several distinct information structures
are possible.
(1) Suppose neither country observes Nature’s move as in
Figure 8.2. Then we say that information is imperfect but sym-
metric in that both players ﬁnd themselves in the same situation.
This game is easy to analyze because we need only com-
pute country B’s expected utility of escalation and modify the
game accordingly. Because B’s expected utility of escalation is
−p8 −3(1 −p) = −3 −5p, it prefers escalation whenever p <
1/5. Thus, if p < 1/5, the outcome is {Do Not Initiate, Escalate};
otherwise it is {Initiate, Acquiesce}.
(2) Suppose that only B observes Nature’s move as in Figure 8.3.
This information structure implies that A is uncertain of B’s
choice. Because Bescalates only in game II, A’s expected utility
from initiating is 4p −(1 −p)8 = −8 + 12p. Thus, A prefers
initiating only if p > 2/3.
(3) Suppose that only A observes Nature’s move as in Figure 8.4.
Thisgamehasasymmetricinformation.Thestrategicsituationis
altered dramatically. Whereas Bdoes not know Nature’s choice,
it knows that Aknows it. Thus, Amust consider what informa-
tion her choices provide about Nature’s draw. To illustrate that
these informational incentives affect behavior, consider a natu-
ral way of playing the game where Ainitiates in game I, but not
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4, −4
−8, −8
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4,−4
−8, −3
N
p
1−p
Figure 8.2. Information Structure I.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
207
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4, −4
−8, −8
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4, −4
−8, −3
N
p
1−p
Figure 8.3. Information Structure II.
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4, −4
−8, −8
A
Initiate
Do  Not
Initiate
0, 0
B
Acquiesce
Escalate
4, −4
−8, −3
N
p
1−p
Figure 8.4. Information Structure III.
in game II. If A plays these strategies, B infers from A’s initia-
tion that they are playing game I and acquiesces. If B responds
in this way, however, Ahas a strong incentive to defect by initi-
ating even in game II.
In this chapter, we focus on the strategic use of information in dy-
namic settings. Incomplete information raises a number of important
issues.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
208
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
r Strategic Use of Information: Does any of the players have a strate-
gic advantage based on the way information is allocated? In many
games, informed players have important advantages. But some-
times the uninformed player is advantaged – ignorance can be
bliss!
r Learning: Can the uninformed players get more information from
observing the actions of the informed players? How do these pos-
sibilities affect the strategies of the informed players?
r Signaling: Can the informed players credibly communicate infor-
mation about the game to the uninformed players? Can informed
players mislead uninformed players?
1. Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
Although subgame perfection rules out some unreasonable Nash equi-
libria, many extensive form games with imperfectly observed actions
require a stronger equilibrium concept. Consider the extensive form
game depicted in Figure 8.5. It models the incentives for a naval ﬂeet
action prior to the invention of radar. Player 1 chooses whether to
deploy military capability secretly to attack an island. She chooses to
send a small ﬂeet of ships (S), to send a big ﬂeet of ships (B), or not
to deploy any ships, ND. Player 2 only observes whether there was a
deployment. Lookouts, relying only on telescopes, can see the ships
approaching but cannot determine how many there are. If there is no
deployment player 2 keeps the island, and the payoffs are (0, 5). If
there is a deployment, player 2 decides whether to respond to the at-
tack (R). If there is no response (NR) player 1 wins the island. If there
ND
B
1
2
S
NR
R
NR
R
0, 5
−3, −5
5, 0
5, 0
−1, −2
Figure 8.5. Naval Deployment Game.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
1. Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
209
is a response, player 2 wins the island, but the casualties for player 2
are much higher under S than under B. The casualties for player 1 are
higher under B than under S.
There are three Nash equilibria to this game. The ﬁrst is (ND, R)
where player 1 does not deploy, but if she did, player 2 would respond.
The second Nash equilibrium is (B, NR) – player 1 deploys a big line
of ships, and player 2 does not respond. The proﬁle (S, NR) is also an
equilibrium.
There is something odd about the ﬁrst Nash equilibrium. Regardless
of whether B or S is played, player 2 is better off playing NR. Should
not player 1 recognize this and send the ships? In the last chapter, we
used subgame perfection to eliminate similar problems, but subgame
perfection fails in this case. Because this game has no proper subgames,
(NS, R) is also a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.
The argument that this proﬁle is unreasonable is predicated on the
notion that player 1 should anticipate a rational response from player
2 at player 2’s information set. The goal is to incorporate this type of
sequential rationality into an equilibrium concept. This is accomplished
by requiring that agents form beliefs about the history reached at each
information set and select best responses given these beliefs. These
equilibria are called perfect Bayesian equilibria (or PBE).
Returning to the example, no belief about the history of play at
player 2’s information set justiﬁes the selection of Ras a best response.
Player 2 believes that either S or Bhas been played and that ships have
been deployed. In either case, she is better off choosing NR.
This example is rather trivial, so now consider a more interesting
example. Suppose that player 1 wins the island only if she selects B.
R
ND
B
1
2
S
NR
R
NR
0,5
3, −5
4, 0
5,0
−2, 2
Figure 8.6. Naval Deployment Game II.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
210
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Moreover, player 2 prefers to defend the island if player 1 has selected
S. Figure 8.6 represents the relevant payoffs.
In this version, whether R or NR is sequentially rational depends
on what beliefs player 2 assigns to the two possible histories in her in-
formation set. If she believes that S was played then R is sequentially
rational. Conversely if she believes that B was played then NR is se-
quentially rational. What should she believe? Clearly, her beliefs are
based on expectations about what player 1 does. But player 1’s choice
depends on what she expects player 2 to believe. A few deﬁnitions help
us close this loop.
1.1. Formal Deﬁnitions. Recall that an information set may be a sin-
gleton or a set containing multiple histories. In extensive form games a
player is asked to choose an action at each information set Ij. Because
p(h) = p(h′) if h and h′ are in the same information set, it is unambigu-
ous to write p(IJ) if IJ is an information set. Given a list of information
sets, we can deﬁne beliefs.
DEFINITION 8.1 In an extensive form game with imperfectly observed
actions, a belief on information set Ij is a probability distribution on
Ij. A belief proﬁle is a mapping from the set of histories into the unit
interval, b : H →[0, 1˙], such that for every history Ij, b(·) is a belief on
Ij. For every Ij, 
h∈Ij b(h) = 1 if Ij is ﬁnite and

h∈Ij db(h) = 1 if Ij is
inﬁnite.
So in the preceding examples, a belief on player 2’s information
set is a probability distribution over {S, B}. A belief proﬁle describes
a complete list of beliefs for all information sets. Because only one
player makes a decision at each information set (the mapping p(·) is
a function), there is no ambiguity about whose beliefs are relevant on
each portion of the belief proﬁle. If player i is called to make a choice
at information set Ij then the portion of the belief proﬁle that describes
the belief at information set Ij describes player i’s belief on Ij at the
time that i chooses.
Wenowdeﬁneaconditiononstrategiesknownassequentialrational-
ity. Loosely speaking, sequential rationality requires that all strategies
are optimal at each information set given a speciﬁc belief proﬁle. To
formalize this idea, let p(Ij) denote the player and s(Ij) denote the
action speciﬁed at information set Ij. These terms are equivalent to
p(h) and s(h) when h ∈Ij. For a ﬁxed strategy proﬁle, s(·), denote the

--- Sayfa 227 ---
1. Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
211
expected utility of player p(Ij) associated with choice a at history h
by Eup(h)(a, h, s(·)). This is an expected utility because other players
may play mixed strategies. If player p(Ij) assigns probability b(h) to
history h ∈Ij (conditional upon being at the information set Ij), the
expected utility of taking action a at information set Ij is
Eup(Ij)(a, Ij, s(·), b(·)) =

h∈Ij
b(h)Eup(h)(a, h, s(·)).
A strategy proﬁle is sequentially rational for a given belief pro-
ﬁle if it speciﬁes optimal actions at each information set. Optimal-
ity requires that players evaluate the desirability of action a using
Eup(Ij)(a, Ij, s(·), b(·)).2
DEFINITION 8.2 Given an extensive form game with imperfectly ob-
served actions and belief b(·) on each information set, the strategy proﬁle
s(·) is sequentially rational at information set Ij if
Eup(Ij)(s(Ij), Ij, s(·), b(·)) ≥Eup(Ij)(s′, Ij, s(·), b(·))
for all available actions s′. If the strategy proﬁle is sequentially rational
at every information set, then it is sequentially rational.
Returning to the example in Figure 8.6, if the beliefs assign a proba-
bility close to 1 on S then R is sequentially rational at the information
set. Similarly, if player 2 believes B is sufﬁciently likely then NR is a
sequentially rational response.
Deﬁning perfect Bayesian equilibrium formally requires an addi-
tional condition on beliefs. Weak consistency of beliefs requires that,
whenever possible, agents use Bayes’ rule to formulate their beliefs
at Ij.3 In order to compute the probability of history h conditional
on reaching information set Ij, we require the probability of reach-
ing this information set. Of course, the probability of reaching Ij de-
pends on the strategy proﬁle. Let Pr(Ij|s(·)) denote the probability
that Ij is reached conditional on the strategy proﬁle s(·). If h is an
2 If there is an inﬁnite set of possible histories, the summation is replaced with integra-
tion.
3 Recall that Bayes’ rule generates the probability that event A occurs conditional
on the occurrence of event B. This conditional probability is given by Pr(A| B) =
Pr(A&B)/Pr(B).

--- Sayfa 228 ---
212
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
element of Ij, the probability that h and Ij are both reached under
strategy s(·) is simply the probability that h is reached. We denote this
probability as Pr(h|s(·)) and conclude that Pr(Ij&h|s(·)) = Pr(h|s(·)).
Therefore, Bayes’ rule implies that the probability of reaching history
h ∈Ij conditional on reaching information set Ij under strategy proﬁle
s(·) is
Pr(h | Ij, s(·)) = Pr(h| s(·))
Pr(Ij| s(·)).
DEFINITION 8.3 Given an extensive form game with imperfectly ob-
served actions and a strategy proﬁle s(·), the beliefs b(·) are weakly con-
sistent relative to strategy s(·) if b(h) = Pr(h | Ij, s(·)) whenever Pr(Ij |
s(·)) > 0.
Combining weak consistency of beliefs and sequential rationality of
strategies yields the perfect Bayesian equilibrium concept.
DEFINITION 8.4 Given an extensive form game with imperfectly ob-
served actions, a perfect Bayesian equilibrium (PBE) is a pair (s(·), b(·))
such that: (1) the strategy proﬁle s(·) is sequentially rational relative to
the belief b(·), and (2) the belief b(·) is weakly consistent relative to the
strategy proﬁle s(·).
If Ij is not reached under s(·) then Pr(Ij| s(·)) = 0, and Bayes’ rule
is undeﬁned. Weak consistency places no requirements on beliefs at
these “out of equilibrium” information sets. This ambiguity is some-
times problematic; it implies that there may be many different perfect
Bayesian equilibria based on different speciﬁcations of beliefs at un-
reached information sets.4
4 A caution about terminology is in order. Some scholars use the term consistency for
what we call weak consistency; they then use the same label to describe a stronger
concept that applies to sequential equilibria. We prefer to use two distinct terms for
these conditions and to defer deﬁning the stronger notion until later in this chapter.
Also, some authors add several additional off-the-path conditions to the deﬁnition of
perfect Bayesian equilibrium. Informally these conditions require that the (1) actions
of agent i do not cause anyone else to update his beliefs about the type of agent j if
agenti does not have additional information about agent j’s type, and (2) players form
beliefs that are consistent with a common joint distribution on the types. In games
with two players these additional requirements are irrelevant; with more than two
playerstheyoftenmatter.Fewapplicationsinpoliticalsciencerequiretheseadditional

--- Sayfa 229 ---
1. Perfect Bayesian Equilibria
213
Returning to the game in Figure 8.5, we now characterize PBE.
Clearly the Nash equilibrium (ND, R) is not a PBE. For any beliefs
about whether player 1 chooses S or B, NR is the unique sequentially
rational response. Given that player 2 chooses NR, player 1’s optimal
choice is to play either S or B. Now if player 1 chooses B then weakly
consistent beliefs assign probability 1 to player 2’s moving at history
B. Thus, one PBE is (B, NR), Pr(B | ˜ND) = 1 where Pr(B | ˜ND) is
the posterior probability of B given that player 1 did not choose ND.
Similarly there exists a PBE where (S,NR) and Pr(B | ˜ND) = 0.
Now consider the game in Figure 8.6. If player 2 believes that
Pr(B | ˜ND) = 1, NR is the best response. On the other hand, if player
2 believes that Pr(B | ˜ND) = 0 then Ris the best response. One candi-
date PBE is (ND, R) and Pr(B | ˜ND) = 0. Because weak consistency
does not impose any constraints on beliefs when player 1 plays ND,
the belief Pr(B | ˜ND) = 0 is weakly consistent relative to the strat-
egy ND. But the strategy proﬁle (ND, R) is not sequentially rational;
player 1 prefers to play B rather than ND when she conjectures that
player 2 plays R. It is also clear that ND cannot be a best response to
NR.
Now suppose there is a pure strategy PBE in which NDis not played.
If B is played and beliefs are weakly consistent, the only sequentially
rational strategy by player 2 involves NR. But if player 1 conjectures
that player 2 is playing NR she wants to play S. So B cannot be part of
a pure strategy PBE proﬁle. On the other hand, if player 1 chooses S,
weakly consistent beliefs assign probability 1 to player 2’s moving at
history S. Thus, the only sequentially rational action involves playing
R. But if player 1 conjectures that player 2 is playing R then she wants
to play B. Thus, there is no pure strategy PBE in which S is played.
Consequently, there are no pure strategy PBEs.
There are, however, mixed strategy PBEs. Suppose that player 1
plays Bwith probability q and S with probability (1 −q). Player 2 plays
R with probability zand NR with probability (1 −z). Weak consistency
of beliefs requires that Pr(B | ˜ND) = q. A mixed strategy equilibrium
requires that player 2 be indifferent between R and NR following ˜ND
so that q(−5) + (1 −q)2 = 0 or q = 2/7. Similarly, player 1 must be
indifferent between B and S so that (1 −z)5 + z(−2) = (1 −z)4 + z3
conditions. For this reason, as well as a preference for using sequential equilibria when
our deﬁnition of PBE is insufﬁcient, we do not present the alternative deﬁnition of
PBE. Interested readers should consult Chapter 8 of Fudenberg and Tirole (1991).

--- Sayfa 230 ---
214
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
or z = 1/6. Accordingly, the strategy proﬁle in which player 1 chooses
S with probability 5/7 and B with probability 2/7 and player 2 chooses
R with probability 1/6 and NR with probability 5/6 following ˜ ND is
supportable as a PBE given the beliefs Pr(B | ˜ ND) = 2/7.
2. Signaling Games
An important class of games of imperfect information involve interac-
tion between a more informed agent, the sender, and a less informed
agent, the receiver. When the sender moves ﬁrst the game is called a
signaling game. These games take their name from the possibility that
the sender’s action conveys information about her type to the receiver.
We focus on the simplest possible signaling game to demonstrate the
incentives agents face and to emphasize the various types of equilibria
that might exist.
Let Nature draw a type θ ∈{a, b} for player 1. Player 1 observes her
type and chooses a message m ∈{a, b}. Player 2 observes the mes-
sage but does not observe player 1’s type. Following the message,
N
A
B
p
1−p
1
1
2
2
a
b
a
b
l
h
l
h
l
h
l
h
5, 3
1,9
0,2
3,1
4,4
4,0
0,0
2,7
Figure 8.7. Signaling Game.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
2. Signaling Games
215
player 2 chooses a policy p ∈{a, b}. The payoffs to each player from
a type action pair are denoted ui(p, θ). Figure 8.7 depicts the game
form.
In this game player 2 faces information sets with multiple histories.
These sets are represented by the dotted lines. When player 2 selects a
policy, she knows player 1’s message, but she does not know the state
selected by Nature.
This game is most interesting if u2(p, θ) > u2(p′, θ) and u2(p′, θ′) >
u2(p, θ′) for p̸ = p′ and θ̸ = θ′. Informally, this condition implies that
player 2 wants to know θ before selecting p. This condition is satisﬁed in
the case of opposed preferences. Suppose that θ affects the desirability
of each policy to each agent: player 1 wants to match θ and p while
player 2 wants the pair to be unmatched (θ̸ = p). To be even more
concrete, suppose a legislature (agent 2) is choosing between the status
quo, a, and a new policy, b. It is uncertain about the consequences of
the new policy. The legislature wants to select a policy that results in an
outcome to the right of the status quo. An informed expert (agent 1)
gives unveriﬁable testimony before Congress about whether b results
in an outcome to the right or to the left of the status quo. The expert
does not share the legislature’s preferences; she prefers a policy that
results in an outcome to the left of a. Let θ = a denote information that
b results in an outcome to the right of a and θ = b denote information
that b results in an outcome to the left of a. Thus, θ is a signal about
which policy the legislature actually prefers.
In this game player 1’s action is cheap talk because agent 2 cannot
verify the accuracy of 1’s speech, and there is no cost to lying. The
assumption that player 1 (the legislature) wants to match p and θ
while player 2 (the expert) does not results in the following ordering
of payoffs.
u1(b, a) < u1(a, a)
u1(a, b) < u1(b, b)
u2(b, a) > u2(a, a)
u2(a, b) > u2(b, b).
To specify a model of imperfect information, we further specify prior
beliefs over the state θ. Suppose that θ = a with probability π > 1/2.
The natural ﬁrst question is whether there is a PBE in which player
1, the sender, reveals her private information to the receiver. This

--- Sayfa 232 ---
216
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
speciﬁcation requires that she use one of the following strategies:
m(θ) =
a if θ = a
b if θ = b
or
m(θ) =
b if θ = a
a if θ = b .
We begin by focusing on the ﬁrst message strategy. Strategies of this
formarecalledfullyrevealingbecauseifthereceiverknowsthestrategy
and observes the message she can infer the private information. The
ﬁrst strategy is also called truthful. If player 1 uses the truthful strategy
proﬁle, weak consistency of beliefs requires that
b(θ = a | m = a) =
π · 1
π · 1 + (1 −π) · 0 = 1
and
b(θ = a | m = b) =
π · 0
π · 0 + (1 −π) · 1 = 0.
Given these beliefs sequential rationality requires that agent 2 select
policy according to the following mapping:
p(m) =
b if m = a
a if m = b .
In verifying that we have characterized a PBE, the last point to check is
whether the speciﬁed m(·) strategy is sequentially rational. The critical
question is whether it represents a best response to the policy mapping
p(·). Because u1(b, a) < u1(a, a) and u1(a, b) < u1(b, b), if player 1 ob-
serves that θ = a she prefers to deviate from the postulated strategy
and announce m = b, resulting in outcome a. Similarly if player 1 ob-
serves θ = b, she gains by deviating and announcing m = a. There is,
consequently, no PBE in which the truthful message strategy m(θ) = θ
is employed. We leave for an exercise the demonstration that there
cannot be a PBE in which the second fully revealing message strategy
is used. The message strategies deﬁned previously are called separating

--- Sayfa 233 ---
2. Signaling Games
217
because in any PBE in which they are used by the sender, the receiver
learns θ.
Although the game does not possess a separating equilibrium, it
may have other PBEs. Suppose that the sender sends the same message
(say a) regardless of θ. Thus m(θ) = a. Given this message strategy, the
receiver learns nothing from observing m. In this case weak consistency
of beliefs requires that
b(θ = a | m = a) =
π · 1
π · 1 + (1 −π) · 1 = π.
What beliefs should the receiver form following an m = b? This ques-
tion is tricky. When we try to use Bayes’ rule we get
b(θ = a | m = b) =
π · 0
π · 0 + (1 −π) · 0 = 0
0.
Because 0/0 is not a number, Bayes’ rule is not well deﬁned. In express-
ing the posterior beliefs, we conditioned on a history that occurs with 0
probability in the given strategy proﬁle. The deﬁnition of weak consis-
tency only requires that beliefs obey Bayes’ rule when the denominator
is greater than 0. Because weak consistency imposes no constraints on
this belief, we are free to specify this posterior in any manner that helps
us construct equilibria. Let us say that b(θ = a | m = b) = π. Given this
speciﬁcation of beliefs, the question of what receiver strategy is sequen-
tially rational requires simply comparing expected utilities. Policy a is
more desirable if
πu2(a, a) + (1 −π)u2(a, b) ≥πu2(b, a) + (1 −π)u2(b, b).
Otherwise policy b is more desirable. Accordingly, if
π ≥
u2(b, b) −u2(a, b)
u2(a, a) −u2(a, b) −u2(b, a) + u2(b, b)
(8.1)
then given these beliefs sequential rationality of p is satisﬁed by
p(m) = b. If the inequality in equation 8.1 is reversed then sequen-
tial rationality of p is satisﬁed with p(m) = a. Finally, we must check
that the message strategy is sequentially rational given the policy func-
tion. This step is trivial. Because the policy function is constant in m,
any message function is a best response. Accordingly, we have found

--- Sayfa 234 ---
218
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
an equilibrium of the signaling game. Such an equilibrium is known as
a pooling equilibrium.
What we assume about b(θ = a | m = b) is important. Let π be suf-
ﬁciently high that the receiver’s best response is b. Now suppose that
we set b(θ = a | m = b) = 0. Here sequential rationality requires that
p(b) = a. Thus, sequential rationality implies that when we change the
off-the-path beliefs the off-the-path policy action changes.
Can we construct an equilibrium based on these new beliefs that uses
the pooling message function m(θ) = a? Suppose the sender observes
θ = a. In the conjectured equilibrium she sends the message a. The
receiver learns nothing from the message and selects b because θ = a
is more likely (π is high). But now, if our sender deviates from this
conjectured strategy and sends the message b, the receiver’s response
is to select policy a. If this conjectured strategy and belief proﬁle is
a PBE, the sender cannot have an incentive to deviate in this way. If
θ = a, however, the sender prefers to deviate in order to elicit p = a
rather than to adhere to the conjectured equilibrium and elicit p = b.
Although the pooling message function was supportable as a PBE for
some weakly consistent beliefs, it is not supportable as a PBE for all
such beliefs. The off-the-path beliefs matter; they generate the incen-
tives for on-the-path behavior.
Another way of constructing pooling equilibria in this game is to
use mixed strategies by the sender. Suppose now that regardless of
her type the sender sends message a with ﬁxed probability σ ∈(0, 1˙).
Bayes’ rule yields
b(θ = a | m = a) = b(θ = a | m = b) = π.
As before characterizing sequentially rational strategies for the re-
ceiver hinges on π. In this pooling equilibrium with mixed messages
Bayes’ rule pins down the beliefs at every observable information set;
no information sets are off the equilibrium path.
In applications, scholars often assume that the type, message, and
policy spaces are larger. Additionally, many models consider multiple
senders and receivers. Despite the complexity introduced by these gen-
eralizations, the same concepts apply. Equilibrium analysis hinges on
characterizing beliefs that are weakly consistent given strategies and
checking that agents do not have incentives to deviate. In addition to

--- Sayfa 235 ---
3. Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
219
separating and pooling equilibria, more general models may also have
partially separating or partially pooling equilibria.5
DEFINITION 8.5 In a general signaling game with multiple senders and
one receiver in which each sender has a type space i, message space
Mi, and the receiver has prior beliefs π(·) on  = ×ii the following
deﬁnitions apply: In a separating equilibrium the receiver’s posterior
beliefs are concentrated at the true state on the equilibrium path. In
a pooling equilibrium the posteriors correspond to the priors on the
equilibrium path. In a partially separating equilibrium neither of the
preceding conditions is true.
3. Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
One of the more intriguing puzzles in the study of campaign ﬁnance
is the question of why incumbent politicians exert so much effort to
raise more campaign money than seems necessary to ﬁnance their cam-
paigns. A standard explanation is that because fund-raising success sig-
nals the incumbent’s electoral strength, incumbents raise these sums
to deter entry by potential challengers. Epstein and Zemsky (1995)
develop a formal model of this argument. Suppose a challenger must
decide whether to run against an incumbent, but that the challenger
wishes to run only if the incumbent is politically Weak. If the incumbent
is Strong, the challenger prefers to sit out the race. Conventional wis-
dom suggests that the incumbent may want to signal to the challenger
her political strength by raising a large amount of campaign monies.
If this war chest convinces the challenger that the incumbent is strong,
he is deterred from entering.
To capture this intuition in a model, let p be the prior probability
that the challenger (C) assigns to the incumbent’s (I) being strong (S).
Conversely, 1 −p is the probability that the incumbent is weak (W).
For simplicity, both C and I receive 1 unit of utility from elected ofﬁce.
Let the probability that C wins against W be πw and the probability
that C wins against S be πs. Naturally, πw > πs. Let k be C’s cost of
5 Those who see the glass half-empty will probably prefer the term partially pooling.
Others will ﬁnd partially separating more in line with their philosophy of life. We
choose to randomize in our usage of the terms.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
220
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Nature
S
W
0
p
1−p0
Incumbent
WC
WC
~WC
~WC
E
Challenger
πs −k
1−πs−cs,
0
1−cs,
1−πs,
0
,1
1−πw−cw,
0
,1
0
1−cw ,
1−πw,
~E
~E
~E
~E
E
E
E
s −k
π
w −k
π
w −k
π
Figure 8.8. Campaign War Chest Game.
running. So that the model is interesting, we assume that πw > k > πs
because if k > πw, C never enters, and if k < πs he always enters.
The key assumption of the model is that S and W incur different costs
when raising a war chest. Politically strong incumbents raise money
much more easily than weaker ones. To keep matters simple, we focus
on whether or not the incumbent builds a war chest; we do not allow
the incumbent to choose various size war chests.6 Thus, the incumbent’s
strategy set is SI = {WC, ˜WC} where WC is the decision to build a war
chest and ˜WC is the decision to forgo one. By sI ∈SI we denote the
strategy chosen by I. Types W and S must pay cw and cs, respectively,
to build a war chest where cs < cw. The probability that the incumbent
wins depends only on his type. The war chest has no direct effect on
the election, but as we shall see it may have an indirect effect. After
observing whether I builds a war chest, C decides whether to enter the
race E or sit it out ˜E. Figure 8.8 provides the extensive form of this
game.7
Consider the last stage of the game. Sequential rationality re-
quires that C enter only if the expected utility of entering is greater
6 This assumption is relaxed in Epstein and Zemsky’s (1995) original model.
7 We can also present the game in Figure 8.8 in a manner similar to that in Figure 8.7. We
depict both approaches to familiarize readers with different graphical presentations.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
3. Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
221
than or equal to k. Consequently, entry requires that πs Pr{S|sI} +
πw Pr {W|sI} ≥k.
In the ﬁrst period, W and S choose whether to build war chests.
There are three possible types of equilibria:
(1) Separating: S and W choose different strategies.
(2) Pooling: S and W choose identical strategies.
(3) Semipooling: S and W choose different mixed strategies.
3.1. Separating Equilibria. First we consider a separating equilibrium
in which the strong incumbent builds a war chest, and the weak in-
cumbent does not. Given this strategy proﬁle, the challenger learns
the incumbent’s type in equilibrium. Because πw > k > πs, she enters
only if the incumbent does not build a war chest.
PROPOSITION 8.1 If cs ≤πs and cw ≥πw, the following strategies and
beliefs constitute a perfect Bayesian equilibrium: sI(S) = WC, sI(W) =
˜WC, sC(˜WC) = E, sC(WC) = ˜E, Pr{S|WC} = 1, and Pr{S|˜WC} = 0.
Given these strategies, Bayes’ rule suggests that C’s equilibrium be-
liefs are Pr{S|WC} = 1 and Pr{W|˜WC} = 1. Because πw > k > πs,
C’s strategy – enter only in the absence of a war chest – is a best re-
sponse. Now, we check that the incumbent’s strategy is a best response.
Incumbent type S derives utility 1 −cs from WC. Because cs ≤πs, this
quantity is greater than her utility from ˜WC, 1 −πs. For incumbent
type W the payoff of building a war chest is 1 −cw, whereas the utility
for not building a war chest is 1 −πw. So ˜WC is a best response given
that cw ≥πw.
Why are cs ≤πs and cw ≥πw required to support a separating equi-
librium? For a war chest to signal strength credibly, the cost of building
a war chest must be considerably higher for the weak incumbent. If
this were not the case, weak incumbents also would build war chests,
and the deterrence of C would no longer be sequentially rational. And
of course, if war chests do not deter challenges, neither type seeks to
build them. Consequently there would be no separating PBE.
There are no equilibria in which the signal is reversed (i.e., weak
incumbents build war chests and strong incumbents do not).
PROPOSITION 8.2 If cs ≤πs and cw ≥πw, the strategies sI(S) = ˜WC
and sI(W) = WC cannot be part of a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
222
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
To verify this proposition, note that C’s best response to these strate-
gies is to enter if and only if WC. Then S receives a utility of 1 for ˜WC
and 1 −πs −cs for WC. So S’s strategy is a best response. Consider
W’s best response, however. She receives 1 −πw −cw for WC and 1
for ˜WC. Clearly, sI(W) = WC is not a best response.
The reason that no such separating equilibrium exists can be under-
stood in terms of incentive compatibility. We say that a message map-
ping where θ types announce m and θ′ types announce m′ is incentive
compatible for types θ and θ′ if and only if EU(m|θ) ≥EU(m′|θ) and
EU(m′|θ′) ≥EU(m|θ′). In other words, each type must weakly prefer
its own message to that of the other type. In a separating equilibrium
the message strategies must satisfy incentive compatibility.
Note that for the reversed signals to be an equilibrium, the incentive
compatibility requirements are
EU(˜WC|S) ≥EU(WC|S)
EU(WC|W) ≥EU(˜WC|W).
Adding these inequalities and moving things around generate the re-
quirement that
EU(˜WC|S) −EU(˜WC|W) > EU(WC|S) −EU(WC|W).
In terms of the model, therefore, we require
Pr{E|˜WC} (πw −πs) > Pr{E|WC} (πw −πs) + cw −cs.
Because cw > cs and πw > πs, incentive compatibility requires that
Pr{E|˜WC} > Pr{E|WC}. Given C’s beliefs, however, this cannot be a
best response. Therefore, reversing the signal is not possible in a PBE.
Incentive compatibility plays a central role in the models of mechanism
design in Chapter 11.
3.2. Pooling Equilibria. Now, we consider pooling equilibria where
both types of incumbents choose the same strategy. Generally, the eas-
iest way to construct such equilibria is to specify the most unfavorable
beliefs about the sender’s type in the event that an out-of-equilibrium
message is delivered. In this model, such a speciﬁcation requires that
C believe that the incumbent is weak following an out-of-equilibrium

--- Sayfa 239 ---
3. Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
223
action. If these pessimistic beliefs support a strategy proﬁle, then that
proﬁle constitutes a PBE. A number of slightly less pessimistic beliefs
also may support that proﬁle as a PBE. It is a good practice to compute
the full set of beliefs that support each PBE.
In the ﬁrst pooling equilibrium, neither type of incumbent builds a
war chest and the challenger does not enter on the equilibrium path.
PROPOSITION 8.3 Suppose that p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw). The follow-
ing strategies and beliefs are a perfect Bayesian equilibrium: sI(W) =
sI(S) = ˜WC, sC(WC) = E, sC(˜WC) = ˜E, Pr{S|˜WC} = p, and
Pr{S|WC} ≤(πw −k)/(πw −πs).
Because W and S play the same strategy, Bayes’ rule implies that
Pr{S|˜WC} = p. So C’s utility from entering when there is no war chest
is
πs p + πw(1 −p) −k = πw −(πw −πs) p −k.
Consequently, after observing ˜WC, C enters only if p ≤(k −πw)/
(πs −πw). Given the assumption p ≤(k−πw)/(πs −πw), sC(˜WC) =
˜E is sequentially rational. What should C believe and do if he observes
WC? PBE is silent about what to do at off-the-equilibrium-path histo-
ries. To generate this speciﬁc PBE, we assign any belief satisfying the
condition Pr{S|WC} ≤(πw −k)/(πw −πs). Such beliefs and sequen-
tial rationality imply that C enters if he observes WC. Now consider
the strategies of S and W. They both get 1 for forgoing a war chest and
1 −πs −cs and 1 −πw −cw, respectively, for building one. Thus, the
strategies are best responses.
Another pooling equilibrium, identical on the path to the ﬁrst, can
be supported with different off-the-path beliefs and strategies.
PROPOSITION 8.4 Suppose that p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw). The follow-
ing strategies and beliefs are a perfect Bayesian equilibrium: sI(W ) =
sI(S) = ˜WC, sC(WC) = sC(˜WC) = ˜E, Pr{S|˜WC} = p, and Pr{S|WC}
≥(πw −k)/(πw −πs).
Here C’s best response given the beliefs on the equilibrium path is
to stay out of the race. Suppose instead that the incumbent defects and
builds a war chest. In this equilibrium, C believes that it is relatively

--- Sayfa 240 ---
224
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
likely that the incumbent is strong at the out-of-equilibrium informa-
tion set. So C still chooses ˜E. Because C always stays out, it is optimal
for neither incumbent to build a war chest.
There are also pooling equilibria where weak incumbents mimic
strong ones by building a war chest. The war chest deters C.
PROPOSITION 8.5 Suppose that p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw), cs ≤πs, and
cw ≤πw. The following strategies and beliefs are a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium:
sI(W ) = sI(S) = WC, sC(˜WC) = E, sC(WC) = ˜E,
Pr{S|WC} = p, and Pr{S|˜WC} ≤(k −πw)/(πs −πw).
Clearly, given the equilibrium beliefs, C’s deterrence by a war chest
is a best response. Alternatively, if C observes ˜WC, she assigns a prob-
ability of incumbent type S sufﬁciently low that she chooses E. Now
consider incumbent type S. She gets 1 −cs in equilibrium and 1 −πs
by defecting. Consequently, type S chooses WC so long as cs ≤πs. In-
cumbent type W gets 1 −cw in equilibrium and 1 −πw from defecting.
So WC is W’s best response if cw ≤πw.
Finally, another set of pooling equilibria involve no war chests and
challenger entry.
PROPOSITION 8.6 Suppose that p ≤(k −πw)/(πs −πw). The follow-
ing strategies and beliefs are a perfect Bayesian equilibrium: sI(W) =
sI(S) = ˜WC, sC(WC) = SC(˜WC) = E, Pr{S|˜WC} = p, and Pr{S|WC}
≤(k −πw)/(πs −πw).
Here C’s strategy of entering is a best response because regardless of
the incumbent’s action, C thinks it unlikely that the incumbent is S. On
the equilibrium path, Bayes’ rule implies that Pr{S|˜WC} = p. Off the
equilibrium path, we assign Pr{S|WC} ≤(πw −k)/(πw −πs). Because
C always enters, a war chest by either type of incumbent wastes re-
sources. Thus, neither type of incumbent has an incentive to build one.
Although many paths of play can be supported as pooling equilibria,
not all can be.
PROPOSITION 8.7 There is no equilibrium where sI(W) = sI(S) = WC
and sC(WC) = sC(˜WC) = E.
Both types prefer defecting to ˜WC; it does not change C’s behavior
but it avoids the cost of building a war chest.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
3. Application: Entry Deterrence in Elections
225
To summarize, there are two types of pooling equilibria to this game:
equilibriawherebothincumbentsbuildwarchestsandequilibriawhere
neither does. Both reveal the same amount of information to the chal-
lenger – none – but they differ in the costs incurred by the incumbent.
Every player prefers (at least weakly) the PBE where both types play
˜WC to the one where they both play WC. Thus, the former type of
equilibria are efﬁcient PBE and the latter are inefﬁcient ones. Impor-
tantly, there is nothing intrinsic to the concept of PBE that allows us
to predict which equilibria are more likely to be played. As discussed
later, however, various criteria for reﬁning the set of PBE have been
formulated. Often these reﬁnements select the efﬁcient PBE.
3.3. Partial Pooling. The remaining possibility is that incumbent types
select different mixed strategies. There are a couple of reasons for
exploring this possibility. First of all, if such equilibria exist, a full char-
acterization of the set of PBEs requires analysis of the partial pooling
equilibria. Second, authors sometimes characterize the most informa-
tive equilibrium (i.e., the one in which the receiver’s posteriors are
closest to the true distribution of types). In many cases, semipooling
equilibria exist for parameter values for which there are no separating
equilibria. In these cases, the most informative equilibrium is partial
pooling.
We present only one of the partial pooling equilibria and leave other
possibilities to the reader as an exercise. In this equilibrium, the type S
incumbent always builds a war chest. The type W incumbent builds one
with probability q. If a war chest is built, C enters with probability r.
PROPOSITION 8.8 Let πw ≥cw and p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw). Then the
strategies sI(S) = WC, sI(W) = {WC with prob q}, SC(˜WC) = E,
SC(WC) = {E with probability r} is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Clearly, Bayes’ rule implies that Pr{S|˜WC} = 0 and thus entry fol-
lowing ˜WC is a best response. When WC is observed, Bayes’ rule is
more complicated:
Pr(S | WC) =
Pr(WC | S) Pr(S)
Pr(WC | S) Pr(S) + Pr(WC | W) Pr(W)
=
p
p + q(1 −p).

--- Sayfa 242 ---
226
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Because C plays a mixed strategy following WC, he must be indifferent
between entering or not entering. This requires that
πs Pr{S|WC} + πw Pr{W|WC} = k.
Substitution yields
πs p
p + q(1 −p) + πwq(1 −p)
p + q(1 −p) = k.
Solving for q, we ﬁnd that the indifference condition is satisﬁed at
q∗=
p(k −πs)
(1 −p)(πw −k).
Because we require that q∗≤1, p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw) is a necessary
condition for this partial pooling equilibrium. Similarly r must satisfy
an indifference condition; a challenger of type W must be indifferent
between building WC and not doing so. If W chooses ˜WC, she gets
1 −πw. A choice of WC yields the payoff r (1 −πw) + (1 −r) −cw.
So the indifference condition requires that
r∗= πw −cw
πw
.
The requirement that r∗≥0 generates the condition πw > cw. Given
these mixed strategies, we need only check that an incumbent of type
S prefers WC. If she plays ˜WC she gets 1 −πs whereas in equilibrium
shereceivesr (1 −πs) + (1 −r) −cs.Thus, EUS(WC) −EUS(˜WC) =
πs (1 −r) −cs = (πscw)/(πw) −cs. This difference is positive because
πs > πw and cw > cs.
This partial pooling equilibrium exists when cw/πw < 1 and p ≥
(k −πw)/(πs −πw). From the earlier discussion we know that the
separating equilibrium exists only if cw/πw ≥1. A separating equi-
librium and this partial pooling equilibrium cannot both exist. So long
as p ≥(k −πw)/(πs −πw), however, the partial pooling equilibrium
exists when the separating equilibrium does not.

--- Sayfa 243 ---
4. Application: Information and Legislative Organization
227
4. Application: Information and Legislative Organization
One of the longest-standing debates about legislative politics focuses
on the role of standing committees. Some scholars focus on their role
in stabilizing majority rule (Shepsle 1979), maintaining distributive
coalitions (Shepsle and Weingast 1987; Weingast and Marshall 1988),
and promoting the interests of the majority party (Cox and McCub-
bins 1994). Gilligan and Krehbiel (1987), however, develop a model
where committees contribute policy-speciﬁc expertise to legislative de-
liberations. Their model is related to the signaling games described
previously.
In their model policymakers do not always know the exact link be-
tween policy choices and policy outcomes. For example, legislators may
not know how a speciﬁc agricultural policy affects farmers’ incomes
because they lack the expertise about how factors such as weather
and foreign competition affect farm prices. Because legislators value
such information, they desire institutional arrangements that facili-
tate its gathering and transmission. Gilligan and Krehbiel argue that a
committee system with limited parliamentary rights helps solve such
informational problems.
To capture the distinction between policy choices and outcomes,
Gilligan and Krehbiel assume that the policy outcome, x, is an additive
function of policy p and a random variable ω or x = p + ω. The model
has two players: the ﬂoor F and the committee C. In our simpliﬁed
version of the model, C knows ω with certainty but F’s prior beliefs
are that
ω =
 θ with prob .5
−θ with prob .5 .
Each player has quadratic spatial preferences over a single dimension:
F has an ideal point of f = 0 and C has an ideal point of c > 0. Thus, the
payoffs are uF(x) = −x2 and uC(x) = −(c −x)2, respectively. Because
F does not know ω, his utility from policy p is
.5uF(p + θ) + .5uF(p −θ) = −.5[p2 + 2pθ + θ2] −.5[p2 −2pθ + θ2]
= −p2 −θ2.
Thus, F’s utility has two components. The ﬁrst is −p2, reﬂecting the
difference between his ideal point and the expected policy. The second

--- Sayfa 244 ---
228
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
is −θ2, reﬂecting the variance in the policy shock ω.8 Because the vari-
ance of the shock enters F’s utility function as a cost, F is risk averse;
he is willing to “pay” to obtain information about ω. Our concern is
whether F wishes to grant extraparliamentary rights to C to provide it
with the incentive to specialize – learn the realization of ω – and then
reveal the information. Formally, F chooses the procedures or rules
under which legislation can be considered. To simplify, we assume that
F chooses between the following two rules:
(1) Open rule: The committee reports a bill and the ﬂoor may freely
amend it.
(2) Closed rule: The ﬂoor must vote up or down on C’s proposal
against the status quo policy, SQ = 0.
The closed rule represents more extensive parliamentary rights for
C; she can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to F. To solve this as a game
of incomplete information, we must specify strategies of both types of
committees (−θ, θ), the ﬂoor’s beliefs following any proposal, and the
ﬂoor’s best response given these beliefs. Following Gilligan and Kre-
hbiel, we characterize the most informative equilibrium. Consequently,
we focus on whether or not a separating equilibrium exists.9
4.1. OpenRule. Undertheopenrule,thecommitteemustworryabout
whether the information it provides can be used to “roll” it on the ﬂoor.
Suppose that the committee revealed all of its information by propos-
ing its ideal policy for each outcome: the committee chooses pc so that
x = c or pc = c −ω. Because there are distinct proposals for each state
of the world, these proposal strategies fully reveal all information to
the ﬂoor. Under an open rule, therefore, the ﬂoor amends the bill until
x = 0 or p f = −ω. The expected utilities in this equilibrium are uF = 0
and uC = −c2. Because we want to determine whether or not a sepa-
rating equilibria exists, we specify beliefs unfavorable to C following an
8 With quadratic preferences, expected utility can be decomposed into two parts: the
utility at the expected value of the random variable and the variance of the random
variable. Some authors refer to this result as the mean-variance property of quadratic
preferences.
9 The reader who is paying attention should respond, “Aha! but haven’t you warned us
thatinformativesemipoolingequilibriacansometimeexistwhenseparatingequilibria
do not!” The attentive reader should consult exercise 8.7 and verify for herself that
this is not one of those cases.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
4. Application: Information and Legislative Organization
229
Table 8.3. Possible Defections
Defection
Conditions
Utility
pc = c + θ
if ω = θ and c > θ
−(c −2θ)2
pc /∈{c + θ, c −θ}
if ω = θ and c < θ
−c2
pc̸ = c + θ
if ω = −θ
−(c + 2θ)2
out-of-equilibrium proposal. Thus, we assume that F treats any other
bill as if it were reported by the “high” type, ω = θ. The sequentially ra-
tional strategy following such a deviation is therefore p f = −θ. Given
F’s best responses, we can verify that only three outcomes can occur,
−2θ, 0, 2θ. The outcome −2θ results from an out-of-equilibrium pro-
posal when ω = −θ, outcome 0 results from pc = c −θ when ω = −θ
or pc = c + θ when ω = −θ or any out-of-equilibrium proposal when
ω = θ, and outcome 2θ results from pc = c + θ when ω = θ.
Is separation a best response given these responses by F? If C de-
fects by proposing pc = c + θ when ω = θ, F passes p f = θ. Because
the resulting outcome is 2θ, C’s utility from defecting is −(c −2θ)2.
Alternatively, by proposing pc = c −θ when ω = −θ, the policy is
p f = −θ, leading to x = −2θ and uc = −(c + 2θ)2. Finally, consider
pc /∈{c + θ, c −θ}. Because all of these proposals generate p f = −θ,
uc(θ) = −c2 and uc(−θ) = −(c + 2θ)2.
Because c > 0 and θ > 0, the most attractive defections are those in
Table 8.3.
The low type C does not defect because −c2 > −(c + 2θ)2. Simi-
larly, if c < θ, the high type does not defect; her equilibrium utility
is the same as that of her most proﬁtable defection. When c > θ and
ω = θ, however, the high type prefers −(c −2θ)2 to her equilibrium
payoff. Therefore, the separating equilibrium does not exist if c > θ.
Absent a separating equilibrium, the only equilibrium is an uninforma-
tive pooling equilibrium where both types use the same mixed strategy
across the set of proposals.
When the committee is an outlier (i.e., c > θ), no information is
revealed.
4.2. Closed Rule. Under the open rule, information cannot be re-
vealed by the outlier committee because the ﬂoor uses this information
to roll the committee and move policy to the ﬂoor median. Under the
closed rule, however, the committee cannot be rolled. The ﬂoor must

--- Sayfa 246 ---
230
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
accept or reject the proposal in favor of the status quo. Suppose there
is a separating equilibrium in which F learns the value of ω. The util-
ity to the ﬂoor from the status quo is −ω2 and for any proposal p it
is −(p + ω)2. This implies that F accepts any proposal in the interval
between 0 and −2ω. Thus, when ω = θ, the largest policy F accepts
is 0. This results in an outcome of θ. When ω = −θ, the largest policy
F accepts is 2θ. This also results in an outcome of θ.
So the committee can guarantee an outcome as high as θ by propos-
ing pc = 0 when ω = θ and pc = 2θ otherwise. If c < θ, an outcome
of c can be guaranteed by proposing pc = c −θ when ω = θ and
pc = c + θ.
To complete the speciﬁcation of the perfect Bayesian equilib-
rium, we must specify F’s behavior and beliefs following out-of-
equilibrium proposals from C. To support all possible separating equi-
libria, it is sufﬁcient to have F accept any proposal such that −2θ ≤
pc ≤0 and vote down proposals pc > 0. This strategy is a best re-
sponse to the beliefs Pr {ω = θ|pc} = 1 following an out-of-equilibrium
proposal.
Now we check that C prefers its equilibrium strategy to any defec-
tion. When c < θ, C gets its ideal point so she cannot do better by
defecting. Thus, a separating equilibrium exists, just as it did for the
open rule. So we need only focus on the case where c > θ. First sup-
pose that ω = −θ. Here C gets −(c −θ)2 for pc = 2θ and −(c + θ)2
for any other bill. C does not defect in this case. Now suppose that
ω = θ. Now C receives −(c −θ)2 for pc = 0, −(c −3θ)2 for pc = 2θ,
and −(c −θ)2 for any other bill. Thus, so long as c < 2θ , C weakly
prefers her equilibrium proposal pc = 0. If c > 2θ, the committee de-
fects. In this case, the only equilibria are uninformative; both types of
committee use the same mixed strategy over all proposals and the ﬂoor
rejects all proposals except pc = 0.
The closed rule can sustain a separating equilibrium in cases where
the open rule cannot (i.e., 2θ ≥c > θ). The model predicts, therefore,
that restrictive rules can encourage greater information transmission
from the committee to the ﬂoor.
4.3. Committee Specialization. In the Gilligan- Krehbiel model re-
strictive rules generate more information transmission from informed
committees than do open rules. We now turn to an analysis of whether a
commitment to restrictive rules by the ﬂoor can induce the committee

--- Sayfa 247 ---
4. Application: Information and Legislative Organization
231
to specialize in the ﬁrst place. So now the game takes the following
form:
(1) F chooses whether the committee reports the bill under open
rule or closed rule.
(2) C decides whether to specialize by paying a cost k to learn ω.
(3) C proposes pc.
(4) F observes the specialization decision and the proposal pc and
selects a policy. Under closed rule, F votes pc up or down against
SQ. Under open rule, F chooses p f .
If the committee does not specialize, F decides on the basis of its
prior beliefs. Therefore, under the closed rule, she vetoes any proposal
other than pc = 0. Under the open rule, F passes p f = 0. Thus, non-
specialization results in a policy of p = 0 for both rules.
Now consider the committee’s specialization decision under the
open rule. If the committee specializes when c ≤θ, C and F play
the open rule separating equilibrium, resulting in an overall payoff
of −c2 −k for the committee. If the committee does not specialize, its
expected utility from p = 0 is −c2 −θ2. So the committee specializes
if k ≤θ2. If c > θ and the committee specializes, the committee and
ﬂoor play the pooling equilibrium leading to p = 0 and an overall com-
mittee payoff of −c2 −θ2 −k. Thus, the committee obviously does not
specialize under these circumstances.
Now consider the closed rule. If c ≤θ, the separating equilibrium
generates an outcome of c so that the committee’s utility of specializing
is −k. Similarly, if c > θ, the utility of specializing is −(c −θ)2 −k. In
both cases, non-specialization leads to a payoff of −c2 −θ2. Comparing
these utilities, it pays for the committee to specialize when k ≤2θc and
c > θ or when k < c2 + θ2 and c ≤θ. Because both of these critical
values for k are higher than θ2, the committee often specializes under
the closed rule when it would not specialize under the open rule.
4.4. Implications. Gilligan and Krehbiel draw several implications
about institutional design by computing the ﬂoor’s utility under the
different rules. The ﬂoor’s expected payoffs under the open rule are
E[uF] = 0
if c ≤θ and k ≤θ2
E[uF] = −θ2
otherwise

--- Sayfa 248 ---
232
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
while the payoffs under the closed rule are
E[uF] = −c2
if c ≤θ and k ≤c2 + θ2
E[uF] = −θ2
otherwise.
A few implications are worth noting. First, F is always better off
when C’s ideal point is close to the ﬂoor’s ideal. This is the basis of Kre-
hbiel’s (1991) argument that majoritarian legislatures should appoint
committees that are representative of the preferences of the chamber.
He contrasts this implication with that of the distributive theory of
legislatures that predicts committees composed of high demanders for
the policies in the committee’s jurisdiction.
Second, the model makes predictions about when F prefers a closed
rule. Speciﬁcally, F chooses a closed rule when c ≤θ and θ2 ≤k ≤c2 +
θ2. Thus, committees with preferences similar to those the chamber
median and committees with intermediate specialization costs are most
likely to receive closed rules.
5. Application: Informational Lobbying
The literature on interest group politics has generated a striking em-
pirical regularity: interest groups almost always lobby their friends.
Because these friends are likely to vote with the interest group any-
way, this observation has often been interpreted to mean that lobbying
activities are not a consequential part of the policy process.
Austen-Smith and Wright (1992, 1994), however, develop a model
where groups do lobby their friends. Nonetheless in equilibrium these
efforts are important. The main premise is that interest groups have
private information about the consequences of a legislative decision.
The legislators are relatively uninformed. In the model, lobbying con-
sists of a group’s making a speech to the legislator. Because lobbying is
assumed to be costly, groups choose whether or not to lobby the legis-
lator. The main result of their papers is that groups often lobby friendly
legislators to counteract the lobbying efforts of opposing groups.
Before analyzing the full model, we begin with a model with only
one interest group and one legislator. The legislator must choose be-
tween two policies A and B. But she is uncertain as to which policy
she prefers. Assume that there are two states s ∈{A,B}. The legislator
prefers policy A in state A and policy B in state B. To keep matters

--- Sayfa 249 ---
5. Application: Informational Lobbying
233
simple, we assume that uL (A) = 1 in state Aand uL (A) = −1 in state
B; uL (B) = 0 in both states. The prior probability is that s = A with
probability p < 1/2. Thus, in the absence of any additional information
provided by lobbying, the legislator chooses B.
Interest group GA prefers Ato B. Its utility function is uGA (A) = 1
and uGA (B) = −1 in both states. If GA decides to lobby, it pays cost
c > 0 to learn the true state with certainty. Its ex ante beliefs are the
same as the legislator’s prior. Once informed, the group sends one of
two messages m = A or B where the messages are to be interpreted
literally.
After observing message m, L can attempt to verify the group’s in-
formation by auditing the message. In doing so, L incurs cost κ. If the
message is found to be incorrect (i.e., m̸ = s), the group is penalized
by an amount δ.
Now consider the group’s possible lobbying strategies. First, suppose
GA always reports A independent of s. Then the message is uninfor-
mative, and L always selects B if she does not audit. L chooses the
optimal outcome following an audit. Because the utility of an audit is
1 −κ, it is easy to show that L’s best response to an “always A” strategy
involves auditing if and only if p > κ.
Because an “always A” lobbying strategy does not affect the out-
come, GAprefers not to lobby at all rather than to employ it. Therefore,
successful lobbying requires that GA tell the truth at least some of the
time. Suppose GA tells the truth all of the time. Then Lalways follows
such advice and never chooses to audit. This gives GA the incentive to
report A even when s = B. Because GA has an incentive to deviate,
this cannot be an equilibrium.
Thus, any perfect Bayesian equilibrium to this game has to be partial
pooling. Consider an equilibrium where GA reports Awhen s = Aand
reports Awith probability μ when s = B. Given this strategy, following
a message of A, L uses Bayes’ rule to update her belief that s = Ato
p =
p
p + μ (1 −p).
In such an equilibrium, L must be indifferent between voting for A
and auditing. The expected utility of voting Ais p −(1 −p) = 2p −1
whereas the expected utility of auditing is p −κ. Thus, μ must satisfy
p
p + μ (1 −p) = 1 −κ.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
234
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Solving for μ yields
μ =
κ p
(1 −p) (1 −κ).
To close the model, Lchooses a probability of auditing α so that GA is
indifferentbetweenlyingandtruthtellingwhen s = B.If GAistruthful,
it gets −1. If GA lies, it gets −α (δ + 1) + (1 −α). The value of α that
equates these two expected utilities is α = 1/(δ + 2).
Given these lobbying and auditing strategies, we compute GA’s ex-
pected utility to determine whether or not it chooses to become in-
formed and lobby. Because L always chooses B in the absence of lob-
bying, the group’s utility from not lobbying is −1. If it does lobby, the
group gets Afor sure when s = Aand an expected utility of −1 when
s = B. Thus, the ex ante expected payoff from lobbying is 2p −1 −c,
and the group lobbies if and only if p > c/2.
Finally, we must check that the mixed strategy probabilities are ac-
tually probabilities. In order for 0 ≤μ ≤1 we need 1 −p > κ > 0; it
cannot be too costly for the legislator to audit. If it is too costly, the
legislator does not audit and guarantees that the group has an incentive
to lie. If the group always lies, however, lobbying is ineffective and the
group chooses not to become informed.
Now consider the model with two groups. Group GB’s preferences
are the opposite of GA’s; uGB(B) = 1 and uGB(A) = −1. It also learns
the true state by paying a cost c. In the ﬁrst period both groups si-
multaneously decide whether to lobby. If a group chooses to lobby it
pays the cost c to become informed. In the second period the group(s)
that chose to lobby learn the other player’s choice and select their
message. If both groups lobby then the messages, mA and mB, are sent
simultaneously.
Because Lchooses B in the absence of lobbying, there is no equilib-
rium where GB lobbies and GA does not. If GB lobbies alone, it incurs
cost c without altering the outcome. Austen-Smith and Wright inter-
pret this result as implying that groups only lobby “friendly” legislators
to counteract the lobbying of other groups.
Because the outcome of GA lobbying alone is outlined previously,
we focus only on the outcome when both groups lobby. Consider
the following equilibrium. Both groups send truthful messages. When
mA = mB = s, the legislator believes that the true state is s. If mA̸ = mB,
L audits the message and chooses her optimal policy. For auditing to

--- Sayfa 251 ---
5. Application: Informational Lobbying
235
be a best response to out-of-equilibrium messages, we assume that
Pr(s = A|mA̸ = mB) ≥κ.
Now we verify that GA does not deviate and choose an untruthful
message. Clearly, it has no incentive to choose mA = B when s = A.
So consider whether it chooses mA = A when s = B. Because this
message leads to an audit, it results in a policy of B and a penalty
of δ for a total payoff of −1 −δ. Because telling the truth leads to a
payoff of −1, GA has no incentive to deviate.
Turning to GB’s decision, we need to check that it does not choose
mB = B if s = A. As before, such a message leads to an audit and a
penalty for GB. Thus, it does not defect.
It remains only to characterize conditions under which both groups
prefer to lobby. Because lobbying by both groups leads to the full
information outcome, the equilibrium utilities of GA and GB are 2p −
1 −c and 1 −2p −c, respectively. GB’s utility from having GA lobby
alone is
−p + (1 −p) [μ (2α −1) + (1 −μ)] = 1 −2p −

κ p
(1 −κ)
2δ + 2
δ + 2

.
This value is less than 1 −2p −c if
p > 1 −κ
κ
δ + 2
2δ + 2c.
As argued earlier, if B alone lobbies, it provides no information, and
policy B is chosen. This gives GA a utility of −1. GA participates as
long as 2p −1 −c ≥−1. This condition reduces to p ≥c/2, the same
condition observed earlier. Thus GA’s decision to lobby is independent
of GB.
Thus, we characterize the equilibrium lobbying decisions of both
groups as follows. If p < c/2, neither group lobbies. If
1 −κ
κ
δ + 2
2δ + 2c > p > c
2,
only GA lobbies. If
p > 1 −κ
κ
δ + 2
2δ + 2c,
both groups lobby.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
236
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Austen-Smith and Wright attribute the following hypotheses to this
perfect Bayesian equilibrium:
r Ceterus paribus, when a legislator is lobbied by groups from just
one side of an issue, the only groups that lobby are those opposed
to the legislator’s ex ante position.
r The decision of a group to lobby an “unfriendly” legislator’s is
independent of the lobbying decisions of opposing groups.
r Conditional on a “friendly” legislator’s being lobbied by an op-
posing group, a group’s decision to lobby that legislator is purely
counteractive.
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
6.1. Sequential Equilibria. Several of our examples demonstrate that
weak consistency lives up to its name. Often, it does not impose strong
enough constraints on off-the-path beliefs. In fact, a PBE need not even
be subgame perfect, a fact demonstrated by the example in Figure 8.9.
run
don’t run
(0, 0, 2)
m
endorse
don’t
endorse
C
high
effort
high
effort
low
effort
low
effort
I
(−1, 0, 0)
(2, 0, 1)
(−2, 1, 1)
(−1,−1,0)
p = 1
p = 0
Figure 8.9. Electoral Endorsement Game.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
237
In this extensive form game, C is a potential candidate for ofﬁce and
must decide whether or not to run. After this decision, the local news-
paper decides whether or not to endorse C. After the endorsement
decision is made but before observing it, the incumbent I decides how
much campaign effort to exert.10 The payoffs reﬂect C’s preference to
enter only if he is endorsed and the incumbent chooses low effort, the
media’s preference to endorse C only if the incumbent chooses low
effort, and the incumbent’s preference to exert effort only when C is
not endorsed.
In Figure 8.9, the shaded branches denote a strategy proﬁle and the
numbers p = 0 and p = 1 denote beliefs. It is not difﬁcult to see that the
ﬁgure depicts a PBE. Given the belief that “not endorse” occurs with
probability 1, the incumbent optimally selects high effort. Moreover,
given the expectation that endorsement and high effort follow a deci-
sion to run, the optimal decision for C is not to run for ofﬁce. Given
this strategy proﬁle, the incumbent’s information set is not reached,
and weak consistency does not restrict beliefs. Despite the fact that
this is a PBE, the speciﬁed strategy proﬁle is not subgame perfect.
To see this, consider the circled subgame that starts with m’s deci-
sion. Given that m chooses endorse, high effort is not a best response.
The problem in this game is that there are nontrivial information sets
for some strategy proﬁles several moves away from the equilibrium
path.
In a reasonably deﬁned equilibrium, I’s beliefs about m’s decision
(conditional on reaching this information set) ought to be somehow
consistent with player m’s strategy. Accordingly, we might conjecture
that (1) if C runs then either m endorses and I exerts low effort, or
(2) m does not endorse and I exerts high effort, or (3) both m and I
randomize. Combining sequential rationality and a stronger notion of
consistency can prevent this pathology.
In this section we limit ourselves to ﬁnite games and present several
stronger equilibrium concepts. All of the concepts deﬁned involve se-
quential rationality as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 8.2. Where these concepts
differ is in the restrictions imposed on beliefs.
First we need a bit of notation. Given a ﬁnite extensive form game,
a mixed strategy proﬁle σ(·) is a mapping that determines a lottery
over available actions at each information set. For a ﬁnite game such
10 We can also interpret the endorsement and effort decisions as occurring simultane-
ously.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
238
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
a strategy proﬁle can be written as a vector (σ(1, 1), . . . , σ(a, I) . . .)
with generic coordinate σ(a, I) denoting the probability that action a
is played at information set I. A strategy proﬁle is a completely mixed
proﬁle if it selects every action at every information set with positive
probability. A pure strategy is then a vector containing only 0s and 1s.
A sequence of mixed strategies {σ(·)n}∞
n=1 is said to converge to a mixed
strategy σ(·) if for each I, a, σ(a, I)n converges to σ(a, I). The notion
of sequential equilibrium replaces weak consistency with a stronger
condition.
DEFINITION 8.6 Given a ﬁnite extensive form game with imperfectly
observed actions, a sequential equilibrium (SE) is a pair (σ(·), b(·))
such that (1) the strategy proﬁle σ(·) is sequentially rational relative to
the belief b(·), and (2) there exists some sequence of completely mixed
strategies{σ(·)n}∞
n=1 and beliefs {b(·)n}∞
n=1 that converge to σ(·), b(·), re-
spectively, and satisfy the condition that for some n′, b(·)n is weakly
consistent relative to the strategy proﬁle σ(·)n if n > n′.
To demonstrate how this concept reﬁnes our notion of PBE, we
ﬁrst return to the game in Figure 8.9. Consider any sequence of com-
pletely mixed proﬁles {σ(·)n}∞
n=1 satisfying the condition that in σ(·)n
every pure strategy is played with at least probability εn. Let εn →0 as
n →∞. If this sequence of mixed strategies converges to the PBE
in Figure 8.9, σ n(endorse, run) must be a mixed best response to
σ n(run) = εn and σ n (high effort, run)= 1 −εn. The media’s expected
utility from endorse is therefore εn, but its payoff from not endorse is
1 −2εn. Therefore, as εn converges to 0, there must be some n′ such that
for all n > n′, mprefers to choose σ n(endorse, run) = εn →0. Because
this is not true of the equilibrium in Figure 8.9, it is not the limit of com-
pletely mixed equilibria and is not a sequential equilibrium.
Sequential equilibria also place restrictions on beliefs. Weak consis-
tency requires that the beliefs about the media’s decision correspond
to the strategy, bn(endorse) = σ n(endorse, run). Accordingly for a se-
quence of completely mixed strategies that converges to a proﬁle play-
ing not run and endorse if run with probability 1, b(·)n must converge
to beliefs that put probability 1 on endorse. Therefore, there are no se-
quences of completely mixed strategies and weakly consistent beliefs
that converge to the strategies and beliefs depicted in Figure 8.9. In fact,
it can be shown that every sequential equilibrium involves strategies
that are subgame perfect. The proof of this result is left as an exercise.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
239
Although sequential equilibrium is an improvement over PBE, in
many applications the two concepts have equivalent equilibrium sets.
For example, in the classic signaling games considered earlier the con-
cepts coincide. Fudenberg and Tirole (1991) have proved the following
equivalence result.
PROPOSITION 8.9 (Fudenberg and Tirole 1991) If a ﬁnite extensive form
game has only two periods or every player has at most two types then
the set of PBE and set of SE coincide.
A very nice property of sequential equilibria is that one always ex-
ists in ﬁnite games. A very nice property of this very nice property is
that the existence proof demonstrates the relationship between perfect
equilibria in normal form games and sequential equilibria in extensive
form games.
Recall that we can always represent an extensive form game as a
normal form game; each player selects her information set contingent
strategies simultaneously. Examples of this equivalence appear at the
beginning of Chapter 7. For our purposes we need to think about a
slightly different normal from representation.
DEFINITION 8.7 Given an extensive form game, the agent normal form
attributes a different identity to the agent that moves at each information
set.
For example, in the Centipede extensive form game depicted in
Figure 7.2 the agent normal form game involves ﬁve players. Abus-
ing notation slightly, for any strategy proﬁle σ(·) in the agent normal
form, let σ(·) also denote the corresponding strategy proﬁle in the ex-
tensive form game. So if player i moves at multiple information sets in
the extensive form game her strategy proﬁle is the composition of the
strategies of multiple players from the agent normal form.
Converting the extensive form game into normal form game allows
us to make the following comparison of equilibrium sets.
PROPOSITION 8.10 Consider a ﬁnite extensive form game. If σ a(·) is a
perfect equilibrium in the agent normal form representation of the game
then there exists a belief b(·) such that the pair (σ(·), b(·)) is a sequential
equilibrium in the extensive form game.

--- Sayfa 256 ---
240
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
Aside from providing a connection between these two concepts this
result is valuable for a second reason. Because Selten (1965) proved
that ﬁnite games possess perfect equilibria, the following result is an
immediate corollary.
PROPOSITION 8.11 (Selten) Every ﬁnite extensive form game has at least
one sequential equilibrium.
6.2. The Intuitive Criterion. The concept of sequential equilibrium
sometimes eliminates implausible PBEs, but not always. Thus, Kreps
and Cho (1987) propose the intuitive criterion to restrict the equilib-
rium set in some signaling games further. Kreps and Cho postulate that
beliefs should be concentrated on those sender types with the great-
est incentive to defect. They illustrate their concept with the Beer and
Quiche game. Because this is the simplest possible demonstration, we
utilize it but with some political embellishments. Consider the game
between Saddam Hussein and George Bush on the eve of the Ameri-
can invasion of Iraq. Consider a two-player signaling game in which the
sender, Hussein, has two possible types. He can have weapons of mass
destruction, θ = w, or not, θ = ˜w. The receiver, Bush, can either at-
tack, sb = a, or not, sb = ˜a. Bush, demonstrating supreme conﬁdence,
has no concerns about winning if he attacks. He does, however, need to
justify the attack with the claim that Hussein has weapons of mass de-
struction. Accordingly, he prefers to attack if w and not to attack if ˜w.
Prior to Bush’s decision, Hussein decides whether to allow weapons
inspections, sh = y or sh = ˜y. The result of a weapons inspection is
not publicized before Bush’s decision of whether or not to attack. We
assume that regardless of Bush’s decision, type w suffers a cost of 1
from inspection, a proven violation of UN resolutions. Type ˜w re-
ceives a beneﬁt of 1 from inspection, public vindication. Regardless of
Hussein’s type he prefers not to be attacked. In fact, the cost of being
attacked is sufﬁciently large that either type of Hussein is willing to al-
low UN inspections if this action prevents attack. Alternatively, Bush
does not care directly about the inspections but prefers attacking so
long as the probability of θ = w is sufﬁciently high (greater than 1/2).
Figure 8.10 depicts the game.
Therearepoolingequilibriainwhichweaponsinspectorsareallowed
(sh = y), and there are pooling equilibria in which they are not allowed
(sh = ˜y). In any pooling equilibria, Bush’s posterior must correspond
to the prior. Thus if the prior probability w is sufﬁciently low, Bush

--- Sayfa 257 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
241
N
w
~w
p = 1/4
1−p = 3/4
Hussein
Hussein
Bush
Bush
y
~y
y
~y
a
~a
3,0
a
~a
0,1
a
2, 0
~a
a
~a
2,1
1,0
3,1
1,1
Figure 8.10. Bush-Hussein Game.
does not attack. To support pooling at sh = y, it is necessary that both
Hussein types prefer y to ˜y. This results in the incentive compatibility
conditions
3 ≥EUH(˜y, ˜w)
2 ≥EUH(˜y, w).
Let Pr(a | ˜y) denote the probability that Bush attacks after observing
y. The incentive compatibility conditions require that
3 ≥0 Pr(a | ˜y) + 2(1 −Pr(a | ˜y))
2 ≥1 Pr(a | ˜y) + 3(1 −Pr(a | ˜y)).
These conditions are true as long as Pr(a | ˜y) ≥1/2. If Bush uses a
strategy in which Pr(a | ˜y) ≥1/2, his posterior belief about Hussein’s
type conditional on the off-the-path action ˜y must satisfy Pr(w | ˜y) ≥
1/2. This posterior, however, cannot be determined by Bayes’ rule.
Recall that the on-the-path belief Pr(w | y) = 1/4 corresponds to the
prior and is pinned down in a pooling equilibrium. So we have shown

--- Sayfa 258 ---
242
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
that there is a PBE (and by Proposition 8.9, a SE) in which both types
of Husseins pool at y and Bush does not attack.
To support the other pooling equilibrium where both types of
Hussein select ˜y and Bush again does not attack, we need only spec-
ify off-the-path beliefs Pr(w | y) ≥1/2. Following these beliefs, Bush
attacks with probability at least 1/2 and so both Hussein types prefer
to select ˜y and avoid attack.
Although both equilibria are PBE and SE, Cho and Kreps argue that
only one of these pooling equilibria is reasonable. Consider the equi-
libria in which both Hussein types select ˜y. This equilibrium requires
that the off-the-path beliefs satisfy Pr(ω | y) ≥1/2. Is it reasonable for
Bush to believe that Hussein is more likely to have weapons if he allows
inspections than if he does not? Recall that in this equilibrium, type w
gets his maximal payoff. No inspections and no attack result in a payoff
of 3. The defection to y and not attack results in a payoff of 2 for w. Such
a deviation is not desirable under the assumption that the deviation
does not trigger an attack. If y triggers an attack, the defection is even
less attractive. On the other hand, consider the potential incentive for
type ˜w to deviate. In equilibrium he gets a payoff of 2. If his defection
does not result in an attack, he gets utility of 3 (and thus improves his
situation). Thus, it seems intuitive that if a defection were observed it
is most likely to be committed by ˜w. Cho and Kreps argue that Bush
would be foolish to interpret y as evidence of w. Instead they imag-
ine that the only justiﬁcation for such an off-the-path deviation is that
Hussein type ˜w might deviate to y and send the following justiﬁcation.
Dear W:
Sorry for past squabbles with your old man. About this recent
disagreement: I know that you are expecting me to choose ˜y and this
doesn’t tell you anything – it’s a pooling equilibrium after all (you
remember pool tables, from Yale, don’t you?). But I am not going
to do this, because I actually don’t have any weapons and I want to
show this to the world, so I am going to make myself even better
off. You should trust that this action indicates that I really have no
weapons because if I did have weapons and I expected you not to
attack if I didn’t allow the inspections (which is the equilibrium we
are playing), then I would only hurt myself by letting in the inspectors.
If I had weapons this deviation would not possibly help me.
Sincerely,
SH

--- Sayfa 259 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
243
Of course this type of communication is not modeled in standard sig-
naling games. The point is, given the Bush strategy, one type can possi-
bly gain from the off-the-path deviation, while the other type can only
lose. In such a setting, the off-the-path beliefs should be concentrated
on the type that stands to gain. Note that the y pooling equilibrium is
immune from this criticism. The only type that possibly stands to gain
from choosing ˜y is w. So the beliefs justifying Bush’s attack following
˜y are justiﬁed.
We now present the intuitive criterion in a somewhat more rigorous
manner requiring a bit more notation. Let s denote a simple signaling
game with two periods and two players. Player 1 has a type space 
and a message space M. Player 2 observes player 1’s message m and
selects an action from A. For simplicity, all of these sets are ﬁnite. For
the more complicated case of nonﬁnite sets, the following conditions
can be modiﬁed but some technical issues are encountered. Although
player 1 knows her type, player 2 only knows that 1’s type is drawn
from some probability function f (·) on  and player payoffs are given
by utility functions us(m, a, θ) and ur(m, a, θ). Accordingly, a mixed
strategy proﬁle is a message function σ s(θ) that selects a lottery on
M for every θ and an action function σ r(m) that selects a lottery over
actions for each possible message. Let σ s(m, θ) and σ r(a, m) denote the
probability that mis played by a sender with type θ and the probability
that a is played by an r that has observed m, respectively. A sequential
equilibrium also involves a belief μ(θ | m). Given a signaling game
and a sequential equilibrium to the game, let U∗
s (θ) denote expected
utility to player 1 of type θ from the equilibrium proﬁle. Finally let
 denote the set of probability distributions on  and let BRr(m) =
∪p(θ)∈{arg maxa∈A
 ur(m, a, θ)p(θ)} denote the set of actions by r
that maximize the receiver’s expected utility for some beliefs about θ.
We say an action r is rationalizable if it is an element of BRr(m).
DEFINITION 8.8 An SE (σ s(·), σ r(·), μ(· | ·)) satisﬁes the intuitive crite-
rion if for any message m such that  σ r(m, θ) f (θ) = 0, the posterior
belief μ(θ | m) > 0 only if U∗
s (θ) < maxa∈BRr(m) us(m, a, θ).
In words, an intuitive equilibrium (more precisely an SE satisfying
the intuitive criterion) requires that out-of-equilibrium beliefs put 0
probability on types that could not gain from the observed deviation
under some expectation that the receiver responds to the deviation by
playing a strategy from her set of best responses.

--- Sayfa 260 ---
244
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
As further demonstration, we modify the entry deterrence game
considered earlier. Now instead of restricting the message space to be
{WC, ˜WC} we allow the incumbent to select a level of fund-raising sI ∈
R1
+ at a cost csI where c is either cw or cs depending on the incumbent’s
type. Let the value of ofﬁce be 1 for the incumbent, so if in equilibrium
she accumulates s′ and wins with probability π her payoff is π −cs′.
There are multiple pooling, partially pooling, and separating equilibria
to this game. There is, however, only one intuitive equilibrium, that is
separating. We leave the analysis of this game as an exercise.
The literature on reﬁnements is quite large and reﬁnements to the
intuitive criterion have appeared in many applications. Commonly,
models with type spaces with more than two elements require stronger
reﬁnements. This is because several types might gain from a defec-
tion for different best responses by the receiver. In such situations,
stronger reﬁnements such as universal divinity (Banks and Sobel 1987)
might restrict the equilibrium set.11 Because universal divinity has been
used in numerous political applications, we present a deﬁnition and an
example.
DEFINITION 8.9 An SE or PBE (σ s(·), σ r(·), μ(· | ·)) satisﬁes universal
divinity if for any message m such that  σ r(m, θ) f (θ) = 0, the poste-
rior belief μ(θ | m) > 0 only if there exists an action a ∈BRr(m) such
that U∗
s (θ) < us(m, a, θ) and for every θ′̸ = θ U∗
s (θ′) ≥us(m, a, θ′).
Universal divinity is more stringent than the intuitive criterion. It
allows the posteriors to place positive probability on a smaller set of
types. In the case of universal divinity, the posteriors only place weight
on a type if there is a rationalizable action that makes the deviation
desirable for this type and no other. Informally, universal divinity re-
quires that off-the-path beliefs put weight only on the types “most
likely” to deviate.
To contrast the intuitive criterion and universal divinity, consider
an application of Michael Spence’s signaling model to political reform
(Spence 1975). Suppose a developing country has type θ ∈{1, 2, 3}
with θ measuring the nation’s potential to repay debts successfully
(higher numbers are better). Let π1 and π2 denote the probability of
11 We encourage motivated students to seek out the original Cho and Kreps (1987) and
BanksandSobel(1987)pieces.Inaddition,Banks(1991)isanexemplarypresentation
of signaling games and reﬁnements in applications dealing with political science.

--- Sayfa 261 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
245
Region of
deviations
r′
Messages r
Packages f
Indifference curve
for type 2
Indifference
curve for
type 1
p
r
f = 2r
p
f(    )
r
Figure 8.11. International Aid and Reform Game.
types1and2(withtype3’soccurringwithprobability1 −π1 −π2).The
country must select a level of observable political reform r ∈R1
+. The
pain associated with reform is dependent on the nation’s type. After
observing r, the IMF determines a ﬁnancial package f ∈R1
+ for the
nation. The receiver’s goal is to match f with the product θr. Payoffs
are as follows: given type θ, reformr, and package f , the nation’s utility
is f −r2/θ.
We ﬁrst consider the case of π1 + π2 = 1 (so there are just two
types of developing countries). In this case, there are pooling, partially-
pooling, and separating PBEs. The intuitive criterion, however, selects
a unique equilibrium. We sketch the argument here. Consider Fig-
ure 8.11, which depicts indifference contours over pairs of messages
and responses for senders of types 1 and 2. Because all senders prefer
more funds and fewer reforms, movements to the northwest quadrant
are desirable.
Consider a pooling (or partially pooling) equilibrium in which both
sender types select the same level r p with positive probability. After
observing r p the receiver knows that the posterior probability of θ < 2
is greater than 0. Thus in any PBE the package corresponding to r p,
f (r p), must be less than 2r p. So there exists a message r′ > r p such
that if f (r′) = 2r′ a type 2 nation prefers the deviation, and a type 1
nation does not. In this case the intuitive criterion implies that beliefs
must place probability 1 on θ = 2 if r′ is chosen. Given these beliefs,
following r′ the package f (r′) = 2r′ is the unique sequentially rational

--- Sayfa 262 ---
246
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
package for the receiver. In the preceding notation, we have
U∗
r (2) = f (r p) −(r p)2
2
ur(r′, 2r′, 2) = 2r′ −(r′)2
2
U∗
r (1) = f (r p) −(r p)2
ur(r′, 2r′, 1) = 2r′ −(r′)2 .
Accordingly,
U∗
r (1) > ur(r′, 2r′, 1)
requires
f (r p) > (r′)2 −(r p)2,
whereas U∗
r (2) < ur(r′, 2r′, 2) requires
f (r p) < 2r′ −(r′)2 −(r p)2
2
.
Both of these inequalities can be simultaneously satisﬁed. See
Figure 8.11 for the region of such values of r′. To recap, in a pool-
ing or partially pooling equilibrium in which both types play r p with
positive probability, the intuitive criterion requires that beliefs assign
probability 1 to type θ = 2 following the (possibly off-the-path) mes-
sage of r′ . Thus, if r′ is played the ﬁnancial package is 2r′. The value
r′ was chosen so that type 2s strictly prefer message r′ to r p meaning
that type 2s cannot put positive probability on the message r p. This
contradicts the assumption of an intuitive equilibrium in which both
types play r p with positive probability. Having ruled out all but sepa-
rating equilibria, we claim that the intuitive criterion selects a unique
separating equilibrium. We leave this as an exercise.
Now assume that π1 + π2 < 1 so that θ = 3 occurs with probability
1 −π1 −π2 > 0. The ﬁrst question to address is whether the intuitive
criterion continues to eliminate all pooling or partially pooling equi-
libria. The answer is no. Suppose that types 1 and 2 are both playing a
message r p with positive probability, and θ = 3 plays a pure strategy
r3 > r p. It can be shown that this happens in some PBEs. Our argu-
ment before was that the intuitive criterion required that following
some reform r′ > r p posterior beliefs are concentrated at the higher
type. With the third type present, however, this turns out not to be
the case. We now satisfy the intuitive criterion with posteriors putting

--- Sayfa 263 ---
6. Reﬁnements of Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium∗
247
Messages r
Packages f
Indifference curve
for type 2
Indifference
curve for
type 1
p
r
f = 2r
p
f(    )
r
f = 3r
min
r
Figure 8.12. International Aid and Reform Game.
weight on θ = 3 following a reform r′ > r p. With such beliefs, the se-
quentially rational choices of f might lead θ = 1 to prefer the devia-
tion to the equilibrium payoff. More speciﬁcally, the requirement that
f (r′) ≤2r′ need no longer hold. Now, only f (r′) ≤3r′ needs to hold.
With f (r′) ≥3r′, type θ = 1 might prefer to deviate with the expec-
tation that a deviation results in f (r′). Accordingly in order for type
θ = 2 to signal that it is not type 1, it needs to send a message at least as
high as the levelrmin depicted in Figure 8.12. For every level ofr > rmin,
however, there are possible best responses f (r) that make type 2 worse
than under equilibrium play. Notice that there is space between type
2’s indifference curve and the line f = 2r. Because the intuitive cri-
terion only requires that type 2 expect a response of f > 2r for an r
greater than rmin, it cannot be certain that the deviation is desirable.
This partial-pooling equilibrium cannot be a universally divine equi-
librium, however. Again suppose that types 1 and 2 are both playing
a message r p with positive probability, and θ = 3 plays a pure strat-
egy r3 > r p. Under universal divinity, a message of r′ that is slightly
larger than r p must result in a posterior concentrated at θ = 2; for
values of r to the right of r p type 1’s indifference curve is above
type 2’s. For pairs (r′, f (r′)) that lie between the two indifference
curves, U∗
s (2) < us(r′, f (r′), 2) and U∗
s (1) > us(r′, f (r′), 1). Moreover,
because type 3 is getting f = 3r, his utility is higher in the equilibrium
than the deviation. Accordingly, universal divinity requires that a mes-
sage of r′ result in beliefs concentrated at θ = 2, and sequential ratio-
nality requires that f (r′) = 2r′. Type 2 gains from the deviation. It is

--- Sayfa 264 ---
248
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
left as an exercise to show that there is exactly one universally divine
equilibrium in the game with three types.
7. Exercises
EXERCISE 8.1 Consider the game of Figure 8.6 where the payoff to the
path B, NRis (5, 0) instead of (4, 0). Characterize all of the PBEs (mixed
and pure strategy) to the game.
EXERCISE 8.2 Consider the game of Figure 8.6 where the payoff to the
path ND is (w, 5) instead of (0, 5). Here w is an exogenous parameter
known to the agents that ranges from −2 to 5. For what values of w are
there PBEs in which ND occurs with positive probability?
EXERCISE 8.3 In the game depicted in Figure 8.7, show that there is no
PBE in which m(θ) =
b if θ = a
a if θ = b .
EXERCISE 8.4 Find all of the PBEs of the game depicted in Figure 8.13.
N
A
B
p = 3/4
1−p = 1/4
1
1
2
2
a
b
a
b
l
 h
l
h
l
h
l
h
2,1
1,1
0, 0
0, 0
1,1
1,0
1,0
2,1
Figure 8.13. Signaling Game.

--- Sayfa 265 ---
7. Exercises
249
EXERCISE 8.5 A model of political repression: Suppose that in each of
two periods, society must decide whether to protest the policies of the
state. The state may either acquiesce or repress. Society gets 1 if the state
acquiesces, −1 if the state represses, and 0 if it does not protest.
Suppose there are two types of states: Moderate and Hardline. The
moderate state (M) gets 0 if the protest does not take place, −2 if it
acquiesces, and −3 if it represses. The hardline (H) state gets 0 for no
protest, −2 for repression, and −3 for acquiescing. Let p0 be the prior
probability that the state is M.
(1) In the second period, what is the critical value p∗such that S
protests if p1 ≥p∗(where p1 is S’s updated belief that the state is
M)?
(2) Is there ever a separating equilibrium with these strategies?
M :{acquiesce, acquiesce}
H :{repress, repress}
S :{protest, stay home if repressed in period 1}
If so, for what values of p0 does it hold?
(3) Is there a pooling equilibrium in the ﬁrst period with these strate-
gies?
M :{repress, acquiesce}
H :{repress, repress}
S :{protest, stay home if repressed in period 1}
If so, for what values of p0 does it hold? Is it consistent with the
intuitive criterion?
(4) Is there a pooling equilibrium in the ﬁrst period with these strate-
gies?
M :{repress, acquiesce}
H :{repress, repress}
S :{stayhome, stay home if repressed in period 1}
If so, for what values of p0 does it hold? Is it consistent with the
intuitive criterion?
(5) Compute a semipooling equilibrium where M represses in the
ﬁrst period with probability q. For what values of p0 does S
protest?
EXERCISE 8.6 Compute the remaining partial-pooling equilibria for the
War Chest game.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
250
Dynamic Games of Incomplete Information
EXERCISE 8.7 Show that there are no partial-pooling equilibria in the
open rule version of the Gilligan-Krehbiel model.
EXERCISE 8.8 Consider the open rule version of the Gilligan-Krehbiel
model described earlier, but suppose that their are two committee mem-
bers with c > θ that observe the state and make simultaneous messages
to the ﬂoor. Does a separating equilibrium exist? Now suppose that there
are three committee members. Does a separating equilibrium exist?
EXERCISE 8.9 Show that for any ﬁnite extensive form game, if σ(·), b(·)
constitutes a sequential equilibrium, then σ(·) is subgame perfect.
EXERCISE 8.10 Show that in a one-sender, one-receiver signaling game if
the sender’s type space has two elements the sets of PBE and SE coincide.
EXERCISE 8.11 Prove Proposition 8.9.
EXERCISE 8.12 Prove Proposition 8.10.
EXERCISE 8.13 Show that in the Hussein-Bush game the equilibrium
pooling on y does not violate the intuitive criterion.
EXERCISE 8.14 Can one modify the probability of w in Figure 8.10 to
support the observed path of play ( ˜y and a) as a PBE?
EXERCISE 8.15 Characterize the levels of sI and entry lotteries that are
supportable in a PBE to the modiﬁed war chest game where the message
space is the positive real numbers.
EXERCISE 8.16 Characterizetheuniqueintuitiveequilibriumtothemod-
iﬁedwarchestgamewherethemessagespaceisthepositiverealnumbers.
EXERCISE 8.17 In the loan guarantee game with two types, show that the
unique intuitive equilibrium involves r(1) = arg max{r −r2} = 1/2 and
r(2) = arg max{r −r2/2} = 1.
EXERCISE 8.18 In the loan guarantee game with three types, show that
the unique universally divine equilibrium involves r(1) = arg max{r −
r2} = 1/2 and r(2) = arg max{r −r2/2} = 1 and r(3) = arg max{r −
r2/3} = 3/2.

--- Sayfa 267 ---
9 Repeated Games
Many models in political game theory involve agents’ playing the same
game repeatedly. In many of these cases, the focus is on how certain
social practices such as conventions, norms, cooperation, and trust are
sustained when actors have short-run incentives to deviate from these
practices. Another signiﬁcant application of “repeated games” is the
study of how to solve social dilemmas such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma
without recourse to centralized authority (Taylor 1976).
The most interesting conceptual issue in such games is the extent
to which repetition creates the opportunity to sustain more behavior
as Nash equilibria than is possible in single-shot games. In general,
the set of Nash equilibria is much larger in repeated games than in the
corresponding static versions; expectations that future play is depen-
dent on current behavior can create incentives for behavior that is not
optimal in a one-shot interaction. Repeated games, however, gener-
ate an opposite problem; the proliferation of equilibria is so great that
generating precise predictions becomes difﬁcult.
To see how expectations about the future can inﬂuence behavior,
consider the normal form game1 in Table 9.1.
IfthisgameisplayedoncethereareonlytwoNashequilibria:(M, M)
and (B, R) (starred in the table). Although the strategy proﬁle (T, L)
provides the highest aggregate payoff, it is not a Nash equilibrium;
player 1 unilaterally defects to B and player 2 unilaterally defects to R.
What happens if this game is played twice with players’ caring about
theircombinedtwo-periodpayoffs?Supposeplayer1choosesthestrat-
egy “Play T in period 1; if player 2 plays Lin period 1 play Min period 2;
1 By this point in the book, we assume that students are quite comfortable with games
that do not have motivating stories.
251

--- Sayfa 268 ---
252
Repeated Games
Table 9.1
1\2
L
M
R
T
8, 8
0, 0
1, 9
M
0, 0
5, 5∗
0, 0
B
9, 1
0, 0
3, 3∗
otherwise play B in period 2.” Moreover, sup-
pose that player 2 chooses the strategy “Play
L in period 1; if player 1 plays T in period 1
play M in period 2; otherwise play R in pe-
riod 2.” This pair of strategies is a Nash equi-
librium if the stage game is played twice. In this
equilibrium the agents play the “good” out-
come (T, L) in the ﬁrst period. If either player
defects, her payoff is 9 + 3 = 12, less than the equilibrium utility of
8 + 5 = 13. In fact, not only do these strategies constitute a Nash equi-
librium, but the equilibrium is subgame perfect. Because (M, M) and
(B, R) are Nash equilibria of the one-shot game, playing them in the
proper subgames is consistent with subgame perfection. A strategy
playing (T, L) in the second period, however, cannot be supported in
a Nash equilibrium.
1. The Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma
One of the most studied games is the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Consideranapplicationfocusedontradepolicy.Supposethattheworld
economy performs better when all nations agree to free trade, but
Table 9.2. Free Trade Game
U.S.\EU
Free Trade
Protect
Free Trade
10, 10
1, 12
Protect
12, 1
4, 4
thatindividualcountriesprefertopro-
tect their domestic economy. Given
this tension, how are free trade
regimes sustained? One answer is that
freetradecanbesupportedasanequi-
librium in a repeated game where a
trade war begins whenever a major
country defects from the trade agree-
ment. To illustrate this argument, consider Table 9.2, a representation
of a trade policy dilemma between the United States (U.S.) and the
European Union (EU).
Obviously, if the game is played once, the unique Nash equilibrium
is the strategy proﬁle (Protect, Protect). If it is played twice, then the
strategy sets for each player are
{FT1FT2FT2, FT1FT2P2, FT1P2FT2, FT1P2P2, P1FT2FT2, P1FT2P2,
P1P2FT2, P1P2P2},

--- Sayfa 269 ---
2. The Grim Trigger Equilibrium
253
where FT1FT2P2 means “Play FT in period 1 and play FT in period 2
if the other country plays FT in period 1; otherwise play P.” Table 9.3
depicts the normal form representation of the two-period game (we
ignore the discounting of future payoffs).
Unlike the example of Table 9.1, repeating the game once does not
affect behavior as (P1P2P2, P1P2P3) is the only Nash equilibrium. This
result can be generalized to any ﬁnite number of periods. In the last
period, each country protects. This is known in the penultimate period,
so it is not possible for penultimate period behavior to affect ﬁnal
period behavior. Thus, each country has an incentive to protect in this
period as well. This process unravels until each country is protecting
in every period.
We could induce ﬁrst-period cooperation in Table 9.1 because ﬁrst-
period behavior helps coordinate among multiple equilibria in the sec-
ond period. The good equilibrium is used as a reward whereas the bad
equilibrium is used as a punishment. Because the Prisoner’s Dilemma
has only one Nash equilibrium, it is impossible to encourage cooper-
ation with the promise of coordinating on a good equilibrium or the
threat of coordinating on a bad equilibrium.
If the game lasts an inﬁnite number of periods, however, this ceases
to be an issue. Suppose that the “good equilibrium” is free trade in
every period and the “bad equilibrium” is protection in every period.
As we will now see, if there is no last period, the good equilibrium need
not unravel as it does in the ﬁnite case. Thus, in every single period,
cooperation is sustained by the reward of the good equilibrium and
the sanction of the bad.
2. The Grim Trigger Equilibrium
To see how inﬁnite repetition eliminates the “last-period” problem,
consider the following strategy: “Play free trade in every period until
the other country protects, then protect forever.” This is known as
the grim trigger strategy, because any failure to cooperate leads to the
noncooperative equilibrium in all future periods. If each country plays
this strategy, both receive 10 in every period. If both countries discount
the future at a common factor of δ, the long-term utility of this strategy
is 10/(1 −δ).2 To show that this strategy is a Nash equilibrium, we must
2 See Chapter 3 for a discussion of time discounting and the calculation of inﬁnite sums
of discounted utilities.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
Table 9.3. Two-Period Free Trade Game
U.S.\EU
F T 1F T 2F T 2
F T 1F T 2P2
F T 1P2F T 2
F T 1P2P2
P1F T 2F T 2
P1F T 2P2
P1P2F T 2
P1P2P2
F T 1F T 2F T 2
20, 20
20, 20
11, 22
11, 22
11, 22
11, 22
2, 24
2, 24
F T 1F T 2P2
20, 20
20, 20
11, 22
11, 22
13, 13
13, 13
5, 16
5, 16
F T 1P2F T 2
22, 11
22, 11
14, 14
14, 14
11, 22
11, 22
2, 24
2, 24
F T 1P2P2
22, 11
22, 11
14, 14
14, 14
13, 13
13, 13
5, 16
5, 16
P1F T 2F T 2
22, 11
13, 13
22, 11
13, 13
14, 14
5, 16
14, 14
5, 16
P1F T 2P2
22, 11
13, 13
22, 11
13, 13
16, 5
8, 8
16, 5
8, 8
P1P2F T 2
24, 2
16, 5
24, 2
16, 5
14, 14
5, 16
14, 14
5, 16
P1P2P2
24, 2
16, 5
24, 2
16, 5
16, 5
8, 8
16, 5
8, 8∗
254

--- Sayfa 271 ---
2. The Grim Trigger Equilibrium
255
Table 9.4. Generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma
1\2
Cooperate
Don’t Cooperate
Cooperate
a, a
d, c
Don’t Cooperate
c, d
b, b
show that neither player prefers to defect. Because each stage game
is identical, either a player wants to defect in every period or never
prefers to defect. Defection gives the defector 12 in the period of the
defection. Because the other country protects forever after the defec-
tion, the defector’s best response is also to protect forever. Therefore,
the defector gets 4 in every period after the defection. The total util-
ity from defecting is therefore 12 + δ4/(1 −δ). Thus, the grim trigger
strategies are a Nash equilibrium to the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma
if and only if 10/(1 −δ) ≥12 + δ4/(1 −δ). This inequality is satisﬁed
if and only if δ ≥1/4. As long as the players are sufﬁciently patient
(δ is large), the grim trigger strategy is a Nash equilibrium. The grim
trigger equilibrium is also subgame perfect. A proper subgame to this
game is also an inﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma; thus playing
protect forever is a Nash equilibrium in any subgame in which at least
one player has previously protected. A subgame following only free
trade looks identical to the original game. Thus, because this strategy
proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium, it is a Nash equilibrium in a subgame of
this type.
Now consider a generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma, shown in Table 9.4.
where c > a > b > d. Using exactly the same arguments, the grim
trigger strategy is a SPNE if and only if a/(1 −δ) ≥c + δb/(1 −δ).
Rearranging yields the condition
δ ≥c −a
c −b.
Thus, cooperation is harder to sustain (requires a higher discount fac-
tor) when
(1) c is large relative to a and b
(2) a and b are roughly equal.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
256
Repeated Games
3. Tit-for-Tat Strategies
The grim trigger strategy is not the only equilibrium of the inﬁnitely
repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma that sustains the cooperative outcome.
Many authors ﬁnd the grim trigger equilibrium unrealistic and undesir-
able, because cooperation disappears forever after a single defection.
Moreover, it is not robust to mistakes by the players. Finally, following
a breakdown of cooperation the players cannot renegotiate to return
to the cooperative phase, something they clearly have an incentive to
do. If players can engage in such renegotiation, however, the incen-
tive for cooperation diminishes; the uncooperative path is no longer a
credible deterrent.
An alternative Nash equilibrium is based on “tit-for-tat” strategies
of the form “Cooperate in the ﬁrst period and then in any subsequent
period play the action that the other player chose in the previous pe-
riod.” In order to check whether tit-for-tat strategies form a Nash equi-
librium, consider a unilateral deviation by player i, don’t cooperate in
period t. Player i’s payoff in period t is c. In period t + 1, she gets
either d or b, depending on how she plays. Return to tit-for-tat in
period t + 1 results in the oscillating sequence d, c, d, c, d, c, . . . . So
the future stream of payoffs from a one-period defection and return
to tit-for-tat is c + δd + δ2c + δ3d + δ4c + · · · = c + δd + δ2(c + δd) +
δ4(c + δd) + · · · = (c + δd)/(1 −δ2). If i plays don’t cooperate in all
subsequent periods starting in t then the stream of payoffs is simply
c + δb/(1 −δ). We leave as an exercise to show that the best deviation
from tit-for-tat results in one of these two payoff streams. Recall that
the stream of payoffs from equilibrium play is a/(1 −δ). Accordingly,
tit-for-tat is a Nash equilibrium if and only if
a
1 −δ ≥max
c + δd
1 −δ2 , c + δ

b
1 −δ

Rearranging allows us to express this as a condition on the discount
rate. The inequality
a
1 −δ ≥c + δd
1 −δ2
reduces to δ ≥(c −a)/(a −d). The inequality
a
1 −δ ≥c + δ

b
1 −δ


--- Sayfa 273 ---
3. Tit-for-Tat Strategies
257
reduces to δ ≥(c −a)/(c −b). Thus tit-for-tat is a Nash equilibrium if
and only if
δ ≥max
 c −a
a −d, c −a
c −b

.
Is tit-for-tat subgame perfect? When players use this strategy there
are two types of subgames to consider:
(1) Asubgamewhere,followingcooperationinthepreviousperiod,
both players are expected to cooperate in the next period. This
is the cooperation phase.
(2) A subgame where following cooperation by one player and de-
fection by the other, the defector is supposed to cooperate and
the other player is supposed to punish the defector by not co-
operating in the next period. This is the punishment phase.
In fact there are also subgames in which both players are supposed
to defect, but these subgames are not reached by a unilateral deviation
from the equilibrium path when players use the tit-for-tat strategy. The
incentives for a deviation in the cooperation phase can be understood
by appealing to the single-deviation principle. In presenting subgame
perfection we proved that the single-deviation principle holds for ﬁnite
games. It also holds for inﬁnitely repeated games when payoffs are dis-
counted with a discount rate δ < 1. We leave the proof of this result as
anexercise.3Aunilateralsingledeviationfromtit-fot-tatyieldsthepay-
off stream c + δd + δ2c + δ3d + δ4c + · · · , and the preceding analysis
demonstrates that this deviation is not desirable if δ ≥(c −a)/(a −d).
Now consider the punishment phase and suppose that agent i is sup-
posed to play don’t cooperate and agent j is supposed to play cooperate.
A unilateral single-period deviation by player i in period t results in co-
operation by both players in all periods after period t. Accordingly, the
payoff stream toi from this deviation is a + δa + δ2a + · · · = a/(1 −δ).
The stream of payoffs from following the equilibrium strategy in
the payoff phase is c + δd + δ2c + δ3d + · · · = (c + δd)/(1 −δ2). Thus,
3 The difﬁculty in extending the principle to inﬁnite horizon games is that it is possible
for a strategy that is not subgame perfect to be beaten only by a deviation in an inﬁnite
number of periods. With discounting, however, deviations that are sufﬁciently distant
cannot inﬂuence payoffs very much, and thus if a strategy is not subgame perfect
there must be a better alternative strategy that has deviation in only a ﬁnite number
of periods. From this, the intuition captured in the ﬁnite game result applies.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
258
Repeated Games
agent i prefers to play tit-for-tat in the punishment stage as long as
(c + δd)/(1 −δ2) ≥a/(1 −δ). This inequality is the reversal of the
condition for tit-for-tat to be a Nash equilibrium. In order to follow
through on the punishment i needs to prefer the oscillation between c
and d over the perpetual stream of c. In order for i to prefer playing
tit-for-tat to an initial deviation, however, she must prefer the per-
petual stream of a’s to the oscillation stream. Accordingly, tit-for-tat
is only a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if δ = (c −a)/(a −d), a
very knife-edge condition.
An alternative version of tit-for-tat avoids the problem of oscillation
in the punishment phase. Milgrom, North, and Weingast (1990) argue
for the strategy “Start out playing cooperate. Unless you selected don’t
cooperate in period t −2, play cooperate in period t if the other player
selected cooperate in period t −1. If you selected don’t cooperate in pe-
riod t −1, then select cooperate in periods t and t + 1.” Although this
strategy seems convoluted, it has a natural interpretation. It suggests
that following any deviation, the deviating player must cooperate for
one period while his opponent defects. This strategy pair punishes the
deviator with the low payoff of d. After this one-period punishment,
both players return to cooperating. As an exercise the reader is asked
to show that this modiﬁed tit-for-tat strategy is subgame perfect as long
as δ is large enough.
4. Intermediate Punishment Strategies
The grim trigger and tit-for-tat strategies represent just two of the
possible strategies that sustain cooperative outcomes. These strategies
can be generalized to include strategies that involve punishment phases
of intermediate length. Consider the following strategies:
(1) Cooperate until your opponent defects. If your opponent de-
fects do not cooperate for the next k periods but then re-
turn to cooperation; if you defect do not cooperate for the
next k periods but then return to cooperation. Once you
have returned to cooperation, cooperate until a defection
occurs. Following a defection use the preceding punishment
strategy.
(2) Cooperate until your opponent defects. If your opponent de-
fects do not cooperate for k periods. If she cooperates in each
of the k periods return to cooperation, ending the punishment

--- Sayfa 275 ---
4. Intermediate Punishment Strategies
259
phase. If she fails to cooperate in any period of the punishment
phase, then the punishment phase starts over: that is, don’t co-
operate for k more periods. If your own failure to cooperate
caused the punishment phase then cooperate during the pun-
ishment phase.
Strategy 1 is similar to the grim trigger strategy in that a punishment
consists of a reversion to the strategy pair (don’t cooperate, don’t co-
operate). But now the punishment phase is ﬁnite. The second strategy
is similar to the subgame perfect version of tit-for-tat in that a defec-
tor is punished by the need to cooperate while the other player does
not.
Consider strategy 1 ﬁrst. There is no incentive to defect during a
punishment phase: noncooperation is a best response to noncoopera-
tion in terms of current period payoffs, and deviation only lengthens
the punishment phase. Consider a defection from mutual cooperation.
The payoff stream from a single defection during a cooperative phase
consists of the one-period gain from defecting, b for k periods, and
an inﬁnite stream of a beginning k + 1 periods in the future. Again
because of the single-deviation principle for subgame perfection, we
need only worry about a single deviation. Thus, using the rules for
computing inﬁnite sums, the utility of defecting during the punishment
phase is
c + δ −δk+1
1 −δ b + δk+1
1 −δ a.
Consequently, sustaining cooperation requires that
a

1 −δk+1
≥(1 −δ) c +

δ −δk+1
b.
Although we cannot generate a closed form for the critical value of δ,
we can rewrite this expression as
δ > c −a
c −b + δk+1 a −b
c −b.
The ﬁrst term on the right side of the inequality is the critical value
for the grim trigger strategy, and the second term is positive for any
ﬁnite k. Not surprisingly, it is harder to sustain cooperation with a ﬁnite

--- Sayfa 276 ---
260
Repeated Games
punishment phase. In a model where players make mistakes, however,
this equilibrium may be preferred to the grim trigger strategy.4
Now consider strategy 2 and a defection from the cooperation phase.
The payoff from a defection consists of a one-period beneﬁt c, a
punishment payoff of d for k periods, and a return to cooperative
payoffs a at the end of the punishment. Summing these up gener-
ates c + (δ −δk+1)d/(1 −δ) + δk+1a/(1 −δ). Because a > d, this ex-
pression is declining in k. Thus, increasing the length of the punish-
ment phase decreases the incentive to defect from the cooperative
phase.
Increasing k, however, may not make such an equilibrium easier to
sustain because it reduces the incentive to comply in the punishment
phase.Considerthepayoffsfromdefectingfromthepunishmentphase.
These payoffs consist of b for one period, d for k periods, and then
returntoa foratotalpayoffofb + (δ −δk+1)d/(1 −δ) + δk+1a/(1 −δ).
The payoffs from adhering to the equilibrium in the punishment phase
depend on the current period of the punishment phase. Because we
must verify compliance in each period, we need to ensure compliance
in the period when the payoff to compliance is lowest. This period is
the ﬁrst one of the punishment phase. Thus, the utility for complying
with the punishment in this period is (1 −δk)d/(1 −δ) + δka/(1 −δ).
Thus, compliance with the punishment requires
δ >
b −d
a −d
 1
k
.
This critical value is clearly diminishing in k.
5. The Folk Theorem
A common theme of these examples is that so long as the agents are suf-
ﬁciently patient, outcomes that are not Nash equilibria in static games
may be Nash equilibria or subgame perfect equilibria of inﬁnitely re-
peated games. In fact, any payoff vector to an inﬁnitely repeated game
that satisﬁes individual rationality can be sustained as a SPNE so long
4 Like the grim trigger SPNE, punishment is not renegotiation proof. Once the agents
reach a punishment phase they both gain from negotiating a settlement that moves
to cooperation in fewer than k periods.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
5. The Folk Theorem
261
as agents are sufﬁciently patient. This result has been well known for
so long that it has been afforded the status of a folk theorem. In this
section, we formally prove one version.
The primitives of a repeated game are a normal form stage game
 = ⟨N, S, u⟩and vector of agent discount rates δ = (δ1, . . . , δn). In
each period t ∈{1, 2, 3, . . .}, the agents play normal form game . Be-
fore agent i selects her strategy in period t, st
i ∈Si, she observes the
strategy proﬁle st−1 played in period t −1. We assume perfect recall so
that st
i can be conditioned on the history ht−1 = (s1, . . . , st−1) ∈St−1 :=
t−1
j=1 S. The null history is h0 = ∅. A pure strategy for player i is then a
sequence of mappings

st
i (ht−1) : St−1 →Si

∞
t=1 . A mixed strategy is a
sequence of mappings

σ t
i(ht−1) : St−1 →(Si)

∞
t=1. Given a sequence
of lotteries over stage game proﬁles {σ t}∞
t=1 agent i’s expected utility
is EUi({σ t}∞
t=1) = (1 −δi) ∞
t=1 δt−1
i
Eσ tui(st) where Eσ tui(st) takes the
expectation of ui(st) over the mixture σ t. The multiplier (1 −δi) is in-
cluded so that for a constant sequence σ t, EUi({σ t}∞
t=1) = Eui(σ t). The
repeated game induced by a stage game is denoted ∞= ⟨N, S, u, δ⟩.
Of course a repeated game is also an extensive form game so that Nash
equilibria and subgame perfect Nash equilibria are well deﬁned in the
repeated game.
We focus on repeated games generated by ﬁnite normal form stage
games. From Nash’s theorem, every such stage game has at least one
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium. It is not surprising, therefore, that
every such repeated game has a mixed strategy subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium; strategies that use the stage game equilibrium strategies
in each period regardless of the history form a SPNE in ∞.
THEOREM 9.1 If σ ∗is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of the stage
game then the repeated game proﬁle σ t
i(ht−1) = σ ∗
i for every (ht−1) for
every t for every i is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of the repeated
game.
An interesting feature of repeated games is that the set of subgame
perfect Nash equilibria is usually very large. The folk theorems serve to
quantify the set of equilibrium payoffs that are supportable in such an
equilibrium. We prove a particularly useful and simple folk theorem.
First, we require several deﬁnitions.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
262
Repeated Games
DEFINITION 9.1 The payoff vector v = (v1, . . . , vi, . . . , vn) ∈Rn is indi-
vidually rational if
vi ≥min
s−i∈S−i

max
si∈Si ui(si, s−i)

for each i ∈N.
The value mins−i∈S−i

maxsi∈Si ui(si, s−i)

is the minimal stage game
utility that player i attains from any strategy proﬁle in which she plays a
best response to s−i. This value is identiﬁed by letting players −i select
s−i so as to minimize the utility to i of playing a best response to s−i.
DEFINITION 9.2 The payoff vector v ∈Rn is feasible if there is some pure
strategy proﬁle s such that for each i ∈N, ui(s)/(1 −δi) = vi.
THEOREM 9.2 For every feasible and individually rational payoff vector
v ∈Rn there is an n-tuple of discount rates δ′ such that the payoff vector
v occurs in a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game if each coordinate
of δ is at least that of δ′.
Proof Assume that v is feasible and individually rational. Let {svt} be
a strategy proﬁle that plays the strategy that attains the payoff vector
v as long as no one has previously deviated from this strategy or more
than two players have deviated. If exactly one player, say i, has de-
viated, this strategy calls for {s pt
i
= arg mins−i∈S−i{maxsi∈Si ui(si, s−i)}}.
This strategy punishes the deviating player in all subsequent periods.
At any period t the payoff to i of playing {svt} is vi and the payoff to
deviating is bounded by
(1 −δt
i)vi + δt
i(1 −δi) max
s∈S ui(s) + δt+1
i
min
s−i∈S−i

max
si∈Si ui(si, s−i)

.
This value is less than vi if
δi ≥
maxs∈S ui(s) −vi
maxs∈S ui(s) −mins−i∈S−i

maxsi∈Si ui(si, s−i)

.
Because maxs∈S ui(s) ≥vi ≥mins−i∈S−i

maxsi∈Si ui(si, s−i)

the right-
hand side is strictly less than 1. As long as this condition is satisﬁed

--- Sayfa 279 ---
6. Application: Interethnic Cooperation
263
for each i ∈N, the conjectured strategy proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium
to the repeated game.
□
The equilibria used in the proof need not be SPNE as the punishment
can be very costly to impose. We can quantify a set of payoff vectors
supportable in SPNE to the repeated game using reversion to stage
game Nash strategies as the punishment. We leave the following result
as an exercise.
THEOREM 9.3 If v ∈Rn is a feasible payoff vector and for each i ∈N
there is some mixed strategy stage game Nash equilibrium that yields the
expected payoff vector v′ with v′
i < vi there is an n-tuple of discount rates
δ′ such that there is subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in the repeated
game that yields the payoff vector v if each coordinate of δ is at least that
of δ′.
Most applications of folk theorems in political science are covered by
these two propositions. Scholars, however, have extended these results
in many directions and we refer interested readers to Abreu (1988) and
Fudenberg and Maskin (1986).
6. Application: Interethnic Cooperation
Fearon and Laitin (1996) use inﬁnitely repeated games to under-
stand how interethnic cooperation is sustained. Consider two groups
A and B both with n (even) members. In each period t, players
Table 9.5. Interethnic Cooperation
Game
1\2
Cooperate
Defect
Cooperate
1, 1
−β, α
Defect
α, −β
0, 0
are randomly matched to play the
Prisoner’s Dilemma in Table 9.5,
where α > 1, β > 0, and (α −β)/2 <
1. Further suppose that each group
member has a common discount fac-
tor δ ∈(0, 1) . In each period mmem-
bers of each group are selected to
be paired with members of the other
group, and the remaining n −m are
matched with members of their own group. This random matching
process suggests that each player has a p = m/n probability of being
matched with an “out-group” member.

--- Sayfa 280 ---
264
Repeated Games
To capture the dynamics of intergroup and intragroup interaction,
Laitin and Fearon assume that the result of in-group pairings is ob-
served by all members of the group. The history of play for members
of the other group is not observed, however. Thus, interethnic coop-
eration is hard to sustain because those who defect in intergroup in-
teractions cannot be singled out for punishment by members of the
other group. Nevertheless, Fearon and Laitin argue that cooperation
can be sustained even in the absence of these direct sanctions. They
consider two such equilibria to this game. The ﬁrst is the spiral equi-
librium. In this equilibrium, cooperation is supported within groups
by kin periods of punishment against individual defectors. Intergroup
cooperation is sustained by the threat of group-speciﬁc punishment
phases of kout periods. During these punishment phases, all members
of a given group are punished by the other group if any has defected
in an intergroup interaction. The second equilibrium is the in-group
policing equilibrium in which there is no cross-group punishment, but
each group punishes its own for defections against the other group.
In the following, we analyze the in-group policing equilibrium and re-
fer the reader to the original article for the discussion of the spiral
equilibrium.
6.1. The In-Group Policing Equilibrium. We focus on group A
as the analysis extends easily to the strategies of group B. Let
st = (k1, k2, . . . , kn) be the state of the system where ki is the number of
periods remaining in the punishment period for player i at the begin-
ning of period t. If ki = 0, player i is a cooperator and if ki > 0 player
i is a defector. The strategy for the in-group policing equilibrium in-
volves nice play (i.e., no player initiates defection). Off the equilibrium
path, defectors are punished for a ﬁxed number of periods by mem-
bers of their own group. Defectors, themselves, cooperate with the
cooperators who are punishing them; punishers defect against defec-
tors. All types cooperate with out-group members. Fearon and Laitin
describe the strategy as follows:
Play C in all out-group pairings. For in-group pairings, always play
C against any partner not in punishment phase, and always play D
against any player in punishment phase. A player enters or restarts
a punishment phase for kgp periods if she defects against either an
out-group or an in-group cooperator.

--- Sayfa 281 ---
6. Application: Interethnic Cooperation
265
For a given state st and any integer l > 0, let nt+l be the number of
members of group Awho will be cooperators in period t + l, assuming
that each plays the equilibrium strategy from period t to period t + l.
Therefore, qt+l = (nt+l)/(n −1) is the probability of facing a coopera-
tor in an in-group interaction.
To demonstrate that these strategies constitute a subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium, we must verify the following conditions:
(1) A cooperator i has no incentive to
(a) defect against any out-group player
(b) defect against any in-group cooperator
(c) cooperate with any in-group defector.
(2) A defector i has no incentive to
(a) defect against an out-group player
(b) defect against an in-group cooperator
(c) cooperate against an in-group defector.
Clearly, conditions 1(c) and 2(c) are satisﬁed; those deviations lower
utility in the current period without affecting strategies of any other
player, that is, do not trigger punishments. Note that 1(a) and 1(b)
reﬂect the same trade-offs; both deviations generate a payoff of α in
period t followed by kgp periods of punishment. Thus, we must only es-
tablish that there is no incentive to deviate in cases 1(a), 2(a), and 2(b).
The utility for cooperation against an in-group cooperator or out-
group member is
1 +
∞

l=1
δl(p + (1 −p)(qt+l + (1 −qt+l)α)),
and the utility from deviations 1(a) and 1(b) is
α +
kgp

l=1
δl(p + (1 −p)(−qt+lβ + (1 −qt+l)0))
+
∞

l=kgp+1
δl(p + (1 −p)(qt+l + (1 −qt+l)α)).
(9.1)
The net utility of cooperating is therefore
1 −α +
kgp

l=1
δl((1 −p)(qt+l (1 + β) + (1 −qt+l)α)).
(9.2)

--- Sayfa 282 ---
266
Repeated Games
So that deviations 1(a) and 1(b) are not proﬁtable, equation 9.2 must
be positive for all states and resulting sequences of qt+l. If α > 1 + β,
equation 9.2 is minimized by qt+l = 1 for l = 1, . . . , kgp. This is the
path following st = (0, 0, . . . , 0). The net utility is positive following
this state if and only if
δkgp ≤1 −(1 −δ) (α −1)
δ(1 −p) (1 + β).
(9.3)
Now consider the case where 1 + β > α. The net utility is minimized at
qt+l = 0 for l = 1, . . . , kgp. Given the deﬁnition of q this is an infeasible
sequence, because all players are assumed to cooperate in their punish-
ment phases and terminate their punishments after kgp periods. Thus,
the minimizing sequence is one where all players defect in time t −1
and return to cooperation status in period t + kgp −1. The sequence of
q is therefore qt+l = 0 for l = 1, kgp −1, and qt+kgp = 1. Some algebra
yields the requirement that

δ −δkgp
1 −δ
α
(1 + β) + δkgp ≥
α −1
(1 −p) (1 + β).
(9.4)
Now we need to check to see whether a defector at time t wishes to
make deviation 2(a). Suppose that a defector with ki is paired against
an out-group player. The utility of cooperating is
1 +
ki−1

l=1
δl(p + (1 −p)(−qt+lβ + (1 −qt+l)0))
+
∞

l=ki
δl(p + (1 −p)(qt+l + (1 −qt+l)α)),
and the utility of the deviation is equation 9.1. Thus, the defector co-
operates with an out-group member so long as
kgp

l=ki
δl((1 −p)(qt+l(1 + β) + (1 −qt+l)α)) ≥α −1.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
6. Application: Interethnic Cooperation
267
The right side of this inequality is minimized when ki = kgp so we
require
δkgp((1 −p)(qt+kgp(1 + β) + (1 −qt+kgp+l)α)) ≥α −1.
Because all players play according to the equilibrium strategy, qt+kgp =
1 for all st. Therefore, the defection is proﬁtable unless
δkgp ≥
α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β).
(9.5)
Finally, we need to rule out deviation 2(b). Assume a defector with
ki = 1 is paired against a cooperator. The utility of cooperating is
−β +
ki−1

l=1
δl(p + (1 −p)(−qt+lβ + (1 −qt+l)0))
+
∞

l=ki
δi(p + (1 −p)(qt+l + (1 −qt+l)α)).
The utility of defecting is given by
kgp

l=1
δl(p + (1 −p)(−qt+lβ + (1 −qt+l)0))
+
∞

l=kgp+1
δi(p + (1 −p)(qt+l + (1 −qt+l)α)).
Consequently,thenetutilityofcooperatingiskgp
l=ki δi((1 −p)(qt+l(1 +
β) + (1 −qt+l)α)) −β. Using the same argument as in case 2(a), a
SPNE requires
δkgp ≥
β
(1 −p)(1 + β).
(9.6)
Now we have a full set of equilibrium conditions. First, consider the
case α > 1 + β; where a SPNE requires equations 9.3, 9.5, and 9.6.
Equation 9.6 holds whenever 9.5 does. Less obviously, we can show

--- Sayfa 284 ---
268
Repeated Games
that equation 9.5 implies equation 9.3. We can rewrite equation 9.3 as
δ

δkgp −
α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β)

≤δ −
(α −1)
(1 −p) (1 + β).
(9.7)
If equation 9.5 holds, both sides of equation 9.7 are positive and the
right side must be larger because 1 > δ > δkgp. Thus, equation 9.5 is
necessary and sufﬁcient for the in-group policing strategies to be a
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if α > 1 + β.
Now consider the case α < β + 1 where a SPNE requires equations
9.4, 9.5, and 9.6 to hold. Here equation 9.6 implies equation 9.5. Also,
if equation 9.6 holds, the following holds:
δkgp ≥
β
(1 −p)(1 + β) >
α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β)
>
α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β) −

δ −δkgp
1 −δ
α
(1 + β).
Therefore, equation 9.6 implies equation 9.4 so that equation 9.6 is
necessary and sufﬁcient for the in-group punishments to constitute
a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. We have proved the following
proposition:
PROPOSITION 9.1 The in-group punishment strategy with kgp-period
punishments is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if and only if
δkgp ≥min

α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β),
β
(1 −p)(1 + β)

.
A few features of this SPNE are worth noting. First, if
δkgp ≥min

α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β),
β
(1 −p)(1 + β)

holds for kgp > 1, it must hold for kgp = 1 . Thus, no more than a single
period of punishment is required to sustain the equilibrium. In fact,
longer punishments are counterproductive; they lower the incentives
of defectors to cooperate in order to end the punishments.
A second important point about this subgame perfect Nash equilib-
rium is that it can only be sustained if p, the probability of out-group

--- Sayfa 285 ---
7. Application: Trade Wars
269
interactions, is low enough. Because the SPNE requires
min

α −1
(1 −p)(1 + β),
β
(1 −p)(1 + β)

≤1,
it does not exist if
p > min

1
1 + β , 1 −α −1
1 + β

.
When the probability of interaction with the out-group is large, the
probability of punishment for any deviation is low because punish-
ments are meted out only by in-group players. This effect generates
the somewhat counterintuitive implication that interethnic coopera-
tion is impeded by too much interethnic interaction. Fearon and Laitin
argue that this result provides an endogenous rationale for groups’
wanting to preserve ethnic boundaries.
7. Application: Trade Wars
Consider a generalization of the free trade game as presented in
Table 9.6.
We now interpret i as the value to each country of the other coun-
try’s open markets and ρ as each country’s gain from protecting its
own markets. As before, free trade can be supported by grim trigger
strategies if an only if i/(1 −δ) ≥i + ρ + δρ/(1 −δ) or
δ ≥ρ
i
for both players.
Supporting this equilibrium depends crucially on each country’s abil-
ity to observe the policies of the other country perfectly. This is not a
very realistic assumption if countries use invisible trade barriers. Also
Table 9.6. Generalized Free Trade Game
1\2
Free Trade
Protection
Free Trade
1, 2
0, 2 + ρ
Protection
1 + ρ, 0
ρ, ρ

--- Sayfa 286 ---
270
Repeated Games
because trade ﬂows vary with a number of market conditions unre-
lated to trade policy, a fall in trade between countries need not require
malfeasance by the other side.
To model these issues, assume that each country cannot directly ob-
serve the policies of the other country but observes only the value of its
trade i, which is a random variable. To keep matters as simple as pos-
sible, assume that when country j engages in free trade i = θ > 0 with
probability π and i = 0 with probability 1 −π. If country j protects
its markets, i = 0 with probability 1. Consequently, following i = θ
country i can infer that j selected free trade; following i = 0 country
i faces uncertainty about country j’s policy choice. Let πθ > ρ so that
each county prefers the free trade outcome to mutual protectionism in
expectation.5
Clearly, there are SPNEs in which protection occurs in every period.
We investigate whether there are equilibria that sustain some level
of free trade. Obviously, such an equilibrium requires some form of
punishment when i = 0 is observed.
First, consider a grim trigger strategy in which country i protects
forever following any observation of i = 0 . Thus, the payoffs to free
trade in the ﬁrst period are πθ + (1 −π)0. Free trade continues to the
next period so long as 1 = 2 = θ, which occurs with probability π2.
Thus, country i’s payoffs in the second period are π2(πθ + (1 −π)0) +
(1 −π2)ρ = π3θ + (1 −π2)ρ. Continuing the same logic to period 3,
we get π5θ + (1 −π4)ρ. Thus, the inﬁnite discounted sum of utilities
from free trade is
VFT = πθ + δ

π3θ + (1 −π2)ρ

+ δ2 
π5θ + (1 −π4)ρ

+ · · ·
VFT = πθ(1 + δπ2 + δ2π4 + · · · ) + δ(1 −π2)ρ + δ2(1 −π4)ρ + · · · .
The ﬁrst series is πθ/(1 −δπ2) while the second series can be further
reduced to δρ/(1 −δ) −δπ2ρ/(1 −δπ2). Consequently,
VFT = πθ −δπ2ρ
1 −δπ2
+
δρ
1 −δ .
The utility from defecting to protection is more straightforward. The
one-period payoff is πθ + ρ, and the future payoff is δρ/(1 −δ) so that
5 This model is based loosely on Green and Porter’s (1984) model of imperfect collusion
and price wars in economic cartels.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
7. Application: Trade Wars
271
VP = πθ + ρ/(1 −δ). Thus, country i chooses free trade if and only
if VFT ≥VP or
δ >
ρ
π3θ .
For comparison, note that if policies were observable, a subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium in grim trigger strategies exists so long as
δ > ρ/(πθ). Thus, the grim trigger strategy is signiﬁcantly more dif-
ﬁcult to sustain when policies are unobservable. In fact, if ρ > π3θ,
there are no discount rates for which grim trigger strategies constitute
a SPNE. The grim trigger strategy is also very costly because bad real-
izations of i can generate inﬁnite punishments. Although no player
defects from free trade without ﬁrst observing i = 0, the equilibrium
results almost certainly in the breakdown of trade.
Following Green and Porter (1984), we consider ﬁnite trigger strate-
gies. If either country observes i = 0, a trade war begins in which
both countries protect their markets for k ≥1 periods. We now estab-
lish conditions under which free trade is the optimal policy if there is
no ongoing trade war.6 Let Vk
i be the value of the k periods of payoffs
for country i in a k-period trade war. It is easy to see that
Vk
i = (1 −δk)ρ
1 −δ
.
Let VFT be the expected payoff of the inﬁnite stream of payoffs be-
ginning at a period in which the countries are in a free trade phase.
Therefore,
VFT = π

θ + πδVFT
+

1 −π2
δ

Vk
i + δkVFT
.
Simple algebra yields
VFT =
πθ +

1 −π2
δVk
i
1 −π2δ −(1 −π2)δk+1 .
Using the single-deviation principle, the value of a deviation, VP, is
VP = πθ + ρ + δ

Vk
i + δkVFT
.
6 Since mutual protection is a Nash equilibrium, we do not need to check the optimality
of protecting during a trade war.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
272
Repeated Games
In equilibrium it must be the case that VFT ≥VP. This requires that
δ −δk+1
1 −δk+1 >
ρ
π3θ .
(9.8)
The left side of this expression is increasing in k so let kmin(δ) be the
smallest integer such that the inequality holds for a given δ. We have
proved the following proposition:
PROPOSITION 9.2 If δ > ρ/(π3θ) and k ≥kmin(δ), the following strate-
gies form a SPNE:
(1) Begin the game, free trading.
(2) Free trade until i = 0 for either country.
(3) Following a period in which i = 0, protect for k periods.
(4) After k periods, return to free trade.
Note that a SPNE can be supported with trade wars of any length
greaterthatkmin(δ).Ifcountriescancoordinateontheoptimalduration
of trade wars, however, the model provides a theory of their duration.
Intuitively, because trade wars are costly, the countries should coor-
dinate on the minimal length war that sustains cooperation, that is,
kmin(δ) . This intuition can be veriﬁed by checking that VFT is strictly
decreasing in k so long as πθ > ρ. Thus, we derive empirical predic-
tions by examining equation 9.8. Recall that the left side is increasing
in k; this implies that kmin(δ) is increasing in the value of protectionism
and decreasing in the value of free trade. This conclusion is reasonable;
trade wars should be longer when the incentive problems are more se-
vere. The duration of trade conﬂict is decreasing in π. Suppose that
we interpret 1 −π as the volatility of trade ﬂows (the probability of
low trade during a free trade regime). This interpretation suggests that
trade volatility increases the duration of trade wars. This is necessary to
prevent countries from enacting barriers and blaming the drop in trade
on natural volatility. In equilibrium, the countries never protect out-
side trade wars so that they know with certainty that i = 0 is caused
by natural volatility. Ironically, although country j never defects, coun-
try i must respond to i = 0 with a costly, lengthy trade war; this is
necessary to ensure that barriers are, in fact, not erected.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
8. Exercises
273
8. Exercises
EXERCISE 9.1 Consider the inﬁnitely repeated game with stage game:
1\2
l
m
r
u
1, 1
8, 3
1, 2
c
1, 6
5, 5
1, 4
d
1, 2
4, 1
2, 2
Assume that players have a common discount rate δ (with 0 < δ < 1).
(1) Is there a Nash equilibrium to the repeated game in which (u, m)
is played in every period? Does the answer depend on the value
of the discount rate δ?
(2) Find the smallest value of δ such that the following is a Nash
equilibrium in the repeated game: Play (c, m) in the ﬁrst period
and in any period in which (c, m) was played in every previous
period. If in some previous period (c, m) was not played then
play (d,r) forever.
(3) Find the smallest value of δ such that there is a Nash equilibrium
in which (u, m) is played in every period.
EXERCISE 9.2 Show that in the Prisoner’s Dilemma of Table 9.4, the best
deviation from tit-for-tat results in one of the following payoff streams:
c + δd + (c + δd)/(1 −δ2) or c + δb/(1 −δ).
EXERCISE 9.3(∗) Prove that the single-deviation principle applies for
subgame perfect equilibria in inﬁnitely repeated games if agents use
discount rates less than 1.
EXERCISE 9.4 Find the range of discount rates for which the modiﬁed
tit-for-tat strategy is subgame perfect in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma
with payoffs given by Table 9.4.
EXERCISE 9.5 Prove Proposition 9.1.
EXERCISE 9.6 Prove Proposition 9.2.
EXERCISE 9.7 Find conditions for the existence of the spiral SPNE to
the Fearon and Laitin model. This equilibrium is based on the following
strategies:

--- Sayfa 290 ---
274
Repeated Games
In in-group pairings, always play C with cooperator, and always play
D against a defector, regardless of one’s status. A player enters or
restarts the in-group punishment phase for kin periods by defecting
against a cooperator. In out-group pairings, play C if neither group
is in an out-group punishments phase. Otherwise play, D. A group
enters the out-group punishment phase for koutperiods if any member
defects in a cross-group pairing when neither group is in the out-group
punishment phase.
EXERCISE 9.8 Consider the model of trade wars. Construct the following
“probabilistic grim trigger SPNE.” Instead of reverting to protectionism
forever the ﬁrst time i = 0 is observed, assume that country i plays a
mixed strategy and protects forever with probability μ.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
10 Bargaining Theory
If political science is the study of “who gets what, when and how,” then
bargaining theory lies at its foundation.1 Legislators and executives
bargain over new legislation. States bargain to reach new international
agreements and to settle crises. Political parties bargain over coalition
governments. And so on.
Not surprisingly, given bargaining’s importance, the application of
game theoretic models of bargaining to study political processes is a
very active area of research. These models focus on two sets of issues.
The ﬁrst are questions of distribution – “who wins” and “who loses.”
Does the president get his preferred legislation? Which country gets to
control the disputed region? Which parties receive government portfo-
lios? The second important question concerns the efﬁciency of political
bargaining. Does the bargaining process itself consume resources or
fail to reach outcomes that make everyone better off? Does legisla-
tive bargaining end in gridlock or a veto even though there are policy
compromises that all prefer? Do international disputes end in costly
militarized conﬂicts and wars? Why does it take so long to form new
coalition governments?
In this chapter, we review some of the most important bargaining
models and their application to political science.
1. The Nash Bargaining Solution
One of the earliest attempts to model bargaining is the framework de-
veloped by John Nash. His approach is axiomatic; it stipulates a number
1 See Lasswell (1936).
275

--- Sayfa 292 ---
276
Bargaining Theory
of features that should characterize the outcome of any bargaining situ-
ation. Before discussing these axiomatic requirements, we describe his
“solution” to the bargaining problem. Our discussion closely mirrors
that of Muthoo (1999).
Suppose that two players Aand B negotiate over the allocation of
X units of some resource. X is inﬁnitely divisible; the feasible alloca-
tions are xA and xB such that xA + xB ≤X. Both players receive utility
based on their allocations, uA(xA) and uB(xB). The utility functions
ui(·) are strictly increasing and concave for both players i ∈{A, B}.
If no agreement is reached, each player receives a default utility, dis-
agreement value or outside option of ui > ui(0). Finally, to ensure that
the bargaining problem is nontrivial, there exists at least one alloca-
tion (xA, xB) such that ui(xi) > ui for each i and xA + xB ≤X. This
ensures at least one feasible allocation that both players prefer to their
disagreement values.
In analyzing Nash’s solution to this problem, it is useful to convert it
into one of allocations of utilities (uA, uB) rather than one of allocations
of X. We, therefore, deﬁne the feasible utility allocations as the set  =

(uA, uB) : uA(xA) = uA, uA(xB) = uB, and xA + xB ≤X

. Given our
assumptions about the utility functions, the boundary of this feasible
set is a locus of points such as in Figure 10.1. This locus is the function
A
u
B
u
A
u
B
u
A
g u
(    )
Figure 10.1. Nash’s Bargaining Solution.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
1. The Nash Bargaining Solution
277
g(uA) = uB(X −u−1
A (uA)). Muthoo (1999) provides a proof that g is
both decreasing and concave in uA. To simplify our exposition, we
assume that it is twice-differentiable.
Now we can state Nash’s solution to the bargaining problem. His
solution, based on the axioms discussed later, is the utility allocation
(uA, uB) ∈ that maximizes
(uA −uA) (uB −uB)
subject to uA ≥uA and uB ≥uB .
The requirement that uA ≥uA and uB ≥uB is illustrated by the dot-
ted lines in Figure 10.1. Thus, the constraint set is g(uA) on the range

uA, g−1 (uB)

. Because g is concave and decreasing, the feasible set is
convex. It is easy to see that the Nash product (uA −uA) (uB −uB) is
quasi-concave in both uA and uB. Thus, its level curves in the region
where the product is positive are the heavy dotted lines in Figure 10.1.
The unique Nash bargaining solution is located at the tangency of
g and the iso-product curves. Mathematically, the solution to this con-
strained optimization problem is
−g′(uA) = uB −uB
uA −uA
and
uB = g(uA).
Before proceeding to general results about the Nash bargaining solu-
tion, it is useful to consider some special cases. Assume that X= 1 and
ui(xi) = xi. The Nash bargaining solution for this model is
uA = xA = 1 + uA −uB
2
and uB = xB = 1 −uA + uB
2
.
This solution has two important features. First, each player does bet-
ter when a disagreement provides her with a higher utility and worse
when the opponent has a better outside option. Second, if both players
have equally valuable outside options, the resources are split evenly.
In this case, bargainersinsist upon their disagreementvalues and equal-
ly split the surplus 1 −uA −uB. This split generates a utility of ui +
(1 −uA −uB)/2.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
278
Bargaining Theory
Turning to the general case, the Nash bargaining solution (in terms
of shares) is provided by the following proposition:
THEOREM 10.1 The Nash bargaining shares are the solution to
uA(xA) −uA
u′
A(xA)
= uB(X −xA) −uB
u′
B(X −xA)
.
Proof Direct application of the previous result using the fact that
g′(uA) = −u−1′
A (X −u−1
A (uA)) · u′
B(X −u−1
A (uA)) = −u′
B(X −u−1
A (uA))/
u
′
A(X −u−1
A (uA)) and u−1
A (uA) = xA.
□
A direct implication of this result is that if the disagreement values
and utility functions are the same for both players, the Nash bargain-
ing shares are xA = xB = 1
2 X. Finally, given our assumptions about g,
payoffs increase in one’s own disagreement value and decline in the
opponent’s.
THEOREM 10.2 Assume that g is twice-differentiable; then ∂ui/∂ui > 0
and ∂u j/∂ui < 0 for i̸ = j.
Proof Because g is twice-differentiable, we can use implicit differ-
entiation
on
the
solution
(g(uA) −uB)/(uA −uA) + g′(uA) = 0.
Because
the
second-order
condition
is
satisﬁed
(i.e.,
(g′(uA)(uA −uA) −(g(uA) −uB))/(uA −uA)2 + g′′(uA) < 0),
the
result follows from −1/(uA −uA) < 0, (g(uA) −uB)/(uA −uA)2 > 0,
and g′(uA) < 0.
□
1.1. Application: Risk Aversion and the Nash Bargaining Solution.
Intuitively, risk is an important component of bargaining. Bargainers
always have to contend with the possibility that an agreement will not
be reached, and they will be left with their outside options. Also we
expect that if a player makes a more aggressive demand, she increases
the probability that the negotiations collapse. Consequently, it seems
natural to think that bargainers who are more willing to tolerate risk
should do better, because they make tougher demands and reject more
offers. Although the Nash bargaining model “black boxes” the nego-
tiation process, its solution is consistent with this intuition.
Assume that each player has a utility function given by ui(xi) = xαi
i
where 0 < αi < 1, disagreement values ui = 0, and X = 1. The differ-
entvaluesofα capturetheplayer’sriskaversion;thelowerα thegreater

--- Sayfa 295 ---
1. The Nash Bargaining Solution
279
the risk aversion.2 It is easiest to compute the equilibrium shares by
using the formula from Theorem 10.1. The solution is
xA =
α A
α A + αB
and xB =
αB
α A + αB
.
In these results, each bargainer’s share decreases in his own risk aver-
sion and increases in the risk aversion of his opponent. This effect is
consistent with the intuition that bargainers who are risk acceptant
enough to take tough positions (i.e., increase the likelihood of dis-
agreement) receive larger allocations.
1.2. Nash’s Axioms. In this section we outline the axioms that under-
lie Nash’s bargaining solution. Informally, the axioms encapsulate the
following principles:
(1) The bargainers maximize expected utility.
(2) Bargaining is efﬁcient. The players fully allocate all of the avail-
able resources, and no player does worse than her disagreement
value.
(3) The allocation depends only on the player’s preferences and
disagreement values.
(4) The bargaining solution is not affected by eliminating from con-
sideration allocations other than the solution.
To formalize these axioms, recall that  is the set of feasible
utility levels (uA, uB) that can be reached through some alloca-
tion of X. The set of Pareto optimal allocations is e = {ω ∈ :
uA ≥uA and g(uA) ≥uB

. A generic bargaining situation is a pair
(, u) where u is the vector of disagreement values. Finally, the set
of all bargaining games is , and a bargaining solution is a function
F :  →R2. Let Fi denote the utility allocated to agent i.
The following axioms form the basis of Nash’s solution.
AXIOM 10.1. Invariance to Equivalent Utility Representations: Let u′
i =
αiui + βi and u′
i = αiui + βi for αi > 0 and deﬁne ′ accordingly. Then
Fi (′, u′) = αi Fi (, u) + βi for i = A, B.
2 A standard measure of risk aversion is −u′′/u′. For these utility functions, −u′′/u′ =
−(α(α −1)xa−2)/(αxα−1) = (1 −α)/x.

--- Sayfa 296 ---
280
Bargaining Theory
Afﬁne transformations of utility functions and disagreement utilities
do not alter the bargaining outcomes. Because the utility allocations
are adjusted by the same transformations as the utility functions, the
resource allocations are the same in both bargaining solutions. For-
mally, u−1
i (Fi(, u)) = u′−1
i
(Fi(′, u′)). From Chapter 3, this axiom
implies that the players are expected utility maximizers.
AXIOM 10.2. Pareto Efﬁciency: If F () = (uA, uB), then there are no
other allocations (u′
A, u′
B) ∈ such that u′
i > ui for some i and u′
j ≥u j
for j̸ = i.
The Pareto axiom holds that the bargainers are not able to improve
upon the bargaining solution by choosing an allocation that makes one
of the bargainers better off without reducing the utility of the other.
AXIOM 10.3. Symmetry: Let uA = uB and assume that (u1, u2) ∈ if
and only if (u2, u1) ∈. Then FA(, u) = FB(, u).
The basic idea of this axiom is that if neither player is advantaged by
having a better disagreement outcome or a utility level unreachable by
her opponent, then the bargainers receive the same utility allocations.
AXIOM 10.4. Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives. Consider two
bargainingsituations(, u)and(′, u)suchthat′ ⊂and F (, u) ⊂
′. Then F (, u) = F (′, u).
The intuition behind the IIA axiom is that, holding the disagreement
points constant, a smaller feasible set of allocations only changes the
bargaining solution if it makes the original allocation infeasible.
From our analysis of the Nash bargaining solution in the previous
section, it is clear that it satisﬁes all of these axioms. The next proposi-
tion establishes that it is the only solution satisfying all four axioms.
THEOREM 10.3 A bargaining solution F :  →R2 satisﬁes axioms 1–4
if and only if it is the Nash bargaining solution.
Muthoo (1999) presents a straightforward proof. The conscientious
reader should independently complete the part of the proof described
in the exercises.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
2. Noncooperative Bargaining
281
2. Noncooperative Bargaining
Although it makes a number of reasonable empirical predictions, the
Nash bargaining solution is best interpreted as a normative argument
about what bargaining outcomes should look like rather than a positive
theory about how actual bargaining takes place. In this section, we
turn to noncooperative game theoretic models to deduce behavior of
bargainers under different extensive forms.
The starting point for the application of noncooperative game theory
to bargaining is the model of Rubinstein (1982). Suppose that two
players try to decide how to divide $1. The players take turns making
offers so that player 1 proposes in periods 0, 2, 4, and so on, and player 2
makes proposals in the other periods. The game continues (possibly
inﬁnitely) until a proposal is accepted by the other player.
In each period that she is the proposer, player 1 makes an offer
(x1, x2) where x1 is player 1’s share and x2 is player 2’s share where
x1 + x2 ≤1. If player 2 accepts, the game ends and the dollar is divided
accordingly. If player 2 rejects, then she gets to make an offer (x1, x2),
and the game continues if player 1 rejects. To simplify matters, both
players have linear utility functions u1(x1, x2) = x1 and u2(x1, x2) = x2.
Each player has a discount factor δi: players value proposal (x1, x2)
accepted t periods in the future as (δt
1x1, δt
2x2).
Just as in the bargaining game encountered in Chapter 7, there are
lotsofNashequilibria.Forexample,considerthestrategypair“Player1
demands x1 = 1 and refuses all other offers, and player 2 always offers
x1 = 1 and accepts any offer.” This equilibrium, however, is not sub-
game perfect. If player 2 rejects player 1’s ﬁrst offer and offers x1 > δ1,
player 1 accepts; the best it can get is the whole dollar next period
discounted by δ1. So we focus on subgame perfect Nash equilibria.
2.1. Subgame Perfect Equilibria. Rubinstein shows that there is a
unique SPNE to this game based on playing the following strategies in
every period:
Player 1 proposes
 1 −δ2
1 −δ1δ2
, δ2 (1 −δ1)
1 −δ1δ2

and accepts player 2’s offer if and only if
x1 ≥δ1(1 −δ2)
1 −δ1δ2
.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
282
Bargaining Theory
Player 2 proposes
δ1(1 −δ2)
1 −δ1δ2
, 1 −δ1
1 −δ1δ2

and accepts player 1’s offer if and only if
x2 ≥δ2(1 −δ1)
1 −δ1δ2
.
We begin by verifying that these strategies are in fact a SPNE.
First we check whether player 1 has an incentive to defect in any
subgame. Consider a subgame beginning with a proposal by player
1 (i.e., an even period). In the equilibrium, player 1 proposes the split
((1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2), (δ2(1 −δ1))/(1 −δ1δ2)), which is accepted by
player 2. Clearly, player 1 cannot gain by lowering x1; such a proposal is
accepted and player 1 gets a lower share. If player 1 raises x1, then she
must lower x2 to maintain feasibility. Any x2 < (δ2(1 −δ1))/(1 −δ1δ2)
is rejected, however. Following such a rejection, player 2 proposes
x1 = (δ1(1 −δ2))/(1 −δ1δ2), and player 1 accepts. Note that we are
using the single-deviation principle by considering a deviation that
changes proposal behavior but not accepting behavior. Thus, player
1’s utility of this defection is (δ2
1(1 −δ2))/(1 −δ1δ2), which is less than
her equilibrium utility of (1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2) because δ1 < 1.
Now consider whether player 1 defects when player 2 is the pro-
poser (i.e., an odd period). Player 2 proposes ((δ1(1 −δ2))/(1 −δ1δ2),
(1 −δ1)/(1 −δ1δ2)). Note that accepting and rejecting the offer lead
to the same utility; the best that player 1 can do is to have x =
(1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2) accepted one period later.
The process of showing that player 2 does not defect is exactly the
same.
2.2. Computing the Equilibrium. The problem with the preceding
proof is that it does not give much of a sense of how the result is
derived. Now we consider a more constructive proof. Let v1 and v2
be the utilities of player 1 and 2 for subgames in which they are the
proposer, for example, if player 1 makes a proposal x1 that is accepted
v1 = x1. If player 1’s proposal is rejected, v1 is the discounted value of
the maximum of what player 2 offers and what player 1 gets by reject-
ing and proposing in his next turn. Given that the postulated strategies

--- Sayfa 299 ---
2. Noncooperative Bargaining
283
are the same in every period, these values are independent of t. These
are continuation values because they also reﬂect the utility of reject-
ing a proposal and moving to the next subgame. Consider a subgame
where player 1 is the proposer. She must offer player 2 at least δ2v2.
Thus, x1 = 1 −δ2v2. Because this offer is accepted v1 = x1 = 1 −δ2v2.
Consider a subgame where player 2 is the proposer. She must offer at
least δ1v1 so that v2 = 1 −δ1v1.
Solving these two equations leads to v1 = (1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2) and
v2 = (1 −δ1)/(1 −δ1δ2). These continuation values are consistent with
the strategies presented in the last section. In fact the strategies pre-
sented earlier represent the only feasible way to attain these continu-
ation values.
2.3. Uniqueness. Although we have shown that Rubinstein’s equilib-
rium is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, we have not ruled out
the possibility that there are others. We now show that this equilib-
rium is the unique SPNE by proving that v1 and v2 deﬁned earlier
are the only continuation values consistent with a SPNE. Suppose
there are more than one SPNE. Let vi and vi be player i’s highest
and lowest SPNE continuation values for any subgame where player
i is the proposer.
Let wi and wi be player i’s highest and lowest
SPNE continuation values for any subgame where player i is not the
proposer.
When player 1 makes a proposal, she never offers more than δ2v2
because player 2 cannot expect more than v2 by rejecting and making
her own proposal in the next round. Thus, player 1’s lowest possible
continuation value must satisfy v1 ≥1 −δ2v2. By a symmetric argu-
ment, v2 ≥1 −δ1v1. Because the other player never offers more than
δivi we also know that wi ≤δivi.
Now consider player 1’s strategy. When she proposes the best she
can do is pay δ2v2 or trigger a rejection to get δ1w1. Thus, we know
that her continuation value satisﬁes v1 ≤max

1 −δ2v2, δ1w1

≤
max

1 −δ2v2, δ2
1v1

= 1 −δ2v2 . Similarly, v2 ≤1 −δ1v1. Thus, the
following four inequalities must be satisﬁed:
v1 ≥1 −δ2v2
v2 ≥1 −δ1v1
v2 ≤1 −δ1v1
v1 ≤1 −δ2v2.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
284
Bargaining Theory
Combining
the
ﬁrst
and
third
inequalities
generates
v1 ≥
1 −δ2(1 −δ1v1), which implies that v1 ≥(1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2).
Sim-
ilarly, combining the second and fourth inequalities generates
v1 ≤1 −δ2(1 −δ1v1) or v1 ≤(1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2). These conditions
imply that v1 = v1 = (1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2). With similar arguments, we
can also establish that v2 = v2 = (1 −δ1)/(1 −δ1δ2). Thus, there is a
single continuation value for each player and the postulated strategies
are the only SPNE.
2.4. Implications. The model suggests a very simple path of play.
In period zero, player 1 proposes ((1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2), (δ2(1 −δ1))/
(1 −δ1δ2)), player 2 accepts, and the game ends. Because the whole
dollar is allocated and there is no delay, the subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium is efﬁcient. It is easy to see that the SPNE has the following
implications:
(1) If both players have the same discount factor, there is a ﬁrst
mover advantage because (1 −δ)/(1 −δ2) > δ(1 −δ)/(1 −δ2).
Intuitively, because player 2 discounts the future, player 1 only
needs offer her a fraction of what she gets for being the pro-
poser next period. Because both players are identical, player 2
is getting only a fraction of what player 1 gets.
(2) Both players’ shares are increasing in their discount factors and
declining in their opponent’s: it pays to be patient. When player
2’s discount factor is high, player 1 has to offer her more to
secure immediate agreement. Conversely, when player 1’s dis-
count factor is high, player 2 must offer him more to reach
agreement in the event that player 2 gets to make an offer. Thus,
rejecting player 1’s offer is less valuable for player 2, suggesting
that player 1 gets to keep more in the ﬁrst period.
(3) Ifδ1 = δ2 = δ,thenbothplayers’sharesconvergeto1/2asδ con-
verges to 1. As both players become perfectly patient, they are
less willing to accept offers that are less than what they can get
as the proposer next period. In the limit, they demand exactly
what they expect to get next period. One way to think about
the discount rates’ converging to 1 is to consider a situation
in which offers and counteroffers can be made very quickly so
that rejecting an offer creates only inﬁnitessimal delay. In such
a case, the equilibrium involves equal division and corresponds
to the Nash bargaining solution.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
2. Noncooperative Bargaining
285
2.5. Asymmetric Disagreement Values. In the canonical Rubinstein
game, the players get 0 in any period for which there is no agreement.
We now modify the game in two ways. First, players receive an alloca-
tion of (d1, d2) in each period prior to an agreement where d1 + d2 < 1.
After an agreement, (x∗
1, x∗
2), is reached, the bargainers receive this
allocation in every period over an inﬁnite horizon. This contrasts with
the model of the last section where the allocation is “consumed imme-
diately.”3 To keep matters simple, we assume that δ1 = δ2 = δ. Thus,
the utilities of reaching agreement (x∗
1, x∗
2) in period t are

1 −δt−1
d1 + δtx∗
1
1 −δ
,

1 −δt−1
d2 + δtx∗
2
1 −δ

.4
Let vi bei’s continuation values for any period in which she proposes.
If an agreement (x∗
1, x∗
2) is reached in such a period, vi = x∗
i /(1 −δ).
Consider player 2’s decision to accept or reject an offer of x2. If
she accepts, she generates a value of x2/(1 −δ) whereas if she re-
jects she gets d2 in the current period and a continuation value v2
in the next. Thus, she accepts so long as x2 > (1 −δ) (d2 + δv2) .
Now consider player 1’s choice. If he makes the minimal accept-
able offer x2 = (1 −δ) (d2 + δv2), his continuation value is v1 =
(1 −(1 −δ) (d2 + δv2))/(1 −δ) = 1/(1 −δ) −d2 −δv2.
Similarly,
if
player 2 wishes to secure an agreement to her proposals, we re-
quire v2 = 1/(1 −δ) −d1 −δv1. The solution to these two equations
is given by
v1 = 1 −d2 + δd1
1 −δ2
=
d1
1 −δ + 1 −d1 −d2
1 −δ2
v2 = 1 −d1 + δd2
1 −δ2
=
d2
1 −δ + 1 −d1 −d2
1 −δ2
.
To show that these are in fact equilibrium continuation values, we must
show that each player prefers to make the equilibrium proposal rather
3 This modiﬁcation rules out strategies where the bargainers delay inﬁnitely in the hope
the discounted sum of di exceeds the one-period agreement. We can easily adjust the
original model to correspond to the assumption that the agreement is over a ﬂow of
utilities rather than one-shot consumption. We would simply use the original model
and assume that the players were allocating 1/(1 −δ).
4 We assume that any agreement results in the same allocation in each period. However,
because the players are risk neutral, there might be agreements to random allocations
that generate the same payoffs.

--- Sayfa 302 ---
286
Bargaining Theory
than defect and get the disagreement value for an additional period.
Thus, we require v1 > d1 (1 + δ) + δ2v1 or v1 > d1/(1 −δ). Similarly,
our equilibrium requires that v2 > d2/(1 −δ). These facts are easily
veriﬁed. The techniques of Section 2.3 can easily be generalized to
show that this is the unique SPNE.
This equilibrium has a number of qualitative similarities to the Nash
bargaining solution. Note that each player’s continuation value in-
creases in her disagreement value and decreases in her opponent’s
disagreement value. This equilibrium also has a surplus-splitting in-
terpretation.
Note that each player’s continuation value has two
components. The ﬁrst is di/(1 −δ) which is the utility each player can
guarantee herself in the absence of any agreement. The second com-
ponent (1 −d1 −d2)/(1 −δ2) corresponds to the equilibrium continu-
ation value in a game to split 1 −d1 −d2 when the players have outside
option values of 0. Thus, a useful interpretation of this equilibrium is
that both players take what they are entitled to and bargain over the
rest.
3. Majority-Rule Bargaining Under a Closed Rule
A key feature of the Rubinstein model is that unanimous consent is
required to reach an agreement on the allocation. This rules out a
number of important political settings where only a simple majority or
a supermajority is required for agreement. Baron and Ferejohn (1989)
have extended Rubinstein’s model to simple majority rule with more
than two bargainers.
Suppose that there are N (odd) players bargaining and any pro-
posal requires n = (N + 1)/2 votes. Instead of assuming alternating
offers, Baron and Ferejohn consider a bargaining protocol with a ran-
dom recognition rule. According to this protocol, in each period, every
player is chosen to make a proposal with an equal probability (1/N).
In this section, we focus on bargaining under a closed rule where the
proposer makes a take-it-leave-it offer for the current legislative ses-
sion. The proposer in each period makes an offer (x1, x2, . . . , xN) such
that xi is the share for player i. Feasibility requires that  xi ≤1. If this
proposal is rejected, the session ends, discounting occurs, and a new
proposer is chosen at the beginning of the next session. Later we con-
sider open rule bargaining where proposals can be amended within the
current session. To simplify, we assume that each player has the same
discount factor δ.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
3. Majority-Rule Bargaining Under a Closed Rule
287
This game has lots of subgame perfect equilibria. In fact, for large N
and δ, there is a SPNE that can support any division of the dollar. If the
players are patient enough, they can design punishment strategies to
guarantee $0 to any defector. These strategies require, however, that
each player know the whole (possibly inﬁnite) history of the game in
order to know which actions are consistent with the prescribed punish-
ment. Thus, following Baron and Ferejohn, we analyze only stationary
equilibria. A stationary equilibrium to this game is one in which
(1) A proposer proposes the same division every time she is recog-
nized regardless of the history of the game.
(2) Voters vote only on the basis of the current proposal and ex-
pectations about future proposals. Because of assumption 1, fu-
ture proposals have the same distribution of outcomes in each
period.
These two assumptions imply that the game essentially starts over
in every period. Therefore, the continuation value of each player is the
expected utility of the game. Let vi be the continuation value for player
i. We focus on symmetric equilibria so that vi = v for all i. Finally, we
consider only equilibria in which voters do not choose weakly dom-
inated strategies in the voting stages. Therefore, a voter accepts any
proposal that provides her at least as much as the discounted continu-
ation value. Therefore, any voter who gets xi ≥δv votes in favor of the
proposal whereas any voter who receives less than δv votes against it.
Given these voting strategies, an optimal proposal gives δv to n −1
other players, z = 1 −(n −1)δv to the proposer, and 0 to the rest. We
assume (although you should show that it must be true) that the pro-
poser chooses her coalition partners randomly. Now we can compute v.
Because the continuation value is just the expected value of the game
starting next period, it is simply ztimes the probability of being chosen
as proposer 1/N, δv times the probability of being included in the win-
ning coalition (n −1)/N, and 0 times the remaining probability. Thus,
v = z
N + n −1
N
δv.
Substituting for z and simplifying yields
v = 1
N.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
288
Bargaining Theory
Thus, the continuation value is a proportional share of the dollar.
Because v is also the expected utility of the game, this result implies
that bargaining is efﬁcient because the sum of player utilities is
maximized. As shown in the exercises, this efﬁciency result may not
hold if voters are risk averse.
Finally, given our solution for v, we compute the proposer’s share:
z = 1 −δ n −1
N
= 1 −δ N −1
2N .
To ensure that the proposer prefers to make an acceptable proposal,
we must check that z > δv; otherwise a proposer would prefer to punt
and wait for the next period. This condition is easily veriﬁed.
Among the important implications of the model are its predictions
about proposal power. One measure of proposal power is the differ-
ence between z and δv or 1 −δ(N + 1)/2N. First, note that proposal
power increases in N. When N increases, the proposer has more po-
tential coalition partners to play off one another. This increases the
competition for inclusion in the winning coalition and drives down
what the proposer must pay. Second, proposal power is decreasing in
δ. When δ is higher, the voters are more willing to vote down proposals
and wait for a chance to propose themselves. Thus, the proposer must
be relatively more generous to secure agreement.
3.1. Supermajority Rule. The model can be easily extended to capture
situations where more than a simple majority is required for passage
of the bill. Now assume that k > n votes are required. If is easy to see
that the proposer’s share is now
z = 1 −(k −1)δv
and the continuation values are now given by
v = z
N + k −1
N
δv.
Simple algebra reveals that once again v = 1/N. This is not terribly
surprising given that the supermajority rule preserves the symmetry of
the majority rule game. The proposer’s equilibrium share is now low-
ered to z = 1 −δ(k −1)/N, however. Thus, the primary consequence
of supermajority rules is to mitigate the proposer’s advantage.

--- Sayfa 305 ---
3. Majority-Rule Bargaining Under a Closed Rule
289
3.2. Asymmetric Proposal Power. A limitation of the preceding mod-
els is the assumption that all legislators have the same probability of
being recognized to make the proposal. In real world legislative insti-
tutions, membership in certain committees and parties may affect the
probability that an individual legislator gets to make a proposal.
To show how the model generalizes, suppose that the members are
divided into two parties A and B. Party A has N −m ≥(n + 1)/2
members so that it is the majority party. Each member of A has a
proposal power p > 1/N. Alternatively, there are m members of B
who have proposal power q < 1/N. For consistency, we require that
(N −m)p + mq = 1.
Again we assume symmetry so that every legislator with the same
recognition probability plays the same strategy and has the same
continuation value.
The members of the two parties have contin-
uation values vA and vB, respectively. We conjecture for now (and
prove later) that vA > vB. Given these continuation values, a member
of party Avotes for any proposal that provides her at least δvA and a
member of party B votes for a proposal giving her at least δvB. Given
these strategies and the assumption that vA > vB, a proposer from
party Agives δvB to the m members of party B and δvA to n −m −1
members of party A. Recall that n = (n + 1)/2. Thus, the proposer’s
share is
zA = 1 −(n −m −1)δvA −mδvB.
A member of B gives positive allocations to m −1 members of B and
n −m members of Aso that the proposer’s share is
zB = 1 −(n −m)δvA −(m −1)δvB.
Note that zA > zB. We can now compute vA and vB
vA = pzA + p(n −m −1)δvA + qm(n −m)δvA/(N −m)
vB = qzB + (1 −q)δvB.
Thus, we have four equations with four unknowns. Solving this system
is straightforward. Writing down the solution is tedious, so we con-
sider a simple example. Let N = 3, m = 1. Note that q = 1 −2p < 1/3.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
290
Bargaining Theory
Therefore, the equilibrium conditions are the following:
zA = 1 −δvB
zB = 1 −δvA
vA = pzA + qδvA/2
vB = qzB + (1 −q)δvB.
After some tedious algebra, we ﬁnd that
vA = (1 −q)(1 −δ)
2 + qδ −2δ
vB =
q(2 −δ)
2 + qδ −2δ .
We still need to check our assumption that vA ≥vB. This occurs when
q < 1 −δ
3 −2δ ≤1
3.
Because this upper bound is always less than 1/3 when δ > 0, the asym-
metry in proposal power must be substantial to give an advantage to
party A. The reason is that its greater proposal power makes members
of Aunattractive coalition partners. Thus, the likelihood of being the
proposer must be large enough to offset this effect. It is easy to show,
however, that vA is decreasing and vB is increasing in q.
To complete our analysis, we need to consider what happens when
(1 −δ)/(3 −2δ) < q ≤1/3. We can rule out vB > vA as this would im-
ply that the member of B is never in a coalition with the proposer.
Thus,
vB = qzB = q(1 −δvA)
vA = pzA + (1 −p)δvA = p(1 −δvA) + (1 −p)δvA.
This leads to vA = (1 −q)/(2(1 −δq)) and vB = q(2 −δ −δq)/
(2(1 −δq)). Note that vB > vA only if q ≥(1 + 2δ)/(3 −2δ) ≥1/3,
which violates our original assumption about q. Thus, the only pos-
sible outcome for (1 −δ)/(3 −2δ) < q ≤1/3 is vA = vB. To support
this equilibrium, proposers from Amust choose a mixed strategy that
randomizes between forming a coalition with the remaining members

--- Sayfa 307 ---
4. The Baron-Ferejohn Model Under Open Rule
291
of Aand forming one with the member of B. We leave computation of
the equilibrium mixed strategy as an exercise.
3.3. Asymmetric Veto Powers. Another institutional variation in leg-
islative institutions is that certain players are privileged with the ability
to block legislation such as the president, an upper chamber, or a court.
In this section, we provide a simple example of how to incorporate ve-
toes into the Baron-Ferejohn model.5 Now suppose that one member
of our three-person legislature has absolute veto power in that she
must approve every proposal. Let party B have the veto player. To
keep matters simple, we return to the case of equal proposal powers.
Because B has an absolute veto, any proposer must include B and
at least one member of Ain her coalition so that
zA = 1 −δvB
zB = 1 −δvA.
Computing the continuation values, we obtain
vA = 1
3zA + δ 1
3vA
vB = 1
3zB + δ 2
3vB.
Thus, we can solve for
vA =
3(1 −δ)
δ2 −9δ + 9 and vB =
3 −2δ
δ2 −9δ + 9.
Note that vA < vB so long as δ > 0.
4. The Baron-Ferejohn Model Under Open Rule
The preceding sections focus exclusively on models where proposals
cannot be amended within the current legislative session. The model
can be extended, however, to allow proposals to be amended before a
ﬁnal passage vote. Now following each proposal a member is selected
at random from the remaining N −1 legislators. The selected legislator
5 This variation of the Baron-Ferejohn game was developed in McCarty (2000a, 2000b).

--- Sayfa 308 ---
292
Bargaining Theory
has two choices. First, she may call the question and bring about a ﬁnal
passage vote on the proposal. Alternatively, she may make a new offer
or amendment. The amendment is paired against the current offer. The
winner of this vote is the proposal on the ﬂoor at the beginning of the
next session. In the next session, a new legislator is chosen either to
amend or to call the question.
Now a legislative proposer has two considerations. First, just as be-
fore, a simple majority must receive their discounted continuation val-
ues in order to support the proposal on ﬁnal passage. Second, the pro-
poser must craft a proposal that deters others from amending it. This
can be accomplished by allocating sufﬁcient resources that the next
proposer prefers to move the initial proposal rather than have her own
proposal on the ﬂoor at the beginning of the next session.
To keep matters simple, we focus again on N = 3. First, consider a
scenario where the proposer keeps z, provides (1 −z)/2 to both other
legislators, and each legislator moves the question. To solve for the
optimal z, deﬁne v2
i (z) as the continuation value of beginning a session
with a proposal giving z to player i and (1 −z)/2 to the other two
legislators. Because we focus on symmetric equilibria, we suppress the
subscript i. Thus, v2(z) is the expected utility of this strategy for the ﬁrst
proposer and that of any proposer who successfully amends a proposal.
Given this deﬁnition, a proposer must give each legislator at least
δv2(z) to induce her to call the question Otherwise, a legislator selected
in the amendment stage defects, making a proposal giving herself z.
Therefore, the equilibrium requires that (1 −z)/2 ≥δv2(z). So long
as this condition holds, the proposer gets z with probability 1 so that
v2(z) = z.Thus,theproposermaximizes zsubjectto(1 −z)/2 ≥δv2(z).
This leads to a solution of
v2(z) = z =
1
1 + 2δ .
Although the proposer secures z = 1/(1 + 2δ) with certainty, she may
prefer to secure the support of only one legislator and risk the de-
feat of her proposal if the excluded legislator is selected to make an
amendment. So now assume that the proposer keeps z, gives 1 −z to
some other legislator, and gives 0 to the third legislator. The legislator
who receives 1 −z moves the question if selected. The legislator who
receives 0 offers an amendment giving z to herself, 0 to the original
proposer, and 1 −zto the other legislator. Such an amendment carries

--- Sayfa 309 ---
4. The Baron-Ferejohn Model Under Open Rule
293
with the votes of the legislators who receive positive allocation in the
amended proposal.
To compute the optimal z, we must consider two values. Let v1
i (z) be
the value to legislator i of beginning the period with a proposal giving
z to i and 1 −z and 0 to the others. Similarly, let v1
i (0) be the value to i
of the game starting from a proposal that gives 0 to agent i and z and
1 −zto the others. Again because of symmetry we drop the subscripts.
First, we compute v(z). With probability 1/2, the proposal is moved
and approved, giving the proposer z. With probability 1/2 , however,
the proposal is amended so that the original proposer gets 0 in the
proposalinplayatthebeginningofthenextsession. Therefore,v1(z) =
z/2 + δv1(0)/2. Now consider the value of starting the period with 0.
With probability 1/2, the proposal is moved and passed, leading to a
payoff of 0. With probability 1/2, the member is selected and amends
the proposal so that she gets zin the standing proposal at the beginning
of the next session. Therefore, v1(0) = δv1(z)/2. Putting these two
values together, we get v1(z) = z/2 + δ2v1(z)/4 or
v1(z) =
2z
4 −δ2 .
Finally, we must ensure that the legislator receiving 1 −z prefers to
move the question rather than amend. This requires that 1 −z ≥δv1(z)
or z ≤1 −δv1(z). Therefore, the proposer chooses zto maximize v1(z)
subject to this constraint. The solution is z = (4 −δ2)/(4 + 2δ −δ2)
leading to a continuation value of
v1(z) =
2
4 + 2δ −δ2 .
To determine which strategy the proposer chooses, we simply need to
compare v1(z) and v2(z). Straightforward algebra shows that v1(z) >
v2(z) when δ > δ∗≡
√
3 −1. Intuitively, when players are patient and
value the future, it is very expensive to inhibit amendments from both
legislators. Therefore, the proposer prefers to buy off only one member
and take his chances with an amendment from the other.
There are two interesting features of the open rule model. First, it is
possible that coalitions are greater than minimal winning. This occurs
when δ < δ∗so that the proposer spreads resources sufﬁciently to deter
all amendments. Second, there can be equilibrium delay in agreement.

--- Sayfa 310 ---
294
Bargaining Theory
This occurs when δ > δ∗and the proposer gives 0 to one member.
If that member is then selected, she makes a successful amendment,
which precludes agreement in the ﬁrst session.
It is useful to compare the equilibrium allocations from the open
rule with those from the closed rule. The literature has paid particular
attention to the proposer’s share.6 Recall that for the closed rule with
N = 3, the proposer keeps (3 −δ)/3. This share is always greater than
v2(z) and is greater than v1(z) when δ > δ∗. Thus, the open rule lowers
the proposer’s advantage. Proposal power can also be mitigated by
the use of supermajority rules. Consider the case of k = N = 3. The
proposer’s share is (3 −2δ)/3, which is always lower than v1(z). Thus,
when δ > δ∗, the unanimity rule lowers proposal power below that of
the open majority rule without incurring costly delay.
5. Bargaining with Incomplete Information
In all of the bargaining models discussed so far the agents know the
disagreement or continuation values of their opponents. Consequently,
they know with certainty which offers are accepted and which are re-
jected.7 This assumption is obviously unrealistic in many political con-
texts. A legislature does not know whether an executive will sign a
particular bill, states do not know whether the peace terms will be ac-
cepted or whether the opponent will prefer to continue ﬁghting, and
so on. In this section, we provide a bare bones model of bargaining
with incomplete information. We then elaborate the model with ex-
amples from executive-legislative bargaining and crisis bargaining in
international relations.
5.1. A Basic Model. Consider the setup of the Nash bargaining prob-
lem where two players negotiate over the division of X. Now there
is uncertainty about player A’s disagreement value. With probabil-
ity π, the disagreement value is uA = 0; with probability 1 −π it is
uA = d > 0. We refer to uA = 0 as the “weak” type and uA = d as the
“strong” type. To keep matters as simple as possible, player B makes
6 This is not only an important equity consideration. In models of allocating the beneﬁts
of costly projects, institutions that limit the proposer’s share reduce the incentive to
pass inefﬁcient projects (Baron 1991; McCarty 2000b; Primo 2004).
7 In the open rule Baron-Ferejohn game, the uncertainty is about which player will
be selected to offer an amendment, but not whether a particular player prefers an
amendment to the proposal.

--- Sayfa 311 ---
5. Bargaining with Incomplete Information
295
a take-it-or-leave-it offer to Aof (uA, uB) ∈. If Aaccepts, the offer
is implemented. If Arejects, the payoffs are (uA, uB).
Clearly, Aonly accepts an offer that gives her uA ≥uA. Because B
does not know the value of uA, she does not know how much utility
to transfer to A to secure her agreement. If she offers less than A’s
disagreement value, A rejects, leading to (uA, uB). Let P(uA|uA) be
the probability that Aaccepts uA when her disagreement value is uA.
We can write B’s expected utility as a function of her offer
EUB(uA) = [π P(uA|0) + (1 −π) P(uA|d)] g(uA)
+ [1 −π P(uA|0) −(1 −π) P(uA|d)] uB
where g(uA) = g(uA) = uB(X −u−1
A (uA)). Sequentially rational be-
havior by A requires that P(uA|uA) = 1 if uA ≥uA and 0 otherwise.
Consequently, we can rewrite B’s utility as
EUB(uA) =

πg(uA) + (1 −π)uB if d > uA ≥0
g(uA) if uA ≥d
.
Given that g(uA) is decreasing in uA, the only possible solutions are
uA = d or uA = 0. We call uA = 0 the aggressive offer and uA = d the
accommodating offer. B chooses the aggressive offer if and only if
πg(0) + (1 −π)uB > g(d) or
π > g(d) −uB
g(0) −uB
.
Although it is very simple, the model makes a number of sensible
predictions. First, B is more likely to make the aggressive offer of
uA = 0 when
r The probability that Ais the weak type is high
r Her disagreement value uB is good
r The utility difference between the aggressive and accommodating
offers, g(0) −g(d), is large
Given the assumptions of one-sided incomplete information and a
single take-it-or-leave-it offer, this model is very limited. Rather than

--- Sayfa 312 ---
296
Bargaining Theory
generalize this abstract model, we review a number of political science
applications that relax these assumptions.
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
In Chapter 7, we studied the application of the Romer-Rosenthal
agenda setting model to the presidential veto. Although this complete
information model provides an excellent tool for studying veto power,
it cannot provide a basis for studying vetoes; it predicts that vetoes do
not occur. We now turn to a simple model for studying vetoes, rather
than veto power. In this model, vetoes do occur. This simple incom-
plete information model in turn provides the foundation for building
more complex models of veto bargaining that incorporate reputation,
learning, and dynamics.8
In order to explain the fact that vetoes occur, it is necessary to dis-
pense with at least one of the assumptions underlying the basic model.
Although the model presented in Chapter 7 has a number of very re-
strictive assumptions, few of them are actually consequential in the
prediction that vetoes do not occur. One important exception is the
assumption that C has complete information about the preferences of
P and O. When the legislature faces uncertainty, vetoes may occur as
the legislature overestimates its ability to extract concessions from the
president or the override pivot.
Relaxing the assumption of complete information has been the start-
ing point for most of the recent work on veto bargaining (Matthews
1989; McCarty 1997; Cameron 1999). To present the basic ﬂavor of
these models, we consider a model without an override possibility so
that q remains the policy in the event of a veto. To capture the uncer-
tainty that the proposer C faces about the receiver P’s preferences,
we assume she believes P is one of two preference types, a moderate
with ideal point m or an extremist with ideal point e. We maintain the
convenient assumption that all agents have linear preferences given by
−|x −i| for policy x ∈R and ideal point i ∈{c, e, m} where e < m < c.
Let π be the probability that P is the extreme type.
The main implication of uncertainty about preferences is that C no
longer knows for sure which bills the president accepts and which he
vetoes. To see this, consider Figure 10.2, where q < e. Here the set of
8 This section draws heavily on Cameron and McCarty (2004).

--- Sayfa 313 ---
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
297
Panel a
Preferred by e and m           Preferred by m only
q
e
m
c
eb
m
b
Panel b
Preferred by e and m             Preferred by m only
q
e
m
eb
m
e
c
b
b
=
=
Panel c
Preferred by e and m             Preferred by m only
q
e
m
m
e
c
b
b
=
=
Figure 10.2. Veto Bargaining Under Incomplete Information.
bills the extremist type accepts over the status quo is only a subset of
those the moderate type accepts. Thus, C can force a more attractive
bill (from her perspective) on the moderate receiver than she can on
the extremist one. C’s dilemma is whether to propose a bill that she
ﬁnds relatively less attractive but that both types accept – a bill such as
be – or be more aggressive and propose a bill – such as bm – she ﬁnds
more attractive but only the moderate receiver accepts. Clearly, the
attractiveness of the gamble depends on C’s beliefs about P’s type. If
π is high (so C believes P is probably an extremist), C is likely deterred
from making the aggressive proposal. On the other hand, if π is low
(so C believes P is probably a moderate), C may well ﬁnd the gamble
attractive. If she offers it, on occasion it proves a poor choice: P turns
out to be the extreme type and vetoes it.
Now we compute the necessary conditions for an equilibrium veto
to occur. First, assume the preference conﬁguration of Figure 10.2
holds (i.e., q < e < m < c). Let Bt(q) be the sets of bills that each type
t ∈{e, m} accepts over the status quo. Just as in our analysis of the
complete information version of the model, these sets are [q, 2t −q] if

--- Sayfa 314 ---
298
Bargaining Theory
t > q and [2t −q, q] otherwise. For any q, president m accepts higher
bills than president e accepts. Because e > q, Be(q) = [q, 2e −q] ⊂
Bm(q) = [q, 2m −q]. Consequently, any bill that e accepts m accepts,
but the converse is not true. Therefore, C faces a trade-off. It can
propose 2e −q, which both types accept, or can propose 2m −q, which
e vetoes. Given C’s beliefs the latter strategy result in a veto with
probability π.
Case 1: c > 2m −q. Given C’s linear preferences, her utility from
b = 2e −q is 2e −q −c, while her expected utility from b = 2m −q is
πq + (1 −π) (2m −q) −c. Thus, if π ≤(m −e)/(m −q), she prefers
b = 2m −q and a veto occurs with probability π.
Case 2: 2e −q < c < 2m −q. C’s payoff from b = 2e −q remains
2e −q −c, but now m accepts b = c. Thus, proposing her ideal point
leads to an expected utility of π(q −c). Thus, C proposes b = c if π ≤
(c + q −2e)/(c −q). Note that the critical value of π is lower than in
case 1, making a veto less likely for this preference conﬁguration.
Case 3: c < 2e −q. Now both types accept b = c. So C proposes its
ideal point for all values of π and no vetoes occur.
The punch line of this simple model is that vetoes are less likely to
occurwhenC’spreferencesareclosertomande.Empirically,Cameron
(1999) ﬁnds that vetoes are less likely to occur during periods of uniﬁed
party control of Congress and presidency: a ﬁnding he interprets as
evidence for this prediction.
6.1. Models with Reputation, Learning, and Dynamics. An interesting
feature of the incomplete information model is that a moderate P does
better if the proposer C believes P is the extreme type. This raises the
possibilitythat P mightattempttomanipulateC’sbeliefsabouthistype
(i.e., reputation). In this section, we examine three models in which
the actors try to manipulate P’s reputation. All are signaling models,
because an informed player takes an action that conveys information
about P’s type. In the ﬁrst two models, the veto threat and sequential
veto bargaining (SVB) models, the informed player is P. In the third
model, the “blame game” veto model, both C and P take actions to
convey information to uninformed voters.
6.1.1. Veto Threats. Ranging from the dramatic “read my lips” vari-
ety to the much more mundane “statements of administration policy”
routinely produced by the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget, the veto
threat is an important feature of legislative politics in the United States.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
299
r            q            e          m                                 c                       a
rb
eb
m
b
ab
Figure 10.3. Best Responses in Cheap Talk Veto Bargaining Model.
None of the models reviewed thus far provides any leverage on under-
standing this phenomenon. Matthews (1989), however, provides an
inﬂuential model of veto threats where the president uses cheap talk
to reveal information about his preferences and veto intentions.
To illustrate this model, it is helpful to increase the number of pres-
idential types from two to four. Therefore, to m and e , we add the two
following types: r the recalcitrant type and a the accommodating type.
We assume that each president type and C have linear preferences
and that r < q < e < m < c < a as in Figure 10.3. President r is called
recalcitrant because he vetoes any bill that C prefers to the status quo.
President a is accommodating because he prefers c to the status quo.
The probabilities of each type are πr, πe, πm, and πa. In this game, the
president ﬁrst makes a “speech” (i.e., a costless signal to the legisla-
ture). Each of these messages has no literal meaning, just a contextual
one derived from the equilibrium that is being played. Following the
speech, C updates her beliefs about the president’s preferences and
then makes a proposal that the president either accepts or rejects.
As a baseline, ﬁrst consider an equilibrium where the president’s
speeches contain no information because each type chooses the same
mixed strategy over the set of possible speeches.9 In this babbling
equilibrium, C simply chooses the bill from br = q, be = 2e −q, bm =
2m −c, or ba = c to maximize her utility. For any such choice, those
withlowertypesveto.Forexample,ifC choosesbm,typese andr vetoso
that the probability of veto is πe + πr. The formulae for the conditions
for each proposal are not presented; rather, illustrated graphically in
Figure 10.4. The ﬁrst ﬁgure shows which proposal is made in the bab-
bling equilibrium for different values of πm and πe for given values
of πa and πr. Note that the proposal br = q is never made because C
does at least as well with a vetoed proposal. This babbling equilibrium
is somewhat bad from the president’s perspective. If the president is
9 This randomization over all speeches implies that there are no off-the-equilibrium
histories. There are no universally divine babbling equilibria where all types give the
same speech. We leave this proof as an exercise.

--- Sayfa 316 ---
300
Bargaining Theory
eb
e
π
m
b
cb
c
=

m
π
1–
a
r
π
π

eb
e
π
m
b
m
π
–
1–
a
r
π
π
–
1–
a
r
π
π
–
1–
a
r
π
π
–
Figure 10.4. Top, Proposals in “Babbling Equilibrium”; bottom, Proposals in
“Two-Message Equilibrium” Following Compromising Message.
type a, there is a utility loss associated with the fact that C may pro-
pose the less desirable policies bm and be. For president m, there are
losses associated with the fact that C might propose c (which he then
vetoes) rather than his preferred be. Because presidents r and e obtain
their status quo utility from all proposals, they are not affected. C is
also affected by the lack of information as it may force her either to
accommodate more than necessary or to risk a veto.
So given the bad outcomes from the babbling equilibrium, it is rea-
sonable to ask whether there are other equilibria where more infor-
mation is transmitted. Matthews shows that some information about
presidential preferences, but not all of it, can be revealed in presiden-
tial speeches. First, consider why a separating equilibrium where every
presidential type gives a distinct speech cannot be an equilibrium. If
C could learn the president’s type from the speech, she would opti-
mally propose br to r, be to e, and so forth. Because m prefers be to bm,

--- Sayfa 317 ---
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
301
however, m prefers to defect and give e’s speech. Thus, a separating
equilibrium cannot exist. Matthews shows that the most informative
equilibrium is one where type a reveals his type with an “accommo-
dating” speech and the other types all make the same “threatening”
speech. Following an accommodating speech, C correctly infers that
the president will accept her ideal point and thus proposes c. Type a
makes the accommodating speech because she clearly prefers c to bm or
be. Following the threatening speech, C learns that the president is not
a and updates her beliefs accordingly. Given these beliefs, C chooses
between bm and be. The second panel of Figure 10.4 illustrates the op-
timal proposal as a function of πm and πe for given values of πa and
πr. There are two important points to note. First, it is more likely that
C proposes be because the knowledge that the president is not type a
makes the probability that bm is vetoed much higher. Thus, C makes
a larger concession to the president’s preferences after a threatening
speech than after an accommodating speech.
It is important to note that an informative equilibrium is not guar-
anteed to exist. Suppose type a preferred bm to c to be; an informative
equilibrium would exist only if C’s best response to the threatening
message were be. Otherwise, a defects to the threatening speech. Sim-
ilarly, if a prefers be to c, no informative equilibrium exists.
For some conﬁgurations of preferences the veto threat is simply a
bluff. Consider what happens if m was moved in Figure 10.3 so far
to the right that he prefers c to q (thus became an accommodator)
but still preferred be to c. In the informative equilibrium, m gives the
threatening speech, but it is a bluff in the sense that he would sign C’s
ideal point.
The informative equilibrium makes C better off (if it did not she
could just turn off the TV and ignore the speech). It is possible, how-
ever, that some presidential types are worse off. Suppose that a were
repositioned so that his preference ordering were such that he prefers
bm to c to be. Further, suppose that the babbling equilibrium produces
bm while a threat in the more informative equilibrium produces be.
Then a would clearly prefer the outcome of the babbling equilibrium
to the informative equilibrium.
6.1.2. Sequential Veto Bargaining with Incomplete Information. Often,
the proposer can make multiple offers, learning about the receiver as
she does so. For example, if the receiver rejects a tough offer early, the
proposer may believe the receiver is genuinely tough. If so, the pro-
poser’s next offer is likely to be more accommodating. This “haggling”

--- Sayfa 318 ---
302
Bargaining Theory
dynamic is very common in many types of bargaining, and one might
well expect to see it in veto bargaining as well. But a complicating fac-
tor is misdirection: the receiver often has an incentive to reject early
offers in order to build a reputation that leads to better offers later in
the game. But knowing this, why should the proposer actually make
the compromises? The sequential veto bargaining model (SVB) model
explores these questions about learning and credibility.
A simple example conveys many of the basic ideas. First, consider a
situation in which q = 0, e = .25, m = .6, and c = 1. By now it should be
clear that in a one-shot game (without a veto threat) be = .5 and bm = c.
Using the results of the one-shot incomplete information model, it is
easy to see that C offers bm = c if π < 1/2 and be = .5 otherwise. But
suppose this is not a one-shot game, so that C may make a second offer
if the ﬁrst is rejected. More speciﬁcally, suppose bargaining breaks
down with probability ρ, but otherwise a second offer can be made. The
probability of a bargaining breakdown reﬂects the inherent uncertainty
ofthelegislativeandotherpoliticalprocesses. Isahagglingequilibrium
possible, that is, one in which C ﬁrst makes a tough offer then, following
a veto and no bargaining breakdown, makes a more accommodating
offer?
In such a haggling equilibrium, the moderate president must accept
the tough offer in the ﬁrst round (if both types rejected the tough
offer, then C should make the accommodating offer lest a breakdown
saddle her with the unappealing status quo). Therefore, the following
incentive compatibility constraint must hold:
(m −c) ≥(1 −ρ) (m −2e + q) + ρ (q −m)
or
ρ ≥c −q −2(m −e)
2 (e −q)
.
The incentive compatibility constraint indicates that accepting the
tough offer in the ﬁrst round is better for the moderate type than reject-
ing the offer and holding out for the more proximate accommodating
offer, taking into account the probability of a bargaining breakdown.
In the example, the critical value for the breakdown probability is .6.
Let μ(e) be C’s belief that the president is the extreme type, following a
veto. Note the following: in a haggling equilibrium, it must be the case

--- Sayfa 319 ---
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
303
that μ(e) ≥1/2; otherwise, following a veto, C makes the tough offer
again in the ﬁnal period (this was proved earlier). But if the probability
of a breakdown is greater than .6, then the moderate type accepts the
initial offer, so that by Bayes’ rule μ(e) = 1, following a veto, and C
indeed makes the accommodating offer in the second round.
There remains an additional incentive compatibility constraint to
examine, however. Congress must ﬁnd it more appealing to make a
tough offer followed by an accommodating offer (conditional on a
veto and no breakdown), rather than make an initial accommodating
offer that would surely be accepted. This requires that
π [(1 −ρ) (2e −q −c) + ρ (q −c)] ≥ρ (2e −q −c)
or
π ≤
c −2e −q
c −2e (1 −ρ) + q(1 −2ρ).
In the example, this condition becomes π ≤1/(1 + ρ). We can now
indicate a haggling equilibrium in the two-period, two-type sequential
veto bargaining model with the ideal points indicated earlier. If .6 ≤
ρ ≤1 and π ≤1/(1 + ρ), then C offers b1 = bm = c and b2 = be = .5.
Presidential type m accepts both be and bm in both periods, while type
e accepts offer be and vetoes bm in both periods. Finally, C’s belief that
the president is an extreme type is μ(e) = 1 following a veto.
6.1.3. Bargaining over Multiple Bills. The last section shows that in-
complete information can affect the dynamics of bargaining on a sin-
gle issue, but McCarty (1997) considers how informational and reputa-
tional incentives alter the bargaining across multiple issues over time.
He considers a model of veto bargaining with incomplete information
where P and C bargain over a series of policies with status quo points
q1 and q2. In each of the two periods, C proposes bt and the president
decides whether to accept or reject. Thus, bargaining over each pol-
icy is modeled as a one-shot game such that if P vetoes bt the status
quo qt is the policy outcome. Because the president’s ideal point is
assumed to be constant across policies, the outcome on policy 1 may
provide information to C prior to her making an offer on policy 2.
Because in the last period, the game is identical to the one-shot incom-
plete information game described earlier, type m does better on the

--- Sayfa 320 ---
304
Bargaining Theory
second policy by having C believe that he is the extreme type if pref-
erences correspond to those given in panel a or b. Thus, given those
preference conﬁgurations, m may be willing to use a ﬁrst-period veto
to build a reputation as the extreme type in order get a better out-
come on policy 2. This involves rejecting bills that he, but not type e,
prefers to q1. Thus, reputational incentives increase the likelihood of a
veto on policy 1. Given that C understands these incentives, she may
be sufﬁciently accommodating on the ﬁrst policy to discourage type
m from vetoing on reputational grounds. Thus, McCarty’s model pre-
dicts a “honeymoon” pattern of accommodating policies early in the
president’s term followed by less accommodating policies toward the
end when reputational incentives are diminished. He notes, however,
that because the existence of reputational incentives depends on pref-
erence conﬁgurations such as those in panels a and b, this honeymoon
effect is unlikely when the expected difference between P and C is
small as in the case of uniﬁed governments.
6.2. Blame Game Vetoes. Groseclose and McCarty (2000) argue that
vetoes are less a product of legislative uncertainty than of electoral
politics. Their article presents a model in which the legislative agenda
setter uses its proposal power to signal that the president has policy
views out of step with the voters’. In this “blame game” model, vetoes
occur when the agenda setter receives a larger payoff from signaling
that the president has extreme preferences than she does from enacting
a new policy. Thus, the electorate’s uncertainty about the president is
critical, but uncertainty of legislators is not.
To illustrate a simple version of this model, consider a new actor
V, the voter. V has linear preferences and an ideal point v. Following
the notation of the last section, V believes the president is type e with
probability π and type m otherwise. We focus on the case where e <
m < v. We assume the voter evaluates the president on the basis of
the expected distance between the president’s ideal point and her own
ideal point. Therefore, the voters’ evaluation is just
w(e, m, π; v) = −π|v −e| −(1 −π) |v −m| = πe + (1 −π) m −v.
An important feature of this model is that P and C care how much ex-
pected utility V gets from the president’s position. The most interesting
case is one of conﬂict, in which the president gets greater utility when

--- Sayfa 321 ---
6. Application: Veto Bargaining
305
the voter believes he is a moderate and Congress gets greater util-
ity when the voter believes the president is an extremist. Such a case
would plausibly arise when Congress and the presidency are controlled
by different political parties or factions, especially when those par-
ties are highly polarized, and the median voter is moderate. In such
a case, C and P trade gains from enacting policy with gains from
political posturing. More speciﬁcally, the president prefers actions
that lead the public to lower π while the legislature prefers actions
that lead the public to increase π. We allow C and P to value these
trade-offs differently by letting λc and λp be the respective weights
each place on policy. Therefore, the utility functions for C and P
are
−λc|x −c| + (1 −λc) (πe + (1 −π) m −v)
and
−λp|x −p| −(1 −λp) (πe + (1 −π) m −v) .
An important assumption of this model is that while V is relatively
uninformed about P’s preferences, C is fully informed. Therefore,
C may be able to communicate its information about π through its
choice of bill. Similarly, the president’s decision whether to veto par-
ticular proposals may also provide information to voters about his
preferences.
A particularly interesting equilibrium is one in which C proposes an
acceptable bill when P is moderate and submits a bill that is rejected
when the president is extreme. It exists if and only if the following two
conditions hold:
λp −λc
λpλc
(1 −π) (m −e) ≥2 (e −q)
(10.1)
and
2 ≥λp −λc
λpλc
π.
(10.2)

--- Sayfa 322 ---
306
Bargaining Theory
Equation 1
λ p
λc
Equation 2
0
0
1
1
Vetoes
Figure 10.5. Conditions for Equilibrium Vetoes in the Blame Game Model.
These conditions produce a number of predictions about the occur-
rence of vetoes.10 First, condition 10.1 cannot be satisﬁed if m = e or
π = 1. Thus, voter uncertainty about the president’s preferences is
crucial. Without this uncertainty, orchestrating a veto has no signal-
ing value to C so she prefers to make acceptable proposals to both
types. Second, both conditions are easier to satisfy when π is lower.
Because the ex ante evaluation of the president is decreasing in π (the
probability he is extreme), the model suggests that vetoes occur more
often when the public believes the president is moderate (that is, be-
lieves the president is ideologically proximate). Intuitively, Congress
ﬁnds the blame game most attractive when it has negative information
about the president’s policy preferences that contradicts the voter’s
beliefs.
The next three predictions are based on C and P’s willingness to
trade policy gains for political gains. Figure 10.5 illustrates how the
policy weights λp and λc affect each of the conditions. The area un-
der the higher line represents combinations of λp and λc that satisfy
10 These conditions are necessary for the case of c > 2m −q + (m −e)(1 −λp)/(λp).
Different positions of c result in slightly modiﬁed but qualitatively similar conditions.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
307
condition 10.1. Alternatively, the area above the lower line represents
those satisfying condition 10.2. The blame game equilibrium described
earlier exists in the intersection of these regions. First, note that condi-
tion 10.1 is met only when λp > λc, suggesting that the president must
put relatively more weight on the policy outcome than does Congress.
If this is not the case, C prefers the policy gains of passing mutually
attractive bills rather than the electoral advantage of passing bills the
president rejects. Condition 10.2 puts an upper bound on the difference
in policy weights. If λp is much greater than λc, C loses the ability to
signal credibly with its proposals. One ﬁnal prediction emerges from
the fact that only extreme types veto in the blame game model. Be-
cause only type e vetoes, every veto is followed by a reduction of voter
support.
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
One of the limitations of bargaining theory is that solutions are gen-
erally highly dependent on the bargaining protocol and are therefore
not robust to changes in the extensive form. In the context of veto bar-
gaining, this is not such a large problem because its protocol is often
codiﬁed in constitutional provisions and well-established legislative
procedures. In crisis bargaining among sovereign states, however, it is
clearly less desirable to have bargaining solutions depend heavily on
particular extensive forms; the relevant protocols are generally more
informal, noncodiﬁed, and unobservable because of secrecy concerns.
Recognizing this problem, Banks (1990) considers what equilibria of
a large class of crisis bargaining games must have in common. Consider
the following crisis bargaining scenario. Two states 1 and 2 bargain over
1 unit of territory. Let x be the share that goes to country 1. Following
Banks, we assume that both countries are risk neutral so that country
1’s payoff from a settlement is x and country 2’s is 1 −x. Failure to
reach an agreement on the division of the territory leads to a war.11
Country 1’s expected utility of a war is u and country 2’s is v. These
expected utilities encapsulate expectations about the probability of
winning the war, the beneﬁts of winning and losing, and the allocation
of territory that the winner can secure.
11 We include in the set of possible agreements a settlement in which the status quo
remains intact.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
308
Bargaining Theory
Banks assumes that country 1 has an informational advantage vis-
a-vis country 2 about the values of (u, v). Following the usual prac-
tice, he models this asymmetric information by assuming that country
1’s type is some t ∈T deﬁned such that country 1’s expected beneﬁts
of war, u(t) , are increasing in its type. Although country 1 learns t
prior to negotiations, country 2 has only a prior f (t), which is common
knowledge.
Given this framework, standard game theoretic models specify a
set of decisions available to the countries, a (probabilistic) outcome
function specifying the probability of a war, and the distribution of
settlements as a function of these decisions. From this model, we can
derive equilibrium strategies (σ 1(t), σ 2) that produce the equilibrium
probability of war p(t) and expected settlement x(t). In such an equi-
librium, country 1’s payoffs are
U(t; x, p) = p(t)u(t) + (1 −p(t))x(t).
Clearly, not every p(t) and x(t) can arise from a Bayesian equilibrium.
In particular, a Bayesian equilibrium has two requirements. The ﬁrst
is incentive compatibility. Type t cannot prefer the outcomes p(t′) and
x(t
′) to p(t) and x(t). Otherwise it would defect from its equilibrium
strategy σ 1(t). Incentive compatibility requires that for every t and t′
p(t)u(t) + (1 −p(t))x(t) ≥p(t′)u(t) + (1 −p(t′))x(t′)
(10.3)
p(t′)u(t′) + (1 −p(t′))x(t′) ≥p(t)u(t′) + (1 −p(t))x(t).
(10.4)
The second condition imposed by Bayesian equilibrium is individual
rationality.12 The value u(t) cannot be greater than x(t) unless p(t) = 1.
Otherwise, t withdraws from the agreement and starts a war with prob-
ability 1. The individual rationality constraint is
p(t)u(t) + (1 −p(t))x(t) ≥u(t).
(10.5)
Although incentive compatibility and individual rationality are mini-
mal requirements, they impose quite a bit of structure on bargaining
outcomes. The most important feature of Bayesian equilibria concerns
the monotonicity of p, x, and U in t.
12 The similarity of Banks’s approach to mechanism design should be obvious to the
attentive reader (at least after the next chapter is digested).

--- Sayfa 325 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
309
LEMMA 10.1 If p and x are incentive compatible and individually ra-
tional, then p(t) is weakly increasing on T.
Proof Let t′ > t. We can subtract the right side of equation 10.3 from
the left side of equation 10.4 and the left side of equation 10.3 from the
right side of 10.4 to produce
p(t′)[u(t′) −u(t)] ≥p(t)[u(t′) −u(t)].
Because u(t) is strictly increasing, u(t′) −u(t) > 0 so that it must be
the case that p(t′) ≥p(t).
□
This lemma shows that in any Bayesian equilibrium the probability
of war cannot decrease as country 1’s expected utility of war increases.
Not only is this a feature of strategic models, it is consistent with the
assumptions of a number of decision theoretic models of war.
For the next result, we deﬁne the set of types who resolve the dispute
through bargaining with a positive probability given p, x. Let Tb =

t ∈T : p(t) < 1

. Note that individual rationality requires that x(t) ≥
u(t) for any t ∈Tb.
LEMMA 10.2 If p and x are incentive compatible and individually ra-
tional, then x(t) is weakly increasing on Tb.
Proof Let t, t′ ∈Tb, and t′ > t. This means that Lemma 10.1 implies
1 > p(t′) ≥p(t). Because x(t) ≥u(t) for all t ∈Tb, we know that
p(t)u(t′) + (1 −p(t))x(t′) ≥p(t′)u(t′) + (1 −p(t′))x(t′).
(10.6)
We can combine this result with equation 10.4 to produce
p(t)u(t′) + (1 −p(t))x(t′) ≥p(t)u(t′) + (1 −p(t))x(t),
which reduces to x(t′) ≥x(t) after dividing by (1 −p(t)), which we
know is positive because t ∈Tb.
□
Not surprisingly, country 1 must do at least as well in the bargaining
outcome when its war utility improves. Taken together Lemmas 10.1
and 10.2 suggest that in any Bayesian equilibrium higher types get

--- Sayfa 326 ---
310
Bargaining Theory
better bargaining outcomes but incur a greater risk for war.13 Incentive
compatibility, however, requires that these trade-offs beneﬁt higher
types (or else they would mimic lower types). Let Tw = {t ∈T : p(t) >
0} so that Tw is the set of types that go to war with some probability.
LEMMA 10.3 If p and x are incentive compatible and individually ra-
tional, then U(t; x, p) is weakly increasing on T and strictly increasing
on Tw.
Proof Let t′ > t, and t′, t ∈Tw. Suppose (contra the lemma) that
U(t) ≥U(t′) so that
p(t)u(t) + (1 −p(t))x(t) ≥p(t′)u(t′) + (1 −p(t′))x(t′).
Because u(t′) > u(t), this implies that
p(t)u(t′) + (1 −p(t))x(t) ≥p(t′)u(t′) + (1 −p(t′))x(t′).
(10.7)
Because t′, t ∈Tw, p(t) and p(t′) are greater than 0 so that equation
10.7 violates equation 10.4. Thus,U(t′) > U(t). This strict equality does
not hold on T\Tw, however. If t, t
′ ∈T\Tw, then p(t) = p(t′) = 0 so
that equations 10.3 and 10.4 clearly imply that x(t) = x(t′) and U(t) =
U(t′).
□
Thus, a better expected utility of war cannot make country 1 worse
off. In fact, for types that go to war with a nonzero probability, higher
war payoffs lead to strictly higher equilibrium payoffs.14
Although the incentive compatibility approach can go a long way to-
ward telling us what predictions are generic to crisis bargaining mod-
els, there are a number of questions it cannot resolve. For example,
we do not learn how country 2’s perceptions of country 1’s war util-
ities, as measured by the priors f (t), affect the likelihood of war or
the bargaining settlement. For that we turn to more explicit models of
crisis bargaining.
13 Banks also shows that if x and p are incentive compatible and individually rational
then x(t′) > x(t) if and only if p(t′) > p(t) for t′ > t and t, t′ ∈Tb.
14 Banks also shows that U(t; x, p) is continuous in t, but we refer the reader to his
article.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
311
7.1. Models of Crisis Bargaining. Fearon’s (1995) article explores sev-
eral models in the class covered by Banks’s results. He gives a speciﬁc
form to (u, v˙). Fearon assumes that each country has a cost of war
ci > 0, country 1 wins any war with probability π ∈(0, 1), and the
winner of the war can impose its most preferred settlement (x = 1
for country 1 and x = 0 for country 2). Therefore, u = π −c1 and
v = 1 −π −c2. Let x0 be the status quo allocation of the territory.
Given this framework, we can deﬁne the set of agreements that
each side accepts in lieu of going to war. For country 1, we require that
x > π −c1 and for country 2 we require 1 −x > 1 −π −c2. Therefore,
any allocation x ∈[π −c1, π + c2] prevents conﬂict. Because the costs
of war are positive, the set of peaceful agreements is nonempty. Under
perfect information, we expect that one of these agreements is reached
and war is prevented.15
Fearon considers a simple model with incomplete information about
country 1’s costs. Although he assumes a continuous distribution of
c1, it sufﬁces to consider a cost distribution where c1 takes on only two
values, c > c. The common knowledge prior is that c1 = c with proba-
bility λ. Fearon ﬁrst considers a model where country 2 makes a single
take-it-or-leave-it offer to country 1. If country 1 rejects it, war ensues.
In analyzing this model, note that if country 2 offers x ≥π −c both
country 1 types accept and war is avoided. Clearly, country 2 has no
incentive to pay higher than π −c, so let x = π −c. If country 2 offers
x ∈(π −c, π −c], only the low-cost type accepts, so that war starts
with probability λ. Of these offers, country 2 prefers x = π −c. Finally,
if country 2 offers x < π −c both types reject, and a war starts with
certainty. This generates a payoff to country 2 of v = 1 −π −c2. Thus,
country 2’s choice boils down to a choice of three utilities, 1 −x, λv +
(1 −λ) (1 −x), or v. We can easily dismiss the third option. Because
the interval [π −c, π + c2] is nonempty, we know that 1 −x > v. Thus,
country 2 never chooses to sabotage the negotiations to generate a war
with probability 1. Now we can determine country 2’s preferences over
the remaining offers. Clearly, λv + (1 −λ) (1 −x) ≥1 −x whenever
λ ≤c −c
c2 + c.
15 This statement of course assumes that the territory is inﬁnitely divisible so that an
agreement in this region is feasible. This may not be the case in some disputes. Prob-
lems of this form are likely to arise when the territory involves religious or ideational
signiﬁcance.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
312
Bargaining Theory
When the probability that country 1 has low costs is sufﬁciently low,
country 2 takes an aggressive bargaining stance that risks war in the
event that country 1 actually does have low costs. Note that the critical
threshold is decreasing in country 2’s costs; it is less willing to take such
a risk when its military capabilities are low.
We can easily check that Banks’s results hold trivially for this model.
When λ > (c −c)/(c2 + c), both types receive the same allocation and
generate 0 probabilities of going to war. When λ ≤(c −c)/(c2 + c),
both types are still offered the same allocation but c goes to war with
probability 1.
As Fearon notes there are reasons to be skeptical of informational
explanations for war. Perhaps opportunities for communication should
resolve such informational asymmetries and prevent war. Given that
the countries have diametrically opposed preferences over the alloca-
tions, however, it is easy to show that cheap talk does not inﬂuence
bargaining or the probability of war. Let country 1 announce H or L
as a signal of its costs c and c, respectively.16 Following the message,
let λ∗be country 2’s updated beliefs about 1’s costs. Clearly, on the
basis of the these updated beliefs, country 2 uses the same cutpoint
rule as before. First we consider whether there are separating equilib-
ria where type c reports H and c reports L. In such a case, λ∗(H) = 0,
λ∗(L) = 1, x(H) = x,and x(L) = x.Theprobabilityofwaris0.Separat-
ing messages, therefore, require the incentive compatibility conditions
x(H) ≥x(L) and x(L) ≥x(H). These conditions clearly fail because
x > x. We leave it to the reader to verify that there are no partially
informative semipooling equilibria.
7.2. A Model of Escalation∗. This section is based on Fearon (1994),
which develops a version of the war of attrition to explore how “audi-
ence costs” imposed on states who back down in international disputes
affect the dynamics of crisis escalation.
Two states 1 and 2 are in a dispute over a prize worth v > 0. The game
is played in continuous time beginning at t = 0. At every instant each
state can choose among three strategies: attack, quit, or escalate. The
game continues until one or both of the states quit or attack. If both
states escalate, the game continues . If either state attacks before the
other quits they both receive their expected payoffs from war wi < 0.
16 The restriction to two messages or endowing them with literal meaning is not conse-
quential.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
313
Fearon interprets these payoffs as resolve; the state with the higher
wi is relatively more willing to engage in military conﬂict to settle the
dispute.
Fearon wants to understand how sanctions imposed on leaders who
backdownduringdisputesaffectcrisisbehavior.Therefore,heassumes
that if state i quits before state j at time t it suffers audience costs
ai(t) that are strictly increasing in t. The dependence on t reﬂects the
intuition that it is more costly to back down during a protracted dispute
than a short one.
A pure strategy in this game speciﬁes a rule for any subgame begin-
ning at time t′ specifying a ﬁnite time t ≥t′ at which to attack or quit.17
We write these strategies as {t, attack} meaning “escalate until t and
then attack” or {t, quit} to represent “escalate until time t and then
quit.”
Before considering the more general model where each side is un-
certain of the other’s resolve, it is instructive to consider the case of
complete information. For each state, we can compute the time t at
which it strictly prefers to attack rather than back down. Clearly, this
occurs when wi ≥−ai(t). Let
ti = −a−1
i
(wi) .
Suppose t1 < t2 because either state 1’s resolve or its audience costs
are higher than state 2’s. Thus, at t1, state 2 prefers to quit rather than
to be attacked; thus it quits. Let Qi(t; t′) be the probability that state i
quits before time t conditional on its not quitting before t′ and Qi(t)
be the unconditional probability of quitting by time t.
Thus, at every subgame 0 ≤t′ < t1, state 2 receives −a2(t′) for quit-
ting immediately and Q1(t; t′)v −(1 −Q1(t; t′))a2(t) for {t, quit}. Con-
sider state 1’s strategy, however. From subgame 0 ≤t′ < t1, strategy
{t1, attack} has a payoff of v while {t, quit} has a payoff of Q2(t; t′)v −
(1 −Q2(t; t′))a2(t) < v. Therefore, Q1(t; t′) = 0 for all t < t1. Now we
can see that state 2’s payoff from {t, quit} is −a2(t) < −a2(t′). Thus,
state 2 quits immediately at every subgame 0 ≤t′ < t1, including 0.
The equilibrium with complete information therefore involves state
2’s stopping immediately and state 1’s claiming the prize.
17 Not including “never quit” in the strategy set eliminates the uninteresting equilibrium
where both sides choose this strategy and escalate forever.

--- Sayfa 330 ---
314
Bargaining Theory
The complete information equilibrium has the property that both
high resolve and audience costs lead to better crisis bargaining out-
comes. It predicts, however, that no crises ever occur, and the weaker
side capitulates immediately. Therefore, Fearon also considers an in-
complete information version of the game where each side is uncertain
of the other’s resolve. The resolve of state i is distributed according to
the cumulative distribution function Fi on the interval [wi, 0].
Just as in the complete information game, the equilibrium depends
on deﬁning a time point after which neither state wishes to quit. Fearon
refers to such a time point as the horizon of the crisis game. Formally,
this horizon point is th, the earliest time point at which Qi(t) is not
increasing for t > th for i = 1, 2.
Fearon observes that the following must be true in any PBE:18
(1) Both states quit simultaneously with probability 0. Suppose
state 1 quits with positive probability mass at t′. Then clearly
state2hasanincentivetowaituntilatleastt′ + ε (forsomesmall
positive number ε) before quitting; this increases its probability
of winning v substantially with only an inﬁnitesimal increase in
its audience costs. Similarly, there is no PBE where a state quits
contemporaneously with an attack from the other state. Again,
if state 2 expects that state 1 quits with probability mass at point
t′, it should hold off its attack until t′ + ε. This implies that both
states cannot plan to quit at th.
(2) State i does not attack at time t′ if Qj(t) is increasing at t′.
Because attacks have negative expected utility, it pays to wait
longer in the hope that the opponent will drop out prior to the
attack.
(3) Both states quit with positive probability in time intervals arbi-
trarily close to th. By the deﬁnition of th, at least one state must
quit with positive probability in the arbitrarily small interval be-
fore th. Suppose that this is true for state i. Now suppose to the
contrary that state j quits with 0 probability after time t′ < th.
Clearly from observation 2, state 2 does not attack between
t′ and th. Therefore, quitting with positive probability after t′,
state 1 unnecessarily increases its audience costs – it knows it
will quit before state 2 yet it keeps escalating.
18 For formal statements of these observations and their proofs, see Fearon (1994).

--- Sayfa 331 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
315
(4) Both states attack with probability 0 for t < th. This follows
directly from observations 2 and 3. Therefore, the utility of strat-
egy {t > th, attack} for state i is
Ua
i (t, wi) = Qj(th)v + (1 −Qj(th))wi
(10.8)
while the utility of {t < th, quit} is
Uq
i (t) = Qj(t)v −(1 −Qj(th))ai(t).
(10.9)
Because Uq
i (t) does not depend on wi, {t < th, quit} is only a
best response if it is constant at some value ki for all t. Suppose
this were not true and let Uq
i (t′) > Uq
i (t) for some t′ < th and
all t < th. Then all types such that Uq
i (t′) > Ua
i (th, wi) quit at
exactly t′ . State j’s best response would then be {t > t′, quit},
making Uq
i (t′) = −ai(t′), which contradicts Uq
i (t′) > Uq
i (t) for
all t < th.
On the basis of these observations, the following lemmas help to
characterize the perfect Bayesian equilibria for this game.
LEMMA 10.4 In any equilibrium in which both states choose to escalate
with positive probability, there must exist a ﬁnite horizon th.
The logic of this Lemma is straightforward. Suppose to the contrary
that there were a PBE where Qi(t) were increasing for all t. By ob-
servation 2, state j never attacks. In turn observation 4 suggests that
Uq
i (t) is constant for all t. This implies that
Qj(t) = ki + ai(t)
v + ai(t) .
But because j never attacks, it must be the case that limt→∞Qj(t) = 1.
This is only true if ki = v or limt→∞ai(t) = ∞. If ki = v, Qj(0) = 1
implying that j does not escalate with certainty. If limt→∞ai(t) = ∞,
i prefers not to choose {t, quit} for arbitrarily large t.
LEMMA 10.5 In any equilibrium with th as the horizon and in which
escalation may occur, (1) if state i chooses {t, attack} it must be the case

--- Sayfa 332 ---
316
Bargaining Theory
that t ≥th; and (2) state i chooses {t, attack} where t ≥th if wi > −ai(th)
and only if wi ≥−ai(th).
Part 1 of this lemma follows directly from observations 2 and 3.
Ignoring several technical complications, part 2 follows from the fact
that Ua
i (t, wi) ≥Uq
i (t) if and only if wi ≥−ai(th).19
From Lemma 10.5, the ex ante probability that state j attacks at th
is (1 −Fj(−a j(th))) . Thus, state i’s ex ante utility of escalating up to th
and then backing down is
ui(th) = Fj(−a j(th))v −(1 −Fj(−a j(th))) ai(th).
We deﬁne t∗
i such that ui(t∗
i ) = 0. Thus, t∗
i has the property that state i is
indifferent between escalating to time t∗
i and conceding immediately.20
PROPOSITION 10.1 Let t∗
i be the unique solution ui(t∗
i ) = 0 and t∗=
min{t∗
1 , t∗
2 }. For any equilibrium in which escalation occurs with positive
probability, the horizon must be t∗.
If th is greater than t∗, the state with the lower t∗
i has an incentive
to quit with probability 1 before td. This contradicts observation 3. If
td is greater than t∗, then both states have an incentive to bluff a little
longer at td before quitting. This contradicts the deﬁnition of td.
These conclusions lead directly to the main result.
PROPOSITION 10.2 Label the players so that t∗= t∗
2 < t∗
1 . Let k1 =
u1(t∗) > 0. The following describes equilibrium strategies for state
i = 1, 2 as a function of type wi:
For wi ≥−ai(t∗), state i plays {t, attack} for any t > t∗.
For wi < −ai(t∗), state i plays {t, quit} with any pure strategies that
yield the following cumulative distributions:
1(t) =
1
F1(−a1(t∗))
a2(t)
v + a2(t)
2(t) =
1
F2(−a2(t∗))
k1 + a1(t)
v + a1(t) .
19 The technical complications involve ruling out situations were Qi(t) has mass points.
20 We implicitly assume that the range of ai(t) is sufﬁciently large that there is a unique
solution to ui(t∗
i ) = 0.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
7. Application: Crisis Bargaining
317
For t ≤t∗, state i believes that the probability that j does not back down
is given by
Pr(w j ≥−a j(t∗)|t) = v + ai(t)
v + ai(t∗).
For t > t∗, state i’s beliefs follow Bayes’ rule in accord with the oppo-
nent’s strategy for attacking. For any t > t∗off the equilibrium path, let
i believe that w j > −a j(t∗) and is distributed according to Fj truncated
at −a j(t∗).
Proof Let Qi(t) be the unconditional probability that state i quits by
time t. From Lemma 10.5 and Proposition 10.1, Qi(t∗) = Fi (−ai(t∗)).
The utility to state i of {t, quit} is therefore
Qj(t)v −(1 −Qj(t))ait.
To ensure that i is indifferent between quitting and continuing for any
t < t∗, we require that Qj(t)v −(1 −Qj(t))ai(t) = ui(t∗) or
Qj(t) = ui(t∗) + ai(t)
v + ai(t)
.
Because only types w j < −a j(t∗) ever quit, these types must quit at
rates
Qj(t)
Fj(−a j(t∗))
so that
 j(t) =
1
Fj(−a j(t∗))
ui(t∗) + ai(t)
v + ai(t)
.
We know that by time t,  j(t) of the types in the interval [w j, a j(t∗))
have dropped out so that
Pr(w j ≥−a j(t∗)|t) =
1 −Fj(−a j(t))
1 −Fj(−a j(t)) + Fj(−a j(t)) (1 − j(t))
= 1 −Fj(−a j(t))
1 −Qj(t)
= (1 −Fj(−a j(t))) (v + ai(t))
v −ui(t∗)
= v + ai(t)
v + ai(t∗).
□

--- Sayfa 334 ---
318
Bargaining Theory
In this PBE, types with low-resolve from state i drop out at a rate
designed to keep the low-resolve types of state j indifferent between
dropping out and escalating through time t∗. At time t∗, both states
attack because they know that all of the low-resolve types for the other
state have dropped out and escalating simply leads to larger audience
costs.
It is instructive to explore why low-resolve types of state j quit at a
rate to make low-resolve types of state i indifferent between dropping
out and escalating. If they dropped out at a faster rate, all low-resolve
types in statei conclude at each t that state j is more likely to be a strong
type. This leads low-resolve types of state i to quit more quickly. Then
state j would then begin to infer that the pool of state i types is stronger
and begin to drop more quickly. In the limit, all low-resolve types would
quit at t = 0, but this cannot be an equilibrium (recall observation 1).
Now consider what happens if low-resolve types from state i drop
out at a slower rate than the equilibrium. Then at each t, state j would
infer that the pool of remaining types is weaker than the corresponding
equilibrium pool. This leads state j types also to drop out at a slower
rate, which in turn induces state i to escalate more, and so on. Such a
dynamic leads to all types’ preferring to escalate until t∗. This cannot
be an equilibrium; low-resolve types would have a clear preference for
dropping out before t∗over attacking at t∗.
An important substantive feature of the model is that it is beneﬁcial
to be able to incur large audience costs. A high-cost state is better able
toconvinceitsopponentthatitis“lockedin”totheconﬂict(i.e.,alarger
set of types are willing to escalate to the horizon and then attack). This
runs counter to a simple intuitive prediction that those with the most to
lose from backing down surrender earlier. Conditional upon starting
a crisis, the signaling value outweighs this effect. By modifying his
model slightly to include an explicit initiation phase, Fearon argues that
this framework provides a justiﬁcation for why democracies (highly
sensitive to audience costs) may be less likely to initiate conﬂict, but
are more likely to prevail.
8. Exercises
EXERCISE 10.1 Let ui(xi) = ln xi for i ∈{A, B}. Solve for the Nash bar-
gaining solution as a function of the disagreement values.
EXERCISE 10.2 Prove that the only bargaining solution satisfying the
four Nash axioms is the Nash bargaining solution.

--- Sayfa 335 ---
8. Exercises
319
EXERCISE 10.3 In the Rubinstein bargaining model with δ1 = δ2 and
d1 = d2 = 0, assume that ui(xi) = xα
i where 0 < α < 1. Compute the
SPNE shares. What is the effect of risk aversion (lower α)?
EXERCISE 10.4 Consider the closed rule Baron-Ferejohn model where
ui(xi) = xα
i . Show that the initial proposer’s share is decreasing in α.
EXERCISE 10.5 In the model described in Section 10.3.2 with N = 3
and m = 1, suppose that (1 −δ)/(3 −2δ) < q ≤1/3. Compute a mixed
strategy equilibrium where vA = vB.
EXERCISE 10.6 In the model described in Section 10.3.2, compute vA
and vB for generic values of N and m.
EXERCISE 10.7 ConsideranextensionofthemodelconsideredinSection
10.3.3. Assume that there are two groups of bargainers, 1 and 2. Let mi be
the number of members of group i so that m1 + m2 = N. Suppose that all
membersofgroupi haveaqualiﬁedvetopowerinthatiftheyobjecttothe
proposal ki votes are required to override their veto where 0 < ki < N.
Assume that k1 > k2. Compute continuation values for members of each
group.
EXERCISE 10.8 Consider an extension of the model described in Section
10.5.1. First assume that there are two rounds of bargaining so that A
makes a counteroffer if it rejects B’s initial offer. Assume that the payoffs
are discounted by a factor δ if agreement is reached in the second round.
What is the PBE to this game? Now assume that there is incomplete
informationabout B’sdisagreementvaluewhereuB = 0withprobability
π and uB = d with probability 1 −π Construct a PBE to this game. Is
it unique?
EXERCISE 10.9 Prove that there are no universally divine equilibria to
the Matthews model depicted in Figure 10.10.3 where all presidential
types make the same speech.
EXERCISE 10.10 In the model described in Section 10.7.1, assume that
c1 is distributed uniformly on the interval [c, c]. Compute the perfect
Bayesian equilibrium. Now consider the extension with prebargaining
cheap talk. Show that if c is sufﬁciently large, there is a PBE where the
high-cost types reveal information about their cost to country 2.

--- Sayfa 336 ---
11
Mechanism Design and
Agency Theory
So far we have discussed techniques that analyze how strategic agents
behave in speciﬁc games. In certain social settings where the rules are
fairlyclear,thisapproachisapowerfulsourceofintuitionandempirical
predictions. An alternative approach asks a slightly different question:
Given a desired outcome, what games among strategic agents produce
it? Do such games even exist?
The ﬁeld of game theory asking such questions is mechanism de-
sign. In this framework, a designer or principal selects a Bayesian
game, or mechanism, for agents to play. Examples of mechanism de-
sign include the design of tax codes that induce agents to reveal
their willingness to fund public projects, the design of auctions that
maximize revenue, and the choice of reelection functions by vot-
ers that create incentives for government ofﬁcials to behave well in
ofﬁce.
Typically, the choice of mechanisms is a maximization problem: the
designer chooses a game to maximize her utility subject to the con-
straint that the agents play the game rationally. If the designer’s pref-
erences correspond to some notion of social preferences, mechanism
design is a normative exercise. A classic example of the normative ap-
proach is the selection of rules that determine the provision of public
goods to maximize the sum of individual utilities. Given its normative
interpretation, mechanism design is closely related to social choice
theory. A version of mechanism design known as implementation the-
ory seeks to uncover choice functions (mappings from agent types to
collective decisions) for which there exists a mechanism that achieves
the choice function. Choice functions of this type are said to be im-
plementable. The Gibbard-Sattherwaite theorem is an example of this
type of work.
320

--- Sayfa 337 ---
1. An Example
321
Although applications of mechanism design are often prescriptive,
we also may use it to make positive predictions. For example, mecha-
nism design is often used to study principal-agent relations. The goal is
to investigate whether a poorly informed principal such as a legislature
or executive can induce well-informed agents such as committees or
bureaucrats to act on her behalf.
In most economic applications, the designer can choose from a very
rich set of games. She usually can commit to contracts with very elab-
orate reward and punishment schemes. Such assumptions are reason-
able in economic settings where third parties such as courts can enforce
complex agreements and where large monetary rewards and sanctions
are considered legitimate. In political applications, however, it is of-
ten unreasonable to assume that principals can precommit to a reward
scheme because third-party enforcement is often unavailable. Also,
monetary incentives are often legally or socially proscribed. Accord-
ingly, after presenting some basic concepts and results of mechanism
design, we focus on incentives when the principal is more constrained.
1. An Example
Consider one of the classic examples – a political science department
of n members and a chair that is deciding whether to purchase a shiny
new Saeco espresso maker. The coffee maker has a cost c, and the
chair wants to learn whether the department members value the ma-
chine sufﬁciently to justify the expense. Each member’s valuation of
the coffee maker is θi ∈R1
+. The chair, a Benthamite and non–coffee
drinker,1 wishes to purchase the machine if and only if n
i=1 θi ≥c.
Unfortunately, the chair does not know the valuations of individual
department members. Instead she believes that each member’s type is
drawn from the probability distribution F(·).
What should the chair do? One solution is to ask each member pri-
vately for his valuation and purchase the espresso maker with depart-
ment funds if the total revealed valuations exceed c. The problem is
that some colleagues might ﬁnd it advantageous to inﬂate their valua-
tions in order to increase the likelihood that the machine is purchased.2
1 Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) was a prominent British philosopher who advocated
an ethical system based on pursuing the “greatest good for the greatest number.”
Historians record that he was also a coffee drinker.
2 We assume here that department members do not concern themselves with the other
ways that the department budget can be used.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
322
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
Thus, this scheme induces a game where each faculty member’s best
response is to report a valuation exceeding its actual level. So this so-
lution will not do a very good job in determining whether the espresso
maker should be purchased. A better solution is to ask each member
to contribute her valuation and purchase the maker if the total contri-
butions exceed c and keep the surplus to pay for coffee beans. If the
contributions do not reach c, the chair returns them. This mechanism
is also ﬂawed. Now the strategic scholars would understate their valu-
ations hoping to free ride on the contributions of their colleagues. This
rule creates a collective action problem.
Although neither of these schemes works well, we can use the theory
of mechanism design to uncover a class of particularly simple mecha-
nisms that can be used to learn the faculty’s preferences. Groves (1973)
and Clarke (1971) show that the following mechanism has desirable
properties.
r Ask each faculty member to e-mail her valuation mi to the chair.
r If n
i=1 mi ≥c purchase the coffee maker; otherwise do not.
r If the coffee maker is purchased, collect from faculty member i
the amount ti(mi, m−i) = c −
j̸=i mj.
r If the coffee maker is not purchased, collect no money.
Under this mechanism each faculty member has an incentive to re-
veal her true valuation regardless of the other members’ valuations.
A key property is that member i’s message affects her contribution
only indirectly through its effect on the ultimate decision of whether
to purchase the espresso maker. The amount that each member pays
depends on the messages of all the other members.
To see that all members have an incentive to offer truthful messages,
consider the decision of member i with type θi. Suppose that she lies
by announcing m′
i < θi. This understatement affects the outcome only
if alters the likelihood that the machine is purchased, or if

j̸=i
mj + mi < c <

j̸=i
mj + θi.
Under these circumstances, c −
j̸=i mj < θi so that the contribution
required from a truthful announcement, c −
j̸=i mj, is less than the
member’s value of the new espresso maker. This deviation from a truth-
ful response can only make the department member worse off. Now
consider whether a member has an incentive to overstate her demand

--- Sayfa 339 ---
2. The Mechanism Design Problem
323
for espresso with a message m′
i > θi. This fabrication only affects i’s
utility if the inﬂated message results in purchasing the machine when
the truthful message would not have. Such a scenario requires that

j̸=i
mj + mi > c >

j̸=i
mj + θi
so that c −
j̸=i mj > θi. Thus, member i’s contribution is more than
her valuation of the coffee maker. So lying does not pay.
Beyond promoting honesty in departmental affairs, the Groves-
Clarke mechanism has the desirable property that the espresso maker
is purchased if and only if the aggregate valuation of the depart-
ment exceeds its cost. It has a less desirable property, however; it is
not “budget balancing.” When the machine is purchased, the chair
collects
n

i=1
ti(mi, m−i) = nc −
n

i=1

j̸=i
mj,
an amount greater than or equal to c. Of course, this is not much of
a problem so far as the chair is concerned – a little compensation for
having to send and read all those e-mail messages.
2. The Mechanism Design Problem
We now consider the mechanism design problem more abstractly.
Consider a set N of n agents and a mechanism designer (denoted
agent 0). The designer ultimately selects a policy x ∈X. Each agent has
a type θi ∈ that is private information. The type vector θ is drawn
from the joint distribution function F(θ). Agents also have Bernoulli
utility functions ui(x, θ) : X × n →R1 that depend on the chosen pol-
icy and the agents’ types. The mechanism designer has a Bernoulli util-
ity function u0(x, θ). In many applications agents care only about their
own type, but we allow agents’ payoffs to be a function of the entire
proﬁle. The primitives of a mechanism design problem are therefore

, F(·), X, u

.
In a typical application, the mechanism designer elicits a vector of
signals from the agents. The designer chooses a message space for each
agent, Mi, and a policy function p(m) :

i∈N Mi →X , that selects a
policy for every possible proﬁle of messages m = (m1, m2, . . . , mn) ∈
M =

i∈N Mi. Accordingly, a mechanism is a pair

M, p(·)

.

--- Sayfa 340 ---
324
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
For a given choice of message spaces and policy function, the nagents
play the Bayesian normal form game with the strategy sets Si = Mi and
payoffs given by the composition of u and p, ui(p(m), θ).
It is straightforward to see how the espresso mechanism maps into
this framework. Clearly, the chair is the designer who selects the mes-
sage space M =  and implements the policy “buy if n
i=1 mi ≥c
and charge c −
j̸=i mj to agent i.” The faculty members then play
a Bayesian normal form game.
Given a mechanism, determining how agents behave requires spec-
ifying a form of rationality. One possibility is to make predictions only
if the agents have dominant strategies in the induced game. These are
known as dominance solvable mechanisms. Alternatively, the agents
might play a Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Clearly, the question of how
well the mechanism performs rests on assumptions about how the
agents play the induced game.
In this chapter we focus on Bayesian Nash equilibria. A large liter-
ature exists in economics using other solution concepts. For example,
the Groves-Clarke mechanism originated in the literature on imple-
mentation in dominant strategies. Given the focus on Bayesian Nash
equilibria, we wish to highlight the types of choice functions g :  →X
that satisfy the following condition: there exists a mechanism

M, p(·)

such that if agents play a Bayesian Nash equilibria to the mecha-
nism then the ﬁnal outcome corresponds to the policy that would
be selected by the choice function, that is, p(m(θ)) = g(θ) for each
θ ∈.
From the mechanism designer’s perspective the mechanism is in-
strumental to achieving a particular choice function. If the designer
wishes to implement the function g(·) in Bayesian Nash strategies then
she must select a mechanism

M, p(·)

such that the corresponding
game has a Bayesian Nash equilibrium where the agents use strategies
m∗
i (·) so that p(m∗
1(θ1), m∗
i (θi), . . . , m∗
n(θn)) = g(θ). Thus, the choice of
a mechanism is informed by knowledge of the incentives created by
the mechanism. The designer anticipates how these incentives shape
behavior by anticipating that agents play equilibrium strategies to the
mechanism.
DEFINITION 11.1 For a mechanism design problem

, F(·), X, u

, the
choice function g(·) is implementable in Bayesian Nash strategies if there
exists a mechanism

M, p(·)

with a Bayesian Nash equilibrium m∗
i (·) in
which p(m∗
1(θ1), m∗
i (θi), . . . , m∗
n(θn)) = g(θ) for every θ ∈.

--- Sayfa 341 ---
2. The Mechanism Design Problem
325
If a game is dominance solvable, the surviving strategy proﬁle is a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium. This means that given a mechanism design
problemthesetofchoicefunctionsthatareimplementableindominant
strategies is a subset of those that are implementable in Bayesian Nash
strategies. Now that we have deﬁned implementability, a hard question
arises. How do we know which choice functions are implementable
given that the number of possible mechanisms is quite large?
Our ﬁrst result, the revelation principle, dramatically simpliﬁes the
search for implementable choice functions by allowing us to focus on
the smaller set of direct mechanisms. Direct mechanisms are those in
which the agents are asked to report their types directly. Thus, direct
mechanismsinvolve Mi = i. Therevelationprinciplesaysthatifthere
existsamechanismthatimplementsthechoicefunction g(·),thenthere
must exist a direct mechanism that implements g(·). This powerful
result tells us that we need not consider all possible mechanisms – just
the direct ones.
Although the revelation principle is quite general, its proof is very
straightforward.
THEOREM 11.1 (Revelation Principle in Bayesian Nash strategies)
Given a mechanism design problem

, F(·), u

, if the choice function
g(·) is implementable in Bayesian Nash strategies, there exists a direct
mechanism

, p(·)

that implements g(·) in Bayesian Nash strategies.
Proof Assume that there is a nondirect mechanism

M, p′(·)

that im-
plements g(·) in Bayesian Nash strategies. We use this mechanism to
construct a direct mechanism that also implements the choice func-
tion g(·). Let si(·) denote the strategy that player i deploys in one of
the Bayesian Nash equilibria to the game induced by

M, p′(·)

, which
implements g(·). Consider the direct mechanism in which agents are
asked to announce messages mi ∈i and then the policy is chosen by
the function p(θ) = p′(s1(θ1), . . . , si(θi), . . . , sn(θn)) for each θ ∈.
We need only verify that under the direct mechanism, truthful an-
nouncements of mi(θi) = θi form a Bayesian Nash equilibrium. First,
suppose that all agents N\{i} are playing truthful strategies. If agent
i also uses a truthful strategy then the ﬁnal outcome will be g(θ) for
each θ. Now suppose that there is a desirable deviation m′
i̸ = θ′
i in the
direct mechanism for agent i with type θ′
i ∈i. If agent i can select
m′
i in the direct mechanism, it must be the case that m′
i ∈i. Because
si(θi) : i →Mi in the game induced by

M, p′(·)

, however, it must

--- Sayfa 342 ---
326
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
be the case that si(m′) ∈Mi exists. This implies that

θ−i∈−i
ui(p′(s1(θ1), . . . , si(m′), . . . , sn(θn))dF(θ−i | θi) >

θ−i∈−i
ui(p′(s1(θ1), . . . , si(θ′
i), . . . , sn(θn))dF(θ−i | θi).
This expression contradicts the fact that si(·) is a best response in the
equilibrium of the Bayesian game induced by

M, p′(·)

. Thus, the re-
sult is established.
□
One cautionary note is in order. We focus only on the existence of
a mechanism that implements a choice function as the outcome of a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Clearly, there may be other equilibria that
result in different collective choices. We refer readers to Palfrey and
Srivastava (1989) for a treatment of mechanism design when mecha-
nisms are required to have unique equilibria.
We can extend the revelation principle to a very large class of equi-
librium concepts. As mentioned, one important example is the case
of implementation in dominant strategies. Exercise 3 of this chapter
provides the appropriate deﬁnitions and asks the reader to prove this
revelation principle. The intuition behind the result is quite similar.
Suppose a player has a dominant strategy to play a particular strategy
in one mechanism. Then under a suitably deﬁned direct mechanism
that provides the payoff of the original mechanism for a truthful mes-
sage, truthfulness is a dominant strategy.
Given the revelation principle, the question of whether a particular
choicefunctionisimplementablecanbeansweredbyfocusingontruth-
ful direct mechanisms. If a choice function cannot be implemented by
such a mechanism, it cannot be implemented by any mechanism.
We now consider a few examples before returning to the develop-
ment of the theory.
3. Application: Polling
Suppose that there are N = {1, 2, . . . , n} (where n is odd – of course)
voters with symmetric single-peaked preferences on R1. The mecha-
nism designer does not know the agents’ ideal points but may ask each
voter a question and select a policy x ∈R1. Each ideal point θi is drawn
from a distribution F(·) on R1. A natural question to ask is whether

--- Sayfa 343 ---
3. Application: Polling
327
there are any mechanisms that induce agents to reveal their ideal points
in dominant strategies. Herve Moulin (1980) shows that the answer is
yes. Consider the mechanism that asks each agent to announce his
ideal point mi ∈R1 and then chooses policy equal to the median an-
nouncement, x(m) = median(m). To see that truthful response is a best
response, consider a respondent with ideal point yi. Let x(mi, m−i) de-
note the median of the proﬁle of messages that includes mi and the re-
sponses of the other n −1 respondents. Further, let x(m−i) and x(m−i)
be the lower and upper bounds of median (m−i).3
Suppose that agent i reports yi. If yi < x(m−i), then x(m−i) be-
comes the median report so that x(yi, m−i) = x(m−i). Similarly, if
yi > x(m−i), x(yi, m−i) = x(m−i). Finally, if yi ∈[x(m−i), x(m−i)], yi
is the median report so that x(yi, m−i) = yi. Thus, a deviation to
yi can result in only three types of outcomes x(m−i), x(m−i), and
yi ∈[x(m−i), x(m−i)] .
Clearly, the defection cannot pay if θi ∈[x(m−i), x(m−i)] because
the agent obtains her ideal point by reporting mi = θi. So suppose
that θi < x(m−i). Now agent i’s best feasible outcome is x(m−i). This
outcome can be obtained by any message less than x(m−i), including
θi. Similarly, if θi > x(m−i), announcing mi = θi weakly maximizes her
utility. Regardless of the responses of the other players, agent i’s best
strategy is to announce mi = yi.
Moulin focuses on mechanisms in which respondents are asked to
announce a number (interpreted as their ideal point). He requires
that the mechanism satisfy two criteria: anonymity, and efﬁciency. The
ﬁrst condition, anonymity, requires, simply, that the mechanism treat
individuals identically.
DEFINITION 11.2 A mechanism g : Rn →Xis anonymous if for any per-
mutation π : N →N, g(m1, . . . , mi, . . . , mn) = g(mπ(1), . . . , mπ(i), . . . ,
mπ(n)).
The efﬁciency condition is essentially identical to Arrow’s Pareto
condition.
DEFINITION 11.3 A mechanism g : Rn →X is efﬁcient if for every pro-
ﬁle of types y = (y1, . . . , yn) g(y) is Pareto efﬁcient (i.e., there is not
3 Recall that if a set of real numbers has an even number of distinct elements, it has
two medians.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
328
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
some other policy z̸ = g(y) such that every agent weakly prefers z to
g(y) and some agent strictly prefers z to g(y).
Moulin proves the following result:
THEOREM 11.2 If preferences are single peaked then every efﬁcient and
anonymous strategy-proof mechanism has the following form: Take the
announcements m1, m2, . . . , mn and add kﬁxed numbers a1, . . . , ak, and
select the median of this longer list.
Because the argument for why such a mechanism is strategy-proof
has already been sketched out, the proof of Moulin’s result is left as
an exercise. Meirowitz (2004a) considers the incentives for informa-
tion revelation in polls when candidates use the polls to inform policy
selection decisions. He ﬁnds that it is typically the case that respon-
dents have an incentive to be dishonest. An exercise asks the reader
to develop some of this logic.
4. Auction Theory
Because of the role of auctions in allocating everything from broad-
cast spectra to bric-a-brac on e-Bay, economists have developed a
large body of theory on how to structure auctions optimally to gen-
erate maximal revenue and achieve allocative efﬁciency. Although po-
litical scientists are generally not concerned with these applications,
there are a couple of reasons to consider some of the basics of auc-
tion theory. First, several important aspects of politics can be mod-
eled as particular types of auctions. Second, auction theory demon-
strates how mechanism design can be used to study the choice of
institutions.
It is not, however, the case that auction theory has been ignored in
political science. A classic application of auction theory are models of
favor buying where competing interest groups offer bribes to secure
public contracts or policy concessions from politicians. Recently one
of us has argued for modeling electoral competition as a form of an
auction (Meirowitz 2004b).
The standard auction problem involves a seller (agent 0) and a pop-
ulation of potential bidders, N = {1, . . . , n}. Each bidder places a val-
uation of θi ∈R1
+ on the item up for auction. These valuations are the
private information of each buyer. The common prior belief is that

--- Sayfa 345 ---
4. Auction Theory
329
bidder valuations are independent and identical draws from a twice-
differentiable distribution function F(·). In an auction model the utility
of a bidder i with valuation θi who wins the item by paying bi is θi −bi.
The payoff of a losing bidder who pays bi is −bi. If a losing bidder is
not required to pay, the payoff is 0. We begin with a few commonly
studied auction mechanisms.
4.1. Second-Price and Ascending-Price Auctions. Consider two auc-
tion designs. In a second-price auction, each participant submits a
sealed bid bi and the one who makes the highest bid wins the ob-
ject. The winner only pays the amount equal to the second-highest
bid, and all other bidders pay nothing. In an ascending-price auction,
all participants begin with their placards up, and the auctioneer an-
nounces an ascending sequence of prices, $10, $11, $12, . . . . When a
price is announced, causing the second to last placard to fall, the item is
sold to the remaining bidder with an upright placard at the announced
price.
Both of these auctions are commonly used and the experience of
bidding under these schemes may seem to vary greatly. Nonetheless,
from a game theoretic perspective the mechanisms are identical. Note
that the auctions induce different games (one is a Bayesian game with
simultaneous moves and the other is a Bayesian game with sequential
moves). Nonetheless, the incentives are identical. To see this we use
the logic of the revelation principle. Imagine that each bidder enters
his valuation θi into a computer that does two things: (1) It submits the
valuations into a second-price auction (i.e., it uses strategy bi = θi).
(2) It has a robot play the following strategy in an ascending-price
auction: hold the placard up until the announced price exceeds the
valuation, θi. In both cases the bidder with the highest valuation wins
the item and pays the amount of the second-highest valuation.
In the second-price auction bidding bi = θi is a dominant strategy.
Consider any other bid bi̸ = θi. Let bmax
−i
= max j̸=i bj denote the high-
est bid submitted by all the other agents. There are three possibilities,
either bmax
−i
= θi, bmax
−i
< θi, or bmax
−i
> θi. In the ﬁrst case bi = θi re-
sults in a tie with an expected utility equal to 0. The strategy bi > θi
results in victory at the price bmax
−i
= θi – also resulting in a utility of 0.
Finally under the strategy bi < θi agent i loses the item’s and receives
utility of 0. In the second case, bi = θi results in agent i winning and
paying bmax
−i . Thus, her payoff is θi −bmax
−i
> 0. Under bi > θi, agent i
wins and pays bmax
−i . Again her payoff is θi −bmax
−i . Under the strategy

--- Sayfa 346 ---
330
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
of bi < θi agent i loses and receives a payoff of 0. In the last case, un-
der the strategy of bi = θi agent i does not win and receives payoff of
0. Under the strategy bi > θi agent i wins and pays bmax
−i
for an item
that she only values at θi < bmax
−i
or she loses and gets a payoff of 0.
Thus the strategy of bi = θi does at least as well as any other strategy
and prevents two types of regret: not winning an item at a price one is
willing to pay and winning an item at a price that one does not want to
pay.
Similarly, lowering the placard once the price exceeds θi is a domi-
nant strategy in the ascending-price auction. Is there a reason to lower
the placard before the price reaches θi? Doing so ensures that the agent
loses the item, resulting in a payoff of 0. Early resignation cannot im-
prove upon the conjectured strategy. Moreover, if it is the case that
all other agents lower their placards at a price p′ < θi then the con-
jectured strategy results in victory at a price of p′ and utility θi −p′.
Now consider the potential consequences of deviating to a strategy of
keeping the placard up after the price exceeds θi. In this case either
the agent loses and receives a utility 0 or she is the winner, paying a
price in excess of her valuation.
4.2. First-Price and Descending-Price Auctions*. In a ﬁrst-price auc-
tion, agents simultaneously submit bids. The highest bidder wins the
object and pays her bid. In a descending-price auction each bidder has
a placard. The auctioneer begins with a high price and lowers it as
the auction progresses, $100, $99, $98, . . . . The bidder who raises her
placard ﬁrst wins the item and pays the most recent price. As in the
case of second-price and ascending-price auctions, the simultaneous
move and extensive form versions of the game are similar. We focus
only on the analysis of the ﬁrst-price auction, leaving as an exercise
the construction of a PBE to the descending-price auction. Follow-
ing Krishna (2002), we present an informal derivation of the equilib-
rium strategies. We begin with a conjecture about equilibrium strate-
gies and verify that the conjecture is consistent with a Bayesian Nash
equilibrium.
Suppose that bidders j̸ = i have strategies represented by the dif-
ferentiable and strictly increasing function b(·) : R1
+ →R1
+. A bidder’s
expected utility is 0 if she pays her valuation or loses. Let the random
variable bmax
−i
be the highest bid from the bidders N\{i} when they
use the conjectured strategy. Because the payoff from losing the item
is 0, the expected utility to a bidder with type θi from using strategy

--- Sayfa 347 ---
4. Auction Theory
331
bi = b(θi) is
Pr(bmax
−i
< bi) [θi −bi] .
If the other bidders use b(·), the term Pr(bmax
−i
< bi) is the probabil-
ity that n −1 draws of θ j from F(·) all have values lower than b−1(bi).
Because the types are independent draws, the expression for this prob-
ability is F(b−1(bi))n−1. Accordingly, the expected utility is
F(b−1(bi))n−1 [θi −bi] .
An optimal bi solves the ﬁrst-order necessary condition
(n −1)F(b−1(bi))n−2 f (b−1(bi))db−1(bi)
dbi
[θi −bi] −F(b−1(bi))n−1 = 0.
In the conjectured equilibrium b(θi) = bi so that
(n −1)F(θ)n−2 f (θ)θ = db(θ)
dθ
F(θ)n−1 + (n −1)F(θ)n−2 f (θ)b(θ).
The right-hand side is
d
dθ

F(θ)n−1b(θ)

. This allows us to reexpress
the ﬁrst-order condition as
d
dθ

F(θ)n−1b(θ)

= (n −1)F(θ)n−2 f (θ)θ.
The ﬁrst theorem of calculus (

 df
dx dx = f (x)) allows us to reexpress
this equation as
b(θ) =

 θ
0 θ′(n −1)F(θ′)n−2 f (θ′)dθ′
F(θ)n−1
.
(11.1)
The right-hand side of equation 11.1 is the conditional expectation of
bmax
−i
given that bmax
−i
< θ. Verifying that b(·) is in fact an equilibrium
bid function amounts to determining whether the local extrema char-
acterized by equation 11.1 is a global maximum. We leave this as an
exercise.
4.3. The Revenue Equivalence Principle*. First-price and second-
price auctions result in different bidding strategies. Given this, a natural
question is which auction the seller prefers. This question is answered

--- Sayfa 348 ---
332
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
by the fundamental result in auction theory, the revenue equivalence
principle (Riley and Samuelson 1981; Myerson 1981). This principle
guarantees that when the types are independent the expected revenue
of an auction depends only on the probability that a seller wins as
a function of her type θi and the utility realized by a seller with the
lowest possible type. An immediate consequence of this result is that,
assuming independent evaluations, all of the preceding auctions yield
the same expected revenue to the seller. In this section we develop this
logic.
Returning to the notation from the beginning of this chapter, let
M =  denote the space of possible messages. Each of the nplayers has
a valuation independently drawn from the differentiable distribution
F(·) on  with density f (·). For convenience  is an interval of the
form [0, k]. The set (N) contains all lotteries over the bidders N. Let
w(m1, . . . , mn) : Mn →(N) and t(m1, . . . , mn) : Mn →Rn
+ denote a
mechanism that speciﬁes for each message proﬁle m a lottery over the
identity of the winner and a transfer proﬁle. Thus, the ﬁrst-price auction
involves winner
w(m) =

1
#{arg max{mj}} if i ∈arg max{mj}
0 otherwise
and transfers
ti(m) =

mi
#{arg max{mj}} if i ∈arg max{mj}
0 otherwise.
.
Ignoring ties, these terms simplify to 1 and mi if i = arg max{mj} and 0
and 0 otherwise. An all-pay, ﬁrst-price auction, which we analyze later,
involves ti(m) = mi.
The revenue equivalence result concerns the expected revenue gen-
erated by Bayesian Nash equilibria in the auction. Standard auctions
have the “winner takes it with certainty” mapping g(m) deﬁned earlier.
Given an increasing bid function b(θi), the expected revenue is ER =
n
i=1

 k
0 ti(b(θi))dF(θi). We can now state the result.
THEOREM 11.3 Let valuations be independently and identically dis-
tributed. In every standard auction, every symmetric and increasing

--- Sayfa 349 ---
4. Auction Theory
333
equilibrium in which the expected payment of a bidder with value 0
is 0 yields the same value of expected revenue.
Proof Consider a ﬁxed standard auction where a symmetric and in-
creasing equilibrium is characterized by the function b(·). Let t+(θi)
denote the expected payment of a bidder with value θi. Suppose that
bidder i’s valuation is θ′
i and consider the bid z = b(θ′′
i ). When all other
bidders use the strategy b(·) the expected utility of bid z to bidder i is
θ′
i F(θ′′
i )n−1 −t+(θ′′
i ).
Differentiating this expected utility with respect to the type θ′′
i yields
the ﬁrst-order condition
(n −1)θ′
i f (θ′′
i )n−2 = ∂t+(z)
∂z
|z=θ′′
i .
Because b(·) is an equilibrium, z = b(θ′′
i ) = b(θ′
i) solves this condition,
yielding
(n −1)θ′
i f (θ′
i)n−2 = ∂t+(z)
∂z
|z=θ′
i .
But this differential equation yields the solution
t+(θ′
i) = t+(0) +
 θ
′
i
0
(n −1)θ′
i f (θ′
i)n−2dθ′
i.
Thus, under the assumption that t+(0) = 0, we have
t+(θ′
i) =
 θ
′
i
0
(n −1)θ′
i f (θ′
i)n−2dθ′
i
independently of the details of the auction. Because
ER =
n

i=1
 k
0
ti(b(θi))dF(θi) = n

t+(θ′
i) f (θ′
i)dθ′
i,
the proof is complete.
□

--- Sayfa 350 ---
334
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
5. Application: Electoral Contests and All-Pay Auctions∗
An all-pay auction requires that contestants pay their bids regardless of
whether they win. Many contests may take this form. Special interests
pay bribes, and the group that makes the largest payment receives
its preferred policy. Candidates compete for ofﬁce and the one who
spends the most money wins. We develop this second application in
some detail and use the revenue equivalence principle to reach some
conclusions about the efﬁciency of imperfect voting. A special case of
this model was analyzed directly in Chapter 6.
Consider a pool of candidates, C = {1, 2, . . . , c}. Each candidate has
a nonnegative, real-valued type θ p ∈R1
+ that corresponds to his overall
efﬁciency at governing. The social goal is to select one of the most efﬁ-
cientcandidates p∗∈arg maxp∈C θ p.Thequalitytypesθ = (θ1, . . . , θc)
are private information – only candidate p knows θ p. For simplic-
ity, the types are independent and identical draws from the distribu-
tion F(·) with density function f (·). Let Mc = max{θ j} j̸=1 denote the
maximal type from c −1 draws of θ. Given θ p the probability that
Mc ≤θ p is Fc(θ p) ≡F(θ p)c−1. Differentiating yields the density of
Mc, fc(θ p) = (c −1)F(θ p)c−2 f (θ p).
Our baseline model involves two periods. In the ﬁrst period each
candidate simultaneously selects a level of campaign effort ap. In the
second period the candidate with the highest level of effort wins of-
ﬁce. The key assumption is that a candidate’s cost of campaign ef-
fort is decreasing in her governing efﬁciency. That is, if candidate 1
has a lower cost of campaign effort than candidate 2, candidate 1
is likely to be a more effective leader than is candidate 2. This as-
sumption can be justiﬁed on the grounds that competence translates
into good management in ofﬁce and good management on the cam-
paign trail. For simplicity, we consider the case where campaigning
costs are inversely proportional to efﬁciency. Candidate payoffs are
then
Eu(ap, θ p) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1 −ap
θ p if ap > max j̸=p{a j}
−ap
θ p if ap < max j̸=p{a j}
1
#{ j:a j=ap} −ap
θ p if ap = max j̸=p{a j}
,
where the last line of the expression follows from assuming that ties
arebrokenthroughrandomization.Multiplyingeachcandidate’sutility

--- Sayfa 351 ---
5. Application: Electoral Contests and All-Pay Auctions∗
335
function by θ p translates this payoff function into that of a standard
all-pay auction where the prize has value θ p and bids have unitary
cost. We now characterize a symmetric, pure strategy equilibrium in
which each candidate’s effort level α(θi) is a strictly increasing and
differentiable function of her efﬁciency type θi. So candidate p with
type θ p who selects effort ap generates an expected utility of
π(ap, θ p) = F(α−1(ap))c−1 −ap
θ p
.
In order for ap to be optimal it must solve the ﬁrst-order condition
(c −1)F(α−1(ap))c−2 f (α−1(ap))dα−1
dap
= 1
θ p
.
In a symmetric equilibrium, α(θ p) = ap, so that α−1(ap) = θ p. Thus
the ﬁrst-order condition reduces to
dα−1
dap
=
1
θ p(c −1)F(θ p)c−2 f (θ p)
or
dα
dθ = θ p(c −1)F(θ p)c−2 f (θ p).
Integration yields the required solution,
α(θ) =
 θ
0
x(c −1)F(x)c−2 f (x)dx
=
 θ
0
xfc(x)dx.
This function is strictly increasing in θ so it remains only to verify that
this solution satisﬁes the sufﬁcient second-order condition. This result
follows from Theorem 2 of Krishna and Morgan (1997), so we do not
reproduce the proof.
PROPOSITION 11.1 A symmetric equilibrium in which effort α(θi) is
strictly increasing in efﬁciency exists. In this equilibrium the best candi-
date p∗= arg maxp∈C(θ p) is chosen with probability 1.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
336
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
A few comments are in order. First, because

 θ
0 xfc(x)dx < θ,
α(θi) < θi so that the winning candidate achieves a strictly positive
payoff. Second, the derivative of the effort functions with respect to c
is
∂α(θ)
∂c
=
 θ
0
x(c −1) ln(F(x))F(x)c−2 f (x)dx.
This derivative is negative because F(x) ≤1. Thus for c < c′ , αc(θ) >
αc+1(θ) where αn(θ) denotes the equilibrium effort function when
c = n. Consequently, the effort that each candidate puts into winning
decreases as the number of candidates increases. Third, because the
model is equivalent to a ﬁrst-price all-pay auction with independent
values and α(0) = 0, the revenue equivalence principle implies that
the expected total effort, Ac = c

 ∞
0 α(x) f (x)dx, must be the same
as the expected payment of the winner in a second-price auction in
which player values are drawn from F(·). This value is simply the
expected value of the second highest of c draws from F(·), which
is
Total effort =
 ∞
0
xc(c −1)(1 −F(x))F(x)c−2 f (x)dx.
This term is increasing in c. Thus, the total effort is increasing in the
number of candidates.
It is reasonable to think that the social objective of elections
is the maximization of θp∗c . If the actual effort of campaigning
is wasteful, however, there is a trade-off between increasing the
expected value of the winning candidate’s quality, Eθp∗c , and de-
creasing the expected campaign costs E c
p=1 α(θ p)/θ p. Letting
v(·) and u(·) denote twice-differentiable increasing functions with
v′′ < 0 and u′′ > 0, we consider a social welfare function of the
form
Vc = Ev(θ p∗c ) −Eu
 c

p=1
α(θ p)
θ p

.
Although the all-pay auction aspect of campaigns does an excellent
job selecting the best-quality candidate, the costs c
p=1 α(θ p)/θ p may

--- Sayfa 353 ---
5. Application: Electoral Contests and All-Pay Auctions∗
337
be considered undesirable. This perspective motivates a natural ques-
tion. How does one select good candidates while preventing excessive
wasteful campaigning? One answer to this question involves imperfect
voting – something that seems to happen occasionally in Florida if not
elsewhere.
The baseline model assumes that elections are perfect screening de-
vices selecting the candidate with the highest level of a. In reality vot-
ing is imperfect. In this section we consider elections with probabilistic
outcomes – the candidate with the highest level a wins with probabil-
ity q + (1 −q)/c and the remaining candidates win with probability
(1 −q)/c. In this setting the candidate payoffs are
Eu(ap, θ p) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
q + 1−q
c
−ap
θ p if ap > max j̸=p{a j}
1−q
c
−ap
θ p if ap < max j̸=p{a j}
q
#{ j:a j=ap} + 1−q
c
−ap
θ p if ap = max j̸=p{a j}
.
Given this utility function, the derivation of equilibrium strategies is
similar to the baseline model (the baseline model sets q = 1). If each
player uses a strictly increasing and differentiable strategy α(θi), can-
didate p with type θ p selecting accumulation ap has an expected utility
of
π(ap, θ p, q) = qF(α−1(ap))c−1 −ap
θ p
+ 1 −q
c
.
For ap to be optimal, it must solve the ﬁrst-order condition
q(c −1)F(α−1(ap))c−2 f (α−1(ap))dα−1
dap
= 1
θ p
.
(11.2)
For all q, a symmetric equilibrium mapping requires α(θ p; q) = ap so
that α−1(ap; q) = θ p. Thus equation 11.2 reduces to
dα−1
dap
=
1
θ pq(c −1)F(θ p)c−2 f (θ p)
so that
dα
dθ = θ pq(c −1)F(θ p)c−2 f (θ p).

--- Sayfa 354 ---
338
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
Integration yields the required solution,
α(θ; q) =
 θ
0
xq(c −1)F(x)c−2 f (x)dx
= q
 θ
0
xfc(x)dx
= qα(θ; 1).
(11.3)
Accordingly, when the election is imperfect, each candidate reduces
her effort proportionally to the imperfection parameter q.
For the remainder of this section we focus on two candidate contests
and consider the optimal level q ∈[0, 1]. In this case the strategies are
α(θ; q) = q
 θ
0
xf (x)dx.
The social welfare associated with q is
V(q) = q
∞

0
v(x)2F(x) f (x)dx + (1 −q)
∞

0
v(x)2(1 −F(x)) f (x)dx
−
 ∞
0
u
2q
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

df (θ).
The optimal value q satisﬁes the ﬁrst-order condition
∞

0
v(x)F(x) f (x)dx −
∞

0
v(x)(1 −F(x)) f (x)dx
=
 ∞
0
1
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

u′
2q
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

f (θ)dθ.
The optimal value q∗is less than 1 if
∞

0
v(x)F(x) f (x)dx −
∞

0
v(x)(1 −F(x)) f (x)dx
<
 ∞
0
1
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

u′
2
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

f (θ)dθ

--- Sayfa 355 ---
6. Incentive Compatibility and Individual Rationality
339
and greater than 0 if
∞

0
v(x)F(x) f (x)dx −
∞

0
v(x)(1 −F(x)) f (x)dx
>
 ∞
0
2
θ
 θ
0
xf (x)dx

u′(0)

f (θ)dθ.
Accordingly, if v(·) is relatively ﬂat and u(·) is relatively steep then
imperfect elections are efﬁciency enhancing. If v and u are linear, the
ﬁrst-order condition does not depend on q and the optimal q is either
1 or 0 – it is either efﬁcient to maximize the probability that the best
candidate serves or to minimize the campaigning costs.
6. Incentive Compatibility and Individual Rationality
In our Saeco purchasing and polling examples, we considered mech-
anisms for which truthfully reporting one’s type was a best response.
Although the revelation principle proves that focusing on direct mech-
anisms does not limit the choice functions under consideration, it is
silent about what types of choice functions are implementable. In other
words, it fails to answer the question, Which types of mechanisms in-
duce agents to be truthful? Incentive compatibility is the requirement
that given the mechanism and the belief that all other agents are being
truthful, agent i prefers being truthful to lying.
Consider a model with agents N, choice space X, type space ,
prior joint density function over types f (θ), and state-contingent util-
ity functions ui(x, θ) for each i ∈N. A direct mechanism is a map-
ping p(θ) :  →X. For there to be a Bayesian Nash equilibrium with
truthful strategies to the game induced by the mechanism the following
incentive compatibility condition must hold:
DEFINITION 11.4 (Incentive Compatibility) For every i ∈N and every
distinct θi and θ′
i in i

−i
ui(p(θi, θ−i), θi)f−i(θ−i)dθ−i ≥

−i
ui(p(θ′
i, θ−i), θi) f−i(θ−i)dθ−i.
(IC)

--- Sayfa 356 ---
340
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
The incentive compatibility (or IC) condition requires that truthful
messages are a best response if other agents are using truthful mes-
sages. The easiest way to ensure that the IC condition is satisﬁed is
to select a mechanism for which

−i ui(p(mi, θ−i), θi) f−i(θ−i)dθ−i is
constant in mi. Consider the following example. Let ω be a random
state variable that affects the players’ payoffs from various policies.
Assume that n ≥3 agents observe ω so that θi = ω with probability 1.
The mechanism designer can implement a choice function x(ω) that
maps a proﬁle of messages into policies x by using the following simple
type of mechanism:
p(θ) =
 x(ω′) if #{ j ∈N : θ j = ω′} ≥n −1
x(w∗) otherwise
where #{ j ∈N : θ j = ω′} denotes the number of individuals announc-
ing θ j = ω′ and w∗is an arbitrary value of ω. Because a single defection
does not alter the policy choice, this mechanism satisﬁes incentive com-
patibility.
Themechanismintheprecedingexample,however,doesnotprovide
a strong incentive to be truthful. In the auction theory incentive com-
patibility is satisﬁed by a second-price auction because the expected
utility (ignoring ties) is
ui(p(mi, θ−i), θi) =

θi −max j θ j if mi > max j θ j
0 otherwise
.
This function is constant in mi if mi > max j θ j and constant in mi for
mi < max j θ j. The variable component of the function jumps from 0
to θi −max j θ j, which is positive only if mi > max j θ j. In contrast
the ﬁrst-price auction is not incentive compatible. In other words,
truthful bidding is not a Bayesian Nash equilibrium to the ﬁrst-price
auction.
To generate some intuition for incentive compatibility conditions we
return to the coffee machine problem. Consider an arbitrary transfer
schedule ti(mi, m−i) that maps a message proﬁle into the amount that
member i is charged. Let p(m) be a policy function that maps the mes-
sage proﬁle into the probability that the coffee maker is purchased.

--- Sayfa 357 ---
6. Incentive Compatibility and Individual Rationality
341
Given this transfer schedule, the expected utility to department mem-
ber i from announcement mi is
Eu(mi, θi) ≡

[θi p(mi, θ−i) −ti(mi, θ−i)] f−i(θ−i)dθ−i.
Incentive compatibility requires that mi = θi maximize Eu(mi, θi). If
we assume that p and t are differentiable functions, then it is easy to
analyzealocalincentivecompatibilityconditionbasedontheﬁrst-order
condition
∂Eu(mi, θi)
∂mi
|mi=θi= 0.
Interchanging the order of integration and differentiation leads to
θi
 ∂p(mi, θ−i)
∂mi
f−i(θ−i)dθ−i |mi=θi
=
 ∂t(mi, θ−i)
∂mi
f−i(θ−i)dθ−i |mi=θi .
Intuitively, this condition requires that in an incentive compatible
mechanism the expected decrease in transfers associated with a slight
underreporting of θi is exactly offset by the reduction in the expected
likelihood of coffee maker purchase times the valuation θi.
Although incentive compatibility requires a willingness of players
to reveal their private information, to implement a choice function
participants must also be willing to play the game. Analysis of these
constraints is somewhat simpler and ad hoc. The key intuition is that
a player rationally participates only if her expected payoff from equi-
librium play is at least as high as her expected payoff from nonpartic-
ipation. In some settings, these constraints are trivial: agents have no
choice but to participate. In other settings it is necessary to be explicit
about the value to players of not participating. Formally, we have the
following additional constraint.
DEFINITION 11.5 (Individual Rationality constraint) Let the value of not
participating in the mechanism be given by vi(θ, θ−i) and the value to
being truthful in a direct mechanism be ui(θi, θ−i). For each i ∈N and

--- Sayfa 358 ---
342
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
each θi ∈

ui(θi, θ−i)dF(θ−i) ≥

vi(θi, θ−i)dF(θ−i).
(IR)
A weaker notion of the individual rationality (or IR) constraint is
that players prefer to play the game ex ante (i.e., before they learn their
type). Such a constraint is called an ex ante IR constraint whereas the
condition deﬁned previously is an ex interim IR constraint.4
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
Classical mechanism design allows the planner to commit to one of
a large number of mechanisms. Incentive compatibility and individual
rationality are the only constraints. In many political settings, however,
principals often lack the ability to commit to a mechanism or to use
certain incentives such as direct monetary transfers. We devote the re-
mainder of this chapter to examples illustrating how political scientists
use constrained mechanism design to address problems of institutional
design.
Models in political science generally fall within the principal-agent
paradigm: there are a set of principals or bosses and a set of agents
or subordinates. Principals like “good” agents and want them to do a
“good job.” Monitoring problems, however, preclude principals from
directly observing whether the agents are good or doing a good job.
Conversely, agents want to convince the principal that they are “good”
and doing a “good job.” Agents, however, typically prefer shirking to
performing well. In most political science models, the principal has
a limited number of instruments available for inﬂuencing the agents’
behavior. In the language of mechanism design, the principal is the
planner and doing a “good job” or revealing whether one is a “good”
type corresponds to selecting appropriate messages in a direct mecha-
nism. The limited number of instruments corresponds to constraints on
the mechanisms that can be enacted. Before turning to more interest-
ing applications, we demonstrate these concepts in a simple delegation
problem.
4 We apologize for the potential confusion between this concept and the usage of
individual rationality in the discussion of repeated games. The literature has used the
phrase in both of these related, but distinct ways.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
343
Suppose there are a principal and two agents. Agents have one of
two possible types θi ∈{good, bad}. Each agent is a good type with
probability π. If an agent is chosen to perform a task she can de-
vote one of two levels of effort ai ∈{high, low}. Effort level ai = high
imposes a cost c on the agent while ai = low is costless. The prin-
cipal must select one of the two agents to perform a task and the
chosen agent must decide which effort level to choose. The funda-
mental question of principal-agent models (or agency models) can
then be phrased as follows: How can the principal design institutions
to select a good type agent and induce the chosen agent to select
high? The former aspect, designing institutions to select good types,
is called solving adverse selection. The latter aspect, designing insti-
tutions to create incentives for high effort, is called solving moral
hazard.
If the principal can observe a label on the agent’s shirt that indicates
his type, and if the choice of effort is readily observable, then there is
no monitoring or observability problem. In this case, matters are easy
for the principal. She simply hires only good types and ﬁres them if they
give low effort. More interesting situations involve private information
about agent types and imperfectly observed effort.
7.1. Electoral Accountability. Ferejohn (1986) models accountability
in repeated elections as a principal agent problem. We work through
a simpliﬁed version of Ferejohn’s model. Ferejohn focuses only on
the moral hazard problem, so for now we ignore the possibility of
different types. There are two identical parties that can serve in ofﬁce.
Suppose that the party in government selects an effort level, but the
voters observe only a noisy policy outcome x ∈{high, low} that has the
following form. If a = high then x is high with probability q > 1/2 and
low with probability 1 −q; if a = low then x is low with probability q
and high with probability 1 −q. Finally, suppose the governing party
receives a rent r each period it is in ofﬁce and discounts the future at
rate δ. The opposition party gets a payoff of 0 each period it is out of
ofﬁce.
The voter chooses a reelection rule specifying the values of x that
result in the reelection of the incumbent. Can the voter select a rule
that creates incentives for the government always to selecta = high? A
simple rule is to retain the incumbent party if x = high and replace it
otherwise. If the voter uses this rule in each period, the governing party
faces a simple decision problem. Selection of a = high in the current

--- Sayfa 360 ---
344
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
period results in the expected utility
r −c + qδVI + (1 −q)δVO
(11.4)
where VI is the value of the game starting next period if the party is in
ofﬁce at the beginning of next period, and VO is the value of the game
starting next period if the party is out of ofﬁce at the beginning of next
period.5 If the government selects a = low then her expected utility
is
r + (1 −q)δVI + qδVO.
(11.5)
If the voter’s rule works, so that the incumbent ﬁnds it optimal to select
a = high in every period, the values of the game are
VI = r −c + qδVI + (1 −q)δVO
and
VO = (1 −q)δVI + qδVO.
Solving these four equations results in
VI =
r −c + cqδ −qrδ
2qδ2 −δ2 −2qδ + 1
(11.6)
and
VO = rδ −cδ + cqδ −qrδ
2qδ2 −δ2 −2qδ + 1.
(11.7)
Incentive compatibility for all governments to select a = high requires
that equation 11.4 is no less than equation 11.5. This incentive con-
straint is
VI −Vo ≥
c
(2q −1)δ .
5 See Chapter 3 for a discussion of Bellman equations and value functions.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
345
Substituting equations 11.6 and 11.7 leads to the requirement that
r −c −rδ + cδ ≥c(2qδ2 −δ2 −2qδ + 1)
(2q −1)δ
.
(11.8)
Equation 11.8 is necessary for the voting rule to induce ai = high in
every period. If the exogenous parameters satisfy equation 11.8, the
moral hazard problem is solved by a rule that retains the governing
party only if x = high. Because the voter prefers x = high to x = low,
she has no problem committing to this rule: the rule represents an
equilibrium strategy given the government decision rule. This is true
because all governments select ai = high and all governments have the
same type (i.e., there is no adverse selection problem). Accordingly,
if the preceding condition is satisﬁed, we have characterized a Nash
equilibrium to the game between the two parties and the voter: parties
in ofﬁce select ai = high, and voters reelect only if x = high.
Now consider an adverse selection version of the problem. Suppose
the government does not select an effort level but has private infor-
mation about its type. For simplicity now each party has a type that is
high with probability π > 1/2 and low with probability 1 −π. These
draws are independent across parties. In each period the voter only
observes x that takes the value high with probability z > 1/2 if the
government is a high type and the value of low with probability 1 −zif
the government is a high type. If the government is a low type, x = high
with probability 1 −zand low with probability z. Once again the voter
may choose the simple rule: retain if x = high and replace otherwise.
This rule, however, may throw out high-quality governments that are
temporarily unlucky. A better rule uses information from previous pe-
riods. For any ﬁnite number of periods ki that party i was in ofﬁce let
hi denote the number of these periods for which x was high. It follows
that in ki −hi of those periods x = low. The posterior probability that
party i is of type high after hi realizations of high from ki trials is given
by Bayes’ rule:
Pr(θi = high | ki, hi) =
πzhi(1 −z)ki−hi
πzhi(1 −z)ki−hi + (1 −π)(1 −z)hi zki−hi .
An optimal rule is to retain the original incumbent until Pr(θi = high |
ki, hi) falls below π, the ex ante expected quality of party j. Going for-
ward, the voter should dump party j as soon as Pr(θi = high | ki, hi) >

--- Sayfa 362 ---
346
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
Pr(θ j = high | kj, h j).Thisdiscussionofagencytheoryisintendedonly
as an introduction. We now discuss several applications of agency the-
ory to the study of delegation.
7.2. A Model of Delegation to Bureaucrats. One of the key questions
in the study of the modern administrative state is the trade-off be-
tween political control of an agency and the autonomy that an agency
requires to apply its expertise to policy problems. Principal-agent the-
ory has been a natural approach to this question. Originally applied
in politics to study when and how the U.S. Congress delegates rule-
making authority to regulatory agencies, principal-agent theory has
been applied to many other political systems and to many other types
of political bodies including political parties and international organi-
zations. In this section, we consider a version of a model that Epstein
and O’Halloran (1994) apply to the study of statutory delegation in
the United States.
Suppose that a legislature L is considering how much authority to
delegate to a bureaucratic agency A. The policy space X is a subset
of R. Each of the n legislators has quadratic policy preferences with
ideal points l1 < · · · < ln. The agency is treated as a unitary actor with
quadratic policy preferences and an ideal point a.
The members of L are uninformed about the consequences of var-
ious policy choices p ∈X whereas Ais fully informed. We model this
uncertainty as Gilligan and Krehbiel (1989) do in their study of leg-
islative committees; assume that the policy outcome x is a function
of the policy choice p and an error term ε. To keep matters as sim-
ple as possible, let x = p −ε. Each legislator has a common knowl-
edge prior that ε has mean 0 and is distributed according to a dis-
tribution function F(ε) with density f (ε). The agency knows ε with
certainty. This informational structure captures the idea that bureau-
crats are policy experts on whom legislators rely to improve policy
formulation.
Rather than solve for the optimal mechanism from the L’s perspec-
tive, we limit the analysis to a very simple class of mechanisms: L
chooses a set of allowable policies P ⊂X. As is standard in the liter-
ature, it is assumed that the legislature selects a P that is unbeatable
under majority rule. The sanction against an agency that chooses p /∈P
is so large that this type of deviation is never made. Given a set of al-
lowable policies, P, and the state of the world ε, Achooses p to solve

--- Sayfa 363 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
347
the problem
max
p

−(a −p + ε)2
subject to p ∈P.
Thus, whenever a + ε ∈P, the agency gets her ideal outcome by choos-
ing p = a + ε. If a + ε /∈P, Achooses the point in P closest to a + ε.
Given A’s best response, we turn to the legislature’s choice of P. In
principle P can be any subset of X. However, the optimal P is always
a closed interval

p, p

⊂X.
PROPOSITION 11.2 P∗is a closed interval

p, p

⊂X.
We refer the reader to Gailmard (2005) for the details of the proof,
but here is some intuition. Suppose that P has a “hole” in it (e.g.,
P =

p, p′
∪[p′′, p] where p′ < p′′). Then whenever p′ < a + ε <
(p′ + p′′)/2, A chooses p′ and when (p′ + p′′)/2 < a + ε < p′′, she
chooses p′′. Thus, the policy outcome as a function of ε appears as
the solid line of Figure 11.1. It is easy to see the variance in the policy
a
p
a
−
p′−
p′′
a
−
p
a
−
ε
Policy
outcome
 a
Figure 11.1. Policy Outcomes from the Epstein-O’Halloran Model.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
348
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
outcome is lowered by moving p′ and p′′ closer together. Because all
legislators are risk averse, they want to reduce the variance so long as
the expected policy outcome does not change. The reader can verify
that it is always possible to move p′ and p′′ closer together without
changing the mean policy outcome.6
Given the proposition, it is clear that the legislature’s collective
choice problem is to choose p and p. Therefore, the agency’s best
response function is
p∗=
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
p if a + ε < p
p if a + ε > p
a + ε otherwise
.
The dotted line of Figure 11.1 gives this best response.
A complication arises in modeling L’s collective choice in that it must
decide over two dimensions, the lower bound and the upper bound.
Fortunately, the majority rule decision is the P∗preferred by the leg-
islator with the median ideal point lm. To see this, note that given A’s
best response, li prefers the combination of p and p that maximizes
−
∞

p−a
(li −p+ ε)2 f (ε)dε −
p−a

p−a
(li −a)2 f (ε)dε −
p−a

−∞
(li −p+ ε)2 f (ε)dε.
The ﬁrst-order conditions are found by differentiating7 with respect to
p and p,
2
∞

p−a
(li −p + ε) f (ε)dε = 0
2
p−a

−∞
(li −p + ε) f (ε)dε = 0.
Whenever li < a, ∂/∂p < 0 for any ﬁnite p. Thus, the optimal choice is
p∗= −∞. Why? When li < a the agency always wants a higher policy
6 Of course, eliminating holes does not prove that the interval must be closed. Closed-
ness is required to make A’s best response well deﬁned.
7 This differentiation involves use of Leibnitz’s rule and some simpliﬁcation.

--- Sayfa 365 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
349
than legislator i would want if she were informed. Thus, legislator i
never ﬁnds it in her interest to constrain Afrom choosing low policies.
Similarly, if li > a, ∂/∂p > 0 and p∗= ∞. Combining these observa-
tions, we see that any policy other than the one that is optimal for the
legislator with ideal point lm can be defeated in a majority vote.
PROPOSITION 11.3 The majority rule outcome for P∗is the closed inter-
val

p, p

preferred by the legislator with ideal point lm.
Because the majority rule outcome is the median’s ideal statute,
the delegation game becomes one between the agency and legislative
median. Thus, the allowable policies for the agency are given by the
solutions
p∗= −∞
∞

p∗−a
(lm −p∗+ ε) f (ε)dε = 0
if lm < a and
p∗= −∞
p∗−a

−∞
(lm −p∗+ ε) f (ε)dε = 0
if lm > a.
Consider the intuition for the expressions for the ﬁnite constraint.
If lm < a, we can rewrite the expression for p∗as
lm =
∞

p∗−a
(p∗−ε)
f (ε)
1 −F(p∗−a)dε.
This condition implies that the expected outcome conditional on the
constraints on A must equal the median legislator’s ideal point. If
this expected outcome were greater than lm, the median could do
better in expectation by further constraining A’s choice to gener-
ate lower policies. Similarly, we can write the condition for p∗when

--- Sayfa 366 ---
350
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
lm > a as
lm =
p∗−a

−∞
(p∗−ε)
f (ε)
F(p∗−a)dε.
To generate some more speciﬁc results, assume that ε is distributed
uniformly on [−E, E] so that F(ε) = (ε + E)/(2E) and
f (ε) =
1/(2E). Then if lm < a, we can solve for p∗= 2lm −a + E. We can
see that if the agency and the median move closer together, either by
raising lm or by decreasing a, the legislature passes a more permissive
statute–onewithagreaterupperbound.Intuitively,thelegislaturedel-
egates more authority to an agency that shares its preferences. Also,
when there is more policy uncertainty (e.g., E is larger), the agency
is granted more authority. Thus, when information asymmetries are
greater, the legislature is more dependent on the informed agency to
formulate policy.8
7.3. Bureaucratic Capacity. One of the important assumptions of the
Epstein and O’Halloran (1994) model and other models of dele-
gation is that the agency can implement its policy choice perfectly
without error. This may be a reasonable assumption for advanced
democracies with cadres of professional, highly trained bureaucrats,
but it is far less applicable in developing states or earlier historical
eras.
Because of the limitations of the standard models, Huber and
McCarty (2004) develop a model in which bureaucracies vary in their
capacity to implement policies. In that model, if A attempts to im-
plement policy p, the resulting policy is p = p −ω where ω is an im-
plementation error with mean 0 and variance σ 2
ω. Bureaucracies with
high capacity are better able to implement policies and therefore have
lower values of σ 2
ω. Conversely, low-capacity bureaucracies implement
policy with imprecision so that σ 2
ω is high. Let G(ω) be the distribution
function for ω and g(ω) be the associated density.
Huber and McCarty embed this model of capacity into a delegation
model very similar to that of Epstein and O’Halloran. The legislature
wants to delegate to the agency because the agency is better informed
8 If lm > a, the solution is p∗= 2lm −a −E. The reader can verify that this lower
bound is less restrictive if lm and a are close together and if E is large.

--- Sayfa 367 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
351
abouttheconsequencesofvariouspolicychoices.Asearlier,theagency
knows ε but the legislature knows only that it is distributed uniformly
on [−E, E]. Again members of L and A have quadratic preferences
over the policy space, X. We retain the notation from the previous
section.
The legislature moves ﬁrst and creates a statute specifying the set of
acceptable policies P =

p, p

.9 The agency then attempts to imple-
ment policy p that results in policy p = p −ω and outcome x = p −ε.
Compliance with the statute requires that p ∈P. Thus, even if the
agency attempts to comply (i.e., p ∈P), implementation errors may
generate a noncompliant outcome. If p /∈P, the agency incurs a
cost δ as a sanction for noncompliance.10 Unlike in the Epstein and
O’Halloran model, in this model the agency may choose to be noncom-
pliant. Alternatively, noncompliance may be a result of implementa-
tion errors. Because it is assumed that Lcannot observe p, the sanction
for noncompliance must be the same regardless of the ultimate cause.
Thus, A is sanctioned when p −ω > p or when p −ω < p. Given a
choice of p, the probability of sanction is G(p −p) + 1 −G(p −p).
To facilitate the exposition, note that a number of features of the
Epstein-O’Halloran model generalize to this model. First, it can be
shown that the majority rule choice of P maximizes the utility of the
legislator with ideal point lm. We assume throughout this section that
a > lm . Second, it can be shown that in the current model p∗= −∞if
a > lm.
Given this setup and the assumption that a > lm, A’s utility function
is 11
−
∞

−∞
(a −p + ω + ε)2g(ω)dω −δ [G(p −p)] =
−(a −p + ε)2 −σ 2
ω −δ [G(p −p)] .
9 A note to the industrious reader who refers to the original publication is in order.
In Huber and McCarty, the political principal is a generic politician rather than a
legislature. We have adjusted the nomenclature and notation to parallel our discussion
of Epstein and O’Halloran.
10 Actually, Huber and McCarty assume that noncompliance is detected probabilitisi-
cally. However, our simpliﬁcation does not alter the results.
11 The second line follows from a useful fact about expected utilities of quadratic func-
tions,
 ∞
−∞
(x + φ)2 f (φ)dφ = (x −E(φ))2 + var(φ), where E is the expectations
operator and var is the variance operator.

--- Sayfa 368 ---
352
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
The ﬁrst-order condition for a maximum is
2(a −p + ε) −δg(p −p) = 0.
The ﬁrst term in this expression represents the marginal beneﬁt of mov-
ing the expected policy closer to the agency’s ideal point a. The second
term represents the net marginal cost of increasing the intended policy
in terms of the probability of sanction. Increasing p increases the prob-
ability of p + ω > p by g(p −p). Clearly, A chooses p to equate the
marginal policy beneﬁts with marginal sanction costs. To get an explicit
solution for p∗, Huber and McCarty assume that g(ω) = (
 −|ω|)/
2.
This density is “tent shaped” on the interval [−
,
] and satisﬁes the
condition σ 2
ω =
2/6. Thus,
 represents a measure of bureaucratic
incapacity.
Giventheseassumptionsaboutthefunctionalform, Figure11.2plots
the marginal policy beneﬁt curve and the marginal compliance costs for
three values of pas a function of p. The marginal beneﬁt line is the bold
downward-sloping line. The marginal policy beneﬁt is independent of
the location of p and declines as the bureaucrat’s action approaches
the bureaucrat’s most-preferred action, a + ε. The marginal cost curves
depend on the location of p, and are depicted in Figure 11.2 by the
three triangles centered at p1,p2, and p3. These triangles represent the
function δg(p −p). If p is too high or too low, the marginal costs are
Marginal benefit of increasing p
a
p
ε
0
ml
a ε
*
2
2
p
p
a
 ε
3p
*
*
1
3
p
p
1p
Marginal compliance
cost of increasing p
f
p
p
+
+
+
−
=
=
=
−
(          )
δ
Figure 11.2. Policy Choice in Huber-McCarty Model.

--- Sayfa 369 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
353
0 at the bureaucrat’s ideal intended action, a + ε. Consequently, the
bureaucrat chooses its ideal action. For non-extreme statutes, the bu-
reaucrat’s best response lies at the intersection of the marginal beneﬁt
curve with the relevant marginal cost curve.12 Statute p1, for exam-
ple, leads to optimal action p∗
1. For any p > p∗
1, the marginal policy
beneﬁts of increasing the policy action (toward the bureaucrat’s most
preferred) exceed the marginal compliance costs, and for any p < p∗
1,
the reduction in compliance costs of moving the action away from the
bureaucrat’s most-preferred action exceed the policy loses.
From Figure 11.2, the effect of changes in p on the bureaucrat’s
best-response depends on whether the apex of the “compliance cost”
triangle is to the left or right of the policy beneﬁt line (i.e., to the left
or right of p2 in Figure 11.2). For p1 < p < p2, p∗> p. In this range,
increases in p increase the marginal compliance costs of any p > p,
inducing the bureaucrat to move toward the politician’s ideal point.
At p2, however, this effect reverses. For p > p2, p∗< p, and increases
in p decrease the marginal compliance cost of any p∗< p, inducing the
bureaucrat to adjust his action closer to his ideal point. Consequently,
the minimal action that the legislature can induce is given by p∗(p2).
Huber and McCarty show that formal solution to the agent’s maxi-
mization problem is
p∗=
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
a + ε
if p −ε ≤a −

2(a + ε)−δ(p+
)

2 −δ
if a −
 ≤p −ε ≤a −δ

2(a + ε)−δ(p−
)

2 + δ
if p −ε ≤a +
 ≤p −ε ≤a +
a + ε
if p −ε ≥a +
.
A few features of A’s best response are worth emphasizing. First,
for extreme statutes (p ≤a −
 + ε or p ≥a +
 + ε), A’s best re-
sponse is to attempt to implement her ideal point. If the statute
is too lax or too constraining, the marginal compliance cost at A’s
ideal policy is 0. Second, lm can only induce policies in the interval
[a −(δ/
) + ε, a + ε].Hecannotinducealowerpolicybecause Acom-
plies less often under a more restrictive statute. This minimal policy is
12 McCarty and Huber assume that
2 > δ, which guarantees that there is a unique
intersection of the marginal beneﬁt and cost curves and it represents a global maxi-
mum. Given their interest in systems where bureaucratic capacity and the ability to
sanction noncompliance are low, this assumption seems reasonable.

--- Sayfa 370 ---
354
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
increasing in
. Thus, lm’s ability to control A decreases when capacity
is lower. The intuition is that a low-capacity bureaucracy is noncompli-
ant a large part of the time regardless of the policies it chooses. More-
over the probability of noncompliance is not very responsive to the
agency’s choices. Therefore, the agency chooses to implement policies
closer to its ideal point because there is little penalty for doing so at the
margin. The model identiﬁes one important effect of low bureaucratic
capacity: bureaucrats are harder to control through statutes.
Given their interest in the bureaucratic politics of low-capacity sys-
tems, Huber and McCarty focus on the optimal statute when bureau-
cratic capacity is sufﬁciently low.13 Under these assumptions the opti-
mal statute is
p∗= a −δ

 + δE

2 .
Like the Epstein-O’Halloran model, the Huber-McCarty model pre-
dicts that L delegates more authority when E is larger. Its prediction
about preference divergence is the exact opposite, however. In the
Huber-McCarty model, the statute is more permissive if a and lm = 0
are further apart. This is because low-capacity bureaucrats are more
likely to defect to their ideal point in response to restrictive statutes.
This defection is extremely costly to L if a is far from lm. Thus, L
grants more latitude to extreme bureaucrats to provide stronger in-
centives for statutory compliance. Finally, the Huber-McCarty model
generates another prediction at odds with the standard models. These
models generally show that if ex post sanctions are high, the princi-
pal delegates more authority. In the Huber-McCarty model, high δ is
associated with a more restrictive statute. High sanctions induce even
low-capacity bureaucrats to comply. Thus, L need not grant more dis-
cretion solely to induce compliance.
7.4. Generalized Models of Delegation. Most game theoretic treat-
ments of delegation maintain a number of stylized assumptions. First,
principals and agents are assumed to be risk averse. Indeed in most ap-
plications, they have quadratic preferences. Second, the policy space
and shocks are assumed to be one dimensional. Third, most models
assume that policy outcomes are additive functions of policy choices
13 “Sufﬁciently low capacity” means
 > min

E, δ/a,
√
δ

.

--- Sayfa 371 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
355
and shocks. Although these simplifying assumptions allow us to specify
parsimonious models, Bendor and Meirowitz (2004) argue that these
modeling choices make it difﬁcult to generalize to other political envi-
ronments. In particular, the assumptions limit our ability to determine
speciﬁcally which features are most important in the decision to del-
egate. For example, is the selection of an agent or are the available
monitoring and control mechanisms more important? We sketch the
key points of Bendor and Meirowitz’s argument.
There are a single principal and n subordinates.14 All agents have
ideal points in Rd and the principal’s ideal point is the 0 vector.
Preferences over outcomes are represented by the utility function
ui(x) = h(−∥x −yi∥) where h(·) is a strictly increasing continuous
function, ∥z∥is the Euclidean norm, and yi is i’s ideal vector in Rd.
Quadratic preferences over a single-dimensional policy are a spe-
cial case of this assumption. As in Epstein-O’Halloran and Huber-
McCarty, Bendor and Meirowitz assume that the principal is less
informed than the subordinates, but their model allows for (1) arbitrary
functional forms and (2) heterogeneity in the uncertainty associated
with different policy selections. Formally, for any policy p, outcome
x(p) is a random variable generated by the conditional distribution
F(x | p). This treatment allows for the possibility that there is more
uncertainty about the consequences of some policies than others. The
principal knows only the family of conditional distributions and the in-
formed subordinates know the deterministic mappings from p into x.
Bendor and Meirowitz also invoke a condition they call perfect shock
absorption. It implies that an informed agent can implement any policy
outcome x by choosing the appropriate p. Epstein and O’Halloran’s
assumption that x = p + ε is a special case. Because of the implementa-
tion shocks, the shock absorption assumption holds only in expectation
in the Huber-McCarty model.
Whereas in the Huber-McCarty model bureaucrats lack the ability
to implement their intended policies, Bendor and Meirowitz consider
variation in the agent’s competence as variation in expertise. With
probability qi agent i learns the random shock and selects p to attain
any x. With probability 1 −qi, however, subordinate i is uninformed
and knows no more than the principal does.
14 Some extensions in Bendor and Meirowitz consider the case of multiple principals,
however.

--- Sayfa 372 ---
356
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
In the basic delegation model, the principal decides whether or not
to delegate. If she does not delegate, she selects policy according to
her prior beliefs about the policy shock. If she delegates, she chooses
an agent and grants that agent complete discretion over the policy
choice. The selected agent chooses policy p, and the game ends. We
now highlight a few of the key ﬁndings. For now assume that all agents
have high expertise, qi = 1 for all i ∈N.
PROPOSITION 11.4 The principal is willing to delegate to agents whose
idealpointfallsinaclosedball B(ε, 0)centeredat0withradiusε. B(ε, 0)
is known as the delegation set.
The construction of B(ε, 0) is straightforward. If agent i controls
policy, she selects a policy that generates outcome x = yi. Accordingly,
the principal delegates to i only if the outcome yi is preferred to the
lottery generated by the principal’s optimal policy choice. As long as
the principal is uncertain, her utility of implementing policy herself, u′
0,
is less than the utility associated with reaching x = 0 with probability
1, h(0). Clearly, the principal delegates to an agent with ideal point
yi = 0. The set of ideal points sufﬁciently close to 0 to merit delegation
solves the inequality
h(−∥yi∥) ≤u′
0.
Given that h(·) is strictly increasing and continuous, for any value of
u′
0 the set {y : h(−∥y∥) ≤u′
0} is a closed ball.
Because little structure has been placed on h(·), this conclusion
shows that the informational rationale for delegation in spatial settings
hinges only on the desire to prevent bad outcomes: risk preferences,
dimensionality, and the nature of uncertainty are secondary issues. It
is easy to see that relaxing the assumption of perfect competence does
not have a qualitative effect. As competency decreases the delegation
set shrinks – if the principal is going to give authority to someone else
who is not likely to know anything more than she does, the agent had
better have preferences very close to the principal’s.
If several agents have ideal points in the delegation set, the choice of
whom to delegate to can be subtle. The traditional literature has often
stressed the ally principle: if the principal delegates, she selects an
agent whose preferences most closely match hers. With homogeneous
competence (i.e., qi the same for all i) and the stylized assumption that

--- Sayfa 373 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
357
x = p −ε (a multidimensional version of the assumption in Epstein-
O’Halloran), the ally principle holds. The proof is left as an exercise.
With heterogeneity in qi or a more general policy outcome function,
the ally principle may fail. As an example with heterogeneous compe-
tence, consider the case of x = p −ε and two agents with ∥y1∥< ∥y2∥.
Would the principal ever choose to delegate to agent 2 instead of the
more proximate agent 1? Bendor and Meirowitz show that if q2 > q1
then possibly yes. They conclude only that the principal never selects
an agent who is dominated by another agent in the sense that agent i
dominates agent j if ∥yi∥≤
yj
 and qi ≥qj with one of the inequali-
ties strict. A more subtle ﬁnding is that once we relax the assumption
that x = p −ε even if q1 = q2 agent 2 might still be chosen over agent
1. This result may arise because the uncertainty associated with differ-
ent policies need not be the same. In the general model it is possible
that an uninformed agent 1’s most preferred policy, p1, results in more
uncertainty than an uninformed agent 2’s most preferred policy, p2.
This can be the case if attempting to enact certain types of outcomes
(such as ones far from the status quo) is harder and perhaps subject to
larger errors than attempting to enact other types of outcomes (such
as those close to the status quo). For an example suppose the policy
and outcome spaces are R1 and consider two agents with ideal points
y1 = −1 + δ and y2 = 1. Thus, agent 1 is closer to the principal. Sup-
pose that F(x | p) is as follows: if p > 0 then x = p + .1 or x = p −.1
with equal probability and if p < 0 then x = p + .2 or x = p −.2 with
equal probability. In this case, both agents select p = yi if they do not
learn the shock. Consequently, agent 1’s uninformed policy choice en-
tails more outcome risk. Accordingly if h(·) is strictly concave and δ
is sufﬁciently small then the principal prefers to delegate to agent 2
although her ideal point is farther from the principal than agent 1’s.
An example of this argument is left as an exercise.
Another violation of the ally principle may arise from free-riding
among agents when information acquisition is costly. Suppose now
that the shock can be learned at a cost, c, by any agent or principal.
Any player who chooses to incur the cost observes the shock with prob-
ability 1. Further suppose that the principal selects an agent and then
observes whether she invests the cost c to learn the shock. If the agent
does not learn, the principal may retake control and decide whether to
invest c to learn the shock and select policy. Alternatively the principal
can select policy in ignorance. In this setting, the delegation set is a mul-
tidimensional “doughnut.” If the principal delegates to an agent with

--- Sayfa 374 ---
358
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
an ideal point very close to her own, the agent has the choice of paying c
to get the outcome utility h(0) or not investing, with the knowledge that
the principal will then retake control and invest c herself. Thus, learning
implies utility h(0) −c while free-riding yields utility h(−∥yi∥). Thus
for agents with ideal points closer than h−1(h(0) −c), free-riding on
the principal is preferred. Accordingly the principal will not delegate
to agents who are very close to her in the policy space. Of course agents
who are very distant select undesirable outcomes and are not in the
delegation set.
PROPOSITION 11.5 If information acquisition has cost c and the princi-
pal can retake control if the selected agent does not invest, the delegation
set consists of agents in the original delegation set with ideal points far-
ther from 0 than d = h−1(h(0) −c).
Bendor and Meirowitz also consider the effect of competition among
agents in settings where there are many agents and one principal. Sup-
pose that agents are perfectly competent and simultaneously announce
outcomes in X. The principal then selects an agent and the agent se-
lects policy (knowing the shock) to enact the outcome she announced.
If the outcome space is one dimensional and there are agents on either
side of the principal, the game is similar to Downsian competition. In
every equilibrium at least two agents promise to enact the principal’s
ideal outcome. This conclusion holds regardless of the dimensionality
of the policy space.
DEFINITION 11.6 Preferences satisfy diversity either (1) if there does not
exist a vector s ∈X such that for all i ∈N xi = λis for some λi ∈R1 or
(2) if such a vector does exist then there must be two agents i and j with
λi > 0 and λ j < 0.
Diversity requires either that preferences are not collinear or that
there are agents on either side of the principal.
PROPOSITION 11.6 Ifpreferencessatisfydiversitythenatleasttwoagents
commit to enacting x = 0 and the principal selects one of these agents in
every equilibrium.
It is clear that if one agent promises to enact 0 the commitments
of the other agents are payoff irrelevant. So any strategy proﬁle in

--- Sayfa 375 ---
7. Constrained Mechanism Design
359
which at least two agents make this commitment is an equilibrium.
Now suppose that no agents are making this commitment. When there
are at least two agents at least one of the agents can move the ﬁnal
outcome closer to her ideal point by committing to an outcome that is
closer to the principal’s than the closest commitment of the remaining
agents. Thus, there cannot be an equilibrium in which the principal
does not get her ideal outcome.
7.5. Application: Electoral Accountability Revisited*. Returning to
the issue of electoral accountability, we consider a model closer to
Ferejohn’s moral hazard model than the binary choice example we
analyzed earlier. In each period t = 1, 2, . . . , an ofﬁceholder privately
observes a shock θt ∈[z, 1 + z] for some constant z ∈(0, 1). She then
selects a level of effort at ∈[0, 1]. Each period’s shock, θt, is an identi-
cal and independent draw from the uniform distribution on [z, 1 + z].
Effort is costly: a politician suffers disutility cat from effort level at.
The politician, however, beneﬁts b from holding ofﬁce in period t. A
representative voter cares about output xt = θtat; higher output is bet-
ter than lower output. In each period t, the voter receives payoff xt but
does not observe the value of θt or at. The voter then decides whether
to retain the politician or replace him. If a politician is replaced, its
payoff is 0 for all future periods. Because this is a model only of moral
hazard and not adverse selection, all possible politicians have the same
payoffs, and the distribution of θ is the same across politicians. Finally,
assume that politicians and the voter discount with the common dis-
count rate δ. Ferejohn shows that if the voter uses pure strategies op-
timal equilibria involve a cutoff rule – retain if xt is greater than some
threshold, x∗, and replace if xt is less than x∗. In an equilibrium of this
form, the politician in ofﬁce chooses at = 0 if θt is below a threshold
θ∗and chooses at = x∗/θt if θt is above θ∗. We leave it as an exercise
to characterize equilibrium thresholds x∗and θ∗.
Using the concept of incentive compatibility, however, we can con-
struct mixed strategy equilibria that make the voter better off than
in Ferejohn’s equilibria. Suppose that the voter randomizes over re-
tention and replacement and selects the probability of retention as a
function of the observed output xt. Is it possible to select such a prob-
ability of retention function that creates incentives for high effort? If
all politicians select the same level of effort in equilibrium, the voter
is indifferent between retention and replacement. Consequently, ran-
domization is a best response. Let p(x) denote the probability that

--- Sayfa 376 ---
360
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
the politician is retained as a function of x. Given this function, the
expected payoff to the politician of selecting at in period t when θt is
observed is
p(θtat)δVin −cat
where Vin is the expected utility of the game in which the politician is
in ofﬁce at the beginning of the next period. In an equilibrium in which
the politician always works as hard as possible (at = 1 regardless of θt)
the value Vin satisﬁes the recursive relation
Vin = b −c + Vin
 1+a
a
p(θ)dθ.
Solving for Vin yields
Vin =
b −c
1 −

 1+a
a
p(θ)dθ
.
Note that

 1+a
a
p(θ)dθ is just the expected probability of retention
when θ is unknown and at = 1. In order to induce full effort, at = 1,
an incentive compatibility condition must be satisﬁed. The function
p(·) must be chosen so that at = 1 maximizes p(θtat)δVin −cat. Thus,
at = 1 needs to solve the following ﬁrst-order condition;
p′(θtat) |at=1=
c
θtδVin
(11.9)
or
p′(x) =
c

1 −

 1+a
a
p(θ)dθ
!
xδ (b −c)
.
(11.10)
Equation 11.10 implicitly deﬁnes the function p(·) by relating its ﬁrst
derivative and integral. Because d ln(x)/dx = 1/x, p(x) = γ ln(x) + k
satisﬁes equation 11.10 (where γ and k are positive constants). In an
equilibrium in which at = 1 regardless of θt, the relevant values of
x are contained in the set [z, (1 + z)]. In order for the probability of
retention to be a proper probability, boundary conditions p(z) ≥0 and
p(1 + z) ≤1needtobesatisﬁed. Thus,thequestionofwhetheramixed
strategy equilibrium inducing at = 1 exists is the same as whether there

--- Sayfa 377 ---
8. Mechanism Design and Signaling Games
361
exist values of γ and k such that
γ ln(z) + k ≥0
(11.11)
γ ln(1 + z) + k ≤1
γ
x =
c
xδ (b −c)

1 −k −γ
 1+z
z
ln(x)dx

.
A possible solution to system 11.11 involves γ ln(z) + k = 0. With
this substitution, the ﬁrst and second inequalities can be satisﬁed as
long as γ ln(1 + z) −γ ln(z) ≤1. The value of γ is positive for the
corresponding value of k. Solving for γ yields
γ =
c
δ (b −c)

1 + γ ln(z) −γ
 1+z
z
ln(x)dx

or
γ =

c
δ (b −c) −ln(z) +

 1+z
z
ln(x)dx

.
(11.12)
Because az < 1 and 1 + z < e, −ln(z) is positive. Because ln(·) is in-
creasing and z < 1, ln(z) <

 1+z
z
ln(x)dx. This means that −ln(z) +

 1+z
z
ln(x)dx ≥0. So for b > c the solution to equation 11.12 is pos-
itive. In fact we have worked harder than necessary to develop the
mixed strategy. Recall that condition 11.9 is the condition that makes
at = 1 optimal. In fact if the upper bound of effort is 1, γ does not need
to equal the solution in equation 11.12 exactly. Our solution guarantees
that a value of at greater than 1 is less attractive than a value of at = 1.
As an exercise, the reader can relax the constraint that at ∈[0, 1] and
instead assume that at ≥0 and ﬁnd conditions supporting an equilib-
rium in which at = α for some ﬁxed value α > 0.
8. Mechanism Design and Signaling Games
As is the case in much of the literature, we have discussed mechanism
design and signaling independently. We think, however, that some in-
tuition can be gained by exploring the connections between these two
normally distinct topics.
Suppose that the sender’s (player’s s) type is θ ∈ = [0, 1] and the
message space is M = [0, 1]. It is common knowledge that θ is drawn

--- Sayfa 378 ---
362
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
from a distribution F(·) on . Following s’s message m ∈M, the re-
ceiver (player r) selects a policy p ∈X = [0, 1]. Even without speci-
fying payoffs, we can use incentive compatibility to specify necessary
conditions for the existence of an equilibrium in which the sender’s
message is fully revealing (i.e., m−1(m(θ)) = θ). In an equilibrium in
which m(θ) is one-to-one, consistent beliefs must be concentrated at
the correct θ. Thus, beliefs can be represented by the probability dis-
tribution
B(θ | m′) =

1 if θ ≥m−1(m′)
0 otherwise
.
Given a fully revealing message, sequential rationality by r requires
that p(m′) ∈P(m′) ≡arg maxp ur(p, m−1(m′)). Sequential rationality
by s requires that she not have an incentive to mislead r by behaving
as if her type were θ′ when it is θ′′. Given the mapping p(·), this
incentive compatibility condition is us(p(θ′′), θ′′) ≥us(p(θ′), θ′′) for
all θ′, θ′′ ∈. Alternatively, the receiver’s best response requires
ur(p(θ′′), θ′′) ≥ur(p(θ′), θ′′) for all θ′, θ′′ ∈. Thus, a requirement of
a separating equilibrium is that p(m′) maximize both us(p, m−1(m′))
and ur(p, m−1(m′)).
PROPOSITION 11.7 A separating PBE exists only if the preferences of
the players are similar – speciﬁcally for every θ ∈ it must be the case
that {arg maxp∈X ur(p, θ)} ∩{arg maxp∈X us(p, θ)} is nonempty.
Given this result, it is clear that truthful revelation in cheap talk
signaling with one sender requires strong similarity between sender
and receiver payoffs. As an example, recall our version of the open rule
Gilligan-Krehbiel (1989) model from Chapter 8. There we showed that
thebestresponseby F toinformativesignalsis p(−θ) = θ and p(−θ) =
θ. The proposition speciﬁes that a separating equilibrium exists if and
only if
uF(θ| −θ) ≥uF(−θ| −θ)
uF(−θ|θ) ≥uF(θ|θ)
uC(θ| −θ) ≥uC(−θ| −θ)
uC(−θ|θ) ≥uC(θ|θ).

--- Sayfa 379 ---
8. Mechanism Design and Signaling Games
363
We know the ﬁrst two inequalities hold since p(−θ) = θ and p(−θ) = θ
so the crucial conditions are −c2 ≥−(2θ + c)2 and −c2 > −(2θ −c)2.
Note that these both hold if c < θ. This is exactly the condition of
preference divergence derived earlier.
Now we extend the general model so that there are two senders 1
and 2 who each observe θ but have possibly different preferences. The
question of whether there is a PBE in which the receiver learns θ can
be modeled as a type of mechanism design problem. In such a model,
the receiver’s choice of a mapping p(m1, m2) : M2 →X is analogous
to selection of a mechanism. In contrast to mechanism design, a PBE
of a signaling game requires that the receiver’s decision be sequentially
rational given consistent beliefs. Thus, we are not free to choose just
any mechanism that satisﬁes the sender’s incentive compatibility con-
ditions. Baron and Meirowitz (2004), however, show that in many cases
the constraint that the receiver’s actions must be sequentially rational
is not binding.
In the mechanism design problem, suppose the receiver wishes to
induce truthfulness by punishing senders if their messages do not co-
incide. Suppose that there exists a bad policy pb that is worse for both
senders than the receiver’s best response to any truthful pair of mes-
sages. Formally, pb is deﬁned so that for every θ
u1(arg max
p∈X ur(p, θ), θ) ≥u1(pb, θ)
(11.13)
u2(arg max
p∈X ur(p, θ), θ) ≥u2(pb, θ).
Given this deﬁnition of pb, the following mechanism satisﬁes the in-
centive compatibility conditions for both senders to be truthful:
p(m1, m2) =

arg maxp∈X ur(p, m) if m1 = m2
pb otherwise
.
Given this policy function, condition 11.13 implies that sender 2’s best
response to a truthful announcement by sender 1 is a truthful an-
nouncement to prevent the dreaded pb. A similar argument applies
for sender 1’s incentive to be truthful. Within the mechanism design
framework, the mere existence of pb is enough to induce truthful-
ness regardless of the receiver’s utility from pb. In signaling models,
however, we must to worry about whether choosing pb is sequentially

--- Sayfa 380 ---
364
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
rational for the receiver. Accordingly it must be the case that pb is
an optimal policy for the receiver given the beliefs she forms at all
information sets where m1̸ = m2. This suggests that our mechanism
design trick is not very compelling to those committed to the signaling
tradition. But recall that weak consistency only constrains beliefs at
information sets that occur with positive probability. In an equilibrium
in which the senders are truthful m1̸ = m2 does not occur. Accordingly,
satisfying sequential rationality and credibly committing to enact pb if
m1̸ = m2 are not very challenging. All that is required is that there exists
some distribution bb(·) on  such that pb ∈arg maxp

ur(p, θ)d bb(θ).
Adding a state θb in which pb ∈arg maxp ur(p, θb) sufﬁces. Using this
argument Baron and Meirowitz (2004) reach the following conclusion.
THEOREM 11.4 Suppose two senders observe θ. As long as there are a
policy pb ∈X satisfying condition 11.13 and a distribution bb(·) on 
such that pb ∈arg maxp

ur(p, θ)d bb(θ) a truthful PBE exists.
In response to Gilligan and Krehbiel’s (1989) work on heteroge-
neous legislative committees, Krishna and Morgan (2001) demonstrate
that with two senders there are PBEs in which the receiver learns the
state θ. This equilibrium does not hinge on a punishment policy pb
but uses out-of-equilibrium beliefs to rationalize a policy that pun-
ishes any agent who has an incentive to lie. Krehbiel (2001) criticizes
this approach on the grounds that the off-the-path responses to some
messages are highly discontinuous and tend to move in the wrong di-
rection. Although in equilibrium high policies are best responses to low
messages, Krishna and Morgan’s PBE calls for low policies in response
to high out-of-equilibrium messages.
Battaglini (2002) shows that if in fact the policy and state spaces
are multidimensional (say, for example, X =  = [0, 1]2) then truthful
equilibria can be constructed that do not depend on beliefs in such a pe-
culiarmanner.Asanexampleofthismodel,considerareceiverandtwo
senders with Euclidean preferences over two dimensions. The receiver
has an ideal point of (0, 0), sender 1 has ideal point (1, 0), and sender
2 has ideal point (0, 1). In this model, each sender observes the shock
θ ∈ perfectly, and the outcomes x are a random function of policy p
where x = p + θ. A message is ms = (m1
s, m2
s) for s ∈{1, 2}. Similarly,
outcomes and policies are vectors (x = (x1, x2), p = (p1, p2)). A par-
ticularly simple direct mechanism can be constructed on the basis of

--- Sayfa 381 ---
8. Mechanism Design and Signaling Games
365
the realization that although neither sender has the same preferences
as the receiver,15 each sender has the same preferences as the receiver
over one dimension. Sender 1 and the receiver both want the second
dimension of the outcome as close to 0 as possible, and sender 2 and
the receiver both want the ﬁrst coordinate of the outcome as close
to 0 as possible. Suppose that sender 1 with ideal point (1, 0) is given
complete control of the second coordinate, so that p1 = −m1
1 and that
sender 2 with ideal point (0, 1) is given complete control of the ﬁrst
coordinate, so that p2 = −m2
2. Given this mechanism, announcement
of ms(θ) = θ is a best response, and thus the mechanism is incentive
compatible. Can this receiver strategy be supported in a PBE? If so we
need to ﬁnd weakly consistent beliefs for which this policy function is
sequentially rational. Because the mapping p(m) described previously
is a direct mechanism at every reached information set, Bayes’ rule
results in concentrated beliefs θ = m1 = m2. It remains to specify be-
liefs for information sets in which m1̸ = m2 that make policy function
p(m) sequentially rational for the receiver and the truthful messages
sequentially rational for the senders. An easy way to do this is to let
the beliefs ignore m1
2 and m2
1. In other words, the beliefs are concen-
trated at θ = (m1
1, m2
2). Battaglini shows that, in the Euclidean prefer-
ences setting with at least two dimensions and two senders, separating
PBEs exist as long as the ideal points of the three players are not on a
line.
We have seen that under certain preference proﬁles separating PBEs
exist with two senders. With three perfectly informed senders {1, 2, 3},
we do not need to make any assumptions about preferences to char-
acterize a simple separating PBE. Let p∗(θ) denote a selection from
the correspondence arg max ur(p, θ) and suppose that p+ ∈p∗(θ) for
some θ. Similarly to the earlier example, suppose the receiver can
commit to the following mechanism that depends on the messages
m1, m2, m3:
p(m) =

p∗(θ) if θ = mi = mj for some i, j ∈{1, 2, 3}
p+ otherwise
.
Truthful messages are a best response because if i and j are truthful
then k’s message is outcome inconsequential. Supporting this policy
function as sequentially rational is easy. Any belief mapping that is
15 By proposition 11.7 there is no truthful equilibrium in the one-sender game.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
366
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
concentrated on θ if m1 = m2 = m3 = θ is weakly consistent, and any
beliefs that are concentrated at θ if θ = mi = mj for somei, j ∈{1, 2, 3}
make the policy mapping a best response for the receiver.
The conclusion of Baron and Meirowitz is that any direct mechanism
that (1) following truthful messages selects an optimal policy for the
receiver and (2) following nontruthful messages selects a policy that is
optimal given some belief on  can be supported in some PBE to the
signaling game.
9. Exercises
EXERCISE 11.1 Instead of maximizing the welfare of her department, the
department chair wants to maximize her surplus (contributions minus
expenditures on the espresso maker). Does she still want to implement
the Groves-Clarke mechanism?
EXERCISE 11.2 Consider a mechanism design problem involving two
agents. The mechanism designer selects a policy p ∈[0, 1] to maxi-
mize the sum of the payoffs for agents 1 and 2. Each agent’s payoff is
ui(p, yi, βi) = −βi |yi −x|. Each coordinate of each agent’s type (yi, βi)
is drawn from a uniform distribution. Assume that the draws are inde-
pendent. (1) Write down an example of a direct mechanism. (2) Do any
direct mechanisms implement (in Bayesian Nash strategies) the objective
of the planner?
EXERCISE 11.3 This exercise is to prove a version of the revelation prin-
ciple. A choice function, g(θ),is implementable in dominant strategies if
there exists a mechanism

M, p(·)

in which each agent has a dominant
strategy to play the strategy mi(θ) for each θ ∈ given policy func-
tion p(m(θ)) = g(θ). Prove the following theorem: given a mechanism
design problem

, F(θ), u

, there exists a direct mechanism

, p(·)

that implements g(θ) in dominant strategies if the choice function g(θ)
is implementable in dominant strategies.
EXERCISE 11.4 Prove Moulin’s result (Proposition 11.2).
EXERCISE 11.5 Considerapopulationofagentswithprivateinformation
about their ideal points and quadratic preferences. Assume that they are
asked to announce their ideal point and the policy x(m) = (1/n)  mi
is enacted (i.e., the average ideal point is the implemented policy). Show
that truthful response does not form a Bayesian Nash equilibrium to this
game.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
9. Exercises
367
EXERCISE 11.6 Prove that the strategies described by equation 11.1 form
an equilibrium to the ﬁrst-price auction.
EXERCISE 11.7 Demonstrate that use of the strategy “Hold up placard
until the price exceeds b(θ)” constitutes a PBE in the descending-price
auction.
EXERCISE 11.8 Find the expected revenue of a standard auction if F(·)
is the uniform distribution on [0, 1].
EXERCISE 11.9 Consider Ferejohn’s model with moral hazard. Assume
that equation 11.8 does not hold. Construct a mixed strategy equilib-
rium where the government sometimes chooses a = low and the voter
alwaysremovesthegovernmentwhen x = lowandoccasionallyremoves
it when x = high.
EXERCISE 11.10 Prove that in the Epstein-O’Halloran model P∗is a
closed interval

p, p

⊂X.
EXERCISE 11.11 In the Epstein-O’Halloran model, show that the ma-
jority rule outcome for P∗is that preferred by the legislator with ideal
point lm.
EXERCISE 11.12 In the Epstein-O’Halloran model, assume that ε is dis-
tributed N(0, σ 2). Compute the optimal statute P. How does P depend
on lm, a, and σ 2? Hint: E(ε|ε < m) = −σφ (m/σ)/ (m/σ).
EXERCISE 11.13 This exercise is related to McCarty (2004). Augment
the Epstein-O’Halloran model by assuming that governor G with ideal
point g > lm appoints A(i.e., selects a) prior to L’s choosing P. Assume
that A learns ε but that Gand Lbelieve that ε is distributed uniformly on
[−E, E]. Show that the governor’s optimal appointment is a∗∈(lm, g).
How does a∗depend on lm and E? What if the governor appoints A
after P is selected?
EXERCISE 11.14 In the context of the Bendor-Meirowitz model, prove
that {y : h(∥y∥) ≤u′
0} is a closed ball.
EXERCISE 11.15 In the Bendor-Meirowitz model, show that if qi is the
same for all i and x = p −ε (with ε distributed according to F(·) on
Rd), the ally principle holds.

--- Sayfa 384 ---
368
Mechanism Design and Agency Theory
EXERCISE 11.16 In the Bendor-Meirowitz model, suppose that q1 =
q2 = 3/4 and u(x) = −x2. Find the minimal value of δ such that the
principal prefers delegation to agent 2.
EXERCISE 11.17 In the continuous version of Ferejohn’s model assume
that at can be any nonnegative level of effort and characterize equi-
librium values of x∗and θ∗as functions of the exogenous parameters
b, c, z, δ.
EXERCISE 11.18 In the continuous version of Ferejohn’s model assume
that at need only be positive (it can be greater than 1). For a ﬁxed value
α > 0 characterize an equilibrium in which ac = α in every period re-
gardless of θt.
EXERCISE 11.19 Construct a fully separating PBE in a version of the
Battaglini model in which sender 1 has ideal point (1, 1) and sender 2
has ideal point (0, 1).
EXERCISE 11.20 Consider a problem in which a policymaker must se-
lect a policy p ∈R3. The outcome is given by x = p + ε where ε is a
random shock. The policymaker’s prior is that ε is given by the distri-
bution function F(·). Assume that there are ﬁve agents. Agents 1, 2, 3
all perfectly observe coordinate 1 of the shock (ε1) but observe nothing
about the remaining dimensions of the shock. Agents 4 and 5 observe
only the second and third dimensions of the shock (ε2, ε3). Assume that
the policymaker’s ideal point is the 0 vector. The remaining agents have
arbitrary ideal points in R3. All agents have quadratic preferences over
the outcome x. Are there any games of cheap talk communication that
possess a perfect Bayesian equilibrium in which the outcome chosen al-
ways corresponds to the policymaker’s most preferred outcome 0? If so,
give an example and characterize such an equilibrium. If not, prove it.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
12 Mathematical Appendix
Mathematics is the study of axiomatic systems and the true propo-
sitions of these systems. Mathematics as a language facilitates com-
munication about these systems and the resulting propositions. In
comparison to ordinary language, mathematical statements tend to
be more transparent, revealing how assumptions and conclusions are
related. Mathematical propositions are true or correct if they follow
from the structure of the system that generates them. For example,
Euclidean geometry is the set of all statements that are true if parallel
lines never intersect. So the statement that the shortest distance be-
tween points is a straight line is true in Euclidean geometry. The claim
that the quickest way to get from Central Park to Princeton is a straight
line may or not be true. The answer might depend on trafﬁc between
these two points, the quality of paving, or other factors. Thus, just as the
extent to which a mathematically true proposition about distance ac-
curately describes a problem we care about is unclear, mathematically
correct propositions about game theoretic models may or may not ac-
curately describe politics. Students and scholars interested in pursuing
more about truth and the value of models and formalism should seek
out epistemologists. From our perspective, a critical step is determin-
ing what the mathematically correct propositions are. In this appendix
we ﬁrst give explicit deﬁnitions to mathematical terminology. We then
deﬁne the standard axioms of the mathematical system in which most,
albeit not all, applications in political game theory are assumed to ex-
ist. We then summarize the more important mathematical propositions
used in political game theory.
369

--- Sayfa 386 ---
370
Mathematical Appendix
1. Mathematical Statements and Proofs
As in any other language, the fundamental unit of mathematics is the
statement, which we denote P. We review the types of mathematical
statements that readers are likely to encounter.
r Universal Statement: P is always true within a given mathematical
system.
Consider the following example of a universal statement. Let x be
a real number, ∀x, x ≤|x|, where the symbol ∀means “for all” or
“for every.” To prove such a statement, we require it to be proved for a
generic x where we can only use the properties common to every value
of x.
r Existential Statement: There are conditions under which P is true.
The following is such an example: ∃x such that x = |x| where ∃means
“there exist(s).” To prove an existential statement, we must only ﬁnd
a value of x in the given system for which P is true. Of course in this
example, x ≥0 is the needed condition.
Mathematics also has well-deﬁned procedures for verifying that a
given statement is true. Now we consider the types of proofs that are
encountered in the text.
1.1. Deduction. Proofs by deduction are those for which a statement
is true because it is logically connected to a statement either known
or presupposed to be true. Suppose we know P to be true; then we
establish that Q is true if we can prove “if P, then Q” or P ⇒Q.
Obviously, this can take place via a number of steps such as
P ⇒R
R ⇒S
S ⇒Q.
Sometimes when we work it out mentally, showing S ⇒Q may be
the ﬁrst step. When communicating the logic of the proof, however, it
should be written in the order given. Deduction is used to prove both
existential and universal statements.

--- Sayfa 387 ---
1. Mathematical Statements and Proofs
371
1.2. The Contrapositive. Sometimes it is easier to establish P ⇒Qby
formulating it in terms of the negative statements ˜Q and ˜P where
˜ means “not.” It is logically true that (˜Q ⇒˜P) ⇒(P ⇒Q).
EXAMPLE 12.1 If 7m is an odd integer, then m is an odd integer.
Thus, P = {7m is odd}, Q = {m is odd}, ˜P = {7m is even}, and ˜Q =
{m is even}. We show P ⇒Q by showing ˜Q ⇒˜P.
˜Q ⇒m = 2k for some integer k
⇒7m = 7(2k)
⇒7m = 2(7k)
⇒7m = 2n for some integer n
⇒˜P.
1.3. Contradiction. One way to prove that the statement P is true is
to demonstrate that ˜P is false. Proving a statement is false is quite
easy: we only need to provide a counterexample. A single counterex-
ample showing ˜P to be false implies that P is true. This procedure
works best when arguing against a universal statement or in favor of
an existential statement.
EXAMPLE 12.2 Let n be any integer and let P = {there exists n > 0 such
n2 + n + 17 is not a prime number} or P = {∃n > 0 ∋n2 + n + 17 is not
a prime number} where ∃means “there exists” and ∋means “such that.”
We now construct ˜P = {∀n > 0, n2 + n + 17 is a prime number}.
But ˜P is false because n = 17 implies that n2 + n + 17 = 17 · 19 and
is thus not prime. Thus, P is true.
We may also establish ˜P is false by deriving a series of implications
from ˜P that lead to a false statement.
˜P ⇒n + 1 + 17/n is not an integer for all n
⇒17/n is not an integer for all n
⇒1 is not an integer.
The ﬁnal statement is obviously false.
1.4. Mathematical Induction. Some statements describe a property of
an index number n (an integer) and may be written as P(n). One way
to prove that the statement P(n) is true for each natural number n is
to demonstrate that P(1) is true and that if P(n) is true then P(n + 1)
must be true.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
372
Mathematical Appendix
EXAMPLE 12.3 Let P(n) be the event that 2n < n2. For n ≥3, P(n) is
true. For n = 3, 6 < 9 and thus P(3) is true. Now assume that P(n) is
true, implying that 2n < n2. Because 2(n + 1) = 2n + 2 and (n + 1)2 =
n2 + 2n + 1, the assumption implies that if 2 < 2n + 1 then P(n + 1) is
true. But this simpliﬁes to 1/2 < n, which is true for n > 3.
2. Sets and Functions
2.1. Sets. A set is a collection of distinct objects. The objects of sets
are called elements. We denote sets either by enumerating them or
by describing them. Suppose S is the set of all positive integers less
than 10. We may write S as S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9} or S = {n|n is
an integer and 0 < n < 10}. The second statement is read as “S is the
set of all numbers that are integers and are greater than 0 and less
than 10.” Sets either have a ﬁnite number of elements as here or an
inﬁnite number such as I = {n |n is integer greater than 7} or J = {x
| 0 < x < 1}. Inﬁnite sets are either countable or uncountable. I is
countable because it is possible to associate each element of I with a
distinct integer. J is uncountable because it is impossible to associate
each element with an integer.
EXAMPLE 12.4 A rational number is one that can be written as a fraction
p/q where pandq areintegers.ProvethatQ = {x | x isrational}isinﬁnite
but countable.
We denote that some element belongs to a set with the symbol
“∈.” Therefore, the following are truthful statements: 3 ∈S, 9 ∈I,
.345678 ∈J, and .8 ∈Q. We can also designate which elements are
not in a particular set with “/∈” so that 10 /∈S, 7 /∈I, 0 /∈J, and
π /∈Q.
2.2. Set Relations and Operations. The following are some useful re-
lationships between different sets.
r Equality:
S1 = S2 implies that x ∈S1 if and only if x ∈S2. In other words, if
S1 = S2 , S1 and S2 contain exactly the same elements.

--- Sayfa 389 ---
2. Sets and Functions
373
r Subset:
S1 is said to be a subset of S2 or S1 ⊆S2 if x ∈S1 implies x ∈S2. Thus,
S1 is a subset of S2 if all of the elements of S1 are also in S2. Note that
if S1 = S2, then S1 ⊆S2 and S2 ⊆S1. We can also deﬁne a “proper”
subset that rules out the possibility of equality. S1 ⊂S2 implies that
for all x ∈S1 , x ∈S2 and ∃y ∈S2 such that y /∈S1. In other words, all
elements of S1 are in S2 but S2 contains additional elements not found
in S1. We use the symbols ⊃and ⊇to write such statements in the
opposite order. Finally, the symbol̸ ⊆means “not a subset of.”
r Disjoint:
Two sets are said to be disjoint if they have no elements in common.
Formally, S1 and S2 are disjoint if x ∈S1 implies that x̸ ∈S2 and x ∈S2
implies that x̸ ∈S1.
There is a special set ∅known as the null set or empty set deﬁned
by the following properties: ∅contains no elements and for all S, ∅
⊂S. Clearly, ∅is the smallest possible set. It is sometimes convenient
to talk about a large set U such that for all S that we are considering
S ⊆U. This set is called the universal set.
A number of mathematical operations on sets are useful.
r Unions:
The union of two or more sets is the total set of elements that are
contained in at least one of the sets. Formally, the union of S1 and S2
is S1 ∪S2 = {x |x ∈S1 or x ∈S2}. The union of a large number of sets
indexed by i is n
i=1 Si = S1 ∪S2 ∪. . . ∪Sn. For an inﬁnite collections
of sets, with the index set I, we may write 
i∈I Si.
r Intersections:
The intersection of two or more sets is the set of elements common
to all of the sets. Formally, the intersection of S1 and S2 is S1 ∩S2 = {x
|x ∈S1 and x ∈S2}. The intersection of a large number of sets indexed
by i as n
i=1 Si = S1 ∩S2 ∩· · · ∩Sn. If S1 and S2 are disjoint, S1 ∩S2 =
∅. Because the sets have no elements in common, the only subset in

--- Sayfa 390 ---
374
Mathematical Appendix
the intersection must be the null set. For an inﬁnite collection of sets,
with the index set I, we may write 
i∈I Si.
r Complements:
Given a universal set U and a subset S, the complement of S is
Sc = U\S = {x |x ∈U and x̸ ∈S}.
r De Morgan’s Laws:
Let A, B, C, and D be sets. Then the operations on these sets must
satisfy the following properties:
Commutative: A∪B = B ∪Aand A∩B = B ∩A
Associative: (A∪B) ∪C = A∪(B ∪C) and
(A∩B) ∩C = A∩(B ∩C)
Distributive: A∪(B ∩C) = (A∪B) ∩(A ∪C) and
A∩(B ∪C) = (A∩B) ∪(A∩C)
r Products:
The product of two sets A and B denoted A× B is the set of or-
dered pairs, (a, b) such that a ∈Aand b ∈B. For indexed sets we write
n
i=1 Si = S1 × S2 × · · · × Sn. Some authors use the notation ×n
i=1Si to
denote
n
i=1 Si. For an inﬁnite collections of sets, with the index set I,
we may write

i∈I Si.
2.3. Correspondences and Functions. Another way to relate two sets
to one another is to specify which elements of each set “correspond” or
“go with each other.” In general a correspondence is a rule, f , that links
the elements of S1 to S2. Formally, we write f : S1 →→S2 where the set
S1 is called the domain (or preimage) set and S2 is the range (or image)
set. For example, consider Figure 12.1 where the correspondence f
relates x ∈S1 to elements y, z ∈S2.
A function is a special type of correspondence that relates each ele-
ment of the domain to a unique point of the range. So if the correspon-
dence f : S1 →→S2 is a function, f (x) is a single element of S2 for
every x ∈S1. For functions we write f : S1 →S2. With a function, mul-
tiple points of the domain may map into the same point in the range.
In Figure 12.2, the function relates x, w, v ∈S1 to elements y, z ∈S2.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
2. Sets and Functions
375
S1
S2
x
      y
 z
Figure 12.1. Correspondences.
S1
S2
w
x
v
                   y
z
Figure 12.2. Functions.
Because each element of the domain maps into a single element in the
range, we may write y = f (x) for x ∈S1 and y ∈S2. We also represent
the function by a set of ordered pairs such as {(y, x) | y = f (x) for
some x ∈S1}.
Consider a function f : A→B. Two important properties are the
following:
r Injectivity: For all a1 and a2 ∈A, f (a1) = f (a2) if and only if
a1 = a2. Each point in the range is associated with a single point
in the domain. This property is also known as “one-to-one.”
r Surjectivity: ∀b ∈B there exist a ∈A such that f (a) = b. This
property is also known as “on to.”
If a function has these two properties, it is known as a bijection,
and there exists an inverse function mapping points in B to points in
A. We write this inverse function as f −1 : B →A or f −1(b) = a for
b ∈B and a ∈A.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
376
Mathematical Appendix
EXAMPLE 12.5 y = 2x is a bijection. Because every y maps to a single x,
we can write the inverse function f −1(x) = y/2.
EXAMPLE 12.6 y = x2 is not injective because x and −x produce the
same y. If we restrict the domain to positive numbers, however, we can
write f −1(x) = √y
3. The Real Number System
The real number system, R, consists of all the integers as well as the
rational numbers (ratios of integers) and the irrational numbers (num-
bers that are not the ratio of integers). The real number system is a set
of numbers with some additional structure. The system also includes
two operators, + and ×, which map from R × R into R and a weak
ordering, ≥, that is a subset of R × R. These are the familiar opera-
tors of addition and multiplication and the ordering is “greater than or
equal to.” Axiomatically, the system is characterized by fourteen ax-
ioms. For our purposes it is sufﬁcient to highlight only a subset of these
conditions. The real number system is a ﬁeld; that means that the op-
erations + and × behave the way we learned in elementary school: the
order of addition (or multiplication) does not matter, multiplication is
distributive (meaning that ∀x, y, z ∈R x(y + z) = xy + xz), multipli-
cation and addition by 0 and 1 have the expected consequences, and
every number has a multiplicative inverse (so that x × 1/x = 1). In ad-
dition the real number system satisﬁes order axioms that ensure that ≥
behaves the way we expect it to. One axiom, completeness, is probably
unfamiliar, so we deﬁne it formally.
DEFINITION 12.1 Completeness Axiom: For every nonempty subset
S ⊂R if there exists an upper bound b of S (meaning x ∈S =⇒x ≤b)
then there exists a least upper bound c (meaning c is an upper bound of
S and if z is an upper bound of S then c ≤z). In other words, every set
with an upper bound has a least upper bound.
An example of a space that is not complete is R\Z, where Z is the
set of integers. In this space the set (0, 1) has an upper bound (example
3/2) but it does not have a least upper bound. This axiom captures
a version of the idea that the set of real numbers does not have any

--- Sayfa 393 ---
3. The Real Number System
377
holes in it. Many of the properties of limits depend on this feature of
the number system.
3.1. Limits of Real Sequences. A sequence of real numbers {xn}∞
n=1,
sometimes denoted {xn}, is an inﬁnite list of real numbers. More
precisely a sequence is a function that maps the counting numbers
(1, 2, 3, . . . ) into the real numbers. In this sense xn is the value of this
function evaluated at integer n. A subsequence is the sequence formed
by considering only a subset of the integers.
DEFINITION 12.2 The number l ∈R is a limit of the sequence {xn} if for
every ε > 0 there is an N such that for all n > N we have |xn −l| < ε. If
l is a limit of the sequence {xn} we write l = lim xn.
PROPOSITION 12.1 A sequence has at most one limit.
We include a proof of this statement as a lesson in how statements
are proved.
Proof Suppose otherwise, then a = lim xn = b and a̸ = b. Because a̸ =
b there exists some ε > 0 such that (1) |a −b| > 2ε. Since a = lim xn =
b it must be the case that for some N if n > N (2) |xn −a| < ε and
(3) |xn −b| < ε. Without loss of generality assume that a < b. If xn <
a < b, then we have contradicted 1 or 3; if a < b < xn, then we have
contradicted 1 and 2; if a < xn < b, then 1 implies that either 2 or 3 is
violated. One of these three cases must be true.
□
DEFINITION 12.3 A sequence {xn} is a Cauchy sequence if for every ε > 0
there is an N such that for all n, m > N we have |xn −xm| < ε.
PROPOSITION 12.2 A sequence has a limit if and only if it is a Cauchy
sequence.
DEFINITION 12.4 A sequence {xn} converges to inﬁnity ∞(−∞) if for
any b ∈R there is some N such that (s.t.) xn > (<)b for all n > N.
DEFINITION 12.5 The number l ∈R is a cluster point of the sequence
{xn} if for every ε > 0 and every N there exists some n > N such that
|xn −l| < ε.

--- Sayfa 394 ---
378
Mathematical Appendix
The sequence xn = −1n has two cluster points 1 and −1 but no limit.
PROPOSITION 12.3 Point l is a cluster point of {xn} if and only if it is the
limit of a subsequence {xn′}.
DEFINITION 12.6 The number l ∈R is the limit superior (limsup) of the
sequence {xn} if (1) for any ε > 0 there is an N such that for all n > N
we have xn < l + ε, and (2) for any ε > 0 and any N there exists some
n > N such that we have xn > l −ε. We write l = lim sup xn.
DEFINITION 12.7 l is the limit inferior (liminf) of the sequence {xn} if
l = −lim sup(−xn).
An alternative deﬁnition that may be more intuitive follows.
DEFINITION 12.8 The limsup is the greatest cluster point and the liminf
is the least cluster point.
PROPOSITION 12.4 For any sequence {xn} lim sup xn ≥lim inf xn and if
equality holds then lim xn exists and lim xn = lim sup xn = lim inf xn.
4. Points and Sets
We now consider arbitrary spaces endowed with a particular structure.
These spaces are called metric spaces. These spaces are endowed with
a distance function satisfying several properties.
DEFINITION 12.9 A metric space (X, d) is a set of points Xand a distance
function d(x, y) : X × X →R, satisfying the conditions
(1) d(x, y) ≥0
(2) d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y
(3) d(x, y) = d(y, x) for any x, y ∈X
(4) d(x, z) ≤d(x, y) + d(y, z) for any x, y, z ∈X.
For any distance function, we can deﬁne regions around points
known as “balls.” For any scalar ε > 0 and point x ∈X, the ε-ball
around x is B(x, ε) = {y ∈X : d(x, y) < ε}. There are two important
properties of sets.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
4. Points and Sets
379
DEFINITION 12.10 A set A⊂X is open if for every x ∈Athere is some
ε > 0 such that B(x, ε) ⊂A. A set A⊂X is closed if its complement
X\Ais open.
Conventionally X and ∅are both open and closed. We state several
results about open and closed sets. These results demonstrate how
one can operate on closed and open sets and ensure that the resulting
product inherits openness or closedness.
PROPOSITION 12.5
(1) If O1 and O2 are open then O1 ∩O2 is open.
(2) Given a collection of open sets O1, O2, . . . , the set ∪i Oi is open.
(3) If C1 and C2 are closed then C1 ∪C2 is closed.
(4) Given a collection of closed sets C1, C2, . . . , the set ∩iCi is closed.
It is not the case that the inﬁnite intersections of open sets are open.
An example is the collection of open sets (−1/n, 1/n). Each such set
is open but the intersection is just the set {0}, which is not open.
Another property of sets is the following.
DEFINITION 12.11 A set A⊂X is bounded if there exists some ﬁnite
scalar k such that for every x, y ∈Awe have d(x, y) < k.
If X is a subset of ﬁnite-dimensional Euclidean space Rn =
{(x1, x2, . . . , xn) : xi ∈R} we have the following deﬁnition:
DEFINITION 12.12 A set A⊂Rn is compact if A is closed and bounded.
In arbitrary metric spaces a more general deﬁnition of compactness
is needed. The more general (or topological) deﬁnition of compactness
deals with open covers.
DEFINITION 12.13 Given a set A, an open covering of Ais a collection
of sets {Oθ}θ∈ where  is an arbitrary index set and Oθ is open for
every θ ∈ such that A⊂{∪θ∈Oθ}. In other words, if x ∈A then there
is some θ ∈ such that x ∈Oθ .

--- Sayfa 396 ---
380
Mathematical Appendix
A set is compact if every open covering has a ﬁnite subcovering.
Formally, this deﬁnition takes the following form:
DEFINITION 12.14 A set A is compact if {Oθ}θ∈ an open covering of A
implies that for some ﬁnite set B ⊂, {Oθ}θ∈B is a covering of A.
Given that addition is deﬁned in our metric space, as is the case for
Rn, the following deﬁnition is useful:
DEFINITION 12.15 A set A is convex if for every x, y ∈A and every
scalar λ ∈[0, 1] the point λx + (1 −λ)y is also in A.
The following result turns out to be of interest in social choice theory
and bargaining. For example, if individual preferences are strictly con-
vex, then the following result ensures the convexity of the preferred
(or upper contour sets) for a collection of individuals.
PROPOSITION 12.6 Given an indexed collection of sets Ai for i ∈α, if
Ai is convex for each i ∈α, ∩i∈α Ai is a convex set.
5. Continuity of Functions
An important property of functions is continuity. Let X and Y be sub-
sets of metric spaces. The metrics for these spaces are dX and dY. The
motivating example is X = Y = R, but the following applies to any
functions that map one metric space into another.
DEFINITION 12.16 A function f : X →Y is continuous at x ∈X if for
any ε > 0 there is some δ > 0 such that dY( f (x), f (y)) < ε for all y ∈X
with dX(x, y) < δ. A function is continuous if it is continuous at every
point in its domain.
The following deﬁnition is equivalent.
DEFINITION 12.17 A function f : X →Yis continuous if for every open
set B ⊂Y the inverse image f −1(B) := {x ∈X : f (x) ∈B)} is open.
Of particular interest are functions for which the range is a subset
of the real line. These functions are called real-valued functions. For
real-valued functions another deﬁnition of continuity is often useful.

--- Sayfa 397 ---
5. Continuity of Functions
381
DEFINITION 12.18 Given a function f : X →R, the upper contour sets
are a collection of sets of the form Uα = {x ∈X : f (x) ≥α} for every
α ∈R. The lower contour sets are the sets Lα = {x ∈X : f (x) ≤α}.
Continuity can be restated in terms of the contour sets.
PROPOSITION 12.7 The function f : X →R is continuous if and only if
all of the upper and lower contour sets are closed.
5.1. Extrema, Solutions, and Fixed Points∗. The following are sufﬁ-
cient conditions for optimization problems to have solutions.
THEOREM 12.1 If f : X →R is continuous and X is compact and
nonempty, there exists a point x∗= arg maxx∈X{ f (x)}.
Another fundamental result follows.
THEOREM 12.2 (Bolzano Intermediate Value Theorem) If f :[a, b] →R
is continuous with f (a) < y < f (b) [or f (b) < y < f (z)], then there is
a c ∈(a, b) with f (c) = y.
Proof Consider the lower contour set of y, Ly = {x ∈[a, b] : f (x) ≤
y}. Now Ly is nonempty as a ∈Ly. This set is also bounded so by
completeness it has a least upper bound. Call this point c. Either c ∈Ly
(that is, f (c) ≤y) or c is a cluster point. If c is a cluster point then
there is some sequence {xn} of numbers in Ly with lim xn = c. Because
f is continuous this implies that { f (xn)} converges to f (c). Because
f (xn) < y for every nit is the case that f (c) ≤y. Thus, we know that c ∈
Ly. Now consider the upper contour set of y, Uy. Now Uy is nonempty
as b ∈Uy. This set is also bounded so by completeness it has a greatest
lower bound. Call this point c. Either c ∈Uy (that is, f (c) ≥y) or c is a
cluster point. If c is a cluster point then there is some sequence {xn} of
numbers inUy with lim xn = c. Because f is continuous this implies that
{ f (xn)} converges to f (c). Because f (xn) > y for every n it is the case
that f (c) ≥y. Thus, we know that c ∈Uy. Thus, c ∈Uy ∩Ly, implying
that f (c) = y.
□
This result proves useful in showing that certain types of equations
have solutions. In fact, one natural connection between the intermedi-
ate value theorem and game theory is through ﬁxed point theorems –
which are typically used to establish existence of equilibria.

--- Sayfa 398 ---
382
Mathematical Appendix
DEFINITION 12.19 Given a function f : X →X a ﬁxed point is a point
x ∈X such that f (x) = x.
A key result is Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem.
THEOREM 12.3 (Brouwer) If X ⊂Rn is compact, convex, and nonempty
and f : X →X is continuous then it has a ﬁxed point.
Although the proof for n > 1 is beyond the scope of this review, one
can prove the one-dimensional version with the intermediate value
theorem.
PROPOSITION 12.8 If f : [a, b] →[a, b] is continuous then it has a ﬁxed
point.
Proof Deﬁne the function g(x) = f (x) −x. This is a continuous
function from [a, b] into [a −b, b −a]. If for some a′, b′ ∈[a, b] we
have g(a′) > 0 and g(b′) < 0 or g(a′) < 0 and g(b′) > 0 then the
intermediate value theorem implies that for some c ∈[a′, b′] ⊂[a, b]
we have g(c) = 0 so that f (c) = c and c is a ﬁxed point. The remaining
cases are g(x) > 0 for all x ∈[a, b] or g(x) < 0 for all x ∈[a, b]. These
cases involve f (x) > x for all x or g(x) < x for all x. But because b =
sup{x ∈[a, b]}
= sup{ f (x) : x ∈[a, b]
and
a = inf{x ∈[a, b]} =
inf{ f (x) : x ∈[a, b]} this is not possible.
□
When X is a ﬁeld (recall the real number system is a ﬁeld), the
following condition is relevant.
DEFINITION 12.20 A function f : X →R with X a convex set is quasi-
concave if the upper contour sets are convex. That is, for every t ∈R and
x, x′ ∈X and every λ ∈(0, 1) it is the case that f (x) ≥t and f (x′) ≥t
implies f (λx + (1 −λ)x′) ≥t. If the last inequality is always strict the
function is strictly quasi-concave.
A useful property of quasi-concave objective functions is easily ob-
tained.
THEOREM 12.4 If X is convex and f : X →R is strictly quasi-concave
then arg maxx∈X{ f (x)} contains at most one point.

--- Sayfa 399 ---
6. Correspondences∗∗
383
6. Correspondences∗∗
Correspondences may have a number of important properties.
DEFINITION 12.21 A correspondence f : X →→Y is convex valued if
for each x ∈X the set f (x) is convex.
Notionsofcontinuitymayalsobeextendedtocorrespondences.First
we deﬁne the upper and lower images.
DEFINITION 12.22 Theupperimageof E ⊂Yunder f (denoted f +(E)),
is deﬁned by f +(E) = {x ∈X : f (x) ⊂E}.
The upper image of a set E is the set of points in X that map into
subsets of E.
DEFINITION 12.23 The lower image of E ⊂Yunder f (denoted f −(E)),
is deﬁned by f −(E) = {x ∈X : f (x) ∩E̸ = ∅}.
The lower image of a set E is the set of points in Xthat map into sets
that intersect E. Just as continuity of functions pertains to properties
of contour sets, continuity of correspondences relates to properties of
these image sets.
DEFINITION 12.24 A correspondence f : X →→Y is upper hemicon-
tinuous if for each x ∈X, whenever x ∈f +(E) for E an open set in Y
there exists an open ball B(x, ε) with B(x, ε) ⊂f +(E).
DEFINITION 12.25 A correspondence f : X →→Y is lower hemicon-
tinuous if for each x ∈X, whenever x ∈f −(E) for E an open set in Y
there exists an open ball B(x, ε) with B(x, ε) ⊂f +(E).
DEFINITION 12.26 A correspondence f : X →→Y is continuous if it is
both upper and lower hemicontinuous.
For most problems in political game theory we can settle for an
alternative condition that is more intuitive than upper hemicontinuity.

--- Sayfa 400 ---
384
Mathematical Appendix
DEFINITION 12.27 A correspondence f : X →→Y is closed at x ∈X if
xn →x, yn ∈f (xn) and yn →y imply y ∈f (x). If a correspondence is
closed at each point in its domain it is closed.
PROPOSITION 12.9 If Y is compact then f : X →→Y is upper hemi-
continuous if and only if it is closed.
The following result is an early version of what is called the theorem
of the maximum. Alternative versions exist, but the basic point for for-
mal theory is clear: the solutions of well-behaved optimization prob-
lems respond smoothly to changes in parameters.
THEOREM 12.5 (Berge) If u : X →R is a continuous function and
	 : Y →→X such that for each y ∈Y, 	(y)̸ = ∅then
(1) the function v : Y →R deﬁned by v(y) = max{u(x) such that x ∈
	(y)} is continuous and
(2) the correspondence a : Y →→X deﬁned by a(y) = arg maxx∈	(y)
{u(x)} is upper hemicontinuous.
Our ﬁnal result is a generalization of Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem.
THEOREM 12.6 (Kakutani) Let A⊂Rn be compact and convex and let
f : A→→Abe closed (or upper hemicontinuous) with nonempty and
convex values; then f has a ﬁxed point, x ∈Asuch that x ∈f (x).
7. Calculus
The preceding analysis results represent insights about problems that
can be gained only on the basis of knowledge of topological features
(compactness, continuity) and convexity features. With more structure
and the use of calculus, more speciﬁc predictions can be obtained. In
this section we provide a quick review of basic concepts of calculus
that are used throughout the book. Readers are also referred to Gill
(2004), Chiang (2004), and Simon and Blume (1994).
7.1. Calculus in R1. Many of the questions we ask in empirical political
science involve what happens to variable y when we change variable x.
If the variables are related by a function so that y = f (x), the derivative
allows us to describe and quantify the effects the variables have on

--- Sayfa 401 ---
7. Calculus
385
y
x
1
x
h
+

2
x
h
+
Figure 12.3. Derivatives.
one another. Suppose that y = f (x). What happens if we increase x to
x + h? The change in y per unit change in x is then given by

y

x = f (x + h) −f (x)
h
which is just the slope of the line drawn from f (x + h) to f (x). The
difﬁculty of this measure is that it depends on h, as illustrated by the
two heavy dotted lines corresponding to h1 and h2 in Figure 12.3. We
prefer a measure that does not depend on h and describes the behavior
of the function as close to x as possible. Such a measure is
dy
dx = lim
h−→0
f (x + h) −f (x)
h
,
which is the derivative of f with respect to x. This is the solid heavy line
in Figure 12.3. The notation f ′(x) is also used for the derivative with
respect to x. It is common to write f ′ to denote the derivative of f .
Although the numerator of this limit goes to 0, the denominator also
goes to 0 so it can converge to any value. There is no guarantee that such
a limit even exist. If it does exists, the function is differentiable at x. The
limit cannot exist if f is not continuous at x. It may be continuous and
not be differentiable, however. The function f (x) = |x| is continuous

--- Sayfa 402 ---
386
Mathematical Appendix
but not differentiable at x = 0. For f (x) = |x|,
lim
h−→0
f (x + h) −f (x)
h
= lim
h−→0
|h|
h .
Such a limit does not exist because a sequence of h < 0 converges to
−1 whereas sequences with h > 0 converge to 1.
Because the derivative is a measure of the rate of change in y given a
change in x, we use it to determine whether or not a function is increas-
ing or decreasing. If f ′(x) > 0, the function is increasing; if f ′(x) < 0,
the function is decreasing.
7.1.1. Some Special Derivatives. Many ordinary functions have deriva-
tives with well-known functional forms. We now list these for reference.
(1) Constant: If f (x) = c then f ′(x) = 0.
(2) Linear: If f (x) = a0 + a1x then f ′(x) = a1.
(3) Polynomial: If f (x) = axn then f ′(x) = naxn−1.
(4) Exponential: If f (x) = eax then f ′(x) = aeax.
(5) Natural logarithm: If f (x) = a ln(bx) then f ′(x) = a/x.
7.1.2. Derivatives of Composite Functions. Taking derivatives of more
complicated functions is easier if we can break them down into com-
posite functions such as f (x) and g(x). The following rules help to
compute such derivatives.
(1) The Addition and Subtraction Rule:
d ( f + g)
dx
= f ′ + g′ and d ( f −g)
dx
= f ′ −g′.
(2) The Product Rule:
d ( f · g)
dx
= f ′ · g + f · g′.
(3) The Quotient Rule:
d( f/g)
dx
= f ′ · g −fg′
g2
.

--- Sayfa 403 ---
7. Calculus
387
(4) The Chain Rule: Let z = g(y) and y = f (x) so that z =
g ( f (x)); then
dz
dx = dz
dy
dy
dx = f ′ (x) g′ (y) .
7.1.3. Higher Derivatives. Because derivatives of f (x) (when they ex-
ist) are themselves functions of x, we can take derivatives of deriva-
tives to learn more about the properties of the function. We rep-
resent the derivative of f ′(x), or the second derivative of f (x) as
d2 f /dx2 = f ′′ (x). As before, if f ′′ > 0, f ′ is increasing and if f ′′ < 0,
f ′ is decreasing. The second derivative can also tell us about the be-
havior of the original function. If
r f ′ > 0, f ′′ > 0, then f (x) is increasing at an increasing rate
r f ′ > 0, f ′′ < 0, then f (x) is increasing at a decreasing rate
r f ′ < 0, f ′′ > 0, then f (x) is decreasing at a decreasing rate
r f ′ < 0, f ′′ < 0, then f (x) is decreasing at an increasing rate
Figure 12.4 plots a function that exhibits each of these properties on
different ranges of x.
x
0
f         f
< 0,
′
′′>
0
f          f
> 0,
′
′′>
0,
< 0
f ′>      f ′′
0,
< 0
f ′<      f ′′
y
Figure 12.4. Second Derivatives.

--- Sayfa 404 ---
388
Mathematical Appendix

0
1
Local and global min
Local min
Local max
Global max
x
y
Figure 12.5. Extremum Points.
In principle, we can take nth-order derivatives, provided that they
exist. We denote these as dn f /dxn or f (n) (x).
7.1.4. Maxima and Minima of Functions. Much of the mathematical
analysis in political game theory involves maximizing or minimizing
functions. Voters maximize utility functions, and politicians maximize
votes. States minimize the number of deaths in combat. The derivative
is very handy in locating the local (as opposed to global) extrema of
functions.
Intuitively, the local maximum (minimum) is the point where the
function ceases to increase (decrease) and begins to decrease (in-
crease). Therefore, the derivative must equal 0 unless the local ex-
tremum is global and located on the boundary of the domain. Fig-
ure 12.5 illustrates the distinctions between global and local maxima
and minima as well as the intuition as to why derivatives must be 0 at
local extrema. The derivative may be 0 at a point that is not a max-
imum or a minimum, however, as demonstrated by the function in
Figure 12.6 that contains a “saddle point.” Thus, a second-order condi-
tion must be satisﬁed to guarantee that a point satisfying the ﬁrst-order
condition is indeed an extremum. Approaching a local maximum, the
derivative is positive, and it becomes negative after reaching it. So the
derivative must be decreasing so that, the second derivative cannot be

--- Sayfa 405 ---
7. Calculus
389
f(x)
x
Saddle point
Figure 12.6. Saddle Point.
positive. Conversely, at a local minimum the second derivative cannot
be negative. At a saddle point, the second derivative is 0.
7.1.4.1. Some Formal Deﬁnitions. The following deﬁnitions are useful.
Let f : D →R; then
r f (x∗) is a global maximum if f (x∗) ≥f (x) for all x ∈D.
r f (x∗) is a global minimum if f (x∗) ≤f (x) for all x ∈D.
r f (x∗) is a local maximum if for some ε > 0 |x∗−x| < ε implies
f (x∗) ≥f (x).
r f (x∗) is a local minimum if for some ε > 0 |x∗−x| < ε implies
f (x∗) ≤f (x).
r If f (x∗) is a maximum, then x∗is known as arg max
D
f (x).
r If f (x∗) is a minimum, then x∗is known as arg min
D
f (x).
r If f ′(x∗) = 0, then x∗is a critical point of f .
EXAMPLE 12.7 Application: Bureaucratic Resource Allocations. A bu-
reaucrat has a budget B to spend on two activities that contribute to the
output of the agency. The output of the agency is given by O = √x1x2
where x1 and x2 are the expenditures on activities 1 and 2, respec-
tively. Because B = x1 + x2, we can replace x2 with B −x1 so that
O =

x1 (B −x1) . Now we wish to ﬁnd the expenditure x1 that max-
imizes the agency’s output. First, we compute the critical values x∗
1 to

--- Sayfa 406 ---
390
Mathematical Appendix
look for local maxima. The derivative of the output function is
O′ =
 1
2 B −x∗
1


x∗
1

B −x∗
1
.
Setting O′ to 0 reveals that the only critical value is x∗
1 = B/2. To
determine whether this is indeed a maximizer, we compute the sec-
ond derivative and evaluate it at x∗
1. The second derivative is O′′ =
−((x∗
1(B −x∗
1))−1/2 −(B/2 −x∗
1)2(x∗
1(B −x∗
1))−3/2). If we evaluate this
second derivation at x∗
1 = B/2, it reduces to O′′ = −2 < 0. Thus, x∗
1 =
B/2 is a local maximizer and produces an output of B/2. It is easy to see
that it is also a global maximizer because O(x∗
1) = B/2 is greater than
O(0) = O(B) = 0.
7.1.5. Concavity and Convexity of Functions. Two important proper-
ties of functions are concavity and convexity. To illustrate these con-
cepts, consider Figure 12.7. A function that curves downward as f1
does is known as concave. We verify it is concave if for any points such
as x1 and x2, the line between f (x1) and f (x2) lies below the function
between those two points. Formally, f : D →R is concave over the
set D if and only if f (λx1 + (1 −λ)x2) ≥λ f (x1) + (1 −λ) f (x2) for all
λ ∈[0, 1] and x1, x2 ∈D.
f(x)
1f
2f
1x
x
2
x
Figure 12.7. Convexity and Concavity.

--- Sayfa 407 ---
7. Calculus
391
Alternatively, a function that curves upward as does f2 is convex. We
canverifyitisconvexifforanypointssuchas x1 and x2,thelinebetween
f (x1) and f (x2) lies above the function between those two points.
Formally, f : D →R is convex over the set D if and only if f (λx1 +
(1 −λ)x2) ≤λ f (x1) + (1 −λ) f (x2) for all λ ∈[0, 1] and x1, x2 ∈D. We
can extend the deﬁnition to the case of strict concavity and convexity
by replacing the weak inequalities with strict ones.
Concave and convex functions are critical because of the following:
r If f : D →R is concave and f ′(x∗) = 0, x∗is a global maximizer.
r If f : D →R is convex and f ′(x∗) = 0, x∗is a global minimizer.
These statements are true because if f ′ exists concavity implies that
f ′′ < 0 and convexity implies that f ′′ > 0.
7.1.6. IntegralCalculus. Let F(x)beafunctionsuchthat F′(x) = f (x).
Then we say that F is the antiderivative of f (x). We typically write
antiderivatives in terms of the indeﬁnite integral:
F (x) =

f (x) dx.
The laws of differentiation lead to the following results (where C is an
arbitrary constant). Check by differentiating the left side of each.
(1)

af (x)dx = a

f (x) dx.
(2)

( f (x) + g(x)) dx =

f (x)dx +

g(x)dx.
(3)

xndx = xn+1
n+1 + C.
(4)

 1
xdx = ln x + C.
(5)

exdx = ex + C.
(6)

e f (x) f ′(x)dx = e f (x) + C.
(7)

( f (x))n f ′(x)dx = f (x)n+1
n+1
+ C.
(8)

f ′(x)
f (x) dx = ln f (x) + C.
The most common use of the integral is to measure the area under
a function. If F is the antiderivative of f , then the area underneath f

--- Sayfa 408 ---
392
Mathematical Appendix
between points a and b is given by the deﬁnite integral
b

a
f (x) dx = F(b) −F(a).
7.1.7. Differentiation of the Deﬁnite Integral. The rules for differenti-
ating deﬁnite integrals are the following
(1)
d
dx
b
a
f (x)dx =
b
a
f ′(x)dx.
(2)
d
db
b
a
f (x)dx = f (b).
(3)
d
da
b
a
f (x)dx = −f (a).
(4)
d
dα
b(α)

a(α)
f (x(α))dx =
b
a
f ′(x(α)) ∂x
∂αdx + f (b(α)) ∂b
∂α −f (a(α)) ∂a
∂α.
The last, most general, rule is sometimes referred to as Leibnitz’s rule
after one of the creators of the calculus, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz.
7.2. Calculus of Several Variables∗. This section presupposes some
basic familiarity with matrix notation. A matrix is a rectangular array
of numbers such as
A=
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23

.
It is convenient to refer to an arbitrary matrix element by reference to
its row and column number (note the location of a23, for example). A
column vector is a column or numbers such as
B =
 b1
b2

.
A row vector is a row of numbers such as
C =

c1
c2
c3

.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
7. Calculus
393
The transpose of a vector or matrix is denoted by the symbol ′. It is
formed by interchanging columns and rows. Thus,
A′ =
⎡
⎣
a11
a21
a12
a22
a13
a23
⎤
⎦
and
B′ =

b1
b2

.
For this section we use boldface letters to denote vectors and non
boldface letters to denote scalars. Consider the function y = f (x). It
is often useful to know how y changes given a change in one of the
elements of x. Typically, we look at the partial effects of xi: that, is how
does a change in xi affect y if the other elements of x are held constant?
This is equivalent to examining the behavior of the function within a
given “slice.” Formally, the partial derivative is
∂f
∂xi
= lim
h→0
f (x + hi) −f (x)
h
where hi is a vector of 0s with an h in the ith position. Partial derivatives
are as easy to compute as regular derivatives because we treat all of
the other variables as constants.
EXAMPLE 12.8 Let f (x1, x2) = x1/x2. Then ∂f /∂x1 = 1/x2, ∂f /∂x2 =
−x1/x2
2.
We often collect partial derivatives in a vector
Dx f =
 ∂f
∂x1
, ∂f
∂x2
, . . . , ∂f
∂xn
′
.
This vector is called the gradient vector of f at x. The gradient vector
evaluated at x describes the behavior of the function near x.
7.2.1. Higher-Order and Cross-Partial Derivatives. Just as with func-
tions of a single variable, we can use higher-order partial derivatives
to characterize the behavior of partial derivatives. The second partial

--- Sayfa 410 ---
394
Mathematical Appendix
derivative with respect to xi is written as
∂
∂xi
 ∂f
∂xi

= ∂2 f
∂x2
i
.
We can interpret this quantity exactly the same way as in the case of
a single variable. In the case of more than a single variable, however,
we may want to know how a partial derivative changes when other
variables change (i.e., how does changing xj affect the partial derivative
with respect to xi?). We write the cross-partial derivative as
∂
∂xj
 ∂f
∂xi

=
∂2 f
∂xj∂xi
.
EXAMPLE 12.9 Let f (x1, x2) = x1/x2. Then ∂2 f /∂x2
1 = 0, ∂2 f /∂x2
2 =
−2x1/x3
2, ∂2 f /(∂x1∂x2) = −1/x2
2, and ∂2 f /(∂x2∂x1) = −1/(x2
2).
Note that ∂2 f /(∂x1∂x2) = ∂2 f /(∂x2∂x1). This is true generally as
∂2 f /(∂xi∂xj) = ∂2 f /(∂xj∂xi). Thus, the order of partial differentiation
does not matter.
The Hessian matrix represents the collection of second- and cross-
derivatives.
H(x) =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
∂2 f (x)
∂x2
1
∂2 f (x)
∂x1∂x2
. . .
∂2 f (x)
∂x1∂xn
∂2 f (x)
∂x2∂x1
∂2 f (x)
∂x2
2
. . .
∂2 f (x)
∂x2∂xn
...
...
...
...
∂2 f (x)
∂xn∂x1
∂2 f (x)
∂xn∂x2
. . .
∂2 f (x)
∂x2n
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
7.2.2. Implicit Function Theorem∗. Many equilibrium characteriza-
tions involve ﬁnding a value of x ∈Rn that solves a system such as
f (x; y) = 0
for a particular value of the parameters y ∈Rk. When a closed form so-
lution for the solution x∗exists, we can solve for an explicit relationship
of the form
x∗= g(y).

--- Sayfa 411 ---
7. Calculus
395
If g is a differentiable function then comparative statics analysis (ﬁnd-
ing out how changes in y affect x) is straightforward. Sometimes, how-
ever, we can prove that a solution x∗exists for each y but we cannot
directly solve for the function g(·). For example, a ﬁxed point theorem
may tell us that a solution to the system f (x; y) = 0 exists, but we may
not be able to solve analytically for the vector x as a function of y.
Under suitable conditions the implicit function theorem lets us im-
plicitly characterize the derivative Dyx∗. First, we present the result in
the case of one endogenous and one exogenous variable.
THEOREM 12.7 (Low-Dimension Implicit Function Theorem) Let x∗∈
R solve f (x, y) = 0 at y ∈R. If f (·, ·) is continuously differentiable and
∂f (x∗, y∗)/∂x̸ = 0 then for some open set Acontaining x∗and an open
set B containing y∗there exists a continuously differentiable function
φ : B →Awith f (φ(y), y) = 0. The derivative of this function at y∗is
given by
∂φ(y∗)
∂y
= −
∂f (x∗,y∗)
∂y
∂f (x∗,y∗)
∂x
.
To present the result for the more general case, we consider endoge-
nous vectors of the form x = (x1, . . . , xn) ∈Rn and exogenous vectors
of the form y = (y1, . . . , yk) ∈Rk. Suppose the system f(x, y) = 0 is of
the form
f1(x1, . . . , xn; y1, . . . , yk) = 0
·
·
fn(x1, . . . , xn; y1, . . . , yk) = 0.
The n-by-n Jacobian matrix of this system with respect to the endoge-
nous variables is then the n-by-n matrix that stacks up the transpose of
the gradient vectors:
J = Dxf(x∗, y∗) =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
Dx f ′
1
.
.
Dx f ′
n
⎤
⎥⎥⎦.

--- Sayfa 412 ---
396
Mathematical Appendix
When manipulating matrices, the analog to dividing is called taking
the inverse. For an arbitrary n × n matrix, M, the matrix M−1 satisﬁes
the equation MM−1 = I where I is the identity matrix containing 1s
on the main diagonal and 0s everywhere else. A matrix is said to be
nonsingular if its inverse exists. We refer readers to Chiang (2004) and
Simon and Blume (1994) or an introductory linear algebra book for
details on the computation of inverses.
The n × k matrix
Dyf(x∗, y∗) =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
Dy f ′
1
.
.
Dy f ′
n
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
consists of the transposes of the derivatives of the equations in f(·, ·)
with respect to the exogenous variables.
THEOREM 12.8 (Implicit Function Theorem) Let x∗∈Rn solve f(x, y) =
0 at y ∈Rk. If f1(·) through fn(·) are continuously differentiable in each
coordinate of x and y and the Jacobian matrix of the system with respect
to the endogenous variables is nonsingular, then for some open set A
containing x∗and an open set B containing y∗there exists a continuously
differentiable function φ : B →Awith f(φ(y), y) = 0. The derivative of
this function at y∗is given by the n × k matrix,
Dyφ(y∗) = −[Dxf(x∗, y∗)]−1 Dyf(x∗, y∗).
7.2.3. Optimization in Rn. Recall that if we want to maximize f :
R →R, we solve for values of x for which f ′ (x∗) = 0.1 If this con-
dition does not hold, some other x in a neighborhood of x∗produces
a larger value of f (x).
The same logic holds for optimizing multivariate functions. In this
case the derivative with respect to each element of x must be 0. Suppose
∂f /∂xi > 0.Thenthevalueofthefunctionincreasesforasmallincrease
in xi and decreases for a small decrease. Similarly, we cannot have
∂f /∂xi < 0 at an interior optimum. It is clear that a necessary condition
1 Since the domain is R, we need not worry about corner solutions.

--- Sayfa 413 ---
7. Calculus
397
for x∗to optimize f : Rn→R is that
Df (x∗) = 0.
The second-order conditions for maxima and minima are based on the
Hessian matrix and require some more advanced concepts in matrix
algebra. The sufﬁcient condition for a maximum (minimum) is that H
is positive (negative) deﬁnite.
DEFINITION 12.28 A n × n matrix M is positive deﬁnite if for all vectors
v ∈Rn, v′Mv > 0. It is negative deﬁnite if v′Mv < 0 for all v ∈Rn. A
matrix is positive or negative semideﬁnite if the inequalities are weak.
We ﬁrst state the following results for R2.
THEOREM 12.9 x∗∈R2 is a local maximizer if Df (x∗) = 0, ∂2 f /∂x2
1 <
0, ∂2 f /∂x2
2 < 0, and (∂2 f /∂x2
1)(∂2 f /∂x2
2) >

∂2 f /(∂x1∂x2)
2.
THEOREM 12.10 x∗∈R2 is a local minimizer if Df (x∗) = 0, ∂2 f /∂x2
1 >
0, ∂2 f /∂x2
2 > 0, and (∂2 f /∂x2
1)(∂2 f /∂x2
2) >

∂2 f /(∂x1∂x2)
2.
The higher-dimensional versions are similar.
THEOREM 12.11 x∗∈Rn is a local maximizer if Df (x∗) = 0 and the
Hessian matrix H(x∗) is negative deﬁnite.
THEOREM 12.12 x∗∈Rn is a local minimizer if Df (x∗) = 0 and the
Hessian matrix H(x∗) is positive deﬁnite.
If Df (x∗) = 0 and the Hessian matrix H(x∗) is negative semideﬁnite,
it is possible that x is a local maximum. But this need not be true. A sim-
ilar statement holds for positive semideﬁnite Hessians. The following
necessity results are, however, true.
THEOREM 12.13 If x∗∈Rn is a local maximizer and the objective func-
tion is twice differentiable then the Hessian matrix H(x∗) is negative
semideﬁnite.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
398
Mathematical Appendix
THEOREM 12.14 If x∗∈Rn is a local minimizer and the objective func-
tion is twice differentiable then the Hessian matrix H(x∗) is positive
semideﬁnite.
EXAMPLE 12.10 Party Resource Allocations. Suppose a political party
wants to allocate its funds across two elections. The party values each of
these seats by W1 and W2, respectively (the party gets 0 for each seat it
loses). Let xi/(1 + xi) be the probability that the party wins seat i where
xi is the amount of money it spends in election i. The cost of spending xi
is simply xi. Therefore, the party wishes to choose (x1, x2) to maximize
x1
1 + x1
W1 +
x2
1 + x2
W2 −x1 −x2.
The ﬁrst-order conditions are
W1
(1 + x1)2 −1 = 0
W2
(1 + x2)2 −1 = 0,
and the Hessian matrix of second derivatives is
⎡
⎣
−
W1
(1+x1)3
0
0
−
W2
(1+x2)3
⎤
⎦.
From the ﬁrst-order conditions, there are four possible critical val-
ues:

−√W1 −1, −√W2 −1

,
√W1 −1, −√W2 −1

,

−√W1 −1,
√W2 −1

, and
√W1 −1, √W2 −1

. The second-order conditions re-
quire −Wi(1 + xi)3 < 0 or xi > −1. Thus, because Wi > 0, the only
critical value that satisﬁes the second-order condition is
√W1 −1,
√W2 −1

.
7.2.4. Concave and Convex Functions. The deﬁnitions of concavity
and convexity generalize easily to Rn.
DEFINITION 12.29 Let U ⊆Rn and f : U →R. The function f is con-
cave if for all x, y ∈U and λ ∈[0, 1], f (λx+ (1 −λ) y) ≥λ f (x) +
(1 −λ) f (y).

--- Sayfa 415 ---
7. Calculus
399
DEFINITION 12.30 Let U ⊆Rn and f : U →R. The function f is con-
vex if for all x, y ∈U and λ ∈[0, 1], f (λx + (1 −λ) y) ≤λ f (x) +
(1 −λ) f (y).
Just as before, concavity guarantees that the critical values generate
global maxima while convexity guarantees global minima.
THEOREM 12.15 Let f : U →R be be a twice-differentiable function
where U is an open and convex subset of Rn. If f is a concave function
on U and Df (x∗) = 0 for x∗∈U, then x∗is a global maximizer of f on
U. If f is a convex function on U and Df (x∗) = 0 for x∗∈U, then x∗is
a global minimizer of f on U.
7.2.5. Constrained Maximization
7.2.5.1. EqualityConstraints. Inanumberofcontextsinpoliticalgame
theory, it is useful to solve constrained maximization problems. Such
constraints may arise either from feasibility constraints on agents’
choices or from the behavior of other agents. Such problems take the
form of
max f (x) subject to g1 (x) = 0
g2 (x) = 0
· · ·
gk (x) = 0
where the function f : Rn →R1 and each of the functions g j : Rn →R
are twice differentiable. The solution to this constrained optimization
problem can be found by setting up and solving a related unconstrained
optimization. The trick is to incorporate the constraints as part of the
objective function.
The Langrangian
L(x, λ) = f (x) −
k

j=1
λ jg j (x)
represents this translated objective function. It depends on both the
choice variables x from our original problem and a new vector of k
variables. These new variables are the constraint multipliers (as each

--- Sayfa 416 ---
400
Mathematical Appendix
constraint gets its own multiplier). The ordinal problem has a real-
valued objective function and k constraints and the translation is an
objective function formed by the sum of k + 1 real-valued functions.
The ﬁrst-order conditions for optimization of the Lagrangian are
∂f (x)
∂xi
=
k

j=1
λ j
∂g j (x)
∂xi
for each i = 1, . . . , n
g j (x) = 0 for each j = 1, . . . , k.
Analysis of the ﬁrst n conditions yields necessary conditions on x for a
solution to the constrained problem. More formally:
THEOREM 12.16 (Lagrangian Theorem) Assume that the gradient vec-
tors of the k constraint functions are linearly independent vectors. If x∗
solves the constrained problem then there exists a vector of Lagrangian
multipliers λ ∈Rk for which (x∗, λ) solve the preceding ﬁrst-order
conditions.
The motivation for translating the constrained problem to this un-
constrained problem is best obtained by inspecting the ﬁrst nﬁrst-order
conditions of the Lagrangian. They require that any increase in the
value of f obtained by changing x (from a solution to the ﬁrst-order
conditions)resultsinacorrespondingchangeinthevalueofatleastone
of the constraint functions g. In other words, if x solves the Lagrangian
then any improvement in f would be at the expense of violating the
constraint. The independence requirement for the procedure to work
is that the Jacobian of the constraints with respect to the variables
x have rank k (that is, the gradient vectors of the k constraints are
independent). Without this constraint qualiﬁcation condition it need
not be the case that a change in k
j=1 λ j(∂g j(x)/∂xi) corresponds to a
violation of the constraint.
EXAMPLE 12.11 Party Resource Allocations Revisited. Suppose the
party has a budget constraint that it must satisfy when allocating funds
across districts. Now the party wishes to maximize
x1
1 + x1
W1 +
x2
1 + x2
W2
subject to B = x1 + x2.

--- Sayfa 417 ---
7. Calculus
401
The Lagrangian is x1W1/(1 + x1) + x2W2/(1 + x2) + λ (x1 + x2 −B).
The ﬁrst-order conditions are W1/(1 + x1)2 −λ = 0, W2/(1 + x2)2 −
λ = 0, and x1 + x2 = B. The ﬁrst two conditions imply that
W2
W1
= (1 + x2)2
(1 + x1)2 or

W2
W1
= (1 + x2)
(1 + x1).
Together with the budget constraint, we have two equations and two
unknowns. Using the positive roots, we have
+

W2
W1
= (1 + B −x1)
(1 + x1)
,
which implies that
x∗
1 =
1 + B −

W2
W1

W2
W1 + 1
and
x∗
2 =
1 +

W2
W1 (B −1)

W2
W1 + 1
.
7.2.5.2. Inequality Constraints. The problem considered earlier re-
quires that the constraints are of the form g j (x) = 0. A larger class
of optimization problems require only that a system of inequality or
equality constraints be satisﬁed. The general problem is then
max f (x) subject to g j (x) = 0 for j = 1, . . . , k
ht (x) ≤0 for t = 1, . . . , w.
Again we assume that all of the relevant functions are differentiable.
The Kuhn-Tucker conditions are similar to the Lagrangian conditions
except in the way the inequality constraints are treated. The relevant

--- Sayfa 418 ---
402
Mathematical Appendix
translated ﬁrst-order conditions are
∂f (x)
∂xi
=
k

j=1
λ j
∂g j (x)
∂xi
+
w

t=1
λt
∂ht (x)
∂xi
for each i = 1, . . . , n
g j (x) = 0 for each j = 1, . . . , k
λtht (x) = 0 for each t = 1, . . . , w.
The difference is that for inequality constraints, either the constraint
binds (in the sense that ht (x) = 0) or the multiplier λt is 0.
7.2.5.3. The Envelope Theorem∗. In applications the objective func-
tion or the constraints may also depend on exogenous variables
y = (y1, . . . , yl, . . . , yz) ∈Rz. Consider the problem
max f (x; y) subject to g j (x; y) = 0 for j = 1, . . . , k
ht (x; y) ≤0 for t = 1, . . . , w.
By v(y) we denote the value function that is a mapping v : Rz →R1
with v(y) = f (x∗(y); y) where x∗(y) is a solution to the preceding opti-
mization problem. The theorem of the maximum indicated that under
suitable conditions the value function is continuous. We can use calcu-
lus to gain more insight into the dependence of the value function on
the exogenous parameters.
THEOREM 12.17 Assume that v(y′) is differentiable at y′ and that
(x∗(y′), λ(y′)) solve the preceding problem and on some open set Acon-
taining x∗(y′) and some open set Bcontaining y′ the set of constraints that
bind on the solution x∗: B →Ais constant, then for each i = 1, . . . , n
∂v(y′)
∂yl
= ∂f

x∗(y′); y

∂yl
−
k

j=1
λ j
∂g j

x∗(y′); y

∂yl
−
w

t=1
λt
∂ht

x∗(y′); y

∂yl
.
The novelty of this result is that in characterizing ∂v(y′)/∂yl we do
not need to worry about Dylx∗(y).
EXAMPLE 12.12 A party decides how to allocate its resources y over
k electoral districts. Assume that it selects ri ∈R1 for districts i =
1, 2, . . . , k. It can only spend y on the election, so the constraint
y −k
i=1 ri ≥0 must be satisﬁed. Let f (r) : Rk →R1 denote the party’s

--- Sayfa 419 ---
7. Calculus
403
payoff from a particular allocation of resources. The envelope theorem
says that if v(y) is the value function from solving this problem and λ is
the multiplier from the constraint, then ∂v(y)/∂y = λ. Thus, the multi-
plier is the marginal value of a local increase in the party’s resources.
7.2.6. Multivariate Integrals. We calculate the area under multivariate
functions with the use of the multivariate deﬁnite integral
b1

a1
. . .
bn

an
f (x1, . . . , xn) dx1 . . . dxn.
Multivariate integrals are calculated by sequentially integrating with
respect to one variable while holding the remaining constant. Suppose
that we integrated with respect to x1. Let F1 (x1, . . . , xn) be the partial
antiderivative with respect to x1; then
b1

a1
. . .
bn

an
f (x1, . . . , xn) dx1 . . . dxn
=
b2

a2
. . .
bn

an
F1 (b1, . . . , xn) dx2 . . . dxn
−
b2

a2
. . .
bn

an
F1 (a1, . . . , xn) dx2 . . . dxn
We continue this iterative process by taking the partial antiderivative
of F1 with respect to x2, and so on. It does not matter which deﬁnite
partial integral we compute ﬁrst.
EXAMPLE 12.13 Consider

 2
1

 1
1/2 x2ydxdy.Nowwebeginbycomputing
F1(x, y) = x3y/3. Then
2

1
1

1
2
x2ydxdy =
1

1
2
8
3 ydy −
1

1
2
1
3 ydy
= 8
3
1
2 −1
8

−1
3
1
2 −1
8

= 7
8.

--- Sayfa 420 ---
404
Mathematical Appendix
8. Probability Theory
As we saw in Chapter 3, models of decision making under uncertainty
are heavily dependent upon probability theory. In this section, we out-
line the basics of probability and review some key results.
8.1. Outcomes and Events. The building blocks of probability theory
are outcomes and events. Let S be the set of all possible outcomes that
can be generated by a random process. Such a set is known as a sample
space. A generic element s ∈S is called an outcome.
EXAMPLE 12.14 Flipping two coins: S = {HH, HT, TH, TT}.
EXAMPLE 12.15 Unemployment rates: S = [0, 100].
The ﬁrst example is that of a discrete sample space because the
number of outcomes is ﬁnite, whereas the latter is a continuous sample
space as the number of outcomes is inﬁnite.
Given a sample space, we deﬁne an event as a subset A⊆S. Thus,
an event is any combination of outcomes.
EXAMPLE 12.16 A= {TH, HT}: “Flip 2 is different from ﬂip 1.”
EXAMPLE 12.17 A= [4, 13]: “Unemployment is between 4 percent and
13 percent.”
8.2. The Axioms of Probability Theory. Probability theory concerns
itself with the likelihood that various events occur. We let Pr(A) de-
note the probability that event A occurs. Classical probability theory
is based on the following axiomatic statements about Pr(A):
AXIOM 12.1. For any event A, Pr(A) ≥0.
AXIOM 12.2. Pr(S) = 1.
AXIOM 12.3. Let A1, A2, . . . , be a possibly inﬁnite list of disjoint events;
then Pr
∞
i=1 Ai

= ∞
i=1 Pr (Ai).
Axiom 1 says that the probability of any event is nonnegative, and
axiom 2 says that the probability that some event occurs is 1. Axiom
3 concerns the probability of mutually exclusive or disjoint events. It
states that the probability of a set of mutually exclusive events is equal

--- Sayfa 421 ---
8. Probability Theory
405
to the sum of the probabilities of the individual events. These axioms
lead directly to a number of useful properties of probabilities.
The probability of the null event is 0.
THEOREM 12.18 Pr(∅) = 0.
Axiom 3 extends directly to the case of a ﬁnite number of disjoint
events.
THEOREM 12.19 Let A1, A2, . . . , An be a ﬁnite list of disjoint events;
then Pr (n
i=1 Ai) = n
i=1 Pr (Ai).
The previous theorem plus axioms 1 and 2 imply that the probabili-
ties of an event and the probability of its complement sum to 1.
THEOREM 12.20 Let S|A be the complement of A; then Pr(A) +
Pr(S|A) = 1.
A direct implication of the previous theorem is that the probability
of any event is less than 1 (weakly).
THEOREM 12.21 For any event A, 0 ≤Pr(A) ≤1.
If the outcomes associated with event B are a proper subset of those
associated with event A, the probability of event Ahas to be at least as
large as the probability of B.
THEOREM 12.22 If B ⊂A, then Pr(A) ≥Pr(B).
The next two theorems concern the probability of a union of events.
With just two events A and B, we can decompose A∪B into three
disjoint sets A\B, B\A, and A∩B. Thus, Pr(A∪B) = Pr(A\B) +
Pr(B\A) + Pr(A∩B) from Theorem 12.19. Theorem 12.19 also sug-
gests that Pr(A) = Pr(A\B) + Pr(A∩B) and Pr(B) = Pr(B\A) +
Pr(A∩B). These results produce Theorem 12.23.
THEOREM 12.23 For any two events A and B, Pr(A∪B) = Pr(A) +
Pr(B) −Pr(A∩B).
Theorem 12.24 is a straightforward generalization of Theorem
12.23.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
406
Mathematical Appendix
THEOREM 12.24 For any n events A1, A2, . . . , An,
Pr
 n

i=1
Ai

=
n

i=1

Pr (Ai) −
n

j>i
Pr (Ai ∩Aj)
+
n

k> j>i
Pr (Ai ∩Aj ∩Ak) −· · ·

.
8.2.1. Dependence and Conditional Probability. We now turn to the
question of how the likelihoods of distinct events are related. The main
concern is whether the occurrence of one event affects the probability
of another. Consider two events Aand B. Suppose we know that event
B has occurred; what is the probability that event Aoccurs?
One obvious possibility is that the likelihoods of the events are unre-
lated. We say that two events Aand B are independent if Pr(A∩B) =
Pr(A) Pr(B). When events are independent, the realization of one
event has no effect on the probability of the other. Suppose that event
B occurs; then Pr(A∩B) is simply Pr(A). Thus, the occurrence of A
is not affected by the occurrence of B. This logic extends to a general
deﬁnition of independence.
DEFINITION 12.31 Let A1, . . . ,An be a set of events. They are indepen-
dent if Pr (n
i=1 Ai) = n
i=1 Pr (Ai).
For this to be true, any subset of the events must also be independent.
See DeGroot and Schervish (2001) for an example where three events
are pairwise independent but are not independent.
Now we turn to cases where there is dependency among events.
A key concept for analyzing such relationships is that of conditional
probability. Given two events Aand B, the conditional probability of
Agiven B is the probability that Aoccurs given that B has occurred.
We denote the conditional probability of Agiven event B as
Pr(A|B) = Pr(A∩B)
Pr(B)
assuming Pr(B) > 0.
Note that if A and B are independent, Pr(A|B) = Pr(A). It is also
easy to see that conditional probabilities must satisfy Pr(A∩B) =
Pr(A|B) Pr(B) = Pr(B|A) Pr(A).

--- Sayfa 423 ---
8. Probability Theory
407
8.3. Bayes’ Rule. One of the most important uses of probability theory
in political game theory is that it makes predictions about how agents
use observed events to make assessments about the probability of un-
observed events. Bayes’ rule speciﬁes exactly how such assessments
are formed. Stating and proving this theorem require an additional
deﬁnition. A partition is simply a group of mutually exclusive events
that cover the entire sample space.
DEFINITION 12.32 A partition of a sample space S is a set of disjoint
events A1, . . . ,Ak such that k
i=1 Ai = S.
We can now state Bayes’ rule:
THEOREM 12.25 If A1, . . . ,Ak form a partition of S and Pr(B) > 0 then
for any B ⊂S and Aj ⊂S
Pr(Aj|B) =
Pr(Aj) Pr(B|Aj)
k
i=1
Pr(Ai) Pr(B|Ai)
.
Proof The proof proceeds in a number of steps.
Claim 1: If A1, . . . , Ak is a partition of S and B is a subset of S, the
sets A1 ∩B, . . . , Ak ∩B form a partition of B. This follows from the
fact that k
i=1 (Ai ∩B) = k
i=1 Ai ∩B = S ∩B = B.
Claim 2: If A1, . . . , Ak form a partition of S, Pr(B) = k
i=1 Pr
(Ai ∩B). This is a direct application of Claim 1 and Theorem 12.19.
Claim 3: If A1, . . . , Ak form a partition of S and Pr(Ai) > 0 for all
i, then Pr(B) = k
i=1 Pr(B|Ai) Pr(Ai). This is an application of Claim
2 and the multiplication rule for conditional probabilities.
Now we prove the main result. Note that if Pr(B) > 0, the deﬁnition
of conditional probability implies that
Pr(Aj|B) = Pr(Aj ∩B)
Pr(B)
.
Bayes’
law
follows
from
the
substitution
of
Pr(Aj ∩B) =
Pr(B|Aj) Pr(Aj) for the numerator and Pr(B)=k
i=1 Pr(B|Ai) Pr(Ai)
for the denominator.
□

--- Sayfa 424 ---
408
Mathematical Appendix
8.4. Random Variables and Distributions. It is often convenient to use
numerical representations of outcomes and events. Such representa-
tions are known as random variables. A real-valued random variable
is simply a function that maps all possible outcomes into real numbers.
DEFINITION 12.33 Let X : S →R for some sample space S. Then X is
a random variable that assigns a real number X(s) to each possible
outcome s ∈S.
Using this deﬁnition of random variables, it is straightforward to de-
ﬁne events as sets of real numbers and to deﬁne probability distribu-
tions over the random variables. A distribution is simply an assignment
of probabilities to such events.
DEFINITION 12.34 Let A be any subset of R and let Pr(X ∈A) denote
the probability that X is in A. Then Pr(X ∈A) = Pr{s : X(s) ∈A}.
A probability distribution of X is a speciﬁcation of Pr(X ∈A) for all
A⊂R.
8.4.1. Discrete Distributions. A random variable X has a discrete
distribution if it can take on only a ﬁnite number of outcomes:
x1, x2, . . . , xk. The set of all possible outcomes is the support of the
distribution.
DEFINITION 12.35 If a random variable has a discrete distribution, the
probability function (pf) f of Xis deﬁned as f (x) = Pr(X = x) for any
real number x.
If x is not equal to one of the points in the support of X, then f (x) =
0. By the axioms of probability theory, 0 ≤k
i=1 f (xi) ≤1 and 0 ≤
f (xi) ≤1.
EXAMPLE 12.18 The Uniform Distribution over Integers: Suppose that
the value of Xis equally likely to be one of kintegers 1, 2, 3, . . . , k. Then
the pf is
f (x) =
! 1
k for x = 1, . . . , k
0 otherwise
.

--- Sayfa 425 ---
8. Probability Theory
409
EXAMPLE 12.19 The Binomial Distribution: Suppose an experiment
succeeds with probability p and fails with probability 1 −p. The pf for
x successes out of n trials is given by
f (x) =
! n
x

px(1 −p)n−x for x = 0, . . . , n
0 otherwise
where
n
x

= n!/(x! (n −x)!).
8.4.2. Continuous Distributions. Suppose that Xtakes values on a con-
tinuum. Then we say that X is a continuous random variable. If X is a
continuous random variable, then there exists a nonnegative function
f such that for any interval A= [a, b]
Pr(X ∈A) =

A
f (x)dx =
b

a
f (x)dx.
The function f is known as the probability density function (or pdf).
It does not tell us the value of Pr(X = x) (which is 0) but f (x) =
limε→0 Pr(X ∈[x −ϵ, x + ϵ]). Every pdf must satisfy the following:
f (x) ≥0 for all x
∞

−∞
f (x)dx = 1.
The set Xs = {x : f (x) > 0} is known as the support of X.
EXAMPLE 12.20 The Uniform Distribution on an Interval: Let a and
b be two real numbers. Consider an experiment in which a point X
is chosen from S = [a, b] where the probability that X belongs to any
subinterval is proportional to the length of that subinterval. This implies
that the pdf must be the same on any point in S and 0 otherwise.
Thus,

 ∞
−∞f (x)dx =

 b
a f (x)dx =

 b
a cdx = 1. Solving the integral for
c, we obtain that c = 1/(b −a). Thus, the pdf for the uniform distribu-
tion is
f (x) =
!
1
b−a for x ∈[a, b]
0 otherwise
.

--- Sayfa 426 ---
410
Mathematical Appendix
8.4.3. The Cumulative Distribution Function. The cumulative distri-
bution function (cdf) is a real-valued function that indicates for any
real number x the probability that X takes on a value no greater
than x:
F(x) = Pr(X ≤x).
For discrete distributions, F(x) = 
{i:xi<x} f (xi). For continuous dis-
tributions, F(x) =

 x
−∞f (ξ)dξ. Note that at any point in which F is
differentiable, we have F′(x) = f (x). Thus, continuous random vari-
ables with densities can be represented either by the pdf or by the
cdf.
The following are some important properties of the cdf:
(1) Pr(X > x) = 1 −F(x).
(2) Pr(x2 > X ≥x1) = F(x2) −F(x1).
(3) F is nondecreasing (i.e., if x2 > x1 then F(x2) ≥F(x1)).
(4) limx→−∞F(x) = 0 and limx→∞F(x) = 1.
(5) F is always continuous from the right. It may be discontinuous
from the left at x if x occurs with a positive probability. See
Figure 12.8.
8.4.4. Bivariate Distributions. Sometimes we are concerned with the
probabilities that two or more random variables, say X and Y, simul-
taneously take on certain values. One useful tool for analyzing two
random variables is the joint distribution that characterizes the prob-
ability of pairs of realizations of X and Y.
1
0
x
F(x)
Figure 12.8. Discontinuous Cumulative Density Functions.

--- Sayfa 427 ---
8. Probability Theory
411
8.4.4.1. Discrete Bivariate Probability Functions. For the case of two
discrete random variables, the bivariate probability function is given
by
f (x, y) = Pr{X = x and Y = y}.
Let x1, . . . , xk and y1, . . . , ym be the support of X and Y, respectively;
then f (x, y) must satisfy the following properties:
(1) k
i=1
m
j=1 f (xi, yj) = 1.
(2) Let
A be any set of combinations of {x1, . . . , xk} and
{y1, . . . , ym}; then Pr{(x, y) ∈A} = 
(xi,yj)∈A f (xi, yj).
8.4.4.2. Continuous Bivariate Density Functions. If X and Y are con-
tinuous random variables, the bivariate density is deﬁned by
Pr{(x, y) ∈A} =

A
f (x, y)dxdy
for any A⊂R2. The bivariate pdf must satisfy the following properties:
(1) For any (x, y) ∈R2, f (x, y) ≥0.
(2)

R2 f (x, y)dxdy = 1.
8.4.4.3. Bivariate Distribution Function. The cdf can be generalized to
bivariate distributions. The joint distribution function can be denoted
by
F(x, y) = Pr{x ≤X and y ≤Y}.
We can use the joint distribution function to determine the probability
that (x, y) lies in a rectangle [a, b] × [c, d]
Pr(a < X < b & c < Y < d)
= Pr(a < X < b & Y < d) −Pr(a < X < b& Y < c)
= Pr(X < b & Y < d) −Pr(X < a & Y < d)
−Pr(aX < b & Y < c) −Pr(X < a & Y < c)
= F(b, d) −F(a, d) −F(b, c) + F(a, c).

--- Sayfa 428 ---
412
Mathematical Appendix
8.4.5. Marginal Distributions. Suppose we know the joint pdf of Xand
Y. We can generate the probability density of each of them individu-
ally. These distributions of the individual random variables are known
as the marginal distributions. For discrete distributions, the marginal
probability functions fx and fy are deﬁned by
Pr(X = x) = fx(x) =

y
Pr(x = X and y = Y) =

y
f (x, y)
Pr(Y = y) = fy(y) =

x
Pr(x = X and y = Y) =

x
f (x, y).
For continuous random variables, the marginal density functions
are
fx(x) =
∞

−∞
f (x, y)dy
fy(y) =
∞

−∞
f (x, y)dx.
8.5. Independent Random Variables. We know that if X and Y are
independent random variables, then
Pr(X = x and Y = y) = Pr(X = x) Pr(Y = y). This implies that
F(x, y) = Fx(x)Fy(y)
where Fx and Fy are the marginal cdf’s. It is also true that
f (x, y) = fx(x) fy(x)
where fx and fy are marginal probability (density) functions.
8.6. Conditional Distributions. Suppose that X and Y are not inde-
pendent. Then we can deﬁne conditional distributions of X given Y
and Y given X. The derivation of the conditional distributions follows
directly from the deﬁnition of conditional probability given earlier.
For the discrete case, the conditional probability functions gx(x|y) and

--- Sayfa 429 ---
8. Probability Theory
413
gy(y|x) are deﬁned as follows:
gx(x|y) = Pr(X = x|Y = y) = Pr(X = x and Y = y)
Pr(Y = y)
= f (x, y)
fy(y)
gy(y|x) = Pr(Y = y|X = x) = Pr(X = x and Y = y)
Pr(X = x)
= f (x, y)
fx(x) .
For continuous random variables,
gx(x|y) = f (x, y)
fy(y)
gy(y|x) = f (x, y)
fx(x) .
8.7. The Expectation of a Random Variable. One of the most impor-
tant features of any probability distribution is its expectation or central
tendency. The expectation of a random variable is the average over all
of the realizations weighted by the probability of the realizations. For
discrete distributions, the expectation of X or E(X) is deﬁned as
E(X) =

x
xf (x).
For continuous distributions,
E(X) =
∞

−∞
xf (x)dx =
∞

−∞
xdF(x).
Often in this book, we are interested in expectations of functions of a
random variable. Let Y = r(X); then E(Y) =

 ∞
−∞r(x) f (x)dx.
The expectation functions satisfy the following properties:
(1) If Y = a + bX, then E(Y) = a + bE(X).
(2) If there exists a such that Pr(X ≥a) = 1, then E(X) ≥a. If
there exists b such that Pr(X ≤b) = 1, E(X) ≤b.
(3) If
X1, . . . , Xn
are
random
variables,
E(X1 + · · · + Xn) =
E(X1) + · · · + E(Xn).
(4) If
X1, . . . , Xn
are
independent
random
variables,
then
E(n
i=1 Xi) = n
i=1 E(Xi).

--- Sayfa 430 ---
414
Mathematical Appendix
It is important to note that (4) does not hold if the random variables
are not independent.
8.8. TheVarianceofaRandomVariable. Anotherimportantproperty
of a random variable is the extent to which it deviates from its expected
value. One such measure is the variance, deﬁned as
var(X) = σ 2
x = E

(X −E(X))2
.
The variance function must satisfy a number of properties.
(1) If there exists c such that Pr(X = c) = 1, var(X) = 0.
(2) For any constants a and b, var(a + bX) = b2var(X).
(3) For any random variable X, var(X) = E(X2) −[E(X)]2.
(4) If
X1, . . . , Xn
are
independent
random
variables,
then
var (n
i=1 Xi) = n
i=1 var(Xi).
8.9. The Median and the Mode. Two other important functions that
help to summarize random variables are the median and the mode.
The Median: Let F be the cdf of X. A point m is the median of X
if and only if Pr(X ≤m) ≥.5 and Pr(X ≥m) ≤.5 or (for continuous
distributions) F(m) = .5.
The Mode: Let f be the pf or pdf of X. Then a number m is a mode
of X if and only if m ∈arg max f (x).
8.10. Covariance and Correlation. Given a joint distribution over
(X, Y), we are often interested in describing the relationship between
Xand Y. In particular, we want to know the extent to which they move
together or covary. To measure this relationship, the covariance is de-
ﬁned as
cov(X, Y) = σ xy = E

(X −μx) (Y −μy)

where μx = E(X) and μy = E(Y).
If X and Y move “together,” the covariance is the expectation of a
positive function and therefore positive. If Xand Y move “against one
another,” the covariance is the expectation of a negative function and
is therefore negative.
The covariance has a scaling problem. Consider the covariance of X
and Z = aY + b. It is straightforward to show that σ xz = aσ xy. Thus,

--- Sayfa 431 ---
8. Probability Theory
415
the covariance depends on how variables are scaled. The correlation
adjusts for this problem. Formally, the correlation between X and Y is
ρxy = σ xy
σ xσ y
.
Covariances and correlation coefﬁcients satisfy the following proper-
ties:
(1) For any random variables X and Y with ﬁnite variances, 1 ≥
ρxy ≥−1.
(2) For any random variables X and Y, σ xy = E(XY) −μxμy.
(3) Forindependentrandomvariables XandYwithﬁnitevariances,
σ xy = ρxy = 0.
(4) For random variable X with a ﬁnite variance and Y = aX + b,
ρxy = 1 if a > 0 and ρxy = −1 if a < 0.
(5) Foranyrandomvariables XandYwithﬁnitevariances,var(X +
Y) = σ 2
x + σ 2
y + 2σ xy.
(6) If X1, . . . , Xn are random variables with ﬁnite variances,
var(n
i=1 Xi) = n
i=1 σ 2
i + 2 n
i=1
n
j=i+1 σ i j.
8.11. Conditional Expectation. Often we are interested in computing
expectationsofrandomvariablesconditionedontheoutcomesofother
random variables. The conditional expectation function is deﬁned as
E(Y|x) =

y
ygy(y|x)
E(Y|x) =
∞

−∞
ygy(y/x)dy.
The conditional expectation is a function of Xand has a distribution de-
rived from the distribution of X. An important property of conditional
expectations is the law of iterated expectations:
E(E(Y|X)) = E(Y).

--- Sayfa 433 ---
Bibliography
Abreu, Dilip. 1988. “On the Theory of Inﬁnitely Repeated Games with Dis-
counting.” Econometrica 56: 383–396.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson. 2005. The Economic Origins of
Democracy and Dictatorship. New York: Oxford University Press.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1951. Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: Wiley.
Ashworth, Scott, and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita. 2006. “Monotone Compar-
ative Statics in Models of Politics.” American Journal of Political Science
50(1): 214–231.
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey Banks. 1988. “Elections, Coalitions, and Leg-
islative Outcomes.” American Political Science Review 82(2): 405–422.
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey Banks. 1996. “Information Aggregation, Ra-
tionality, and the Condorcet Jury Theorems.” American Political Science
Review 90: 34–45.
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey S. Banks. 1999. Positive Political Theory I:
Collective Preference. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey S. Banks. 2005. Positive Political Theory II:
Strategies and Structure. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Austen-Smith, David, and John R. Wright. 1992. “Competitive Lobbying for
a Legislator’s Vote.” Social Choice and Welfare 9: 229–257.
Austen-Smith, David, and John R. Wright. 1994. “Counteractive Lobbying.”
American Journal of Political Science 38: 25–44.
Axelrod, Robert. 1970. Conﬂict of Interest. Chicago: Marham.
Axelrod,Robert.1984.TheEvolutionofCooperation. NewYork:BasicBooks.
Banks, Jeffrey S. 1990. “Equilibrium Behavior in Bargaining Games.” Ameri-
can Journal of Political Science 34(3): 599–614.
Banks, Jeffrey A. 1991. Signaling Games in Political Science. Chur, Switzerland:
Harwood Academic.
Banks, Jeffrey, and Joel Sobel. 1987. “Equilibrium Selection in Signaling
Games.” Econometrica 55: 647–661.
Baron, David P. 1991. “Majoritarian Incentives, Pork Barrel Programs, and
Procedural Control.” American Journal of Political Science 35(1): 57–90.
Baron, David P., and John A. Ferejohn. 1989. “Bargaining in Legislatures.”
American Political Science Review 83(4): 1181–1206.
417

--- Sayfa 434 ---
418
Bibliography
Baron, David P., and Adam Meirowitz. 2006. “Fully-Revealing Equilibria of
Multiple-Sender Signaling and Screening Models.” Social Choice and Wel-
fare 26(3): 455–470.
Battaglini, Marco. 2002. “Multiple Referrals and Multidimensional Cheap
Talk.” Econometrica 70: 1379–1401.
Bellman, Richard. 1957. Dynamic Programming. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Bendor, Jonathan, and Adam Meirowitz. 2004. “Spatial Models of Delega-
tion.” American Political Science Review 98(2): 293–310.
Berge, Claude. 1997. Topological Spaces. Mineola, NY: Dover.
Black, Duncan. 1958. The Theory of Committees and Elections. London: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Border, Kim C. 1989. Fixed Point Theorems with Applications to Economics
and Game Theory. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brouwer, L. E. J. 1910. “ ¨Uber Abbildung von Mannigfaltigkeiten.” Mathema-
tische Annalen 71: 97–115.
Calvert, Randall L. 1985. “Robustness of the Multidimensional Voting Model:
Candidate Motivations, Uncertainty, and Convergence.” American Journal
of Political Science 29(1): 69–95.
Camerer, Colin F. 2003. Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic
Interactions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cameron, Charles M. 1999. Veto Bargaining: The Politics of Negative Power.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, Charles M., and Nolan McCarty. 2004. “Models of Vetoes and Veto
Bargaining.” Annual Review of Political Science 7: 409–435.
Chiang, Alpha. 2004. Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Clarke, Edward H. 1971. “Multi-Part Pricing of Public Goods.” Public Choice
2: 19–33.
Cho, In-Koo, and David Kreps, 1987. “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102: 179–221.
Condorcet, Marquis de. (1785/1976). “Essay on the Application of Mathe-
matics to the Theory of Decision-Making.” Reprinted in K.M. Baker (ed.),
Condorcet: Selected Writtings. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Cox, Gary, and Mathew D. McCubbins. 1994. Legislative Leviathan. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Debreu, Gerard. 1959. The Theory of Value. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
DeGroot, Morris, and Mark J. Schervish. 2001. Probability and Statistics.
Boston: Pearson Addison Wesley.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy New York: Harper
& Row.
Duggan, John, and Cesar Martinelli. 2001. “A Bayesian Model of Voting in
Juries.” Games and Economic Behavior 37: 259–294.
Echenique, Federico, 2002. “A Characterization of Strategic Complementari-
ties.” Working Papers 1142, California Institute of Technology, Division of
the Humanities and Social Sciences.

--- Sayfa 435 ---
Bibliography
419
Ellsberg, Daniel. 1961. “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 75: 643–669.
Epstein, David, and Sharyn O’Halloran. 1994. “Administrative Procedures,
Information, and Agency Discretion.” American Journal of Political Science
38(3): 697–722.
Epstein, David, and Peter Zemsky. 1995. “Money Talks: Deterring Quality
Challengers in Congressional Elections.” American Political Science Review
89(2): 295–308.
Fearon, James D. 1994. “Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of
International Disputes.” American Political Science Review 88(3): 577–592.
Fearon, James D. 1995. “Rationalist Explanations for War.” International
Organization, 49(3): 379–414.
Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 1996. “Explaining Interethnic Coop-
eration.” American Political Science Review 90(4): 715–735.
Fedderson, Timothy, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 1998. “Convicting the Inno-
cent: The Inferiority of Unanimous Jury Verdicts Under Strategic Voting.”
American Political Science Review 92(1): 23–35.
Ferejohn, John. 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public
Choice 50: 5–26.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Eric Maskin. 1986. “The Folk Theorem in Repeated
Games with Discounting or Incomplete Information.” Econometrica 54:
533–554.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1991. Game Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gailmard, Sean. 2005. “Menu Laws and Forbidden Actions: Choice of In-
struments to Constrain Bureaucratic Discretion.” Typescript, Northwestern
University.
Gaughan, Edward. 1993. Introduction to Analysis, 4th ed. Paciﬁc Grove, CA:
Brooks Cole.
Gibbard, Alan. 1973. “Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Result.”
Econometrica 41(4): 587–602.
Gill, Jeff. 2004. Essential Mathematics for Political and Social Research. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Gilligan, Thomas, and Keith Krehbiel. 1987. “Collective Decision-Making and
Standing Committees: An Informational Rationale for Restrictive Amend-
ment Procedures.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 3(2): 287–
335.
Gilligan, Thomas W., and Keith Krehbiel. 1989. “Asymmetric Information and
Legislative Rules with a Heterogenous Committee.” American Journal of
Political Science 33(2): 459–490.
Green, Edward, and Rob Porter. 1984. “Noncooperative Collusion Under Im-
perfect Price Information.” Econometrica 52(January): 87–100.
Groseclose, Timothy. 1996. “An Examination of the Market for Favors and
Votes in Congress.” Economic Inquiry 34: 320–340.
Groseclose, Timothy, and Nolan McCarty. 2000. “The Politics of Blame: Bar-
gaining Before an Audience.” American Journal of Political Science 45(1):
100–119.

--- Sayfa 436 ---
420
Bibliography
Groves, Theodore. 1973. “Incentives in Teams.” Econometrica 45: 617–631.
Harsanyi, John C. 1967–68. “Games with Incomplete Information Played by
Bayesian Players.” Management Science 14: 159–182, 320–334, 486–502.
Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition.” Economic Journal
39(153): 41–57.
Huber, John D., and Nolan McCarty. 2004. “Bureaucratic Capacity, Delega-
tion, and Political Reform.” American Political Science Review 98(3): 481–
494.
Kahn, Kim F., and Patrick J. Kenney. 1999. The Spectacle of U.S. Senate Cam-
paigns. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis
of Decision Under Risk.” Econometrica 47(2): 263–291.
Kakutani, Shizuo. 1941. “A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theo-
rem.” Duke Mathematical Journal 8: 457–459.
Knight,FrankH.1921.Risk,Uncertainty,andProﬁt.Boston:HoughtonMifﬂin.
Kolmogorov A. N., and S. V. Fomin. 1970. Introductory Real Analysis. New
York: Dover.
Krehbiel, Keith. 1991. Information and Legislative Organization. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Krehbiel, Keith. 2001. “Plausibility of Signals by Heterogeneous Committees.”
American Political Science Review 95: 453–458.
Krishna. Vijay. 2002. Auction Theory. San Diego: Academic Press.
Krishna, Vijay, and John Morgan. 1997. “An Analysis of the War of Attrition
and the All-Pay Auction.” Journal of Economic Theory 72: 343–362.
Krishna, Vijay, and John Morgan. 2001. “Asymmetric Information and Legisla-
tive Rules: Some Amendments.” American Political Science Review 95(2):
435–452.
Lasswell, Harold D. 1936. Politics: Who Gets What, When and How. New York:
McGraw Hill.
Matthews, Steven A. 1989. “Veto Threats: Rhetoric in a Bargaining Game.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 347–369.
McCarty, Nolan. 1997. “Presidential Reputation and the Veto.” Economics
and Politics 9: 1–27.
McCarty, Nolan. 2000a. “Proposal Rights, Veto Rights, and Political Bargain-
ing.” American Journal of Political Science 44(3): 506–522.
McCarty, Nolan. 2000b. “Presidential Pork: Executive Veto Power and Dis-
tributive Politics.” American Political Science Review 94(1): 117–129.
McCarty, Nolan 2002. “Vetoes in the Early Republic.” Working paper,
Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.
McCarty, Nolan. 2004. “The Appointments Dilemma.” American Journal of
Political Science 48(3): 413–428.
McKelvey, Richard D. 1976. “Intransitivities in Multidimensional Voting Mod-
els and Some Implications for Agenda Control.” Journal of Economic The-
ory 12: 472–482.
McKelvey, Richard D., and Richard Niemi. 1978. “Multistage Game Represen-
tation of Sophisticated Voting for Binary Procedures.” Journal of Economic
Theory 18: 1–22.

--- Sayfa 437 ---
Bibliography
421
Meirowitz, Adam. 2002. “Informative Voting and Condorcet Jury Theorems
with a Continuum of Types.” Social Choice and Welfare 19: 219–236.
Meirowitz, Adam. 2004a. “Polling Games and Information Revelation in the
Downsian Framework.” Games and Economic Behavior 51: 464–489.
Meirowitz, Adam. 2004b. “Costly Action in Electoral Contests.” Typescript,
Princeton University.
Mertens, Jean-Fran¸cois, and Shmuel Zamir. 1985. “Formulation of Bayesian
Analysis for Games with Incomplete Information.” International Journal of
Game Theory 14(1): 1–29.
Milgrom, Paul, Douglass North, and Barry Weingast. 1990. “The Role of Insti-
tutions in the Revival of Trade: The Medieval Law Merchant, Private Judges,
and the Champagne Fairs.” Economics and Politics 2: 1–23.
Morrow, James. 1994. Game Theory for Political Scientists. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Moulin, Herve. 1980.“On Strategy-Proofness and Single Peakedness.” Public
Choice 35: 437–455.
Muthoo, Abhinay. 1999. Bargaining Theory with Applications
New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Myerson, Roger. 1981. “Optimal Auction Design.” Mathematics of Operations
Research 6: 68–73.
Nash, John C. 1950a. “The Bargaining Problem.” Econometrica 18(2): 155–
162.
Nash, John F. 1950b. “Equilibrium Points in N-Person Games.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science 36: 48–49.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the
Theory of Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ordeshoo K, Peter C. 1986. Game Theory and Political Theory: An Introduc-
tion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Palfrey, Thomas R., and Howard Rosenthal. 1984. “Participation and the Pro-
vision of Discrete Public Goods: A Strategic Analysis.” Journal of Public
Economics 24(2): 171–193.
Palfrey, Thomas R., and Howard Rosenthal. 1988. “Private Incentives in Social
Dilemmas: The Effects of Incomplete Information and Altruism.” Journal
of Public Economics 35: 309–332.
Palfrey, Thomas, and Sanjay Srivastava. 1989. “Mechanism Design with Incom-
plete Information: A Solution to the Implementation Problem.” Journal of
Political Economy 97(3): 668–691.
Plott, Charles R. 1967. “A Notion of Equilibrium and Its Possibility Under
Majority Rule.” American Economic Review 57: 787–806.
Powell, Robert. 1999. In the Shadow of Power. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Primo, David. 2004. “Open vs. Closed Rules in Budget Legislation: A Result
and an Application.” Typescript, University of Rochester.
Riker, William. 1962. The Theory of Coalitions. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
sity Press.
Riley, John G., and William F. Samuelson. 1981. “Optimal Auctions.” American
Economic Review 71: 381–392.

--- Sayfa 438 ---
422
Bibliography
Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal. 1978. “Political Resource Allocation,
Controlled Agendas, and the Status Quo.” Public Choice 33(1): 27–44.
Royden. H. L. 1988. Real Analysis, 3d ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982. “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model.” Econo-
metrica 50: 97–110.
Sattherwaite, Mark. 1975. “Strategy-Proofness and Arrow’s Conditions: Ex-
istence and Correspondence Theorems for Voting Procedures and Social
Welfare Functions.” Journal of Economics Theory 10: 187–217.
Savage, Leonard. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Selten, Reinhard. 1965. “Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells
mit Nachfragentragheit.” Zeitschrift fur die gesamte Staatswissenschaft 12:
201–324.
Shepsle, Kenneth. 1979. “Institutional Arrangements and Equilibrium in Mul-
tidimensional Voting Models.” American Journal of Political Science 23(1):
27–59.
Shepsle, Kenneth A., and Barry R. Weingast. 1987. “The Institutional Founda-
tionsofCommitteePower.”AmericanPoliticalScienceReview81(1):85–104.
Simon, Carl P., and Lawrence Blume. 1994. Mathematics for Economists. New
York: W. W. Norton.
Spence, Michael. 1974. Market Signaling. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Taylor, Michael. 1976. Anarchy and Cooperation. London: Wiley.
Topkis, Donald. M. 1998. Supermodularity and Complementarity. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Von Neumann, John, and Oscar Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Weingast, Barry R. 1997. “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the
Rule of Law.” American Political Science Review 91(2): 245–263.
Weingast, Barry R., and William J. Marshall. 1988. “The Industrial Organiza-
tion of Congress; or, Why Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized as
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 96(1): 132–163.
Whittman, Donald. 1977. “Candidates with Policy Preferences: A Dynamic
Model.” Journal of Economic Theory 14: 180–189.
Zhou, Lin. 1994. “The Set of Nash Equilibria of a Supermodular Game Is a
Complete Lattice.” Games and Economic Behavior 7: 295–300.

--- Sayfa 439 ---
Index
Abreu, D., 263
accountability, electoral, 343–346,
359–361
Acemoglu, D., 193–194, 195, 196, 197
acyclicity, 10
addition and subtraction rule, 386
adverse selection, 343, 345
afﬁne transformations, 280
agency theory, 346–359
agenda control, and extensive form
games, 186–192
agent(s), and normal form games, 90.
See also agency theory
agent form, 186
Allais, M., 52
Allais paradox, 52–53, 54, 57
all-pay auction, 118n13, 166n10,
334–339
ally principle, 356–357
Arrow’s Theorem, 69–73, 76, 83, 84
ascending-price auctions, 329–330
Ashworth, S., 138n21
associative operations, and sets, 374
asymmetric information, 150–152
auctions: and Bayesian games, 166–168;
mechanism design and theory of,
328–333
Austen-Smith, D., 2, 3, 11, 156n4, 159,
198, 200, 232, 236
babbling equilibrium, 299–301
backward induction, 175–177, 178, 184,
188, 193, 199
Banks, J. S., 2, 3, 11, 156n4, 159, 198, 200,
244n11, 307, 308, 310nn13–14, 312
bargaining theory: and Baron-Ferejohn
model under open rule, 291–294; and
coalition formation, 198, 201; and
crisis bargaining, 307–318; and
incomplete information, 294–296;
and majority-rule bargaining under
closed rule, 286–291; and Nash
bargaining solution, 275–280; and
noncooperative bargaining, 281–286;
and political science, 275; and veto
power, 296–307
Baron, D. P., 4, 286, 363, 366
Baron-Ferejohn model, 291–294
Battaglini, M., 364, 365
Bayesian games: campaigns, contests, and
auctions as examples of, 166–168;
and deﬁnitions of terms, 152–154;
and incomplete or imperfect
information, 150–152, 161–164; and
jury voting, 156–161; and public
goods, 161–164; and trade
restrictions, 154–156; and
uncertainty about candidate
preferences, 164–165
Bayesian Nash equilibrium, 153–154,
168–169, 324. See also perfect
Bayesian equilibria
Bayes’ rule, 48–50, 407
Beer and Quiche game, 240
behavioral models, in economics, 51n7.
See also beliefs; learning
beliefs: and model of uncertainty, 27;
proﬁle of, 210; and sequential
rationality, 209
Bellman, R., 58, 60
Bellman equation, 59
Bellman’s principle, 271
Bendor, J., 45, 355, 357, 358
Bentham, J., 321n1
423

--- Sayfa 440 ---
424
Index
Berge, C., 125, 384
Berge’s Theorem of the Maximum, 125
Bernoulli utility function, 36, 37, 38, 42,
45, 90, 323
best response correspondence, to
strategies in normal form games,
96–98, 106, 108, 111, 116–117, 123
bijection, 375
binary relations, 8, 11, 15
binomial coefﬁcient, 142n24
binomial distribution, 409
bivariate distributions, 410–411
Black, D., 76
blame game veto, 298, 304–307
Blume, L., 384, 396
Bolzano intermediate value theorem, 381
Borda Count, 67, 72, 82
Border, K. C., 124, 125
boundedness, 13
branches, of game tree, 171
Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem, 124, 126,
136, 382, 384
Bueno de Mesquita, E., 138n21
bureaucracy: and agency theory, 346–354;
and resource allocations, 389–390
Bush, George W., 240–243
calculus, 384–403
Calvert, R. L., 4, 105
Cameron, C. M., 296n8, 298
campaign war chest game, 219–222
cardinal preferences and utility, 21, 37–38
Cauchy sequence, 377
Centipede game, 175–176, 239
certainty, and classical theory of choice, 7.
See also uncertainty
certainty equivalent, 41
chain rule, 387
cheap talk, 215, 299, 312
Chiang, A., 384, 396
Cho, I.-K., 240, 242, 244n11
choice functions, manipulation of, 82–84
choice theory: and continuous choice
spaces, 11–18, 20–21; deﬁnitions and
basic assumptions in, 6–7; and ﬁnite
sets of actions and outcomes, 7–11;
and spatial preferences, 21–25; and
utility representations on continuous
choice spaces, 20–21; and utility
theory, 18–20. See also choice
functions; collective choice; rational
choice; social choice theory;
uncertainty
Clarke, E. H., 322
closed rule, 228, 229–230, 286–291
closed set, 12–13, 14, 33n3, 379
cluster point, 381
coalition formation, 197–201
collective choice, and social choice
theory, 67, 68, 76–82
Colonel Blotto game, 100, 107, 108, 109,
110f
common knowledge, in games of
incomplete information, 152
commutative operations, on sets, 374
compactness, of sets, 14–15, 138,
379–380
comparative statics, 126–138
complements, of sets, 374
complete information, 7, 173, 177–184.
See also incomplete information
completely mixed strategy, 238
completeness, and weak preference
relation, 33
completeness axiom, 376
composite functions, derivatives of,
386–387
compound lottery, 30, 31, 32f, 33, 36, 37
concavity, 39, 390–391, 398–399
conditional distributions, 412–413
conditional expectation, 415
conditional probability, 48, 51, 211n3,
406
Condorcet, Marquis de, 76
Condorcet winners, 76, 77, 78
consistency. See weak consistency
constrained maximization, 399–403
constrained mechanism design, 342–361
constrained optimization, 121–126,
199n3
consumption, temporal patterns in, 62
contests, and Bayesian games, 166–168
continuation values, 283
continuity: of functions, 380–382; and
lotteries, 33
continuity axiom, 35
continuous bivariate density functions,
411
continuous choice spaces, 11–18, 20–21
continuous distributions, 409
continuous functions, 20, 125–126, 166
continuous strategy spaces, 116–117
contour sets, 381
contradiction, 371
contrapositive, 371
convex combination, 17–18
convexity, 17–18, 123, 380, 390–391,
398–399

--- Sayfa 441 ---
Index
425
convex utility function, 39–40
convex valued correspondence, 383
cooperation, and repeated games,
252–253, 256, 258–260, 263–269
core, and social choice theory, 76–78
core point, 81
corner solutions, 120
correlation, 414–415
correspondences, and functions, 374–375,
383–384
covariance, 414–415
crisis bargaining, and bargaining theory,
307–318
cross-partial derivatives, 393–394
cumulative distribution function, 410
cut point strategy, 160, 161n6, 162
Debreu, G., 20n10
deduction, and proofs, 370
deﬁnite integral, 392
DeGroot, M., 406
delegation, agency theory and models of,
346–350, 354–359
democracy: audience costs and crisis
bargaining, 318; extensive form
games and model of transition to,
193–197; and preference aggregation
rules, 69
De Morgan’s laws, 374
dependence, and conditional probability,
406
derivative, 384–388
descending-price auction, 330–331
dictators, and social choice theory, 69, 83,
84
differentiation and differentiability
condition, 81n5, 385–386, 391
direct mechanisms, 325, 341
disagreement value, 276
discounting and discount rates: and
bargaining theory, 284; and choice
under uncertainty, 60–62; and
repeated games, 256, 257n3, 262
discrete distributions, 408–409, 411
disjoint events, 48–49, 404–405
disjoint sets, 373
distributions, and random variables,
408–412
distributive operations, 374, 376
dominance, in normal form games,
113–114
dominance solvable mechanisms, 324,
325
dominated strategies, 94–95
Downs, A., 101
Downsian model, 101, 358
Duggan, J., 159n5
dynamic games: and complete but
imperfect information, 177–184; and
entry deterrence in elections,
219–226; examples of, 204–208; and
informational lobbying, 232–236;
and legislative organization,
227–232; and Nash equilibrium, 174;
and perfect Bayesian equilibria,
208–214, 236–248; and signaling
games, 214–219
Echenique, F., 138
economics: and behavioral models, 51n7;
and mechanism design, 321; and
preferences, 21. See also political
economy
efﬁciency, of bargaining, 279
efﬁciency condition, in mechanism
design, 327
elections: and accountability, 343–346,
359–361; and Bayesian games,
164–165, 166–168; comparative
statics and models of campaigns,
127–129; and contributions by
interest groups, 117–119; dynamic
games and entry deterrence in,
219–226; and mechanism design,
334–339, 343–346, 359–361; and
platform choices, 101–107; and
resource allocations by political
parties, 398, 400–401. See also
campaign war chest game; electoral
endorsement game
electoral endorsement game, 236–238
Ellsburg, D., 52
Ellsburg Paradox, 52
enforcement, and dynamic games,
177–178
entry deterrence games, 219–226, 244
envelope theorem, 402, 403
Epstein, D., 219, 220n6, 346, 350, 351,
354, 355
equality, and set relations, 372
equality constraints, on maximization,
399–401
equilibrium effects, and comparative
statics, 130
escalation games, 194t, 206f, 207f,
312–318
Euclidean geometry, 369
Euclidean preferences, 45–46, 80

--- Sayfa 442 ---
426
Index
Euclidean spaces, subsets of, 14
events, and probability theory, 404
existential statement, 370
exogenous utility streams, 59
expectation, of random variable,
413–414
expected utility, 33, 51–57
expected utility functions, 36
expected value, 41
extensive form games: and agenda
control, 186–192; and backward
induction, 175–177; and coalition
formation, 197–201; deﬁnition of,
171; and ﬁnite games, 239; and
information set, 210; and model of
transition to democracy, 193–197;
and perfect Bayesian equilibria,
208–210; and power transitions,
192–193; and revolution game,
171–174; and single-deviation
principle, 184–185; subgame
perfection and perfect equilibrium,
185–186
externality game, 119–121
extrema, 381–382
faculty search, as example of social
choice theory, 66–67
fair bet, 38–39
favor buying, models of, 328
Fearon, J. D., 263, 264, 269, 311, 312, 313,
314, 318
feasibility constraints, on maximization,
399
Fedderson, T., 159, 161
Ferejohn, J., 4, 286, 343, 359
ﬁnite case, and choice under uncertainty,
27–38
ﬁnite-dimensional Euclidean space,
126
ﬁnite games, 115–116, 184–185, 237–239
ﬁnite trigger strategies, 271
ﬁrst-order condition (FOC), 116–117
ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance, 44–45,
46
ﬁrst-price auction, 166n10, 330–331
ﬁxed point and ﬁxed point theorem,
123, 124, 126, 133, 136, 137f,
381–384
folk theorem, 260–263
Fomin, S. V., 12n5
free-riders and free-riding, 120–121, 141,
357–358
free trade game, 252–253, 254t, 269–272
Fudenberg, D., 213n4, 239, 263
fully revealing strategies, 216
functions, 372–376, 380–382
Gailmard, S., 347
game tree, 171, 172
Gaughan, E., 12n5, 15n7
Gibbard, A., 82
Gibbard-Sattherwaite Theorem, 82–84,
320
Gill, J., 384
Gilligan, T., 227, 228, 231, 346, 362, 364
global maximum, 145, 353, 388, 389, 399
global minimum, 388, 389, 399
gradient vector, 80
Green, E., 270n5, 271
grim trigger equilibrium, 253, 255, 260,
270, 271
Groseclose, T., 304
Groves, T., 322
Groves-Clarke mechanism, 323, 324
Harsanyi, J. C., 151
Harsanyi maneuver, 204
Heine-Borel theorem, 15n6
hemicontinuous correspondences, 123,
125
Hessian matrix, 394, 397, 398
higher-order derivatives, 393–394
history, of play, 171, 173, 211n2
horizon, of crisis game, 314, 315, 316
Hotelling model, of political competition,
101–107, 164
Huber, J. D., 350, 351nn9–10, 352, 353,
354
Hussein, Saddam, 240–243
hyperbolic discounting, 60–62
ideal point, 22
identity matrix, 396
ideological candidates, 103–107
imperfect information, 151–152, 173,
177–184. See also incomplete
information
implementation theory, 320
implicit function theorem, 128–129,
394–396
incentive compatibility, 222, 241, 308–309,
310, 339–342, 359
incomplete information, 151–152,
161–164, 294–296, 301–304. See also
complete information; imperfect
information
increasing differences, 134

--- Sayfa 443 ---
Index
427
indeﬁnite integral, 391
independence axiom, 33, 34–35, 53
independence of irrelevant alternatives
(IIA), 69–70, 72, 74–75, 84, 280
independent random variables, 412
indifference and indifference condition,
8, 17, 142
individual rationality, 261, 308–309,
339–342
induction, 371
inequality constraints, on maximization,
401–402
inﬁnite horizon games, 257n3
inﬁnite sets, 372
information: and explanations for war,
312; and types of lobbying, 232–236.
See also asymmetric information;
complete information; imperfect
information; incomplete
information; informative equilibrium
information set, 210
informative equilibrium, 301
initial node, 173n1
injectivity, of functions, 375
institutional design, 231–232
integer, 372
integral calculus, 391–392
interest groups, 117–119, 232–236
interethnic cooperation, 263–269
intermediate punishment strategies,
258–260
intermediate value theorem, 161, 381
international aid and reform game, 245f,
247f
international externalities, and normal
form games, 119–121
intersections, of sets, 373–374
intuitive criterion, 240–248
inverse multiplicative, 376
irrational numbers, 376
iterated elimination, and Nash
equilibrium, 100
Jacobian matrix, 130, 395
jury voting, and Bayesian games,
156–161
Kahn, K. F., 131–133, 138
Kahneman, D., 52, 53–57
Kakutani, S., 384
Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem, 124, 126,
133, 136
Kenney, P. J., 131–133, 138
Knight, F., 51
Kolmogorov, A. N., 12n5
Krehbiel, K., 15n8, 227, 228, 231, 346,
362, 364
Kreps, D., 240, 242, 244n11
Krishna, V., 330, 335, 364
Kuhn-Tucker programming, 121, 401
Lagrange multipliers, 121
Lagrangian theorem, 399–400, 401
Laitin, D. D., 263, 264, 269
large numbers, law of, 164n8
last-period problem, and repeated games,
253
lattice, and monotone comparative
statics, 134
learning: and dynamic games of
incomplete information, 208; and
uncertainty in choice theory, 46–51;
and veto bargaining, 298–304
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm,
392
Leibnitz’s rule, 348, 392
liminf, 378
limits, of real sequences, 377
limsup, 378
linear preferences, 23f
lobbying, and interest group politics,
232–236
local incentive compatibility condition,
341
local maximum, 106, 388, 389, 397
local minimum, 388–389, 397, 398
lotteries, and choices under uncertainty,
29–38, 53–55
low-dimension implicit function theorem,
395
lower contour set, 15–16, 381
lower hemicontinuous correspondence,
383
lying, in signaling games, 215
majority rule: and bargaining, 286–291;
and constrained mechanism design,
349–350
majority-voting rule, 73, 74–76, 77, 78, 82,
96, 97, 99
manipulation, of choice functions,
82–84
marginal cost, 128, 352–353
marginal distribution, 412
marginal productivity, 128
Markov process, 59
Martinelli, C., 159n5
Maskin, E., 263

--- Sayfa 444 ---
428
Index
mathematics: and calculus, 384–403; and
continuity of functions, 380–382; and
correspondences, 383–384; and
graduate study in political science, 2;
points and sets, 378–380; and
probability theory, 404–415; and real
number system, 376–378; review of,
4–5, 369–415; sets and functions,
372–376; statements and proofs,
370–372
matrix: and representation of normal
form games, 91–92, 130; variables in
calculus and notation, 392–399
Matthews, S. A., 299, 300
maximal set, 8–9, 68, 76
maximum: of functions, 388–390;
theorem of, 125, 384
McCarty, N., 291, 294n6, 296, 303, 304,
350, 351nn9–10, 352, 353, 354
McCoy, J., 87
McKelvey, R. D., 79, 180n2
McKelvey’s Theorem, 79–82
mean-preserving spread, 41
mean-variance property, of quadratic
preferences, 228n8
mechanism design: and adverse selection,
343, 345; and auction theory,
328–333; constrained forms of,
342–361; deﬁnition of, 320; economic
applications of, 321; electoral
contests and all-pay auctions,
334–339; example of, 320, 321–323;
incentive compatibility and
individual rationality, 339–342; and
polling, 326–328; problem of,
323–326; and signaling games,
361–366
median, 327, 414
median voter, 76, 104, 105, 164, 187–188,
195, 305
Meirowitz, A., 45, 159n5, 161, 328, 355,
357, 358, 363, 364, 366
Mertens, J.-F., 205n1
message strategies, 216–217
metric spaces, 378
Milgrom, P., 258
minimum, of functions, 388–390
mixed strategies, 108–114, 126, 140–145,
169
mode, 414
modiﬁed tit-for-tat strategy, 258
monitoring problems, 342
monotone comparative statics,
133–138
monotone likelihood ratio, 159
moral hazard, 343, 359
Morgan, J., 335, 364
Morrow, J., 2
Moulin, H., 327, 328
multivariate integrals, 403
Muthoo, A., 276, 280
Nash, J., 4, 89, 96, 275
Nash bargaining solution, 275–280
Nash equilibrium: and dynamic games,
174; and normal form games, 89,
96–101, 102–103, 106, 107–113,
115–117, 120, 123–126, 138–140; and
repeated games, 251–252. See also
Bayesian Nash equilibrium
Nash product, 277
Nash’s axioms, 279–280
naval deployment game, 208–210
Niemi, R., 180n2
nodes, 171, 173
noncomparability problem, 9
noncooperative bargaining, 281–286
nondictatorial preference aggregation
rule, 69, 70
nonsatiable preferences, 22. See also
satiable preferences
norm, 13
normal form games: and comparative
statics, 126–138; and constrained
optimization, 121–126; dominance
and mixed strategies in, 113–114; and
Hotelling model of political
competition, 101–107; and interest
group contributions, 117–119; and
international externalities, 119–121;
and modeling of political
phenomena, 89–93; and Nash
equilibria, 107–113, 115–117,
123–126, 138–140; Prisoner’s
Dilemma and Terrorist Hunt as
examples of, 87–89; and private
provision of public goods, 140–145;
solutions to, 93–101. See also
Bayesian games
North, D., 258
null event, 405
null set, 373
off-the-path beliefs, 242, 243
O’Halloran, S., 346, 350, 351, 354, 355
Olson, M., 140, 141
open cover, 14–15
open rule, 228–229, 291–294

--- Sayfa 445 ---
Index
429
open set, 12–13, 14, 379
optimality, principle of, 58, 60
optimization: mathematical conditions
for solution of, 381–382; and matrix
notation, 396–398; normal form
games and constrained, 121–126
Ordeshook, P. C., 2, 3
ordinal preferences, 21
outcome, and probability theory, 404
outside option, 276
override pivots, 190
pairing, and Plott conditions, 80
pairwise voting, 66–67, 68, 75
Palfrey, T. R., 4, 140, 145n26, 326
Palfrey-Rosenthal game, 141, 144f
Pareto, Vilfredo, 69
Pareto efﬁciency, 69, 280
partial derivatives, 393–394
partially separating equilibrium, 219n5
partial pooling, 219n5, 225–226
partition, of sample space, 407
payoffs: and model of uncertainty, 27,
57–60; and normal form games, 90
perfect Bayesian equilibria (PBE),
208–214, 236–248, 362–366
perfect equilibrium, 140, 185–186
Pesendorfer, W., 159, 161
player types, in Bayesian games, 152
Plott conditions, 78, 80–82
plurality rule, 66–67
points, 378–380
political economy, and taxation policy,
194–195. See also economics
polling, and mechanism design, 326–328
pollution, and international externalities,
119–121
pooling equilibrium, 218–219, 222–225,
240–242
Porter, R., 270n5, 271
Powell, R., 192
power transitions, 192–193
preference(s): assumptions about in
classical theory of choice, 7; and
binary relations, 8; convexity and
individual, 380; and economics, 21;
and uncertainty in Bayesian game,
164–165. See also cardinal
preferences and utility; Euclidean
preferences; linear preferences;
quadratic preferences; relative
preferences; risk preferences;
satiable preferences; single-peaked
preferences; spatial preferences;
symmetric preferences; time
preferences
preference aggregation rules, 68–76, 79
preferred set, 15n8
principal-agent models, 342, 343, 346–350
Prisoner’s Dilemma: and Bayesian
games, 155; and dynamic games, 178;
and normal form games, 87–88, 91,
93, 94, 97, 98, 99, 119; and repeated
games, 252–253, 255, 263
private provision, of public goods,
140–145
probability theory, 28, 404–415
product(s), of sets, 374
product rule, 386
proofs, 370–372
proposal power, 288, 289–291
prospect theory, 53–57
public goods, 140–145, 161–164
pure strategies, and normal form games,
90, 94, 107, 115–117
quadratic preferences, 23f, 228n8
quasi-concave function, 107–108, 382
quasi transivity, 9–10
quotient rule, 386
randomization, in games, 152–153
random recognition rule, 286
random variables, 152, 408–414
rational choice, 6–11
rationality, assumption of, 6. See also
individual rationality; rational
choice; sequential rationality
rational number, 372
real number system, 376–378
real value functions, 380
reﬂexivity, and binary relations, 9
regulatory enforcement game, 177–178
relative preferences, 37
repeated games: deﬁnition of, 251; and
folk theorem, 260–263; and grim
trigger equilibrium, 253, 255; and
interethnic cooperation, 263–269;
and intermediate punishment
strategies, 258–260; Nash equilibria
in, 251–252; and Prisoner’s Dilemma,
252–253; and tit-for-tat strategies,
256–258; and trade wars, 269–272
reputation, and veto bargaining, 298–304
resolve, and crisis bargaining, 313–314,
318
resource allocations: in bureaucracies,
389–390; in political parties, 398–399

--- Sayfa 446 ---
430
Index
revelation principle, 325, 326, 329, 339
revenue equivalence principle, 331–333
revolution: and dynamic games of
incomplete information, 204–208;
and extensive form games, 171–174,
195–196
risk, and expected utility theory, 51–52
risk acceptance, 40–44
risk aversion, 40–44, 45–46, 278–280
risk preferences, 38–46
Robinson, J., 193–194, 195, 196, 197
Romer, T., 186
Romer-Rosenthal model, 186–188, 189,
200
Rosenthal, H., 4, 140, 145n26, 186
Rubinstein, A., 4, 281
rule of law game, 183f
saddle point, 388, 389f
sample space, 404, 407
satiable preferences, 22, 38, 44–45
Sattherwaite, M., 82
Savage, L., 51–52
Schervish, M. J., 406
Schiff, A., 87
screening devices, elections as, 337
second-order condition (SOC), 116–117
second-order stochastic dominance, 44,
46
second-price auction, 329–330
Selten, R., 140, 240
separating equilibrium, 216–217, 219,
221–222
separating hyperplane, 24–25
sequence, of real numbers, 377
sequential bargaining, 176–177
sequential equilibrium, 236–240
sequential rationality, 174, 209, 210–211
sequential veto bargaining, 301–304
sequential voting, 180–181
sets, 372–376, 378–380
signaling and signaling games: and
dynamic games of incomplete
information, 208, 214–219; and
mechanism design, 361–366; and
model of political reform, 244–248;
veto bargaining and models of, 298
Simon, C. P., 384, 396
simple lotteries, 30, 31
simplex, 29, 30f
sincere strategy, in voting, 157, 159
single-deviation principle, 184–185, 257
single-peaked preferences, 22–24, 73, 74f,
75, 77, 187
slackness conditions, 122
Sobel, J., 244n11
social choice theory: and collective
choice, 67, 68, 76–82; and convexity
of individual preferences, 380;
example of, 66–67; and manipulation
of choice functions, 82–84; and
preference aggregation rules,
68–76
social welfare function, 336
sophisticated equivalents, 180–181
spatial preferences, 21–25
Spence, M., 244
Srivastava, S., 326
standing committees, and legislative
organization, 227–232
statements, in mathematics, 370–372
stationary equilibria, 287
stationary plan, 60
stochastic dominance, 40–44
strategic complements, 131–133
strategy proﬁles, 90, 93, 97–98
strategy space, 116–117
strict convexity, 18
strict dominance, 94
strict monotone likelihood ratio (SMLR),
159, 161
strict preferences, 8
subgame(s), 179–180, 257
subgame perfection, 185–186
subgame perfect Nash equilibria (SPNE),
180–184, 281–282
subjective probability, 51–52
subsequence, 377
subsets, 14, 373
substitution axiom, 34n5
supermajority rule, 288
supermodular games, 131, 133–138
surjectivity, of functions, 375
symmetric equilibrium, 167
symmetric preferences, 22–24
symmetry, and Pareto axiom, 280
take-it-or-leave-it offer, 295
Tarsky’s ﬁxed point theorem, 136,
137f
terminal nodes, 172
Terrorist Hunt game: and Bayesian
games, 150–152, 153, 154; and
normal form games, 88–89, 91–93,
96, 97, 98–99, 111, 112–113
Texas Hold’em, 168n11
Theorem of the Maximum, 125, 381
thick rationality, 6

--- Sayfa 447 ---
Index
431
thin rationality, 6
time consistency problem, 60–61
time preferences, and choice under
uncertainty, 57–62
Tirole, J., 213n4, 239
tit-for-tat strategies, 256–258
top cycle set, 78–79, 81–82
Topkis, D. M., 134n19, 138n21
trade restrictions, and Bayesian games,
154–156
trade wars, model of, 269–272
transitivity: and binary relations, 9–10;
and preference aggregation rule, 70,
75–76; and weak preference
relations, 33
transpose, of matrix, 393
trees, and visualization of lotteries, 29,
31f, 34
truthful strategy, 216, 365
Tversky, A., 52, 53–57
two-period free trade game, 254t
two-player ﬁnite games, 115–116
unanimity rule, 72
uncertainty, and choice theory: about
candidate preferences in Bayesian
game, 164–165; and expected utility
theory, 51–57; and ﬁnite case, 27–38;
and ideological candidates, 105–107;
key elements to model of, 27; and
learning, 46–51; and normal form
games, 92, 93t; and risk preferences,
38–46; and time preferences, 57–62.
See also certainty
uniform distribution on an interval, 409
uniform distribution over integers, 408
unions, of sets, 373
universal divinity, 244
universal set, 373
universal statement, 370
upper contour set, 15–16, 381
upper hemicontinuity, 123, 125, 383, 384
upper semicontinuity, 135–136, 138
utility, deﬁnition of, 19. See also cardinal
preferences and utility; exogenous
utility streams; expected utility;
utility representations; utility theory
utility functions, 19. See also Bernoulli
utility function; convex utility
function; expected utility functions;
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility
functions
utility representations, on continuous
choice spaces, 20–21
utility theory, 18–20
variance: of lottery, 41; of random
variable, 414
vector, deﬁnition of, 29
veto bargaining, 188–189, 190–192, 291,
296–307
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility
functions, 27, 36–37, 90
vote maximizing candidates, in models of
electoral competition, 103
war: and crisis bargaining, 309, 310,
311–318; and extensive form games,
192–193. See also trade wars
war chest, and elections, 219
weak consistency, of beliefs, 211–213, 217,
238
weak dominance, 95–96
weak ordering, 10–11, 173n1
weak Pareto criterion, 71, 74–75, 83, 84
weak preferences, 8
Weierstrass Theorem, 21
Weingast, B., 181–183, 258
Whittman, D., 4, 105
Wright, J. R., 232, 236
Zamir, S., 205n1
Zemsky, P., 219, 220n6
Zhou, L., 136