--- Sayfa 4 ---
PUPPETMASTERS
The political use of
terrorism in Italy
PHILIP WILLAN
Authors Choice Press
San Jose New York Lincoln Shanghai

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Puppetmasters
The Political Use of Terrorism in Italy
All Rights Reserved © 1991, 2002 by Phillip Willan
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, graphic, electronic, or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, taping, or by any
information storage or retrieval system, without the
permission in writing from the publisher.
Authors Choice Press
an imprint of iUniverse, Inc.
For information address:
iUniverse, Inc.
5220 S. 16th St., Suite 200
Lincoln, NE 68512
www.iuniverse.com
Originally published by Constable and Company Ltd
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
ISBN: 0-595-24697-4
ISBN: 978-1-4697-1084-6 (ebook)

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Contents
INTRODUCTION
[1]
IN DEFENCE OF DEMOCRACY
[2]
THE ORIGINS OF TERROR
[3]
THE MASONIC CONSPIRACY
[4]
GELLI AND AMERICA
[5]
MINO PECORELLI
[6]
THE COUP SEASON
[7]
COVERING UP FOR THE BOMBERS
[8]
OPERATION GLADIO
[9]
STILL COVERING UP
[10]
MANIPULATING THE LEFT
[11]
THE MORO KIDNAP
[12]
THE PECORELLI VERSION
[13]
THE MAGLIANA MESSAGES

--- Sayfa 7 ---
[14]
THE MORO DOCUMENTS
[15]
MR BROWN’S STORY
[16]
MORE VALUED THAN MORO?
[17]
TIME FOR GLASNOST IN THE WEST
POSTSCRIPT
GLOSSARY

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Treason doth never prosper: what’s the reason?
For if it prosper, none dare call it treason.
Sir John Harington, 1561-1612

--- Sayfa 9 ---
INTRODUCTION
The manipulation of Italian terrorism is a complex and highly
controversial subject. Many of the most interesting insights come from
highly suspect sources: terrorists, common criminals and members of the
secret services, who, if they are not licensed to kill, are certainly expected
to lie in the interests of the state. Nobody’s word, therefore, should be taken
on trust. Wherever possible, I have identified the sources of my information
and I believe that the many fragments go to make up a plausible overall
pattern.
Italian magistrates constitute one of the most reliable sources. Many of
them are highly intelligent, courageous and independent-minded people,
who have generated hundreds of thousands of pages of written reports to
describe crimes of politically motivated violence in their country. Much of
what is known about Italian terrorism today is the result of their skill in
threading a path through the innumerable traps and obstacles that have been
laid in their way. Until 1989, a judicial investigation had to be initiated by a
public prosecutor. He would then work in tandem with an examining
magistrate. At the end of the investigation, the prosecutor submitted his
written recommendations to the examining magistrate, who responded with
a written report of his own, and the prosecutor then took the case forward to
the actual trial. The result of this somewhat laborious process is a vast fund
of documentary evidence about Italian crime. Following a judicial reform
introduced in October 1989, the role of the examining magistrate has been
greatly reduced and the length of the pre-trial investigation has also been
curtailed.
Paradoxically, while some practitioners of Anglo-Saxon law have been
impressed by Italy’s success in defeating terrorism and have been
advocating a move towards the Italian legal system, the Italians have
decided to change theirs to something closer to the British or American
model. As we shall see, the efficacy of the Italian judicial system was by no
means the only reason for the country’s ultimate success in eradicating
domestic terrorism.
The Italian secret service played a crucial role in both the rise and the
fall of Italian terrorism. The military intelligence service has been through a
bewildering series of name changes as a result of the political scandals and

--- Sayfa 10 ---
conspiracies in which it has been involved, each new name supposedly
indicating that the service has been changed and reformed. The Servizio
Informazioni Militari (Military Information Service) or SIM was
established in 1925 and disbanded in 1945 at the end of the Second World
War. Only in 1949 did the Allies allow the service to be re-established as
SIFAR (Servizio Informazioni Forze Armate-Armed Forces Information
Service). SIFAR was succeeded, from 1965 to 1977, by SID (Servizio
Informazioni Difesa-Defence Information Service). In 1977 the current
system was established, with SISMI (Servizio per le Informazioni e la
Sicurezza Militare-Military Information and Security Service) taking over
from SID and a new domestic intelligence service, SISDE (Servizio per le
Informazioni e la Sicurezza Democratica-Democratic Information and
Security Service), being created. The two services report to the Defence
Minister and the Interior Minister respectively, as well as to a coordinating
committee presided over by the Prime Minister. Despite these many
reincarnations, the creature does not seem to have changed its spots and has
frequently been accused of collusion with terrorism.
Another useful source of information comes from the obscure hints
and blackmailing messages uttered by some of the protagonists in the story.
These do not necessarily provide reliable guidance but they can cast an
interesting light on events in the absence of more concrete evidence, and
they are an established feature of Italian political life.
For the purposes of this book I have accepted the conclusions of the
Parliamentary P2 Commission that the lodge membership lists found in the
possession of Licio Gelli are an accurate guide to the lodge’s adherents.
Many of the people named in the lists disagree.
This book is dedicated to those who helped and to those who wouldn’t,
whatever their reasons.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
[1]
IN DEFENCE OF DEMOCRACY
AT 10.25 a.m. on 2 August 1980, a powerful bomb exploded in the
second-class waiting room at Bologna railway station. It was the height of
the summer holiday season and the station was crowded with tourists and
Italians heading for their holidays by the sea. Eighty-five people were killed
and 200 injured in one of the worst terrorist atrocities seen in Europe since
the war. Seven of the victims were children under the age of fifteen, one of
them a girl of three. Ten foreigners were killed in the blast, including a
young English couple and a twenty-year-old student from Japan, the victims
of a conflict they can have known nothing about. More than a decade later
very little is known for certain about the bombing. What is clear, however,
is that the Italian secret services worked hard to prevent judicial
investigators from uncovering the truth. Partly for this reason, the process
of justice has followed a pattern set in previous terrorist bombings, with
initial convictions being overturned on appeal and mystery ultimately
shrouding the identity of the bombers.
If the genesis of the Bologna bombing remains obscure, the political
background to the earlier bombings has become increasingly plain. Eight
indiscriminate bomb attacks on the Italian public, from the bombing of a
bank in Milan on 12 December 1969 to the blowing up of a train near
Florence on 23 December 1984, cost 150 lives and injured 818 people over
a fifteen-year period. Magistrates now attribute much of that violence to a
strategy of terrorism fostered by Italian and foreign secret services and
designed to prevent the Communist Party from achieving power. The
Bologna station bombing has also been attributed to that strategy, following
a seven-year judicial investigation. On 11 July 1988, after a trial lasting
more than a year, a Bologna assize court convicted four right-wing
extremists of planting the bomb and sentenced them to life imprisonment.
But two years later, on 18 July 1990, an appeal court in the same city
overturned that verdict. There was widespread consternation as yet another
terrorist outrage went unpunished. Amid all the uncertainty, alarming new
hypotheses have begun to emerge as to the motivation of the Bologna
bombing.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
A constant feature of right-wing bombings has been the deliberate
muddying of the waters by representatives of the Italian secret services. On
occasion, the secret services have had prior knowledge of terrorist attacks
but have done nothing to prevent them; they have protected from
prosecution people suspected of involvement in terrorism; and they have
laid false trails for investigating magistrates. Repeated scandals have
prompted repeated attempts at reform and the removal of so-called
‘deviant’ elements, but the secret services have remained true to their
central objective, even when this has involved complicity with terrorists.
The result has been a confusing series of name changes but little real
change. Since the war, the acronym by which the military intelligence
service is known has changed three times, from SIFAR, to SID, to SISMI.
According to Felice Casson, an examining magistrate from Venice who has
probably done more than any other to lay bare the roots of right-wing
terrorism, the reforms have made little impact on the secret services. ‘The
situation has not changed at all. They did not collaborate before and they
don’t collaborate now. The law has changed, but not the men and the
structures.’1
One possible explanation for why the secret services should act as
guardians of the terrorists is offered by a philosophy professor from
Brescia, Emanuele Severino. In an article in the Corriere della Sera
newspaper (16 January 1985), he drew attention to the fact that terrorist
violence in Italy has been administered in small doses, with left-wing
terrorists taking a rest while the right-wing are active and vice versa. He
also pointed out that while the bombers were capable of destroying ten
trains in one night, in practice they would only blow up one at a time and
that once every few years. ‘Terrorism does not unleash a destructive power
capable of overthrowing our social system, but enough to maintain it under
constant pressure,’ he wrote. Given that terror increases people’s desire for
security at the expense of their desire for change, Severino observed that the
ideology that has suffered the most from the consequences of terrorism in
Italy is that of the Communist Party, ‘because it proposes the renewal of
society in the most radical and unpredictable way’. This, in a nutshell, is the
‘strategy of tension’: destabilizing in order to stabilize. It has been applied
in Italy with considerable success, bolstering the mainly centre-right
governments that have ruled the country since the war whenever their
electoral support showed signs of faltering.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
In the two decades since 1969, Italy has suffered the most protracted
and traumatic terrorist onslaught of any developed Western country, with
the exception of Britain and Spain. By 1987, 356 people had been killed
and more than 1,000 wounded as a result of Italy’s domestic political
terrorism. This in a country bordering on communist Yugoslavia, with a
strategic position dominating the central Mediterranean, and containing the
largest Communist Party in Western Europe. In June 1976 that party came
close to taking over from the Christian Democrat Party as the largest party
in the country and thus bidding for the right to form a government. A period
of violent activity by left-wing terrorist groups, which began in 1974 and
climaxed in 1978, helped to create a climate of fear in which wavering
voters were unlikely to be tempted by the adventure of change, and ensured
that the unthinkable did not happen.
The violence in Italy pales into insignificance in comparison with the
sectarian slaughter seen in Northern Ireland. In the equivalent period
between 1969 and 1987, 2,618 people were killed and more than 33,000
injured in the disjointed British province. Though the Irish Republican
Army (IRA) may have succeeded in laying siege to Ulster society, its
violence, perhaps surprisingly, has had relatively little impact on politics
and society in mainland Britain.
In his maverick book, Of Terrorism and of the State , Gianfranco
Sanguinetti divided all terrorist actions into two categories: offensive and
defensive. He described Irish and Palestinian terrorism as offensive and
Italian terrorism as defensive. ‘The desperate and the deluded resort to
offensive terrorism; on the other hand it is always and only states who
resort to defensive terrorism, either because they are in a deep social crisis,
like the Italian state, or because they fear one, like the German state,’ he
wrote. In his rare, privately published book, which is written in a frequently
truculent style, Sanguinetti suggested it was easy for secret services to take
control of genuine ‘offensive’ terrorist groups and manipulate them to their
own advantage. ‘All secret terrorist groups are organized and run by a
hierarchy which is kept secret even from their own members, and which
reflects the division of labour typical of this kind of social organization:
decisions are taken at the top and carried out by the bottom. Ideology and
military discipline protect the true leaders from any risk and the base from
any suspicion.’2

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Those with an interest in seeing that the Communist Party did not
come to power were not only the secret services, the armed forces, and the
conservative politicians who controlled them, but also the United States,
Italy’s most powerful NATO partner. The US government was
understandably unenthusiastic about communist electoral advances in Italy
in the mid-1970s, and since Italy’s defeat in the Second World War
American intelligence agencies have exercised a strong and abiding
influence over their Italian counterparts. A parliamentary commission
investigating illegal spying on people in public life by the Italian secret
services found that much of this activity was carried out on behalf of the
United States and the Vatican. The minority report of the commission,
submitted by the Socialist Party (PSI), described the situation as ‘contrary
to the Constitution, an open violation of national sovereignty and of the
principle of the liberty and equality of citizens, and a constant threat to the
very democratic equilibrium of our country.’3
Italy’s strategic importance to the Western Alliance should not be
underestimated. Until 1988 the country did not possess an aircraft carrier.
This was not just because of its studiedly unaggressive foreign policy stance
but because its geographic position, jutting into the central Mediterranean,
enables it to project air power throughout the Mediterranean basin. On 5
June 1967, the decision was made to base the NATO Mediterranean naval
command in Naples. At about the same time the NATO Defence College
was moved from Paris to Rome and the US Sixth Fleet from Villefranche to
Gaeta following the decision by General Charles de Gaulle on 7 March of
the previous year to withdraw his country from full membership of the
Atlantic Alliance. The importance of Italian naval bases was further
increased after Dom Mintoff came to power in Malta, in June 1971, and
promptly closed Maltese ports to Western warships as part of his country’s
new policy of non-alignment. With a total of 10,000 personnel in nine
military bases, including a submarine base in Sardinia and air bases
scattered throughout the Italian peninsula, it is not surprising that the US
government were not keen to see the communists growing in electoral
strength and knocking on the door of government.
The growth in the electoral support for the Italian Communist Party
(PCI) was accompanied by a progressive distancing of the party from
Moscow, as it spearheaded the development of Eurocommunism and sought
a middle way between Soviet-style Marxism-Leninism and Western free-

--- Sayfa 15 ---
market capitalism. In elections for the Chamber of Deputies, the PCI’s share
of the vote moved from 26.9 per cent in 1968, to 27.2 per cent in 1972, to
34.4 per cent in 1976, tailing off in 1979 to 30.4 per cent. Over the same
period, the Christian Democrat Party’s (DC’s) share of the vote remained
stable at around 39 per cent, making it the largest party in the country,
followed by the communists in second place and then by the PSI with under
10 per cent. The tendency of the PCI to perform better at regional elections,
where control over the national government was not at stake, made this
trend seem all the more alarming to those who were ideologically
committed to keeping the PCI out of government. The parabola of electoral
support for the PCI was shadowed and paralleled by the amount of terrorist
activity in the country. There were 398 terrorist attacks in 1969, the figure
rising to 595 in 1972, and to 1,353 in 1976· The peak period for terrorist
activity came in the following three years: 1,926 attacks in 1977, 2,379 in
1978, 2,513 in 1979. After 1980, with 1,502 attacks, the figure began to
decline steadily, to 634 in 1981, 347 in 1982, with a return to double figures
in 1984. It is hard to believe that the increase in the communist vote and the
matching increase in terrorist violence were pure coincidence.
The PCI was founded in 1921. Its first major step away from its
revolutionary roots came in March 1944, when party secretary Palmiro
Togliatti told a meeting in Salerno that the party was going to change from
being a small revolutionary vanguard to a mass party operating within
democratic rules and institutions for the transformation of Italian society.
For many years the PCI leadership maintained an ambivalent attitude
towards the revolutionary aspirations of many of the party rank and file.
This policy of double-bluff, known as doppiezza , was as much designed to
keep the militants quiet by leading them to believe that the party was in the
process of penetrating the bourgeois citadel in order, eventually, to
overthrow it, as it was intended to deceive conservative political rivals into
lowering their guard. The inherent dishonesty in it, however, would provide
opponents with ample material to justify their claim that the PCI was not a
genuinely democratic party. More ammunition was handed to critics in
1956, when the party defended the Soviet suppression of the Hungarian
uprising. After this one hiccup, the gulf between the party and Moscow
would grow steadily wider, with the pace of divergence increasing
noticeably in the 1970s. In 1968 the PCI condemned the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia, by the mid-1970s it had accepted Italian membership of

--- Sayfa 16 ---
NATO, in 1979 it criticized Soviet deployment of SS-20 missiles. It was
also critical of US plans to deploy equivalent missiles in Europe but did not
forcefully oppose the scheme. And in it condemned the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. Under the leadership of Enrico Berlinguer in the 1970s, the
party came to espouse positions on foreign policy and defence which many
would consider took it to the right of the British Labour Party. But there is
no indication that any of this was recognized in Washington or that it made
the PCI any less obnoxious to American eyes.
In 1988 the US embassy in Rome told me that the US government’s
attitude to the Italian Communist Party remained that expressed in by
Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs Lawrence Eagle-burger. In answer
to a question on the Reagan Administration’s view on possible communist
participation in a future Italian government, the US official told II Tempo
newspaper (1 May 1981), ‘We and our allies stand for freedom and
democracy. We do not believe the communists share our values.’ While
insisting that the US would not interfere in the democratic choices of its
allies, Eagleburger said the US government had an obligation to them to
express its views clearly. ‘The US in both Republican and Democratic
administrations has been opposed to Communist Party participation in
governments of our allies. We would like to see communist influence in any
Western European country reduced. That policy has been consistent and
clear. It spans the post-war period. It is not under review.’
The importance of keeping the communists from power in Italy was
not merely dictated by the presence of NATO military bases or the strategic
geographic position of the country. The Yalta Agreement in 1945 had laid
the basis for the division of Europe into two geopolitical blocks. Whether
the maintenance of those blocks depended more on the agreement or on the
realities of military power is open to argument. Many Italian commentators
attribute the tacit understanding between the superpowers that each should
have a free hand in their own sphere of influence to what they call ‘the logic
of Yalta’. Just as, according to this interpretation, the Americans were
unable to intervene when Russian tanks rolled into Czechoslovakia or
Hungary, so it was unthinkable that a Communist Party could be allowed to
come to power in a country of the capitalist West. It followed then that the
Soviet Union would have accepted that outright communist rule in Italy was
out of the question and that, if necessary, American tanks would move to
prevent it. When, in the late 1970s, a coalition government including both

--- Sayfa 17 ---
the Christian Democrats and the communists was proposed, the Soviets
would have been almost as alarmed as the Americans at the prospect. It was
far preferable for them to have the Communist Party in opposition and, they
hoped, loyal to Moscow, than in a centrist coalition government and aligned
with the West.
It is not easy to determine exactly who was responsible for the political
decisions that gave rise to the strategy of tension. Those decisions would be
taken in secret and frequently outside institutional frameworks. It is
unlikely that intelligence agencies in the United States and Italy kept their
governments fully informed about the more unsavoury of their clandestine
operations. But there can be no doubt that the rising strength of the
Communist Party was perceived as a major threat and that the relevant
agencies did not just sit and watch. CIA Director William Colby has
described in his memoirs how he was sent to Italy in the 1950s to run ‘what
was by far the CIA’s largest covert political-action program undertaken until
then, or, indeed, since.’ The man who was CIA director from 1973 to 1976
explained how his task was ‘to prevent Italy from being taken over by the
communists in the next-1958-elections and thus prevent the NATO military
defences from being circumvented politically by a subversive fifth column,
the Partito Comunista Italiano.’
Colby went on to point out that it had been anxiety at the possibility
that the communists might win the 1948 elections in Italy that led to the
formation of the Office of Policy Coordination, ‘which gave the CIA the
capability to undertake covert political, propaganda, and paramilitary
operations in the first place.’ The Italian Communist Party has clearly been
singled out for the special attention of the CIA since the end of the war. It is
a good indication of the priority it was accorded that Colby recalled his own
covert action programme in Italy in the fifties as being the largest
undertaken during his career with the agency, and therefore until his
retirement in 1976. He described his job in Italy as ‘an unparalleled
opportunity to demonstrate that secret aid could help our friends and
frustrate our foes without the use of force or violence.’4 It can safely be
assumed that if Colby was aware of the CIA using violence in Italy he
would not consider the information as suitable for publication in his
memoirs.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Colby had no regrets about the programme when I questioned him
about it in 1989. ‘There were some negative consequences but not many.
The assistance was not given to the right wing but to the centre. It went to
build institutions such as trade unions, which would otherwise have been
under the total control of the Communist Party,’ he said. Colby claimed that
the PCI was at that time receiving massive aid from the Soviet Union,
running at $50 million a year according to CIA estimates. These claims
have never been independently confirmed. ‘It helped to match the activity
supported from Moscow.’ He did not believe that the aid had been more
damaging than beneficial in the long run because of the perceived
corruption of many political leaders and resulting public disenchantment
with them. ‘You don’t have an issue that Christian Democrat politicians
were personally rich as a result of stealing from the public till. You did have
corrupt leaders but there were also some prosecutions.’5 Colby’s view is
over-optimistic, as we shall see.
According to Ray Cline, former deputy director of the CIA, the first
numbered document issued by the new National Security Council, on 14
November 1947, was NSC 1/1, a top secret report entitled ‘The Position of
the United States with Respect to Italy’. United States concern for the
outcome of the 1948 elections was borne out by a cable from George
Kennan, director of the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff, quoted by
Cline in his book The CIA under Reagan, Bush and Casey . On 15 March
1947 Kennan wrote: ‘As far as Europe is concerned, Italy is obviously key
point. If communists were to win election there our whole position in the
Mediterranean, and possibly in Western Europe as well, would probably be
undermined.’ For Kennan, the stakes were high indeed. Cline was in no
doubt that the creation of the Office of Policy Coordination and a
permanent covert political action capability for the CIA was ‘intended to
include paramilitary operations as well as political and economic warfare’.
Cline traced authorization for covert action to the National Security Act of
1947.4 An elastic, catch-all clause was included, referring to the CIA’s
performance of “such other functions and duties related to intelligence
affecting the national security as the National Security Council may from
time to time direct,” and this clause was later cited as giving authority for
covert actions,’6 he noted. The Senate Committee on Intelligence, chaired
by Senator Frank Church, found in 1976 that the CIA had been involved in
activities that the committee considered to be unethical. ‘The Committee

--- Sayfa 19 ---
has found that certain covert operations have been incompatible with
American principles and ideals and, when exposed, have resulted in
damaging this nation’s ability to exercise moral and ethical leadership
throughout the world,’ it reported.7 The committee was not in the business
of making damaging revelations about the CIA’s use of violence, in Italy or
anywhere else, but the report makes specific mention of the agency’s
activities in Chile in 1970. The payment over the years of millions of
dollars by the CIA and American multinational companies to centre and
right-wing political parties and individuals in Italy has undoubtedly helped
to swing a number of close-run elections. However, the public perception
that these parties were venal and corrupt gave rise to strong popular
disaffection for them and to the view that real political change could not be
achieved through the democratic process: both elements that contributed to
the rise of terrorism, particularly the terrorism of the left.
It would be absurd to claim that no pawn moved on the chess-board of
terror without the hand of the CIA or the Italian secret services behind it.
The conservative forces with an interest in the strategy of tension were
often divided by fierce personal rivalries, they were sometimes seeking
different and incompatible goals and they operated within a kaleidoscope of
constantly shifting alliances. Relations between intelligence agencies and
terrorists are rarely candid or straightforward. Often they are based on
reciprocal blackmail and a secret service may find that granting protection
for a small crime leads it into covering up for a bigger one later. The
motives of the terrorists themselves are not easily fathomed and their own
convictions do not provide a reliable guide to understanding them. Giovanni
Tamburino, an examining magistrate who investigated a major right-wing
conspiracy in the early 1970s, warned that a terrorist is liable to ‘say he is
something different than he believes he is; believe he is something different
than he is; be something different than the organization to which he belongs
and which conditions him.’
It is often argued that the inability of the Italian secret services to
combat terrorism was not the result of a deliberate policy of protecting
terrorists but of incompetence: the secret services were in disarray
following repeated scandals and attempts at reform and were unprepared for
the terrorist onslaught. There were undoubtedly difficulties and instances of
incompetence, but the presence of secret service informers in virtually
every terrorist organization of note belies this argument. ‘Few statements,

--- Sayfa 20 ---
measured against experience, are as unwise as the statement that the secret
services are inefficient: if there is an area where the secret services have
been present, active and informed, this is the area of terrorism,’ Tamburino
told a 1984 magistrates’ conference.8
Despite the partial and contradictory nature of the evidence, there have
been two constants in the story of Italian terrorism since it flared up at the
beginning of the 1970s: the attitude of the Italian secret services and the
consequences of the terrorism. From 1969 to 1974 the secret services
nurtured certain right-wing terrorist groups. After 1974 they stood back and
watched while left-wing terrorism flourished, largely of its own accord. The
effect of both right-and left-wing terrorism was to damage the electoral
prospects of the Communist Party.
The early phase of right-wing terrorism, which lasted until 1974 and
was characterized by the tactic of indiscriminate bombings directed against
the public, can only be understood in conjunction with a series of right-
wing coup plots. The plots were supported by conservative figures from the
spheres of politics, industry and the military, and on several occasions they
came close to achieving power by the overthrow of the elected government.
The threat of a military coup and the constant pressure from terrorism were
enough to exercise an intimidating influence on left-wing political parties
and to increase the public’s demand for security, both of which bolstered the
centre-right components of the coalition governments. This was all along
the intention of the more sophisticated political leaders who were prepared
to make use of the radical right-wing elements in the conspiracy but were
unwilling to go all the way with them in a violent seizure of power. The
more cautious of the conspirators were also well aware of the difficulties
they were likely to encounter if the powerful Communist Party and trade
unions were to mobilize popular opposition to a coup d’état : they could
almost certainly have made the country ungovernable, even by a military
regime.
The principal purpose of the bomb outrages was to provide the excuse
for military intervention. The perpetrators of the bombings frequently tried
to attribute responsibility for their attacks to left-wing or anarchist groups
and police and secret service investigators eagerly followed up these leads.
One right-winger seriously injured himself when a bomb he was handling
blew up in a train’s toilet on 7 April 1973. Before attempting to set the

--- Sayfa 21 ---
timing device going, he had walked up and down the train displaying a
copy of Lotta Continua (Continuous Struggle), a newspaper of the extreme
left.9 It may well have been decided that there was more to be gained by
falsely blaming the left for terrorist attacks than by risking such potential
political capital on the uncertain outcome of a military coup.
The bloody right-wing bombings often came as the culmination of a
series of bloodless demonstrative bombings against political or economic
targets. It is possible to see this as a kind of dialogue within the right-wing
camp: those who promised to move after our demonstrative bombings have
done nothing so we will give them a bombing that will force them into
action. This interpretation is supported by the testimony of a right-wing
terrorist, Sergio Calore, to a Florence public prosecutor in 1984. Calore said
the bombing of the Banca Nazionale dell’Agricoltura in Piazza Fontana in
Milan, which inaugurated the series of right-wing bomb massacres, was a
message to the organizers of a projected military coup. ‘When, in December
1969, it was decided that the coup would not take place, various young
extremists, loosely linked to the youth groups of the Fronte Nazionale
(National Front), decided to force the situation by carrying out the
December 12, 1969, bombings in order to provoke the stabilizing
intervention of the armed forces.’10
By 1969 the theorists of the strategy of tension had already elaborated
their doctrine. It is spelt out in graphic terms in an anonymous document
entitled Our Political Action’, which was sent from Italy to the Aginter
Press, a Lisbon-based agency that gave cover to extremist political activity
throughout Europe, in November 1968. The document recommends the
promotion of chaos throughout the structures of the regime and the
undermining of the economy. ‘This will lead to a situation of strong
political tension, of fear in the industrial world, of hostility towards the
government and all the parties. In our opinion the first action to be
embarked upon is the destruction of the structures of the state, which should
appear to be the action of the communists and the pro-Chinese.’ It then goes
on to recommend working on public opinion and the armed forces to
highlight the inadequacies of the legally constituted government and ‘to
make us appear as the only ones capable of providing a social, political and
economic solution suited to the needs of the moment.’11 It is hard to
imagine the secret services being accomplices in such a direct attack on the
constituted order which it was their job to defend, particularly when it was

--- Sayfa 22 ---
the police and armed forces, their colleagues in arms, who were most
exposed to terrorist violence. Many terrorists, especially those on the left,
forcefully reject suggestions of such complicity. Yet in one particularly
cynical instance, officers of the carabinieri paramilitary police granted
protection to the terrorists who had used a booby-trapped car-bomb to
murder three members of their own force.
The career of Ievno Azev, the agent of the tsarist secret police who
infiltrated a socialist revolutionary group with such gusto that it is almost
impossible to tell whether his true role was that of terrorist or informer,
shows just how difficult it is to determine loyalties in the murky world of
intelligence and betrayal. Azev’s terrorist associates were at first unable to
believe that he was an agent because he was an accomplice in so many
political assassinations, including the murder of the head of the political
section of the secret police and the Interior Minister. Azev, born the son of a
Jewish tailor in 1869, became the head of the ‘Battle Organization’ of the
Social Revolutionaries following the arrest of the group’s original leaders.
But the fact that an agent provocateur was in charge did not bring an end to
the high-level assassinations. On 17 February 1905, Azev’s group murdered
Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovitch, the tsar’s uncle and head of the
Moscow military region, and it appears the tsar himself was a target for
assassination. In 1909 it was revealed that Azev had been an informer of the
secret police since 1892, on an annual salary of 14,000 roubles. His life is
one of the most extreme examples of how the role of terrorist and secret
agent can be combined within the same person.
By 1974 it was clear that the original strategy of tension was not
working.
Investigations
by
independent-minded
magistrates
were
establishing that it was not the left but the right who had been behind the
bombing campaigns, and electoral support for .the communists was
continuing to grow. After years during which the authorities tried to lay the
blame for terrorism falsely on the left, a generation of genuinely left-wing
extremists was about to take up arms and begin attacking magistrates,
police, politicians and industrialists in the vain hope of bringing about a
revolution. Their ‘attack on the heart of the state’ would far more
effectively discredit the Communist Party than anything the secret services
had hitherto been able to devise. In September 1974 General Vito Miceli,
the head of military intelligence, made a fateful prediction during the course
of an interrogation by Judge Tamburino: ‘Now you will no longer hear

--- Sayfa 23 ---
people talk about black [fascist] terrorism, now you will only hear tell of
those others.’12 This forecast that left-wing terrorists would dominate the
headlines in the coming years shows anything but incompetence on the part
of the secret services, rather an uncanny prescience.
It is ironic that one of the factors that gave rise to red terrorism was
precisely the fear of an imminent right-wing coup. This was frequently
cited by left-wing millionaire publisher Giangiacomo Feltrinelli as the
reason for his financing of armed revolutionary groups. His followers, he
said, would stage a latter-day Resistance when the military seized power.
The secret services could not have been more pleased at the eventual
activities of his acolytes, many of whom ultimately joined the Red
Brigades. Feltrinelli was killed in an operation of old-style terrorism, trying
to blow up an electricity pylon near Milan, on land he himself owned, in
1972. Given the reputation that the secret services had by then acquired, it
was suggested, inevitably, that they were in some way involved in his death.
Relatively little reliable evidence of collusion between the Italian
secret services and left-wing terrorism has as yet emerged. There can be
little doubt that left-wing terrorist groups enjoyed widespread popular
support, at least in the early 1970s, and that they sprang up as a spontaneous
response to genuine social problems. There is no suggestion of their having
been as thoroughly or as blatantly manipulated as their right-wing
counterparts. Many Italians, and particularly those who once sympathized
with the ideals of their ‘erring comrades’, hotly contest any suggestion
whatsoever that groups like the Red Brigades may have been working,
perhaps unconsciously, for their political enemies. Nevertheless, some
former Red Brigades leaders now suspect that they were in fact used by the
secret services to prevent or slow down political change in Italy.
In Of Terrorism and of the State , Sanguinetti claimed that nothing was
easier for the secret services than to infiltrate and take control of
spontaneously arisen terrorist groups ‘either through arrests made at the
appropriate moment, or through the killing of the original leaders, which
normally occurs in a shoot-out with the police, tipped off by their own
infiltrators’. He added that the original terrorist group, ‘born of its
supporters’ delusions about the possibility of carrying out an effective
strategic offensive, changes strategists and becomes nothing more than a
defensive appendage of the state’.13 In 1974 the carabinieri , acting on a tip-

--- Sayfa 24 ---
off from an infiltrator, arrested most of the leadership of the first generation
of Red Brigades. Several of those who subsequently took over from them
have been suspected of collusion with the secret services. The truth about
the manipulation of left-wing terrorism will never be fully known. It is
particularly hard to be sure of the real motives of the left-wing extremists
since many of them shared with the secret services a passionate hatred of
the Communist Party. They considered the party to be revisionist and a
traitor to its original Marxist ideals as it slid progressively, throughout the
Seventies, towards an accommodation with the Christian Democrats.
Paradoxically, both the secret services from their conservative standpoint,
and the Red Brigades as hardline Marxists, had a common interest in
thwarting such an alliance.
As with right-wing terrorism, it is sometimes possible to get an idea of
the truth, when there is a lack of reliable factual evidence, from the coded
messages sent out by some of the protagonists. They often contain a
blackmailing intent and there is no guarantee as to their accuracy, but they
can provide persuasive indications that the truth is somewhat more sinister
than the official versions would have us believe. The Moro kidnap is the
single episode that has generated the greatest doubts about the real nature
and purpose of the Red Brigades. The precedent of secret service dealings
with right-wing terrorists, now well established both judicially and
historically, should at least convince us to keep an open mind about what
may also have happened on the left.
On 31 October 1974, General Vito Miceli, then head of Italian military
intelligence, was arrested on a charge of conspiring to overthrow the
government by provoking an armed insurrection in order to provide an
excuse for military intervention. The warrant, signed by Judge Tamburino,
referred to the existence of a so-called security organization, which ‘in fact
acts as an obstacle to particular changes in domestic and international
polities’. Tamburino said the organization resorted to ‘illegal, secret and
violent acts’ in order to restrict popular sovereignty. Miceli defended
himself by arguing that he had always remained faithful to his institutional
duties, which he could not discuss as they were covered by state secrecy
laws. He did, however, indicate that the incriminated organization, which
became known as the ‘Parallel SID’, was formed under a secret agreement
with the United States and within the framework of NATO.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
One of Miceli’s co-conspirators, a lieutenant-colonel in the military
secret services by the name of Amos Spiazzi, was slightly more
forthcoming. He told magistrates he had joined the ‘Rosa dei Venti’
(Compass Rose) right-wing conspiracy on the orders of a SID officer.
Asked whether he had received an order in June 1973 to put the irregular
‘support groups’ of the armed forces on standby, Spiazzi answered: Ί
received an order from a military superior belonging to the security
organization of the armed forces, which does not have a subversive purpose
but aims to protect the institutions of the state against Marxism. This
organization is not the same as SID but in large part coincides with it.’14
Spiazzi added that the membership was not made up purely of military
personnel but also of civilians, including industrialists and politicians.
Miceli himself offered a slightly more detailed account of the secret,
Parallel SID in 1977, during a trial for a 1970 coup attempt. ‘There is and
always has existed a certain very secret organization, which the highest
authorities of the state know about. Seen from outside, by the profane, this
organization could be incorrectly interpreted, it could appear to be
something outside official policy.’15 Miceli said the organization fell within
the framework of SID, that its activities were ‘fully institutional’, but ‘far
removed from information gathering’.
It is at this secret level of intelligence co-operation between Italy and
the United States that the men responsible for the strategy of tension are
likely to be found. The existence of secret NATO protocols committing the
secret services of the signatory countries to work to prevent the Communist
Party from coming to power first emerged in 1966 when President de
Gaulle decided to pull France out of NATO’s combined command structure,
denouncing the protocols as an infringement of national sovereignty.
According to Giuseppe De Lutiis’ History of the Secret Services in Italy ,
Italy signed the protocols in 1949 when it was first admitted to the Atlantic
Pact. He said the protocols provided for the creation of an unofficial
organization ‘charged with guaranteeing Italy’s international alignment
within the Western Block by any means, even if the electorate were to show
a different inclination’.16 In Italy, with the largest Communist Party in the
West challenging to become the largest party in the country, there was
clearly plenty of work for such an organization. Given the secret and illegal
nature of the protocols, De Lutiis commented, they were not destined to
leave much trace in official archives. The rigour with which they were

--- Sayfa 26 ---
applied would depend on the attitude of the head of the Italian secret service
towards his American counterparts.
A Top Secret Memorandum of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff dated 14
May 1952 reveals the existence of a plan code-named ‘Demagnetize’,
designed to reduce the influence of the Communist Party in two European
countries. The document states that the fundamental objective of the plan is
to lessen the influence of the communists over government and trade unions
in Italy and France so as to reduce the risk of communism becoming
established in either country and thus damaging the interests of the United
States. To that end a series of ‘political, paramilitary and psychological
operations’ were to be employed. The Italian and French governments must
not be made aware of the plan’s existence as it ‘may interfere with their
national sovereignty’.17 The man charged with implementing the Italian end
of the plan, without informing his political bosses, was the then head of
Italian military intelligence, General Giovanni De Lorenzo. He would later
be accused of having plotted a military coup in the summer of 1964.
It is by no means easy to determine who was responsible for day-to-
day tactical decisions in the running of the strategy of tension. But there can
be little doubt that overall responsibility for the strategy lay with the
government and intelligence services of the United States. The rise of
communism in Italy naturally posed a security problem for NATO and
ultimate responsibility for solving it inevitably rested with Italy’s most
powerful NATO ally. It is hardly surprising that the United States should
have been concerned by Italy’s lurch to the left in the 1970s and that it
should have taken steps to bring it to a halt. Some might argue that
clandestine intervention in Italian politics prevented the communists from
gaining power and thus sparking off a full-blown civil war, or worse, war
between the superpowers in Europe. Nevertheless, questions will remain
about the adoption of methods that brought violent death to hundreds of
innocent victims. The United States has consistently refused to recognize
the Italian Communist Party’s increasingly wholehearted commitment to
the principles of Western democracy and its validity as an alternative to the
generally corrupt and incompetent political parties that have governed Italy
since the war. Had it done so, much of the bloodshed resulting from the
strategy of tension might have been avoided.
Notes

--- Sayfa 27 ---
1   Felice Casson to the author, 1987.
2   Gianfranco Sanguinetti, Del Terrorismo e dello Stato , Milan,
1980, p. 28.
3   Commissione parlamentare d’inchiesta sugli eventi del
giugnoluglio 1964, Relazione di minoranza , Rome, 1971.
4   William Colby, Honourable Men , Hutchinson, London, 1978,
p. 109.
5   William Colby to the author, 4 December 1989.
6   Ray S. Cline, The CIA under Reagan, Bush and Casey ,
Acropolis Books, Washington, 1981, pp. 122-5.
7   Senate Select Committee to study governmental operations
with respect to intelligence activities, Washington, 1976.
8    Giovanni Tamburino in L’Eversione Nera: Cronache di un
Decennio, Atti del Convegno, Brescia 25-26 May 1984 , Franco
Angeli, Milan, 1985, pp. 138-42.
9   Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 3, Tome 2,
Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1983, p. 318.
10   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni (ed.), Servizi Segreti , Tullio
Pironti, Naples, 1986, pp.109-10.
11   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 1, Italo
Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1981, p. 174.
12   Investigation of Judge Giovanni Tamburino, in Giuseppe De
Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in Italia , Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1984,
p. 137.
13   Gianfranco Sanguinetti, op. cit., p. 28.
14   Quoted in L’Espresso, 16 March 1975.
15   Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., p. 129.
16   Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., p. 126.
17   Quoted in Il Malaffare , Roberto Faenza, Mondadori, Milan,
1978, pp. 313-14.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
[2]
THE ORIGINS OF TERROR
IN order to understand the origins of the strategy of tension and the
directions that terrorism would take in later years, it is necessary to go back
to what happened during the Second World War and in its immediate
aftermath. The identification of the vast majority of the Italian people, and
in particular the establishment and middle class, with Benito Mussolini’s
fascist regime was to pose serious problems after its fall, when the majority
of Italians discovered overnight that, at heart, they had supported the
Resistance all along. The problem, for those embarking on the
reconstruction of a stable, democratic society in Italy after the war, was that
one of the largest groups with the most convincing anti-fascist credentials
was the Communist Party. Because of their ideological distance from
Mussolini there had been no question of the communists becoming his
accomplices. They had instead established some of the most active and
effective Resistance units to harry the German and Italian fascist forces
ahead of the advancing Allied armies. But even before the liberation of Italy
was completed the first signs of tension between communist Resistance
forces and their more conservative Resistance allies were beginning to
emerge. Agents of the American Office of Strategic Services (OSS) and the
British Special Operations Executive (SOE) who parachuted into Italy
behind German lines often faced a delicate task in convincing the left-and
right-wing Resistance fighters to finish the war against Hitler before
starting to settle scores among themselves. Many Italians were already
moving into the East-West Cold War before the shooting war was over. All
this against a background of widespread lawlessness and considerable
controversy over the tactics of the Resistance, which inevitably sparked
German reprisals against the civilian population. There was a certain bandit
element in many of the Resistance groups, a fact that has tended to be
glossed over in the post-war mythification of the movement: this tendency
was fuelled by the guilty consciences of those who had failed to make a
stand against fascism at the time.
Another bandit element recruited by the United States to support the
Allied war effort was the Sicilian Mafia. Mafia boss Lucky Luciano was
released from prison in America so that he could activate his contacts in

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Sicily to prepare the ground for the Allied landings there. The Mafia was
also drafted in to provide the backbone of post-war local government in
southern Italy. It was a natural choice, since Mussolini’s ruthless crackdown
on the criminal organization meant the conservative-minded Mafia could be
relied upon to be both antifascist and anti-communist. This set a precedent
for the years to come, as the Mafia would provide a useful secret conduit
between the United States and Italy and an effective instrument for exerting
influence in Italian politics. Not being too fussy about one’s friends during
the prosecution of a world war is understandable, but continuing to use
those unpresentable friends in peacetime is less so. Unless, of course, one
believes the peace is really just war by another name. The Mafia’s support
would later be sought in the right-wing coup season of the early 1970s.
Another victim of Mussolini’s persecution, Freemasonry, would be called
upon to stand alongside the Mafia in the conservative anti-communist
alliance. It too would constitute a secret, transatlantic channel of influence
and play a role in the strategy of tension.
The first major challenge for the Allies in their attempt to ensure a
stable democratic future for Italy within the Western orbit came with the
1948 general elections, which became a fierce tussle for the country’s
political soul. In practice, it was a challenge for the United States, as
Britain, one of the three Yalta signatories, was already slipping away from
its pre-war superpower status. As we have seen, it was these elections
which called into being the CIA as a peacetime successor to the OSS and
with the same covert action capabilities that had gone without question
during the war.
With the elections scheduled for 18 April, the full extent of the threat
was made apparent on 15 February, when the Popular Democratic Front
made up of the Communist Party (PCI) and the Socialist Party (PSI) won
municipal elections in Pescara with a 10 per cent increase on their 1946
showing and with the Christian Democrats (DC) coming in a poor second.
Document 1/2 of the United States National Security Council, dated 10
February 1948, urged ‘actively combating communist propaganda in Italy
by an effective US information programme and by all other practicable
means’.1 NSC 1/3 on 8 March recommends the United States should as a
matter of priority take ‘further measures designed to prevent the
communists from winning participation in the government’. These were to
include urging members of Congress ‘to announce immediately that the

--- Sayfa 30 ---
attitude of the American people is such that they would never support
economic assistance to Italy if its government included parties inimical to
the United States’. For a country still recovering from the devastation of
war this was an argument liable to carry considerable weight. The document
also recommended the initiation of a campaign of speeches by government
officials and private individuals and of letter-writing by private citizens,
‘regarding the political issues in Italy’.
consequently atheistic doctrines and methods on which communism is
based can in no way be reconciled with the Christian Faith’.5 On 8 February
1948, Professor Luigi Gedda, the president of Catholic Action, founded an
organization known as Citizens’ Committees with the intention of getting
out the anti-communist vote and with the blessing of the Vatican and the
CIA. The organization was able to call on the support of 300,000 activists
from 22,000 parishes. With slogans such as ‘You’re a rabbit if you don’t
vote,’ the Citizens’ Committees were remarkably successful in drumming
up the electoral support of the devout and ill-educated peasant class. A CIA
report on Gedda’s organization said it was undoubtedly one of the decisive
factors in the elections and that it had been decided to keep it in existence
even after they were over, ‘as an exemplary and permanent unit for anti-
communist propaganda’.6
Well-timed acts of generosity on the part of the United States also
played their part. A month before the elections President Harry Truman
announced the decision to transfer twenty-nine merchant ships to the Italian
government, as ‘a gesture of friendship and confidence in a democratic
Italy’.7 Four days later the House Appropriations Committee approved
payment of an additional $18.7 million of ‘interim aid’ funds for Italy. In
the lead-up to the elections the CIA channelled $1 million directly to Italian
‘centre parties’.8 A survey by United Press showed that the anti-communist
parties spent seven and a half times as much as the Popular Democratic
Front on all forms of propaganda, with the Christian Democrats alone
spending four times as much. The Soviet Union did little to help the Front.
The communist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in February was an
object lesson in what could happen if you were on the wrong side of the
Yalta divide and helped to justify US intervention on its own side. What’s
more, the US, France and Britain urged the Soviet Union to agree to the
return of the Adriatic port city of Trieste to Italy from its status as a ‘free
city’ under the terms of the peace treaty. In order not to antagonize its ally

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Yugoslavia, whose border passes close to Trieste, the Soviet Union rejected
the Western proposal. Its decision, announced five days before the Italian
vote, was a severe blow to the electoral hopes of the Front. The Christian
Democrat Party emerged as clear winners with 48 per cent of the vote, the
left-wing Front trailing in with a mere 31 per cent. Italy had been saved for
democracy.
After this resounding success it was safe to admit Italy as a member of
NATO and allow it to have its own military intelligence service, which had
been disbanded at the end of the war. It was not thought prudent to allow
Italy an autonomous intelligence agency after 1944 until its future political
alignment had been resolved by the 1948 elections. The contemporaneous
joining of NATO and reinstatement of an intelligence capability was more
than mere coincidence and gives an insight into the fundamental purpose of
the post-war Italian secret service in the intentions of those who sanctioned
its rebirth. While the Central Treaty Organization, which grouped the
United States, Britain, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, provided specifically for
the creation of an anti-subversion committee, NATO preferred to resort to
secret bilateral agreements in this area, out of deference to the left-wing
oppositions in Italy and France.
Given the widespread Italian support for fascism it was almost
inevitable that the administrative personnel of the new Italian republic
should in large part be made up of people co-opted from the former fascist
regime. In October 1946 there were 40,000 fascists in Italian prisons, but a
few months later this figure fell to 4,000. An attempt to purge the state of
those people most closely identified with fascism was brought to an end by
an amnesty signed by Justice Minister Palmiro Togliatti. Togliatti, the
leader of the Communist Party, was a member of a series of post-war
coalition governments, from 1945 until 1947, in recognition of his party’s
contribution to the defeat of Mussolini. The failure to remove fascist
sympathizers from the state bureaucracy would have important long-term
consequences for the country. Their retention in the police and later in the
reestablished secret services would prove particularly significant. The OSS
made contact with leaders of the fascist secret police in Mussolini’s last-
stand Republic of Salo (named after its capital, a small town on Lake
Garda) before their surrender. After the fall of Salo, secret police chief
Guido Leto was provisionally confirmed in his post by the Allies. He was
subsequently cleared of all war crimes charges and in 1946 became director

--- Sayfa 32 ---
of Italy’s police schools. It has been suggested that his lenient treatment
may have had something to do with his role as custodian of the sensitive
OVRA (secret police) archives at the end of the war, which subsequently
passed into the hands of the Allies.9
Another fascist to achieve sensitive office in post-war Italy was
carabiniere General Giuseppe Pièche. He had served in fascist military
intelligence, co-ordinating the supply of military assistance to General
Francisco Franco in Spain in 1937. Later he served as head of the Italian
military mission in Yugoslavia, liaising with the bloodthirsty leader of the
anti-communist Ustascia forces, Ante Pavelich. Despite having been
investigated for his activities under Mussolini, Pièche was put in charge of
the Interior Ministry’s fire department, which he combined with a secret
political police role. He oversaw a new purge of the police under which ex-
members of the Resistance were compulsorily retired at forty while former
fascist policemen were taken on up to the age of sixty. In the run-up to the
1948 elections he infiltrated his agents into left-wing organizations and
encouraged the creation of armed right-wing groups such as the Anti-
Bolshevik Front, which was financed by the CIA and British intelligence
service.10 While Western intelligence agencies elsewhere were recruiting
Nazi war criminals such as Klaus Barbie to work for them because of their
anti-communist dependability and experience in the intelligence field, it is
hardly surprising that a similar process should have been set under way in
Italy. Italian fascists could also be relied upon for their anti-communism
and they were the only people with recent experience of government.
The first major scandal involving the Italian secret services came to
light on 11 May 1967, when L’Espresso magazine published the first of a
series of revelations about preparations for a military coup which had been
set in motion in the summer of 1964 but had never actually been brought to
completion. Inquiries by a Defence Ministry commission and a later
parliamentary commission showed that the carabinieri had drawn up a
secret plan known as Piano Solo, which, as the name implies, provided for
the paramilitary police to intervene on their own in order to restore public
order. In investigating the background to the coup the inquiries discovered
that the secret services had embarked on a massive programme of
surveillance of Italian political and business figures. This was partly
intended to identify left-wing suspects who, under the plan, would be
rounded up and then imprisoned in concentration camps on the island of

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Sardinia. The investigators’ findings gave an idea of the subordination of
Italian intelligence agencies to their US and NATO counterparts. But a full
understanding of this was made impossible by the imposition of state
secrecy. The whole episode provides a good illustration of the
uncomfortable position Italy was in, with a large left-wing component to the
electorate, a political system frozen in immobility and conditioned from
outside by secret military and intelligence accords.
According to the report of the Defence Ministry commission, the
creation of personal intelligence dossiers on prominent and less prominent
citizens began in 1959 and expanded over the years until the secret services
had amassed 157,000 files, including ‘34,000 devoted to members of the
business world, politicians and other categories of people of importance to
the life of the nation’.11 The commission reported a tendency on the part of
SIFAR (military intelligence) not only to gather information potentially
damaging to their targets but to distort the information so as to emphasize
its unfavourable significance. Attention would focus on ‘business
operations of doubtful legality and even frivolous manifestations’. It also
found the secret services had resorted to spreading false rumours and then
recording them in their files: ‘the information was created and then gathered
in.’ According to General Giovanni De Lorenzo, head of the carabinieri at
the time of the projected coup, this unsavoury activity was a matter of
NATO security. De Lorenzo told the commission that the intelligence-
gathering was carried out by the carabinieri at the request of the Atlantic
Pact Security Office to check on the reliability of state officials before
granting security clearance. ‘The matter of the dossiers is therefore a
question of the security of the Atlantic Pact,’ he said.
This interpretation is supported by Roberto Faenza, who claims in his
detailed account of US influence in Italian domestic politics,12 that a copy
of the SIFAR dossiers was routinely deposited at CIA headquarters in
Langley, Virginia. He quotes an unclassified CIA cable acknowledging
receipt ‘from our contact in the Italian secret services’ of reports on
political leaders ‘under observation’. To illustrate the wide range of
SIFAR’s interests, Faenza cites a i960 order from General De Lorenzo
inviting his secret service subordinates to extend their dossiers to cover
‘prelates, bishops and priests of the various dioceses’. This snooping does
not appear to have unduly antagonized the Vatican, given that the minority
report of the parliamentary commission found that much of SIFAR’s

--- Sayfa 34 ---
intelligence-gathering was carried out on behalf of ‘countries of the Atlantic
Alliance and the Vatican State’.13 Pope John XXIII was, however, furious
when it was discovered that SIFAR had planted microphones in the papal
apartments to monitor his conversations and those of his staff. SIFAR also
planted bugs in the offices of the Italian President’s official Rome
residence, the Quirinale Palace. This operation, which continued over a
number of years, at times with the approval of the President himself, was
ordered by De Lorenzo at the request, according to Faenza, of CIA station
chief William Colby. That such an operation could be contemplated is an
indication that SIFAR did not ultimately owe its allegiance to the Italian
head of state.
It is of course possible that the generals implicated in Italy’s various
secret service scandals claimed falsely that they had acted in accordance
with NATO agreements when, in reality, they had broken the law entirely
on their own initiative. This was indeed the conclusion of the Defence
Ministry inquiry presided over by General Aldo Beolchini. ‘Direct
responsibility for the deviations, which were due to an excess of zeal and
personal ambition, falls on the heads of SIFAR from 1956 onwards,’14 it
said. However, NATO has never publicly distanced itself from the excesses
of Italy’s right-wing generals and Beolchini’s reductive view is hard to
square with the repeated imposition of state secrecy on investigations into
their misdemeanours. Beolchini’s own findings were censored: it was
decided that Parliament could be trusted with only half of his eighty-one-
page report. A later report by the deputy commander of the carabinieri ,
General Giorgio Manes, was peppered with seventy-two deletions.
Beolchini subsequently stated that had his report been made fully available
to Parliament and the judiciary he believed it would have prevented the
recurrence of such scandals.15
The man responsible for concealing the results of these inquiries
through the imposition of state secrecy, and whose thoroughness in the task
earned him the sobriquet ‘Signor Omissis’ (Mr Deletions), was Prime
Minister Aldo Moro. But this display of Atlantic loyalty and responsibility
would not be enough to remove Moro from the spotlight of suspicion. Some
years earlier Rome CIA station chief Thomas Karamessines had asked
General De Lorenzo, then head of SIFAR, for dossiers on politicians who
favoured the formation of an alliance with the Socialist Party and, in
particular, for detailed study of Moro’s circle of collaborators.16 Moro

--- Sayfa 35 ---
would again come under suspicion in the 1970s as he attempted to bring the
communists into a government of national unity.
Virtually any politician of note was liable to come under the scrutiny
of the secret services, whose job on occasion included developing a
photographic chronicle of the subject’s ‘extra-conjugal or otherwise
irregular sexual relations’. An idea of their conscientiousness can be
gathered from the size of the dossiers they generated, as described in an
interview with Il Mondo by Beolchini. ‘Some of them were enormous. For
Deputy [Amintore] Fanfani, for example, there were four volumes, each
twice as fat as a dictionary.’17 The intimidatory nature of such spying was
emphasized in a speech to Parliament in 1967 by socialist Deputy Luigi
Anderlini. Τ m thinking of the SIFAR dossiers. In somebody’s mind it could
have been the net into which the entire ruling class of our country could be
made to fall.’ Anderlini likened the 1964 crisis to the military coup that had
just been staged by the Greek colonels. A third Defence Ministry inquiry
into the SIFAR scandal, presided over by General Luigi Lombardi,
concluded that there had been no coup attempt in 1964. It did, however,
concede that General De Lorenzo had instituted illegal measures to enable
the carabinieri to take control of Italy’s main cities, which is close enough
to a coup for most people. It also revealed the existence of ‘support units’
made up largely of retired carabinieri.
The recruitment of irregular ‘support units’ is a recurrent theme in the
succession of secret service scandals. They provide an ideal opportunity for
the arms-length use of agents provocateurs and for the manipulation of
terrorism. One of the men involved in this recruitment was Colonel Renzo
Rocca, director of SIFAR’s office of industrial counter-espionage, the
Office of Economic and Industrial Research (REI). The parliamentary
commission of inquiry into the SIFAR scandal found that Rocca used secret
service funds and other money provided by wealthy industrialists to recruit
members for these paramilitary forces, who would be paid as secret service
‘informants’. ‘The recruitment concentrated primarily on retired carabinieri
and naval personnel but it also included other groups of adventure-seeking
youths, who were to act above all as provocateurs ,’18 the minority report
stated. Rocca’s activities were closely monitored by the CIA. According to
Faenza, Rome station chief William Harvey urged the colonel to try to
destabilize Moro’s attempts to reach an understanding with the socialists.
Harvey suggested Rocca use his ‘action squads’ to ‘carry out bombings

--- Sayfa 36 ---
against Christian Democrat Party offices and certain newspapers in the
north, which were to be attributed to the left’.19 Faenza also claimed that
Harvey was in possession of lists containing more than 2,000 names of
right-wingers belonging to paramilitary groups, who were available for use
against the communists.
Rocca committed suicide in 1968, shortly before he was due to be
questioned by the parliamentary commission. His death is one of a series of
mysterious suicides and accidents which befell people who were privy to
the sensitive secrets of the Italian intelligence service.
Rocca was found dead in his central Rome office on 27 June, having
apparently shot himself in the head with a small, pearl-handled pistol. He
had left the secret service a year earlier in order to work for the Fiat car
manufacturer but the close collaboration between the secret service and Fiat
meant that the change was merely cosmetic, despite official statements to
the contrary. The Turin-based industry in fact made extensive use of SIFAR
agents to spy on its own unruly workforce. Rocca’s continuing links with
intelligence made it worthwhile for secret service agents to visit his office
and remove certain documents before calling in a magistrate. According to
some accounts, they removed a file concerning Rocca’s illegal 1964
recruitment campaign.20 The rest of the documents were removed from the
office on the orders of the public prosecutor, Ottorino Pesce. So alarmed
was the head of the secret service, Admiral Eugenio Henke, at the prospect
that they might contain information harmful to the security of the state that
he requested that they only be examined in the presence of one of his
officers, who would be able to identify any papers covered by state secrecy.
Pesce refused the request and was subsequently relieved of the case, which
passed into the hands of a more malleable magistrate, who duly concluded
that Rocca had indeed shot himself. Forensic tests, however, failed to pick
up any traces on Rocca’s hand that would indicate he had himself fired the
pistol. Bloodstains on the floor beside the body appeared to show that, if
Rocca had shot himself, he must have lain down flat on the floor before
doing so.21 The minority report of the parliamentary commission
emphasized Rocca’s anxiety at the prospect of having to testify before the
commission about his knowledge of delicate secret service activities.
‘Certainly, responsibility for the most obscure and secret and also the least
lawful operations, had fallen to him,’22 it observed.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Rocca was not the only person with inside knowledge of the SIFAR
scandal to meet with sudden death. On 27 April 1969 the former head of the
carabinieri , who had been responsible for commissioning an investigation
into the events of 1964, died in a car accident. General Carlo Ciglieri was
driving alone on a straight stretch of road outside Padua when his car
suddenly ran off the road. Unusually, no personal identity documents were
found on him. Photographers who came to the scene took pictures of the car
boot which showed it contained a bag. The bag subsequently disappeared.
The man from whom Ciglieri commissioned the report was General Giorgio
Manes. He collapsed and died of a heart attack on 25 June 1969, while
waiting to give evidence to the parliamentary commission.23 His assistant,
Colonel Remo D’Ottavio, who actually wrote the report for him, attempted
suicide in July.24 D’Ottavio shot himself in the region of the heart, but
miraculously survived. Many people who had assumed he was dead were
astonished when he was called to give evidence by Venice magistrate Felice
Casson more than twenty years later.
One of Rocca’s delicate tasks on behalf of SIFAR was to finance the
Alberto Pollio Institute, a right-wing think-tank founded in 1964 with the
purpose of developing a strategy and tactics for combating the communist
menace. He prevailed upon a number of companies which were interested
in winning defence contracts to subscribe to the institute’s newsletter: a
conveniently discreet way of subsidizing its activities. Rocca also
contributed to the costs of a conference held by the institute in Rome’s
Parco dei Principi Hotel from 3 to 5 May 1965. The conference speeches25
offer an illuminating insight into the thinking of the unreconstructed fascists
and other conservative figures who attended. Among these were Guido
Giannettini, a journalist and secret service informer, who would later be
charged with involvement in the 1969 Piazza Fontana bombing. Also
present was a group of right-wing students from Rome University,
including Stefano Delle Chiaie, the future terrorist leader. When he was
asked during the Bologna bomb trial in 1987 about his presence at the
conference, Delle Chiaie’s memory was hazy but he thought he might have
looked in on it briefly. The reason for his amnesia became clear when he
said he was well aware that the conference had been branded as the
‘momento zero ’ of the strategy of tension.
The subject of the conference was ‘Revolutionary War’, seen as the
undeclared war waged on a global scale and without respite by world

--- Sayfa 38 ---
communism. The meeting endorsed the view that ‘the Third World War is
already under way, even if it is being fought at a low level of military
intensity’. Ex-fascist and founder member of the institute Enrico De
Boccard told the meeting that the communist onslaught aimed at the
‘general disintegration of society’ through the use of ‘subversion backed by
terror’. ‘We say therefore that we don’t accept communism and we publicly
express our desire to fight it, returning in full measure to the communists
the terror that they have imposed on the world,’ he said. Many of the
speakers stressed the need to move from the theoretical to the practical in
the counter-revolutionary war. Right-wing journalist Pino Rauti, founder of
the terrorist organization Ordine Nuovo (New Order) and later to be another
of the suspects in the Piazza Fontana bombing, highlighted the propaganda
value of the conference. But he added that it would be up to others ‘to draw
the concrete consequences from all this’ and ensure that it was followed up
by a ‘complete elaboration of tactics for counterrevolution and defence’.
De Boccard took a similarly firm line, warning that any violation of
the ‘sanctuary’ of the state by the communists, ‘even if it were only by
obtaining an under-secretary in the Post Office Ministry’, would constitute
‘such a grave attack on the vital “political space” of the state as to
necessitate the implementation against them of a total defence plan. That is
to say the direct, determined and decisive intervention of the armed forces.’
Another speaker, Eggardo Beltrametti, urged the creation of ‘permanent
self-defence groups’ to oppose communist penetration, which ‘would not
hesitate to take up the struggle in the most unorthodox conditions, with the
necessary energy and ruthlessness,’ Beltrametti described the blocking of
the communist advance as a task ‘which the Atlantic Alliance implicitly
confers on us’. In order to carry out this task he called on both fascists and
former Resistance members to unite their forces. All were invited to bury
their differences in the common vision of the conference, which was
forcefully summarized by Beltrametti: ‘It is a struggle to the last drop of
blood and our aim is to eliminate the communist threat by whatever means.
We would prefer non-violent methods but we must not refuse to consider
other forms of struggle.’ He concluded rather lugubriously by pointing out,
‘without being too optimistic’, that violent conflict would reveal how many
true communists there were in Italy. ‘Perhaps then we will find there will be
less of them than we believed.’

--- Sayfa 39 ---
A more practical approach was offered by Pio Filippani Ronconi, a
university professor, in his outline of a plan of defence and counterattack.
After discussing two categories of passive supporter of the anti-communist
struggle, he went on to recommend the creation of a third level, made up of
‘élite units with very few members, trained for counter-terror tasks’, who
would be used to destroy the precarious balance and bring about a
rearrangement of the forces in power. ‘These units, possibly unknown to
one another, but well co-ordinated by an executive committee, could be
made up in part of those youths who currently exhaust their energies, their
time, and worse still their anonymity, in noble but sterile demonstrative
enterprises which do not succeed in shaking the indifference of the masses
in the face of the deteriorating national situation.’ This was the sort of
subversive planning which was being carried out with the money and the
blessing of the Italian secret services and would later be faithfully reflected
in the organization and methods of neo-fascist terrorism.
The practical application of the ideas discussed by the Pollio Institute
can be seen in the activities of Ordine Nuovo. ON had been set up by Pino
Rauti in 1956, officially as a centre for the study of Italian fascism and
German national-socialism. In practice it became the rallying point for
many in the extreme right who were dissatisfied with the excessive
moderation of the official neo-fascist party, the Movimento Sociale Italiano
(MSI). A letter from the National Directorate of Ordine Nuovo dated 3 June
1970 gives details of the subjects to be covered in a series of summer camps
scheduled for July and August of that year, which mirror to a remarkable
degree the content of the Pollio Institute’s discussions. ‘Lesson 1: The Third
World War has already begun. Characteristics of the Third World War:
psychological, revolutionary, ideological, total war. Lesson 2: The theory of
revolutionary war. Technical aspects of revolutionary war. Revolutionary
war in advanced industrialized countries. The problem of response to
revolutionary attack. . . . Lesson 7: Organization of an operational
revolutionary group. . . . Lesson 10:
Techniques for the organization of self-defence groups Lesson 13:
Strategy and tactics for the struggle in universities and schools.’26 A
reading list for the course recommended Giannettini’s book Techniques of
Revolutionary War along with Adolf Hitler’s Mein Kampf The letter also
outlined the timetable for a typical day. Having started with coffee at 6 a.m.,

--- Sayfa 40 ---
the aspiring Ordine Nuovo cadres would move on to gymnastic exercises,
karate and self-defence lessons from 6.15 to 8 a.m. From 8.30 to 12 they
would be walking in the mountains and taking part in the uninformatively
vague ‘various exercises’. After lunch there would be more karate and self-
defence, political discussion and lessons, and the day would be rounded off
by bucolic ‘songs and drinks around the camp-fire’, before bed at 11 p.m.
A flavour of the kind of people Ordine Nuovo sought to attract can be
gathered from one of their questionnaires, which begins by asking, ‘Why
are you in ON?’ ‘Question 3: Do you want ON to impose dictatorship on
the country? Why?. . . Question 5: Are you capable of supporting a
completely unpopular thesis at a public meeting? Why? Question 6: Do you
respect public opinion? . . . Question 8: Are you anti-semitic? Why?
Question 9: Can you demonstrate that men are not equal? How? Question
10: Do you consider yourself bound by common morality? Why?’
On 2i November 1973, a Rome assize court sentenced thirty members
of Ordine Nuovo to prison terms of up to five years for reconstituting the
banned Fascist Party. By then forty-three members of the organization had
been accused of minor acts of violence and criminal damage but in later
years ON affiliates would go on to commit some of the bloodiest crimes
perpetrated by the right. Among the documents confiscated from ON
members before the 1973 trial was one that gave a vivid idea of the
organization’s potential for violence. ‘Behind the proud axe [symbol] of
Ordine Nuovo have gathered men who have no fear, whose violent force
will descend implacably upon the filthy, bleating herd, led by Christian-
communist jackals,’ it read. This is just the frame of mind required if one is
to plant bombs in crowded public places. The prosecutor at the 1973 trial
was Vittorio Occorsio. He was shot dead by Ordine Nuovo members on 10
July 1976, in the first assassination of a magistrate carried out by a right-
wing group.
One of the principal influences on the ideology of Ordine Nuovo, and
of the neo-fascists in general, was the philosopher Julius Evola. Εvola
rejected what he saw as the decadence of the modern world in favour of the
nobility of ‘tradition’, based on a blend of mythology, occultism and
esotericism. It has even been suggested that the remarkable control
exercised by the leaders of the extreme right over some of their teenage
followers could in part be explained by their dabbling in black magic and

--- Sayfa 41 ---
esotericism. Evola puts forward an idea of aristocratic elitism as a basis for
society and an alternative to the despised concept of democracy. One of the
subjects for discussion at the 1970 ON summer camp was ‘The ideological
and existential identity between the concept of Western neo-capitalism and
Marx-ism-Leninism’. Evola in fact rejected American capitalism as
wholeheartedly as he did Marxism, since he considered that they were both
based on a materialistic vision of life. This was reflected in ON’s policies:
in favour of a strong Europe and virulently anti-Soviet and anti-American.
This may make it hard to imagine ON playing a role in a wider conservative
conspiracy ultimately manoeuvred by NATO secret services. But the use of
apparently hostile forces to further one’s own intelligence aims provides an
excellent opportunity for plausibly deniable covert operations. The
extremists of both right and left were, in any case, frequently divided by
fierce ideological and personal differences. The public prosecutor at the
Bologna bomb trial described the relationship between terrorists and
representatives of the Italian state as one of ‘constant alliance and conflict
based on reciprocal manipulation’.27
One characteristic of extremist right-wing groups that would be of
interest to the secret services, if it was not originally instigated by them,
was their eagerness to acquire intelligence about the communist enemy.
Attempts to infiltrate anarchist or left-wing groups have been a constant
feature of rightist extremism. A notebook confiscated from Clemente
Graziani before the 1973 trial showed that ON had devised its own ‘secret
service’ in order to learn ‘how the enemy is organized’. It made use of
people whose politics were not known to their friends and who were not
members of the neo-fascist MSI party, who were to compile ‘secret
dossiers’ for the organization. Infiltration of left-wing groups was not only
useful for intelligence-gathering but could also be used to lay the blame on
the left for right-wing terrorist actions.
In 1959 Stefano Delle Chiaie, formerly the secretary of a Rome branch
of the MSI, founded a rival organization to ON known as Avanguardia
Nazionale (National Vanguard). The group would go on to distinguish itself
for its participation in violent clashes with left-wing students at Rome
University in the 1960s and would later develop into a fully fledged
terrorist organization. Throughout its existence, AN has been dogged by
rumours of secret contacts between some of its leaders and senior officials
in the Interior Ministry. A document published by AN itself hints at

--- Sayfa 42 ---
potentially embarrassing collusion between the terrorist group and members
of the Italian political establishment. The document, published in the
National-revolutionary Counter-information Bulletin of 30 June 1975, was
a response to a decision by the Interior Minister to ban the organization,
accusing it, like ON, of reconstituting the Fascist Party. The bulletin warns
that the organization will resist the ban and then adds menacingly: ‘If it
comes to a trial, Avanguardia Nazionale will call to the witness stand
ministers, politicians, party secretaries, secret services and all those who, in
one way or another, first sought the “friendship” of Avanguardia Nazionale
and then, having seen their advances rejected, decided to put an end to an
organization that cannot be fitted into the game-plan of the regime.’ It is
possible, of course, that these were merely empty threats and Delle Chiaie
has never spelt out exactly what he meant. But the evidence suggests
otherwise. Delle Chiaie has continued to drop similar hints over the years
and is doubtless well aware that blackmail cards are only valuable while
you keep them up your sleeve.
In the years following the meeting at the Parco dei Principi Hotel, the
counter-revolutionary strategy devised by the Pollio Institute was
progressively put into effect in Italy, often involving close practical
collaboration between the secret services and members of the extreme right.
One particularly scandalous instance of this was the training of rightists at a
secret NATO base near Capo Marrargiu on the west coast of Sardinia.
According to Giuseppe De Lutiis,28 the base was set up in 1963, just as
General De Lorenzo was laying plans for his coup of the following year, as
a school for saboteurs to be run by Italian military intelligence. In 1968 the
base was expanded and modernized under the guidance of American
‘technicians’. Its purpose was to train ‘stay-behind units’ who would
organize resistance and sabotage behind enemy lines in the event of an
Eastern Bloc invasion of Italy. More realistically, the units were to carry out
sabotage and terrorism in peacetime Italy to ensure that Italian communists
never got their hands on the levers of power. Those trained at the school
came from a similar background to Colonel Rocca’s recruits: former
military personnel and right-wingers who could be relied on for their
passionate anti-communism. The school was at its most active between
1969 and 1975. During that time, which coincided with the early years of
the strategy of tension, between 1,000 and 4,000 potential terrorists were
trained at the base. Many of the students were flown in by military aircraft

--- Sayfa 43 ---
from Ciampino military airport just outside Rome and then taken out to the
base, which was inaccessible by road, by helicopter. At the end of the
course, Capo Marrargiu graduates would be allowed to keep the weapons
and explosives with which they had been provided on arrival at the base.
This may go some way towards explaining why the explosives used in
right-wing bombings very rarely turned out to be stolen. According to one
account, Arab guerrillas and members of left-wing groups also received
training at the base.29 De Lutiis’ account of the base bears a remarkable
similarity to a training camp for CIA special agents described in L’Espresso
magazine (18 January 1976): ‘It’s in Sardinia, in an inaccessible location,
and the trainees are almost all destined for the countries of Eastern Europe
and the Middle East.’ Clearly, not all Capo Marrargiu’s graduates went so
far afield.
A meeting of Ordine Nuovo held in the town of Cattolica on the north-
east coast of Italy between 28 February and 2 March 1974 gives a further
indication of the close relationship between the secret services and
members of the far right. Despite the fact that ON had been officially
banned by the Interior Minister in November 1973, the group decided to
stage its meeting at a hotel run by a secret service informer. Subjects for
discussion were the clandestine reorganization of Ordine Nuovo and
weapons procurement. The hotel was the Pensione Giada, run by Caterino
Falzari, a fluent speaker of Slavonic languages who had worked as a
translator for the police, the carabinieri and the secret services. ‘It is at the
very least unusual for the leaders of an illegal group to choose to meet in a
place where they know they may be under surveillance,’ commented Vito
Zincani, an examining magistrate from Bologna. ‘The only explanation is
that that was the one place where they knew they were safe.’30
Whatever the Italian secret services were doing, it is unlikely they
were acting entirely on their own initiative, if one bears in mind the
comments of the minority report of the parliamentary investigation into the
SIFAR affair. It found that the Italian government had allowed the
establishment of a secret service office ‘at the disposal of the secret services
of other countries, to gather information on entire categories of citizens,
particularly those of a certain political persuasion, but also on the whole
political class of our country’. The report said that the foreign secret
services (its authors fight shy of openly naming the United States) had as a
result been able to influence Italian government appointments. It warned

--- Sayfa 44 ---
that the provision of this information ‘makes the interference of foreign
secret services far more penetrating; the propensity of some of them to
intervene, even violently, in other countries’ political affairs, is known
through past experience. The activities of such agencies have constituted,
and still do, a latent threat to the democratic stability and the prospects for
progress of our country.’31
Notes
1   Quoted in Ray S. Cline, The CIA under Reagan, Bush and
Casey, Acropolis Books, Washington, 1981, p. 123.
2   William Blum, The CIA: A Forgotten History, Zed Books,
London, 1986, p. 25.
3   Ibid., p. 27.
4   Ibid., p. 27.
5    La Repubblica, 5 April 1988.
6   Roberto Faenza and Marco Fini, Gli Americani in Italia ,
Feltrinelli, Milan, 1976, p. 276.
7   William Blum, op. cit., p. 29.
8   Ibid., p. 29.
9   Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in Italia , Editori
Riuniti, Rome, 1984, pp. 48-9.
10   Ibid., p. 50.
11   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni (ed.), Servizi Segreti , Tullio
Pironti, Naples, 1984, p. 4.
12   Roberto Faenza, Il Malaffare , Mondadori, Milan, 1978, p.
318.
13   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni, op. cit., p. 14.
14   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Tartito del Golpe , Vol.1, Italo
Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1981, p. 136.
15   Massimo Caprara, ‘La verità sta negli omissis’, in Il Mondo ,
25 July.
16   Roberto Faenza, op. cit., p. 317.
17   Massimo Caprara, op. cit.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
18   Marco Sassano, SID e Partito Americano , Marsilio Editori,
Padua, 1975, p. 76.
19   Roberto Faenza, op. cit., p. 369.
20   Marco Sassano, op. cit., p. 80.
21   Ibid., p. 85.
22   Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., p. 73.
23   Ibid., p. 87.
24   Ambrogio Viviani, Servizi Segreti Italiani 1815-1985, ADN
Kronos Libri, Rome, 1985, p. 137.
25   La Guerra Rivoluzionaria, Atti del primo convegno
organizzato dall’Istituto Pollio, Giovanni Volpe Editore, Rome, 1965.
26   Atti del processo a carico di Graziani Clemente ed altri ,
Rome, 1973.
27   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni, op. cit., p. 19.
28   Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., pp. 133-7.
29   Corrado Incerti and Sandro Ottolenghi, L’Europeo , 21 May
1976.
30   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni, op. cit., p. 39.
31   Ibid., p. 15.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
[3]
THE MASONIC CONSPIRACY
Ahi, Pistoia, Pistoia, chè non stanza
D’incenerarti si che più non duri,
Poi che in mal far lo seme tuo avanzi?
(Ah, Pistoia, Pistoia, why do you not decree your own reduction to
ashes so that you endure no longer, since you surpass even your ancestors in
evil-doing?)
Dante Alighieri, Inferno , Canto 25.
In 1967 many of the most sensitive files from the SIFAR archives
passed into the hands of the man who would later become Venerable Master
of the Propaganda Two (P2) secret masonic lodge. They were given to him
by General Giovanni Allavena, director of SIFAR until his dismissal in June
1965, on the general’s joining the lodge. The man who received them and
whose discreet use of them would make him one of the most influential
power-brokers in Italy was Licio Gelli. The son of a Tuscan miller, Gelli
was born in Pistoia on 21 April 1919. By the early 1970s he was firmly
established as the head of a lodge which numbered among its members
senior officers from all branches of the military (including the secret
services), parliamentarians, civil servants and members of the judiciary, as
well as prominent figures from the worlds of finance and industry. At the
height of his power, Gelli and his associates were able to influence
government appointments and policy, help to advance the careers of P2
members in all fields, and enrich themselves by converting political
influence into material wealth on a grand scale. This period coincided with
the most radical implementation of the strategy of tension and an upsurge of
terrorist violence in Italy. It is unlikely that US intelligence agencies would
have allowed the SIFAR files, which were created at their instigation and at
a time when they exercised tight control over the Italian secret services, to
fall into unauthorized hands.
There are a wide range of conflicting views as to the real nature and
purpose of P2. Some people maintain it was principally an association of
thieves, others that it was a mutual aid society for ambitious careerists, and

--- Sayfa 47 ---
others that it was primarily a political organization. There is also
considerable disagreement over its political aims, whom it served and who
was damaged by its activities. The first accurate insight into the nature and
dimensions of the lodge came in March 1981 when two Milan magistrates
ordered a search of Gelli’s Arezzo home and of his office at the Giole
mattress factory in nearby Castiglion Fibocchi. The latter yielded up
membership lists containing 962 names, along with other documents
relating to the lodge. The discovery that four cabinet ministers, three under-
secretaries and thirty-eight parliamentarians were members of P2
precipitated the fall of the government led by Arnaldo Forlani, and for the
first time since the war a Prime Minister was appointed from outside the
Christian Democrat Party. A commission of legal experts decided the lodge
was a secret association and therefore illegal under the terms of the
constitution. An all-party parliamentary commission then spent three years
investigating the activities of the lodge. Its report, couched in cautious and
at times ambiguous language, reflected an attempt to gain the widest
possible political support for its conclusions and embarrassment at the
extent to which the Italian establishment had identified with Gelli’s political
project.
The commission was presided over by Tina Anselmi, a Christian
Democrat deputy, whose independent-minded direction of the investigation
effectively scotched her chances of achieving ministerial office. Its report,
published in 1984, described P2 as ‘a neutral instrument for operations of
conditioning and control’ of Italian political life. It likened P2 to a pyramid
with Gelli at the apex, but suggested that above Gelli there was another,
inverted, pyramid containing the people responsible for the overall strategy
and who passed their orders down to the lower pyramid through Gelli. For
understandable reasons of political expediency the commission chose not to
point an accusing finger at Italy’s powerful ally, the United States. It
claimed that it had been unable to identify the forces present in the upper
pyramid ‘other than identifying the nature of the relationship linking Licio
Gelli to the secret services’. In a first draft, the report described Gelli’s
relationship with the military as having the objective of ‘maintaining a
political framework congenial to the traditional forces of power’.1 This
passage, which could also be applied to his relationship with the secret
services, was dropped as part of the process of toning down the original
version of the report. The final document gives no clear and unequivocal

--- Sayfa 48 ---
account of the purpose of Gelli’s partnership with the secret services; it
does, however, drop the hint that interpretations of P2 ‘should not be
restricted to narrow domestic horizons, but should look realistically at the
problems of our epoch and the role our country plays in it’.2 Despite the
overwhelming evidence of P2’s role in a wider conservative conspiracy, the
accounts of the lodge are as varied as the diverse political parties that care
to put them forward. One version popular among the conservative parties is
that Gelli was an agent of the KGB or some other Eastern Bloc secret
service. Gelli being a complex character, there is some evidence to support
this view, at least with regard to the early years of his career. But the first
public manifestation of his political leanings came with the Spanish Civil
War. At the age of seventeen, Gelli enrolled as a volunteer in the 735th
Black Shirts Battalion and went to fight in Spain, where his brother
Raffaele was killed at Malaga in April 1938. After returning to Italy Gelli
enlisted in an infantry regiment in 1940. A year later he volunteered to join
a parachute regiment but was invalided out after an accident in training. In
1942 he was sent to the small port of Cattaro in Yugoslavia as aide-de-camp
to a Fascist Party official. There he is reported to have worked for SIM, the
wartime secret service, and come into contact with representatives of the
British and Soviet secret services.3 At the time the Italians were holding the
Yugoslav national gold reserves in the town before transporting them to
Rome and were warding off attempts by the British, Germans and Yugoslav
Resistance to ‘liberate’ the gold. The fact is sometimes cited as a possible
explanation for Gelli’s subsequent wealth. His boss, Piero Parini, was
reportedly involved in putting out secret feelers on behalf of Mussolini to
both Soviet and Western representatives.4 If Gelli was involved in these
negotiations it may have given him his first opportunity to enter into contact
with secret services from both sides of the future Iron Curtain.
In 1943 he returned to Italy to become liaison officer for the German
forces in his home town of Pistoia, with the rank of sergeant-major in the
Hermann Goering Division of the German SS. It was during the closing
stages of the war that he began to show the talent for deviousness and
double-dealing for which he would later be renowned and which would
make it so difficult to identify him in his true political colours. Overtly
committed to the fascist Salo regime but facing the certainty of an imminent
Allied victory, Gelli had to resolve a further dilemma: with which partisan
camp should he throw in his lot? Given the hostility between the

--- Sayfa 49 ---
communists and the other antifascist forces, having collaborated with one
group would not necessarily guarantee protection from the other. As a
natural survivor, Gelli appears to have hedged his bets. His biographers cite
descriptions of him as a ferocious torturer of Italian partisans and deserters.
But other accounts have him leading German troops on fruitless searches of
the Italian countryside having first tipped off the Resistance about their
plans.
A document dated 4 October 1944, and signed by the communist
president of the Pistoia National Liberation Committee, Italo Carobbi, states
that Gelli, ‘despite having served the fascists and the Germans, made
himself useful to the cause of local patriots’.5 Pending further examination
of his activities, it said, he should not be interfered with in any way. It
stated specifically that Gelli had warned partisans that they were about to be
arrested, driven supplies to two non-communist Resistance formations on
six occasions, and participated in a raid to free political prisoners from jail.
The curious thing about the document is that it is signed by a communist
Resistance leader, but the specific instances of collaboration that it cites
were carried out with non-communist partisan groups, who do not appear to
have been consulted before the document was drawn up. It is possible,
however, that Gelli also collaborated with the communists through one of
his sisters, who was married to a communist Resistance member.
One of the groups with which Gelli worked was led by an anarchist,
Silvano Fedi. Fedi was betrayed to the Germans and killed in an ambush on
29 July 1944. Rumours at the time suggested that it was Gelli who had
betrayed him. According to Marcello Coppetti, a Florentine journalist,
expert on UFOs and the paranormal, and a self-professed ‘enemy’ of
Gelli’s, Gelli may have betrayed Fedi as a favour to the communists, who
viewed him as a dangerous and unruly rival. It was this favour, according to
Coppetti, that would enable Gelli to blackmail the Communist Party in later
years. Coppetti claims the destabilization of Italy may have been the fruit of
a secret pact between the CIA and the KGB, working together to a common
goal. Although he was at times close to both Gelli and the Italian secret
services and excessively well informed, he does not appear a particularly
reliable witness. We will meet him again.
The confusingly ambivalent communist attitude towards Gelli was
well illustrated by an article in the neo-fascist newspaper Il Giornale

--- Sayfa 50 ---
d’ltalia (3 February 1982). The paper published a letter, dated 29 January
1952, from a former mayor of Pistoia and Communist Party senator,
Giuseppe Corsini, requesting Gelli’s assistance in speeding up the payment
of a pension to one of Corsini’s relatives. The letter opened ‘Dear Licio’
and concluded ‘with sincere thanks and cordial greetings’. Another letter
followed from Corsini, this time to an old friend of his, the freemason
Menotti Baldini, who had written to him to inquire about Gelli’s wartime
activities. The letter, dated 30 April 1972, described the fascist Gelli as ‘the
organizer of all the reprisals’ and responsible for ‘the most ferocious
torture’ of suspected partisans. Either Corsini had gathered new information
on Gelli in the intervening years or he had known this all along and was a
man of remarkable cynicism. Alternatively, he may have considered that it
was necessary to preserve Gelli’s persona as a fascist torturer as cover for
someone who was, in reality, a faithful servant of the communists. The
lukewarm denunciation of Gelli by the communists in later years and their
acceptance of a soft-soaping P2 Commission report would square with the
view of Gelli as a communist spy or in some way capable of blackmailing
the Communist Party.
Communist Party representatives argue that their delay in denouncing
Gelli was the result of ignorance about him, caused by their exclusion from
government and its confidential sources of information. Their acceptance of
a weakly worded parliamentary report was prompted by the desire to see it
endorsed by as many parties as possible and, according to their friends, by a
long-standing inferiority complex when it comes to criticism of the United
States. Gelli himself offered a possible clue in a defensive memorandum he
sent to the commission in 1984. In his inimitable style, he complained of
the distortion of the facts and the false charges laid against him ‘in the hope,
which I intend to disappoint, that I may have forgotten what I learned in my
multifarious contacts, which spread in every direction, in absolutely every
direction’.6
The author of a 1950 secret service report on Gelli, published by the
P2 Commission, had no doubt about his political leanings. ‘The above-
mentioned is one of the most dangerous elements operating in the 8th Zone
under the direct orders of the Communist Party,’ he wrote. In short, Gelli
was ideally cut out to be a communist spy ‘because of his qualities as a
traitor, because of his skills as a delinquent and because of his mobility’.
According to the report, entitled Cominform, Gelli went over to the

--- Sayfa 51 ---
communists in 1944 ‘to save his skin’. He had been put up against a wall
and was about to be shot by partisans ‘when the timely intervention of the
communist Giuseppe Corsini saved him from his just deserts’. He began his
intelligence-gathering work in 1947, making full use of the fact that he was
considered to be a fascist sympathizer. The report noted that he appeared to
spend far more money than his probable earnings would allow and said he
was suspected of involvement in arms trafficking with members of a
communist revolutionary cell.7 Another secret service report written about
the same time stated that Gelli was ‘continuing his suspect activity, masked
by his work for an American typewriter company: Remington Rand
Italiana’, whose representative he had become. Gelli had opened a shop in
Pistoia’s Corso Gramsci, it said, where ‘a portrait of General MacArthur
dominates one wall’.8 Neither report however offers any concrete evidence
of Gelli’s espionage activities and rather than pursuing him and bringing
him to trial for spying, the secret services subsequently appear to have lost
all interest in him. In 1956 his name was removed from the Interior
Ministry’s register of potential subversives. By 1974 he was being
described as politically to the right and ‘highly regarded in influential
circles in Arezzo’, where he then lived.9
Thus far, it would appear that Gelli may have worked for communist
partisans in the closing stages of the war and for communist intelligence
after it. Having been discovered by the Italian secret services he then
changed his allegiance again and agreed to work for them, after which the
secret service archives have little of interest to offer on him. There is,
however, no concrete detail on what he may have done for the communists
and it would be wise to view any secret service report on him with
considerable scepticism. The parliamentary commission suggested as much
when it said the letters accompanying the Cominform report appeared to be
‘more the formal pretext’ for acquiring the document than a genuine
correspondence between secret service offices.10
Gelli’s reported contacts with Western intelligence go back just as far
as those with the communists. It is of course possible that for a while he
worked for both. A note accompanying a list of fifty-six Pistoia fascists
betrayed to the police by Gelli after the war’s end reported that he began
collaborating with the Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC) of the American
Fifth Army in October 1944. And an article in La Nazione newspaper (1
September 1981) described Gelli’s capture by communist partisans on 8

--- Sayfa 52 ---
September 1944, as he acted as guide to a patrol of South African soldiers.
In this version he was saved from a firing squad by Osvaldo Gori, a nephew
of Corsini, who confirmed the account. ‘I knew that Licio had been a fascist
but I also knew that he had later collaborated with us, although, after all
these years, I couldn’t say how,’ he told the paper. It is also interesting that
amid correspondence predating the Cominform report was a note requesting
information about Gelli following a tip-off from ‘an allied agency’ that he
was a suspected communist agent. And a covering letter accompanying the
report, dated 29 September 1950, actually attributes Cominform to ‘the
noted informant at the American embassy’ from whom it had been received
some time earlier. 11 So it would appear that Gelli may owe his communist
credentials, true or false, to American intelligence.
The P2 Commission was in no doubt about Gelli’s relationship with
the Italian secret service. ‘There is no alternative but to recognize that Gelli
belonged to the secret service, since it is the only logical explanation for the
protection extended to him, both passively, by not acquiring information on
him, and actively, by not supplying information to the political authorities
who requested it,’ it wrote. The commission cited two reports from the
office of military intelligence in Florence which related that, prior to June
1971, Gelli told a number of people that he was a secret service agent
operating under the cover name of Filippo. The commission considered that
he had offered convincing evidence to back up his claim. Among other
things, the reports said, he used to give the telephone number of the
Florence secret service office to people who needed to contact him. The
commission also cited an incident in which the director of counter-
espionage ‘flew into a fury’ on learning that the head of the Florence office
of military intelligence had initiated an investigation into Gelli. He later
personally reprimanded the officer for his action, describing Gelli as
‘someone influential and useful to the service’.12 In later years Gelli had a
secret service office in Rome at his personal disposal. On ι July 1978, he
wrote to members of the P2 lodge to inform them that they could call a
number in Rome, 4759347, during office hours if they wanted further
information about ‘our institution’. Even years later, according to Bologna
prosecutors Libero Mancuso and Attilio Dardani, the number corresponded
to a secret service office in an annexe of the Defence Ministry.13 It is
unlikely that at this stage the secret services can have suspected Gelli of
having secret communist leanings.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Communist P2 commissioner Antonio Bellocchio takes a different
view. ‘We have identified, above all, the American secret services as the
occupants of the upper pyramid,’ he told me.16 ‘We have come to the
definite conclusion that Italy is a country of limited sovereignty because of
the interference of the American secret services and international
freemasonry. If the majority of the commission had been prepared to follow
us in this analysis they would have had to admit that they are puppets of the
United States of America, and they don’t intend to admit that ever.’ It is
possible that both Piazzesi and Bellocchio are right. It is unlikely that Gelli
was the originator of the political projects he pursued. For a start, he was
only semi-educated, having been expelled from school at the age of thirteen
for striking the headmaster. His role was simply to follow instructions. It is
a sad reflection on Italian political life that a man of Gelli’s modest
intellectual abilities, for all his shrewdness and cunning, should once have
wielded such influence. There can be little doubt, given his talent for timely
shifts of allegiance in order to ensure his presence on the winning side, that
from an early stage he had thrown in his lot with the conservative forces
that have dominated post-war Italy and who had the ultimate guarantor of
their power in Washington.
This did not preclude him from engaging in profitable trading relations
with Romania while, according to one report, P2 members in the finance
police turned a blind eye to customs irregularities. Gelli’s involvement in
the clothes and textiles trade with Romania in the 1970s is frequently cited
by those who claim he was an East Bloc agent. Given the independent
foreign policy line pursued by President Nikolai Ceausescu and the favour,
including an English knighthood, that it won him in the West, the argument
is not entirely convincing. The Italian secret service can hardly expect to be
believed when it generates a report describing Gelli as a potential
communist ‘sleeper’ at a time when he is on intimate terms with the heads
of the service, who also happen to belong to his masonic lodge. In order to
understand the complex and elusive character who was Venerable Master of
P2 it is necessary to appreciate the nature of the lodge, its relationship to the
secret services, and the patrons who promoted Gelli’s remarkable masonic
and political career. There is plenty of evidence available.
Gelli himself has offered plenty of clues, in numerous interviews, in
memoranda to the P2 Commission and in his autobiography, modestly
entitled The Truth. His utterances are undoubtedly self-serving but can

--- Sayfa 54 ---
sometimes be illuminating, particularly if one manages to decipher his
coded messages to powerful former friends. I went to speak to him in the
summer of 1989 at his luxury villa surrounded by vineyards and cypress
trees on a secluded hill near the Tuscan town of Arezzo. Gelli was happily
holding court to members of the foreign and Italian press who wished to
make the pilgrimage to hear his tale of the political persecution of innocent
men. He gave the impression of a mild-mannered provincial banker, with
grey hair, a grey suit and a slightly bulbous nose in a placid-looking face.
There were no visible signs of the heart disease that had secured his early
release from prison for an urgent bypass operation, which many months
later had still not been deemed necessary. Nor did his judicial position seem
to be causing undue preoccupation.
Gelli began our conversation with a solemn and somewhat
sanctimonious disquisition on the abuse of media power and the iniquities
of the twentieth century. The P2 lodge, he was happy to explain, was a
regular lodge owing obedience to the Grand Orient of Italy but with special
rules of confidentiality because it contained important personalities and
others whose ideology ostensibly precluded them from becoming masons. It
was therefore inappropriate for their identities to be divulged or for them to
be expected to meet all the other members of the lodge. ‘And anyway it was
impossible as there was nowhere large enough for 1,000 or 1,500 people to
meet.’17 This was reassuring news. Listening to Gelli’s bland words and
observing his mild demeanour, one might have started to believe that he
really was an inoffensive old man, the victim of judicial persecution. But
here, already, was one of the blackmailing messages for which he is
renowned. So there are 500 people who have still not been identified? Ί
don’t know. There are those who speak of 1,000 members, others speak of
1,500, others of 2,000, some have even reached the figure of 3,000.’ Gelli
had handed over the membership list to the Grand Master before leaving the
country in 1981 and it was up to that official’s successor, he said, to reveal
the true figure. There have been repeated claims that the P2 membership
was well over 1,000 and this implicit confirmation from Gelli himself
would indeed be worrying for members whose identity had not yet publicly
emerged.
Gelli continued in similar vein. What was his reaction to claims by
Clara Calvi, widow of Banco Ambrosiano chairman Roberto Calvi, that the
real head of P2 had been Giulio Andreotti, followed at the top of the

--- Sayfa 55 ---
organization by Francesco Cosentino, secretary general of the Chamber of
Deputies, and businessman Umberto Ortolani: according to this hierarchy,
Gelli was only fourth in the pecking order of the lodge? ‘Really? I was the
Venerable Master, so if those others were members, and I am not free to say,
they were only ordinary members.’ This is a curious lapse on Gelli’s part.
The names of both Ortolani and Cosentino were on the Castiglion Fibocchi
lists; Andreotti’s was not, something one might have expected Gelli to point
out.
Gelli began his masonic career in 1965 when he joined the Romagnosi
lodge of the Grand Orient of Italy. Italian freemasonry is divided into two
principal groupings, commonly referred to by the name of their Rome
headquarters. The Grand Orient, with between 15,000 and 20,000 members,
had its headquarters in Palazzo Giustiniani, while its chief rival, with 5,000-
10,000 affiliates, was based in the central Piazza del Gesù. The revival of
freemasonry in Italy after the war was encouraged by both the British and
the Americans and lodges sprang up in the wake of the advancing Allied
armies as the period of fascist persecution of masons came to an end. A
secret service report on ‘Freemasonry in Italy’ highlighted the influence of
British and American freemasonry on Italian lodges. ‘Washington’s policy
is to direct European states towards interests and objectives that fall into the
United States’ orbit, concerned as it is not to lose Western Europe and to
counteract Moscow’s attempts to engineer the break-up of NATO,’18 it
observed. The masonic influence of the United States coincided with its
military presence. According to Giuseppe D’Alema,19 American lodges
have been set up for every NATO base in Italy, beginning with the
Benjamin Franklin, established in Livorno on 25 July 1959. Palazzo
Giustiniani owed a particular debt of gratitude to US freemasonry as it only
recovered its headquarters, which had been confiscated under Mussolini,
after American pressure on the Italian government. A key role in the
negotiations was played by one Frank Gigliotti, a former OSS and then CIA
agent. The agreement to return the building to the Grand Orient was signed
in i960 by the Italian Finance Minister and Grand Master Publio Cortini.
Witnesses at the ceremony were US Ambassador James Zellerbach and
Frank Gigliotti.20
Also in i960, Palazzo Giustiniani received official recognition from the
powerful North American masonic district. Part of the deal was that the
Grand Orient should agree to merge with a small Scottish rite lodge headed

--- Sayfa 56 ---
by the right-wing Sicilian Prince Giovanni Alliata di Montereale. Despite
its diminutive size, Alliata’s lodge, based in Via Lombardia in Rome,
already enjoyed the recognition of the North American district. It is a good
indication of the political complexion of US-sponsored freemasonry that
Alliata would later be implicated in both the Borghese and Rosa dei Venti
coup plots, as well as being linked to the Mafia.
This was exactly the milieu in which Gelli’s career would thrive. After
a year in the Romagnosi lodge he was transferred to P2, a lodge where the
membership was known only to the Grand Master and to the lodge
secretary, in order to protect its influential affiliates from the importunate
demands for assistance of their less fortunate ‘brothers’. The lodge was
named Propaganda Two to distinguish it from another, regular Propaganda
lodge based in Turin. In 1969 Gelli was given the task of working for the
unification of the various Italian masonic groupings and to improve
relations with the Catholic Church, which until 1983 explicitly
excommunicated any Catholic who became a freemason. In 1971 he was
made secretary of P2. This accelerated masonic promotion was personally
instigated by Grand Master Giordano Gamberini, who has been dubbed ‘the
travelling-salesman of anti-communism’. On his retirement in 1970,
Gamberini was given responsibility for contacts with foreign masonic
lodges and with the CIA.21 Gelli was asked about the reason for his rapid
masonic career by the left-leaning mason Ferdinando Accornero at a
meeting of the Grand Orient’s governing council in 1967. ‘He told me he
was a member of the council as a representative of a foreign Grand Lodge
the name of which I don’t remember,’ Accornero told Bologna magistrates
in 1977.
In order to understand the purpose of P2 one has to bear in mind the
nature of its membership. Politicians in the lodge were recruited from every
political party except the Radical and Communist Parties. The membership
lists discovered in 1981 showed that 195 high-ranking officers from all
branches of the military belonged to the lodge. There were fifty-two officers
from the carabinieri paramilitary police, six from the police and thirty-
seven from the finance police; nine belonged to the Air Force, twenty-nine
to the Navy and fifty to the Army. Most significantly, the heads of both the
domestic secret service (SISDE) and military intelligence (SISMI) were
affiliates. ‘As can be seen at a glance, the membership lists reveal a map of
the highest levels of military power, with individuals who have often played

--- Sayfa 57 ---
a central role in particularly significant moments of the recent history of our
country, as well as in events of a subversive nature,’22 the P2 Commission
commented.
One of the most significant names on the list was that of General Vito
Miceli, the head of military intelligence arrested in 1974 on a charge of
subversive conspiracy. Miceli’s membership of the lodge is particularly
illuminating, given the sensitive nature of his military career. Before
becoming head of military intelligence Miceli had been responsible for the
Atlantic Pact Security Office, vetting government officials for their security
clearance: not a job that would be entrusted to someone who did not enjoy
the full confidence of the NATO intelligence establishment. American
confidence in Miceli was illustrated in February 1972 when Ambassador
Graham Martin made him a secret payment of $800,000 to be used on
political propaganda. Miceli joined P2 in October 1971, in the same month
as he was appointed director of SID. Gelli was at first coy about his
relationship with members of the secret services when I spoke to him. ‘If
there was an officer who was a member of P2 I wasn’t in a position to know
it because I wouldn’t ask him whether he belonged to the secret services
and if he did belong, he shouldn’t tell me, or what sort of secret services
would they have been?’ But he quickly recognized the manifest
implausibility of this explanation coming from the head of a masonic lodge
whose members numbered among them the highest ranks in both branches
of the intelligence service. Ί knew masses of them, what do you expect? I
knew whether or not they belonged to the secret services,’ Gelli said, while
insisting that he had never himself worked for either the KGB, the CIA or
the Italian intelligence services. A more accurate impression of his
influence emerges from a claim he made to Florence Prosecutor Pierluigi
Vigna. He boasted to the magistrate in 1974 that he had actually engineered
Miceli’s appointment as director of SID through his own political
contacts.23 The claim is by no means implausible. In June 1976 Miceli was
elected to Parliament as a representative of the neo-fascist party, the
Movimento Sociale Italiano (MSI).
Gelli’s overt political activity has always been right-wing, despite the
secret service disinformation about his Eastern Bloc contacts and his
complex relationship with some members of the PCI. Clearly, a man of
Miceli’s political outlook felt quite at home in the P2 lodge. Gelli himself
has made no secret of his anti-communism, while preferring to classify

--- Sayfa 58 ---
himself as a political moderate in his conversation with the author. Ί can tell
you that we [in the P2 lodge] were always anti-communist. We were above
all political ideology but we wanted nothing whatever to do with the two
political extremes, with the far right and the far left. All the others were
acceptable.’ Gelli claimed he had never had any contacts with the PCI,
other than with Italo Carobbi, an old family friend, and with Osvaldo Gori,
a distant cousin and the man who had saved him from a partisan firing
squad. Ί have no respect for the PCI. There are those who are born
mediocre and those who become mediocre by joining the PCI,’ he quipped.
For all his claims that he and his lodge were above politics, there is
considerable evidence that both were actively involved in the politics of the
extreme right over many years. As early as September 1969, a freemason
from the Umbrian town of Grosseto referred in a letter to Gelli’s
involvement in the secret masonic initiation of 400 senior army officers in
order to prepare a ‘government of colonels, always preferable to a
communist government’.24 But there is more than mere hearsay to go on.
On 15 July 1971, Gelli sent a copy of the minutes of a P2 meeting held in
Rome on 5 March to those members who had been unable to attend. ‘As
you can see, philosophy has been banned, but we thought, and still do, that
we must tackle solid and concrete questions concerning the entire life of the
nation,’ he wrote in a covering letter, thus reversing the usual masonic
embargo on politics. The subjects discussed at the meeting included: ‘a. the
political and economic situation in Italy; b. the threat of the Communist
Party, allied to clericalism, attempting to seize power; c. the inadequacy of
the forces of law and order; f. our position in the event of the clerico-
communists coming to power.’25 At a meeting of the governing council of
the Grand Orient on 10 July 1971, Grand Master Salvini warned that Gelli
was organizing a coup. At about the same time, the left-wing mason
Ermenegildo Benedetti was receiving reports that Gelli had written to
senior military officers belonging to P2 inviting them to consider the
possibility of forming a military government.
Gelli’s publicly professed political ideas can be gathered from an
affidavit he swore for Michele Sindona when the Sicilian financier was
fighting extradition from the United States to Italy following the 1974
collapse of his transatlantic banking empire. In his testimony Gelli
described himself as someone who had spent all his life fighting against
communism. ‘As a businessman I am known for being anti-communist and

--- Sayfa 59 ---
I am aware of the communist attacks on Michele Sindona,’ he declared.
‘The hatred of the communists for Michele Sindona is due to the fact that
he is anti-communist and has always been in favour of a free enterprise
system in a democratic Italy.’ He rounded off his affidavit by emphasizing
the deteriorating situation in Italy caused by the ‘infiltration of the left’ and
warning that Sindona would not get a fair trial in the country but that his
very life could be in danger.26
The political project elaborated within P2 is spelt out in detail in two
documents confiscated from Gelli’s daughter Maria Grazia at Rome airport
on 4 July 1981. The documents, written for Gelli around 1976, advocate a
government by technocrats and reform of the constitution to allow a
presidential system of government based on the French or American model.
Some of the proposals, such as the civil responsibility of magistrates and
other constitutional changes, have since been introduced or are currently
under discussion. The overall package was unquestionably right-wing-
restricting the political influence of trade unions was a prime objective-but
it contained a number of perfectly reasonable and moderate proposals that
could hardly be seen as a denial of the principles of Western democracy.
More objectionable, though, were the methods by which the plans were to
be implemented.
In one of the documents, a ‘Memorandum on the Political Situation in
Italy’, the author speculated about the possibility of civil war in Italy, which
would justify the formation of a military government ‘as the only
alternative to a communist regime’. The author observed that the
international situation ‘does not seem to allow exceptions to the logic of
Yalta, not even for Finnish-style frontier experiments, and if that may seem
comforting on the one hand, in another respect it is not, because the
dominant power (USA) does not appear to be inclined, despite its
experiences in South-east Asia, towards patient British-style therapies.’ The
memorandum referred to the PCI as ‘hiding its true Hungarian and
Czechoslovak face behind a mask of respectability’ and voiced the
suspicion that Italy’s terrorist bombings were the work of Soviet or East
German agents. The second document, a ‘Plan for Democratic Revival’,
specifically ruled out the overthrow of the system by force but
recommended corruption as a suitable alternative. The author suggested that
‘figures of not more than 30 or 40 billion Lire [£20-26 million] should be
enough for well-chosen men of good faith to win the necessary key

--- Sayfa 60 ---
positions’ in order to control the political parties, press and trade unions. If
it was decided that the existing political parties were not so discredited as to
be useless, ‘adequate financial instruments’ would be made available to buy
their control. If they were not salvageable, two new political parties would
be created. With regard to the press, a couple of campaigning news
magazines were to be bought, as were individual journalists, two or three
per publication. ‘Once acquired, the journalists must be given the task of
“supporting” selected politicians,’ the author noted. Though the season for
coups passed without the feared military takeover ever occurring, the
‘Democratic Revival’ of Italy was well under way before Gelli’s disgrace in
1981.27
Given its membership and the political project it pursued, it seems
clear that the true function of P2 was that of an anti-communist security
organization, operating to prevent the PCI from achieving power in Italy
and to reduce its influence in the country. Gelli himself did not quarrel with
this definition when I spoke to him. Until 1976 a number of its members
played a leading role in a succession of right-wing coup plots, though
opinion was divided over whether the coup should really be enacted or
whether the mere threat of it would be enough to shift the political centre of
gravity to the right.
Over the years various judicial investigations have uncovered evidence
linking P2 to right-wing terrorism. One of the earliest, the investigation into
the bombing of the Italicus express train on 4 August 19/4, in which twelve
people were killed and 105 injured, concluded that the P2 lodge was at the
time ‘a powerful arsenal containing the most dangerous instruments of
political and moral subversion and as such in irrefutable contrast with the
professed statutory aims of the institution’.28 The Bologna assize court
acquitted the defendants for lack of evidence but it put on record the
opinion of the injured parties that the accused had been ‘inspired, armed
and financed by freemasonry, which made use of subversion and right-wing
terrorism in the framework of the so-called “strategy of tension” to create
the conditions for a possible coup d’etat .’ The verdict stated that the
implication of P2 in the crime had met with ‘grave and alarming
corroboration’, despite the fact that the evidence was insufficient to secure a
conviction. It also noted that P2 showed ‘evident leanings towards coup
plotting’ and had financed right-wing parliamentarians and youths
belonging to rightist extra-parliamentary groups.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
In December 1987 a Florence assize court sentenced Gelli to eight
years’ imprisonment for financing an armed band, whose activities included
planting bombs on railway lines in Tuscany between 1973 and 1975. The
court found him guilty of making a payment of 18 million Lire (£11,000) to
Augusto Cauchi, the co-ordinator of ‘black’ terrorism in Tuscany, in the
spring of 1974. The verdict stated that Gelli was aware that ‘the money
offered would be used to buy arms and explosives’ and that it was likely to
be used for terrorist acts ‘aimed at blocking the movement to the left of the
political order; he could not but be aware of that because that was his aim
too and because in those years a terrorist bombing was neither an
exceptional nor improbable event’. According to ex-terrorist Andrea Brogi,
Cauchi told Gelli the money would be used for training and for minor
bombings in the lead-up to that year’s referendum on divorce, which was
expected to result in a victory for the left. Cauchi’s group feared that the
defeat of the Christian Democrats by a vote for the retention of the divorce
law would be followed by a further victory of the left in subsequent general
elections. ‘In practice we would have become partisans in reverse and
would have taken to the hills,’ Brogi explained. He said that Gelli agreed to
make the payment provided a representative of the carabinieri was present
at the handover and that the money was used exclusively for the purposes
Cauchi had indicated to him. The surprising insistence that a member of the
paramilitary police should act as guarantor for the transaction is less strange
when one remembers the frequent collusion between members of the armed
forces and right-wing terrorists and coup plotters.
In July 1988 Gelli was convicted of aggravated calumny at the
Bologna bomb trial and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment. The
unusually harsh sentence was because Gelli was held to have been involved
in an attempt to disrupt the investigations by fabricating evidence against
innocent people. The court acquitted him for lack of evidence on charges of
subversive conspiracy. Since Switzerland has refused to extradite him for
these ‘political’ offences, the sentences remain a dead letter. On 15
September 1987, Gelli brought to an end a period of six years on the run in
South America by giving himself up to the Swiss authorities. He had
previously been arrested in Switzerland in 1982 for using a false passport
but had avoided extradition to Italy then by his timely escape from Champ-
Dollon prison on 10 August 1983. Though he cannot be tried for terrorism-
related crimes, the Swiss did agree to extradite him to face charges of

--- Sayfa 62 ---
calumny against two Milan magistrates and for his alleged involvement in
the fraudulent bankruptcy of the Banco Ambrosiano. He was finally
extradited to Italy on 17 February 1988, and released on grounds of ill
health a mere seven weeks later. Since then, his role as invalid and victim of
judicial persecution has not prevented him from travelling freely within
Italy, accompanied everywhere by a police escort, and reviving many of his
old political and business contacts. His decision to return to Italy via
Switzerland was clearly taken on excellent legal advice and effectively
protects him from prosecution for the most serious crimes of which he has
been accused. The Italian Justice Ministry has shown no particular
eagerness to see him tried for his political crimes, repeating its extradition
request to Switzerland in terms it already knew were inadmissible under
Swiss law.
More recently, the courts appear to have been working diligently to
rehabilitate the P2 boss. In July 1990 Gelli was acquitted of calumny in
connection with the 1980 station bombing by a Bologna appeal court. Later
the same year, in October, the Court of Cassation ruled that Gelli could not
be tried for financing the Tuscan railway line bombings because the Swiss
had not granted his extradition for that offence. Nevertheless, the court
decided that Gelli was entitled to a fresh trial in order to give him the
opportunity to prove his innocence. Effectively, the new trial could reach
only one verdict: Gelli’s innocence. At the end of the day, the only
defendant to be found guilty, and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment,
was Gelli’s accuser, Andrea Brogi. This extraordinary state of affairs was
the result of much complex legal argument concerning the terms of various
extradition treaties, but anyone believing Gelli to enjoy the protection of
very powerful friends could only have their suspicions reinforced by the
verdict.
Notes
1   ‘Il Complotto di Gelli’, L’Espresso Special Supplement, 20
May, 1984, p. 37·
2   Relazione della Commissione Parlamentare d’lnchiesta Sulla
Loggia Pi (Report of the P2 Commission), Rome, 1984, p. 154.
3   Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in Italia , Editori
Riuniti, Rome, 1984, p. 180.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
4   Gianfranco Piazzesi, Gelli, Garzanti, Milan, 1983, p. 74.
5   Ibid., p. 266.
6   ‘Il Memoriale Gelli’, L’Espresso Special Supplement, 10 June
19845 p. 15.
7   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 2,
Rome, 1984, pp. 74-88.
8   Ibid., p. 90.
9   Ibid., p. 119.
10   Report of the P2 Commission, p. 63.
11   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 2,
Rome 1984, pp. 312-13.
12   Report of the P2 Commission, pp. 64-71.
13   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni (ed.), Servizi Segreti, Tullio
Pironti, Naples, 1986, p. XI.
14   Gianfranco Piazzesi, op. cit., p. 212.
15   Ibid., p. 214.
16   Antonio Bellocchio to the author, 1984.
17   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
18   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 2,
Rome, 1984, pp.
134-5·
19   Giuseppe D’Alema, in La Resistibile Ascesa della P2, De
Donato, Bari, 1983, p. 54.
20   Report of the P2 Commission, p.11.
21   Ibid., p. 13.
22   Ibid., p. 77.
23   Ibid., p. 80.
24   Gianni Rossi and Francesco Lombrassa, In Nome della
Loggia, Napoleone, Rome, 1981, p. 44.
25   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 1,
Rome, 1984, pp. 456-60.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
26   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 1, Tome 1,
Rome, 1984, p. 136.
27   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 1,
Rome, 1987, pp. 187-207.
28   Report of the P2 Commission, p. 93.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
[4]
GELLI AND AMERICA
There is much evidence that Gelli, like numerous of his P2 colleagues,
enjoyed the complete confidence of the United States intelligence
establishment. He attended the inaugural ceremonies of Presidents Ford,
Carter and Reagan, and was, as General Giuseppe Santovito, head of
military intelligence in the late 1970s and a fellow lodge member, told the
P2 Commission, ‘the only Italian invited to Reagan’s inaugural lunch’.1
According to his own account, he was seated in the front row for at least
two of the ceremonies. There is not a great deal of information available,
however, as to who Gelli’s contacts in the United States were. One of them
was Philip Guarino, an Italo-American ex-priest who in 1979 was director
of the Senior Citizens Division of the Republican Party National
Committee, and who had been introduced to Gelli by Michele Sindona. In a
letter to Guarino dated 28 August 1979, Gelli wrote: Ί would also like you
to let me know as urgently as possible whether the candidate you support is
General Alexander Haig: as you know, we are able to help both through the
Italian press, to influence Italo-Americans and Italians resident in your
country, and through other channels, as well as economically.’2 The letter
could perhaps throw light on the minutes of a Pike Committee hearing of 14
July 1975. ‘(State Department official) said that one of the problems he had
in dealing with (deleted [Italian]) affairs is that people like (international
businessman) have excellent access to higher echelons of our government
and there was no way of knowing their information input. He said that
(international businessman) had very good relations with (deleted) of the
White House. (The international businessman conducted foreign fund-
raising activities for a US political party.)’3 Of course the ‘businessman’
could equally well be Michele Sindona or somebody quite different.
However, it does appear that the United States authorities have reason to be
embarrassed about their relationship with Gelli. A spokesman at the US
embassy in Rome told me that the subject was ‘too delicate’ when I
requested ‘information on contacts between Licio Gelli and the US
government or US individuals’, in 1988.
Gelli’s collaboration with American intelligence, as we have seen,
dates back to the end of the war, when he worked for the Counter

--- Sayfa 66 ---
Intelligence Corps of the US Fifth Army. At about the same time, in
Germany, US Army Intelligence was enlisting the services of Nazi war
criminal Klaus Barbie. After the partisans had handed Gelli over to the
Americans, he was held for a fortnight in the Pistoia region before being
moved to the tiny island of Maddalena off the north coast of Sardinia. ‘They
gave me 10 Lire and a kilo of bread a day for my family,’ he told me. But
why? Ί don’t know.’ Could he be useful to them? Ί think so, but they never
asked me anything. I have always had a great admiration for the
Americans.’
A number of people have testified to the existence of political links
between Gelli and the Americans in subsequent years, a subject about
which he is not himself forthcoming. Some accounts might appear
implausible if they were not made less so by the overall context of Gelli’s
relationship with the United States. P2 member Arrigo Molinari told
magistrates that, following communist advances at regional elections in
1975, Gelli had attended a meeting at the US embassy in Rome between
representatives of the American and Italian secret services, and
multinational companies, to discuss ways of halting the communist
electoral surge. It was decided to make money available to buy control of
the press and use it for propaganda purposes. According to Molinari, the
money was collected and deposited in the Banco Ambrosiano but when the
PCI vote fell back the following year, the funds were returned to their
original contributors. He said the source of this information was Professor
Lorenzo Acquarone, a P2 member and former head of the law faculty at
Genoa University. Molinari, an official in the Genoa police, claimed that he
had joined P2 on the orders of his superiors in order to investigate possible
links between the secret lodge and the Red Brigades. His testimony was
first published in L’Espresso magazine (3 June 1984) and was commented
on by US Ambassador Maxwell Rabb in a now declassified cable to the
State Department. Rabb opened his report by informing the Secretary of
State that L’Espresso was carrying a story ‘which purports to link the US
embassy in Rome to Licio Gelli and the financing of the P2 masonic lodge’
and went on to observe that the story was ‘far-fetched and has aroused little
interest here’. The embassy cable summarized Molinari’s central allegations
and then commented on some of his other claims: ‘”Gelli and his friends”
were invited to a number of US presidential inaugurations (which ones were
not specified by Molinari).’ Despite Rabb’s disparaging parenthetical

--- Sayfa 67 ---
comment, this is now an established fact and should have been known to
the ambassador at the time. ‘Gelli and his associate, Umberto Ortolani,
“introduced” current Italian Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti to US and
Argentine presidential circles. Though it is not explained why Andreotti
would have required Gelli’s help to make such contacts.’ Again Rabb
sought to minimize Molinari’s claim but Gelli’s close relationship with
Argentine President Juan Peron is another well established fact and the
ambassador was presumably aware of whatever relationship existed
between Gelli and ‘US presidential circles’. The cable ended by dismissing
Molinari’s story as ‘confused and contradictory. It lacks dates and specifics
with regard to most of the alleged events he describes and appears to have
been discounted by most serious journalists here.’ Rabb noted, with obvious
satisfaction, that ‘the embassy has received no inquiries about it’. But most
telling of all was his final comment: ‘The embassy has no record of contacts
with either Molinari or Acquarone.’ The ambassador denied the existence
of contacts with the author of the allegations or his source. He did not deny
the existence of contacts between the embassy and Gelli; a curious
omission!4
Another witness, prison health administrator Matteo Lex, told an
examining magistrate from Bologna of a meeting held in Livorno in the
autumn of 1980 to reassure P2 members in the aftermath of a lengthy
interview granted by Gelli to the Corriere della Sera (5 October 1980) in
which he discussed the activities of the lodge. A representative of Gelli
‘reassured us about our cover, given that there were personalities in the
lodge whose names would never emerge and he told us that the names of all
P2 members were held in code by the Pentagon’. Lex also related how a
colleague, a consultant psychiatrist at a military hospital in Florence, had
told him that the destabilization of Italy was not the work of two groups,
‘red’ and ‘black’ terrorists, but of a single organization, working to a single
purpose. His colleague had claimed that both the United States and Libya
were involved in this activity. Lex said he had been introduced to Philip
Guarino by Gelli and had attended a party given by Guarino in Washington,
where General Vito Miceli was among the guests.5
There are also numerous documents alleging links between Gelli and
the CIA. The journalist Marcello Coppetti handed over a series of his own
handwritten notes about Gelli to magistrates in Florence. One of them read:
‘P2 is the [lodge] which maintains contacts with the CIA under the cover of

--- Sayfa 68 ---
“international relations.” ‘6 In another of his notes Coppetti had scrawled,
‘(USA: Gelli), (British: Salvini).’7 In a letter to two Florence magistrates
following his expulsion from P2, Gelli’s long-standing opponent Francesco
Siniscalchi suggested that many masons ‘would be able to testify to the
links to the CIA (or to known members of this American espionage
organization) of Messrs Salvini, Gamberini and Gelli’.8 Even an anonymous
letter sent to Examining Magistrate Luciano Violante in 1975 when he was
investigating a coup plot instigated by Gelli’s P2 partner Edgardo Sogno,
declared that Gelli ‘appeared to be linked to Allied intelligence services’
since the time of the Liberation of Italy. More specifically, it added, ‘he
appears to be in touch with the intelligence services of the United States’,
and it correctly drew attention to his links with Sogno.9 In contrast, the
director of SID, Admiral Mario Casardi, replied in 1977 to a request for
information about P2 from magistrates investigating the Italicus bombing
by saying that his organization had ‘no particular information about the P2
lodge’ and ‘no information about Licio Gelli as regards his membership of
the lodge other than what has been widely reported in the press’.10
The documents confiscated from Gelli’s office in 1981 serve to cast
further light on the Venerable Master’s contacts and interests. Among them
was an index for Gelli’s archive, with 426 dossiers dedicated mainly to
leading Italian public figures. Other titles dealt with SID (the Italian secret
service), CIA-disposition other countries, US policy, Report on
international communism, Communist cells in the armed forces, Italian
Communist Party, Extremist groups; many of these were based on the
original Italian intelligence service files.11 The dossiers themselves were not
found but had already been safely transferred abroad. Another illuminating
document is Gelli’s office address book. Along with a sprinkling of
admirals, generals and secret service personnel, were the names of nine
politicians who had already reached cabinet rank or would do so later. Of
these, three have held the office of Prime Minister: Giulio Andreotti
(address, home and office telephone number), Emilio Colombo (address
only), and Francesco Cossiga (telephone number only), who was elected
State President in 1985. Given that the addresses and telephone numbers of
important people are not easy to come by in Italy for security reasons, Gelli
was clearly well connected. Another of his addresses was that of a certain
Colonel Rocco Cannizzaro, to be found at the offices of the Western

--- Sayfa 69 ---
European Union, the political association grouping European NATO
members, in Paris.
Given Gelli’s familiarity with members of the Italian political and
military establishment, his US and NATO contacts and the unequivocally
right-wing political complexion of P2, it is significant that the
disinformation practised about him has not been restricted to the Italian
secret services. British intelligence also played its part. Not long after the
breaking of the P2 scandal a British intelligence source was repeating the
myth about Gelli’s Eastern Bloc contacts to author Stephen Knight.
Knight’s 1983 book on freemasonry, The Brotherhood , relayed the NATO
line: ‘According to an impeccable source within British intelligence, Gelli
was recruited by the KGB soon after he set about the task of building up . . .
P2. Britain’s intelligence service (MI6) has closely monitored P2 since its
inception. It detected KGB involvement in the affair at an early stage.’
Knight’s informant claimed that P2 was ‘a KGB-sponsored programme
aimed at destabilizing Italy, weakening NATO’s southern flank, sweeping
the communists into power in Italy and sending resultant shock waves
throughout the Western world.’12 An eloquent ‘error’, assuming Knight’s
source really was as ‘impeccable’ as he claimed.
The Bologna bomb trial prosecutors cited numerous accounts of the
close relationship Gelli enjoyed with many of Italy’s most influential public
figures. In their written indictment, they referred to the testimony of Gelli’s
two secretaries describing how the chairman of Fiat, Italy’s most powerful
industrialist, Gianni Agnelli, had presented their boss with a ‘golden
telephone’, as a gift. They also cited the account by P2 Commission
functionary Giovanni Di Ciommo of a meeting with Gelli’s Rome secretary
Nara Lazzerini. ‘The sense of what she said was this: Gelli had such
widespread connections that he was in constant and not merely superficial
contact with people ranging from Agnelli to Delle Chiaie.’13 Lazzerini was
never formally interrogated by the P2 Commission. When a communist
commissioner suggested that she should be, his proposal was rejected after
objections from Christian Democrat Deputy Bernardo D’Arezzo pertaining
to ‘the witness’s morality’.14 Lazzerini had been Gelli’s mistress, but it was
what she might have said, rather than her sexual morality, that seems to
have caused D’Arezzo’s embarrassment.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
An early indication of Gelli’s connections with the Italian military
establishment came in 1964 when the Permaflex company, of which he was
a director, won a contract to supply 40,000 mattresses to all branches of the
armed forces. The following year he opened a factory in Frosinone, the
political fiefdom of Defence Minister Giulio Andreotti. In 1966, it was
Andreotti who, as Industry Minister, recommended that Gelli should be
made a commendatore (commander), a state honour given to outstanding
figures in business and public life.
The Bologna magistrates were in no doubt as to the nature of his
relationship with the secret services. ‘From the trial documents the figure of
Gelli emerges clearly as the “dominus” of the secret services (and not a
mere “source” of information . . . as his affiliates tried to describe him in
various depositions to the P2 Commission and the judiciary). He is, in fact,
a “dominus” whose will cannot be questioned, given the relationship of
masonic subordination to him that the official directors of the secret
services had accepted from the outset.’ The prosecutors wrote that Gelli
‘conditioned secret service careers, indicated subjects for investigation and
the line to be followed’ as well as personally enjoying the protection of the
intelligence service bosses, who were responsible for ‘omissions, lies and
the sidetracking of the most delicate terrorism investigations’ in order to
shield him.15
Gelli’s relationship with the American authorities is illuminated by a
curious document filed at the Bologna trial by Francesco Pazienza, a
businessman and collaborator of Italian military intelligence who was
accused of attempting to sidetrack the investigation into the station
bombing. It is a letter from Paul Goldberger of the New York law firm
Goldberger and Dubin to Gelli’s Rome lawyer Maurizio Di Pietropaolo
discussing ongoing negotiations with the US Justice Department aimed at
securing some kind of immunity from prosecution or protection against
Italian extradition requests. In the letter, dated 3 September 1985,Gelli is
referred to by the pseudonym Maurice III. Ί am now in a position to obtain
a written agreement with the United States Justice Department executed at
the highest level which would absolutely guarantee the items which you and
the client feel are required,’ Goldberger wrote to his Italian colleague.
‘There will be absolutely no chance of any double dealing-the agreement
will be binding and enforceable in any court in the United States.’ That
these negotiations should even have been initiated is in itself highly

--- Sayfa 71 ---
significant and can only be explained by the existence of contacts between
Gelli and the US authorities of a type that has never publicly emerged.
Goldberger recommended that ‘Maurice III’ should only enter the United
States on receipt of a written agreement from the government. ‘All
arrangements, including security, living accommodations, bail status, etc,
would be made in advance so as to assure no possible inconvenience to the
client,’ Goldberger wrote. The letter gave the impression that the
negotiations had made considerable progress. ‘We are very close to
concluding the matter,’ Goldberger said and proposed holding an urgent
meeting ‘so that I can learn each of your requirements and present them to
the US government and obtain further iron-clad approval.’
Pazienza, despite having collaborated over the years with various US
intelligence agencies, was arrested by the FBI in the United States in March
1985 and extradited to Italy in June of the following year. But this
discouraging experience should not be a cause for alarm, Goldberger told
Di Pietropaolo. ‘It is important that you understand that Pazienza’s situation
should not be looked at as [a] precedent for any situation regarding Maurice
III,’ the American lawyer wrote. The galling contrast between his own
experience and what the letter indicated would be the likely treatment of
Gelli may well go some way towards explaining why Pazienza made the
document public by filing it at court. What is perhaps more likely, however,
is that Pazienza knew something of the background to the negotiations and
of Gelli’s prior links to the Americans and wanted to drop a gentle hint
about his ability to make embarrassing revelations on the subject.
The presence of senior military and secret service officers in the P2
membership lists goes a long way to defining the nature and purpose of the
lodge. Other emblematic names help to take the process further. One such
was that of Federico Umberto D’Amato. A Neapolitan bon viveur and
sometime restaurant reviewer for L’Espresso magazine, D’Amato played a
crucial role in determining the police response to political subversion. He
has been accused in the media of fostering terrorism of both right and left
but has only ever come under investigation by the judiciary for his alleged
part in a relatively minor episode of illegal telephone-tapping, of which he
was acquitted. He too is a man who unquestionably enjoyed the confidence
of the American security services. D’Amato, like many of the people whose
names appear on the list, has denied belonging to P2. Some have even gone
to court to clear their names and in some instances civil tribunals have

--- Sayfa 72 ---
indeed decided that they did not belong to the lodge. The P2 Commission,
however, concluded that the lists were authentic and that, if anything, they
were incomplete.
In the summer of 1943 D’Amato contacted the Allies and became an
OSS agent operating in occupied Rome, where he was responsible for
winding up a spy network run by the German Air Force. For this and other
achievements the Americans awarded him the Bronze Star and the
congressional ‘Medal of Freedom’, the same award as was granted to Pope
John XXIII and the first US astronauts. He joined the Italian police shortly
before the end of the war and worked as a liaison officer between the police
and the OSS. One of his more delicate tasks was as a member of the OSS
mission which contacted Guido Leto, head of the fascist secret police, to
negotiate the handover of the OVRA archives.16 Feelers were put out to
Leto in June 1944, before the war’s end, and there has been speculation that
the bargain that was struck may explain how Leto emerged unscathed from
war crimes trials to end his career as the national director of police schools.
Like Miceli, D’Amato worked for NATO security, heading the Interior
Ministry secretariat of the Atlantic Pact Security Office. He also
represented the Italian security services on a NATO committee dealing with
terrorism and subversion from i960 to 1974 and was appointed head of the
Interior Ministry’s Office of Special Affairs in 1971. In 1968, he was the
prime mover behind the creation of the Club of Berne, an association of
European police chiefs providing a framework for regular meetings to co-
ordinate anti-terrorist activity. Having been ‘a protagonist in the battle
against subversion and terrorism for thirty years’, D’Amato was, according
to his own curriculum vitae, ‘one of the targets most exposed to the threat
of attack by terrorists of all political colours’.17 Despite these risks and
despite his claims to have instigated police crackdowns on extremist
organizations of every political hue, allegations that he had a less than
limpid relationship with certain terrorist leaders have persisted. Secret
service reports brought to light by the Catanzaro assize court18 state that
Stefano Delle Chiaie was being financed by the Rome police in 1968 and in
1975 was in contact with the Interior Ministry’s Office of Special Affairs.
‘Certain of the media have often indicated that Delle Chiaie was an
informant of the ex-Office of Special Affairs and in particular of Police
Chief D’Amato. From our files, the individual appears generally to be
considered as in contact with the aforementioned office,’ a SID report,

--- Sayfa 73 ---
dated 24 April 1976, declared. It is even alleged that D’Amato used Delle
Chiaie and his followers to daub Rome with posters attacking the soft line
of the Communist Party from the standpoint of the extreme left. ‘The ultra-
left was created out of nothing in the Office of Special Affairs,’ claim
journalists Andrea Barberi and Nazareno Pagani.19
D’Amato was interviewed by La Repubblica newspaper shortly after
his retirement (8 July 1984). Asked about his professional contacts with the
Americans, he replied abruptly: ‘Listen, I believe I have always worked in
the interests and at the service of my country . . . What’s more the
Americans have always worked correctly here in Italy, in a correct manner
according to the interests of their country, except for one period, under
(Prime Minister Fernando) Tambroni.’ His one quibble was that American
intelligence had fed Tambroni with false information about the
revolutionary intentions of the PCI in i960. D’Amato’s view of P2 was
similarly reductive. Gelli, whom he admitted meeting five or six times, was
‘basically a cretin’. ‘Gelli’s purpose in establishing this organization was
not political but economic’, he told the newspaper. ‘Why should he have
subverted institutions, planned a coup? He was doing very well as it was,
scheming, making masses of money, finding people who would listen to
him . . . He couldn’t care less about politics.’ This view contrasts starkly
with the one expressed by the president of the P2 Commission, Tina
Anselmi (Corriere della Sera , 12 April 1989). ‘P2 was not a club,’
Anselmi said, in an attempt to counteract Gelli’s successful self-
rehabilitation. ‘It tried to influence and condition political life in our
country, above all by acting through the secret services, which it controlled
for many years.’ She reminded her interviewer of the numerous military
officers, politicians and magistrates who had been members of the lodge.
‘These people did not attend to talk about masonic brotherhood or business.
Besides, businessmen were under-represented in the lodge.’
D’Amato’s coyness in admitting to no more than half a dozen meetings
with Gelli caused the P2 boss some hilarity when I spoke to him. ‘If he has
spoken of those four or five occasions [that we met], it’s obvious that he
doesn’t remember the others.’ Gelli claimed that he had not discussed the
detail of D’Amato’s police work with him but had spoken of it in general
terms. ‘When we met for lunch or dinner, we discussed the situation in
general, how these politicians could be improved, their need for a
government that was, yes, democratic but with greater powers, how to

--- Sayfa 74 ---
provide the executive with much greater powers in order to save the
republic and democracy. We never went beyond this.’
While D’Amato, according to his own account, would appear to have
paid Gelli scant attention, only meeting him for the first time in 1976,
studying him briefly after press allegations that he was implicated in right-
wing terrorism, and taking no further action, Gelli seems to have been more
conscientious in his scrutiny of the corpulent police chief. One of the files
smuggled out of Italy before the police raid on Gelli’s office but later
obtained from Uruguay by the P2 Commission was devoted to D’Amato.
‘D’A’s financial holdings in Switzerland and at the Banque Morin in Paris
(American payments) are very large,’ Gelli’s report said. It also suggested
that D’Amato was himself in possession of an important private archive,
which he used to describe to his friends as ‘my powder keg’.
Delle Chiaie has reportedly boasted of his ability to ruin D’Amato and
other Interior Ministry officials if he ever decided to talk.20 The possibility
that there may be more to D’Amato’s career than meets the eye emerges
from a curious exchange that began at the Bologna bomb trial in 1987. On 4
June, Francesco Pazienza, the SISMI consultant charged with subversive
conspiracy, reiterated a request that the court should interrogate D’Amato.
‘Federico Umberto D’Amato has been one of the CIA’s men in Italy since
the time of Angleton,’ Pazienza said, in making his request. Like Delle
Chiaie, Pazienza’s defence tactic was to hint at the powerful people he
might, if necessary, implicate in the affairs that had brought him to trial. A
little over a month later it appeared that he had elicited a reply. D’Amato
gave an interview to 11 Borghese magazine (12 July 1987) about his
longstanding friendship with James Jesus Angleton, the OSS, then CIA
agent who played an important role in paving the way for the Christian
Democrat victory in the 1948 elections and later rose to be CIA head of
counter-espionage. D’Amato recounted a series of anecdotes about his
professional association with Angleton to Il Borghese’ s editor Mario
Tedeschi, a neo-fascist ex-senator and member of P2. Among other things,
he told how Angleton sought him out towards the end of 1946 to tell him
that fascism was defeated and the new enemy was communism. Ί told him
that I understood the new strategy perfectly: it was a historic watershed, as I
had already begun to realize.’ This was presumably a cryptic reference to
the often unconfessable tactics with which the ‘new enemy’ had been
fought. But the real purpose of the interview came in the final exchange.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
D’Amato remarked how Angleton, like any good agent, had taken his
secrets with him to the grave. ‘Aren’t you tempted to speak out? To go
beyond the stories you have told me today?’ asked Tedeschi. ‘D’Amato
smiles. “Who knows,” he says, “who knows . . .”’ Those who were meant
to will surely have got the message.
Despite this interview, D’Amato was still called to give evidence at the
Bologna bomb trial, as Pazienza had requested. During his interrogation by
the court, he was questioned in detail about his alleged contacts with
Stefano Delle Chiaie. The police chief said he had never met Delle Chiaie
before and that the Avanguardia Nazionale leader had never been an
informer of the Office of Special Affairs. He said the rumour had been put
about by SID agent Captain Antonio Labruna at the behest of his
commanding officer General Gianadelio Maletti, the director of counter-
espionage. ‘At a certain moment, General Maletti initiated a series of
operations which were directed against the Interior Ministry and against the
intelligence services of the Interior Ministry, because there was a kind of
dualism and rivalry as regards relations with foreign secret services,’21
D’Amato said. His deposition reveals an extraordinary state of affairs: that
competition between the military intelligence service and the Interior
Ministry intelligence service was so fierce that the one was prepared to
accuse the other, probably accurately, of collaborating with one of Italy’s
most dangerous fascist terrorists. It is significant that D’Amato attributes
the conflict to rivalry over relations with foreign secret services. The
foreign secret service he had in mind was the CIA, the most important
Allied agency with whom the Italians had to deal.
During the session, D’Amato was questioned in detail by Pazienza’s
lawyer about obscure financial dealings with apparently little bearing on the
subject of the trial. Presumably Pazienza was taking the opportunity to stir
embarrassing memories for ‘one of the CIA’s men in Italy’.
In the summer of 1990 RAI1, the Christian Democrat-controlled
channel of state-run Italian television, broadcast a remarkable series of
allegations about Gelli’s relationship with the CIA and his role in the
manipulation of Italian terrorism. The man making the allegations was
Richard Brenneke, an American who claimed to have worked for the CIA
and to have first-hand knowledge of the activities he described. The report,
aired on 2 July, was the final programme in a four-part investigation into

--- Sayfa 76 ---
allegations that P2 had been in some way involved in the 1986 assassination
of Swedish premier Olof Palme. It unleashed a storm of political
controversy, which was heightened when President Cossiga wrote to Prime
Minister Andreotti calling on the government to investigate Brenneke’s
claims. In the event of the allegations being unfounded, Cossiga wrote,
legal action should be taken against those responsible for their
dissemination. It was not clear from the President’s letter which outcome he
thought most likely, or most desirable.
In the television interview Brenneke, a balding forty-eight-year-old
who runs a property management company in Lake Oswego, Oregon, and
who claims to have worked on covert operations for the CIA, Mossad and
the US Customs, said that he had first come into contact with P2 in 1969
and that he had been personally involved in making payments to the lodge
on behalf of the CIA. The amount varied, at times, from $1 million to more
than $10 million a month. The money, Brenneke claimed, had been used to
finance drug trafficking and terrorism. ‘We used them to create a situation
that would favour the outbreak of terrorism in Italy and in other European
countries in the early seventies. These were very important activities, since
certain governments fell as a result of them,’ Brenneke told the interviewer.
The American said he had worked for the CIA on a contract basis and that
Gelli did likewise. He claimed he had met the P2 boss on a number of
occasions, including one, in Colorado, when Gelli was a fugitive from
Italian justice. Brenneke also said he was aware of the existence of an
operational link between P2 and the American Mafia.
Gelli issued a swift and indignant denial, announcing through his
lawyer on 9 July that he would be seeking ‘purely symbolic’ damages from
RAI of 10 billion Lire (£5 million). The charges, Gelli said, were
‘unfounded, crazy and highly defamatory’. Even the CIA was moved to
issue a formal denial that Brenneke ‘was ever an agent of the CIA or
associated in any way with the CIA’. ‘We repeat this public denial because
of the outrageous nature of his claims,’ the aptly named CIA spokesman
Peter Earnest told American news agencies. ‘Allegations attributed to him
regarding Agency involvement in terrorist activities in Italy or the Palme
assassination are absolute nonsense.’22 Only a month earlier, however, as we
shall see, a court in Portland, Oregon, had chosen to believe Brenneke’s
claims that he had worked for the Agency rather than official assurances
that he had not.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Gelli himself appears not to have been unduly put out at the idea that
people might believe Brenneke’s claims, at least to judge by the curious
wording of some of his later denials. ‘This Mr Brenneke, of whose
existence I was unaware until now, must be a sleepwalker or a dreamer,’ he
told L’Europeo magazine (4 August 1990). ‘However, I cannot refrain from
pointing out the stupidity of making such statements. If he really had been a
CIA agent he should know that certain revelations are forbidden. And if
they were false, it would be forbidden even to think them.’ Did Gelli mean
to imply that Brenneke’s claims were actually true? A similar impression
might be gained from his statement to another news magazine at about the
same time (Panorama , 5 August 1990). ‘I’m a friend of the current
President, George Bush. I met him in 1981, at Reagan’s inauguration. We
saw one another for an entire week . . .’ Gelli was careful not to date his
acquaintance with Bush any earlier, particularly not as far back as 1976,
when Bush was himself director of the CIA. But what could the two men,
who had only just met, have discussed for an entire week? It was certainly a
bizarre choice on Gelli’s part to claim such intimacy with Bush, especially
as Brenneke had made extremely damaging allegations about the President
and had linked him, in the process, to Gelli.
In the course of the television interview, and on other occasions,
Brenneke had alleged that Bush had taken part in secret negotiations with
representatives of the Khomeini regime to delay the release of the fifty-two
US hostages then being held in Teheran until after the US presidential
elections. According to Brenneke’s claim, the Republican Party was
worried that if President Carter succeeded in obtaining the release of the
hostages before the vote it might be enough to win him a second term in
office. Brenneke said that Bush, then vice-presidential candidate, campaign
director William Casey who was later appointed director of the CIA by
President Reagan, and CIA officer Donald Gregg attended a secret meeting
in Paris at which the Iranians were promised arms in return for delaying the
release of the hostages. Gelli too, Brenneke said, had attended the meetings.
The American hostages were released on 20 January 1981, the day of
President Reagan’s inauguration. Shortly afterwards the US began
clandestinely supplying arms to Iran, in some cases with the assistance of
Israel. These same secret supply channels would be used in later years in
what became known as the Iran-Contra scandal, which involved the

--- Sayfa 78 ---
diversion of profits from arms sales to Iran to finance the anti-Sandinista
rebels in Nicaragua, in order to get round a Congressional ban on such aid.
Brenneke had made similar allegations in a US court while giving
evidence on behalf of a friend who also claimed to have worked for the
CIA. As a result he had himself been taken to court, charged with five
counts of lying under oath. A jury in Portland, Oregon, acquitted him on all
five counts without a single dissenting vote in May 1990. ‘It was 100 per
cent,’ jury foreman Mark Kristoff told journalists after the trial. ‘There
never was a guilty vote.’23 Kristoff told a local reporter: ‘We were
convinced that, yes, there was a meeting, and he was there and the people
listed on the indictment were there.’24 Donald Gregg’s personal credibility
emerged somewhat tattered from the trial. He told the court that he could
not have attended the secret Paris meeting because he was on holiday in
Delaware at the time and produced photographs to prove it. Gregg, who
became Vice-President Bush’s national security adviser in 1981 and was
later appointed ambassador to South Korea, was discomfited when
Brenneke called up a meteorologist who testified that the photos could not
have been taken in Delaware on the day in question because the weather
was different (.Economist , 12 May 1990). Brenneke’s contention has also
received support from former President Jimmy Carter. Ί chose to ignore the
reports of backstairs deals by Reagan campaign officials,’ he wrote in 1988
to two American journalists investigating the affair. He said he had
subsequently learned from former Iranian President Bani Sadr that ‘an
agreement was made involving McFarlane, George Bush and, perhaps, Bill
Casey. By this time the elections were over and the results would not be
changed.’ (Wall Street Journal , 20 October 1988.)
Brenneke elaborated on his allegations about CIA/P2 involvement in
the destabilization of Italy in a number of interviews with Italian news
magazines. He described P2 as a ‘parallel NATO structure’ dependent on
Italian but above all American organizations and ‘leading the attack on the
political opposition’. He said the CIA at times made use of apparently
hostile forces in order to prosecute its own campaigns. ‘There are former
CIA agents in prison accused of having trained terrorists in Libya, some of
whom were active in your country [Italy]. The CIA has denied these agents
ever officially belonged to the Agency, but you shouldn’t be taken in: this is
their classic modus operandi . Ostensibly hostile entities, such as Libya, are
used to set up operations that cannot be traced back to their true originator.’

--- Sayfa 79 ---
(L’Europeo , 9 November 1990.) On another occasion Brenneke was asked
whether he thought Eastern Bloc secret services had been aware of this CIA
activity. ‘Not to begin with. We duped them and used them. All the arms
and supplies came from the countries of the Socialist Bloc. Then around
1980 they realized but they didn’t intervene. It is possible that we were
given a free hand as a result of a very high level agreement.’ (L’Europeo ,
18 August 1990.) A sensitive use of East Bloc weapons by the Italian secret
services in the context of NATO security policy has recently been made
public in Italy. Brenneke has supplied convincing evidence that he was
personally involved in acquiring arms from Czechoslovakia. His suggestion
that the destabilization of Italy may have taken place within the framework
of informal secret service accords between the superpowers has been put
forward by other informed sources, as we shall see.
In one of the magazine interviews Brenneke claimed that the CIA had
used Michele Sindona’s Banca Privata Finanziaria to channel funds into
Italy. This assertion was supported by another witness interviewed in the
course of the RAI television investigation. The man, who also claimed to
have worked for the CIA over many years, was not identified by name and
his face was concealed from view. He was later identified as Ibrahim Razin
but is said to use numerous aliases, including Oswald LeWinter and George
Cave. According to one account he was at one time the CIA’s number two
man in Europe. During the interview, which focused mainly on the
background to the Palme assassination, Razin stated categorically that
Sindona had been a CIA ‘asset’, or unpaid collaborator, over many years. In
another interview, with the left-wing Italian magazine Avvenimenti (5
September 1990), Razin backed up Brenneke’s claim to have financed P2
on behalf of the CIA. He said he knew that P2 had passed on part of the
money to terrorist groups. ‘It all served to increase the “red peril” and so to
keep the communists out of government,’ he said.
It is unwise to trust too blindly the word of anyone emerging from the
shadowy world of secret intelligence and, at first sight, Razin and Brenneke
appear to have spun a number of particularly fantastic tales. However,
Brenneke’s claims about P2 do fit into a plausible overall pattern of
evidence. For the first time, someone claiming to have detailed first-hand
knowledge of the relationship between P2 and the CIA has decided to speak
out. The CIA itself recently did its bit to bolster Brenneke’s credibility. The
Agency turned down a Freedom of Information Act request for documents

--- Sayfa 80 ---
about Gelli made by an American journalist in order to protect national
defence and foreign policy interests as well as the Agency’s own methods
and sources.25 The confirmation that Gelli had either been an asset or an
agent of the CIA could hardly have been clearer.
Notes
1    P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 19,
Rome, 1984, p. 679.
2   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 1, Tome 2,
Rome, 1984, p. 1102.
3   Report of the Pike Committee, in Village Voice , 20 February
1976.
4   Telegram from US Embassy, Rome, to State Department,
N0.013974, ‘Italian weekly ties US embassy to P2’, May 1984.
5   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 20,
Rome, 1987, pp. 535-8.
6   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 18,
Rome, 1987, p. 850.
7   Ibid., p. 1090.
8   Ibid., p. 978.
9   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 3,
Rome, 1984, p. 92 ’
10   Report of the P2 Commission, p. 75.
11    Il Mondo Special Supplement, 7 August 1981, p. 43.
12   Stephen Knight, The Brotherhood , Granada, London, 1983,
p. 281.
13   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni, op. cit., p. 160.
14   Ibid., p. 161.
15   Ibid., pp. 125-30.
16   Umberto Cecchi, Storia della Pi , Editori Riuniti, Rome,
1985, p. 41.
17   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 22,
Rome, 1987, pp. 527-8

--- Sayfa 81 ---
18   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 4, Tome
1, Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1985, pp. 180-1.
19   Andrea Barberi and Nazareno Pagani, in L’Italia della Pi ,
Mondadori, Milan, 1981, p. 80.
20   Norberto Valentini, La Notte della Madonna , Le Monde,
Rome, 1978, p. 22.
21   Federico Umberto D’Amato to Bologna assize court, 19
October 1987, p. 58.
22   UPI, Rome, 23 July 1990, ‘National furore mounts over
television allegations linking the CIA with Italian terrorism.’
23   AP, Portland, 5 June 1990, ‘Jury foreman says he never
doubted Brenneke’s innocence.’
24    Willamette Week , 10-16 May 1990, Ά question of treason.’
25    La Repubblica , 21 October 1990.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
[5]
MINO PECORELLI
Further light is cast on Gelli, and much else besides·, by the writings
of an unusual journalist, Mino Pecorelli, the editor of a scurrilous magazine
called Osservatore Politico (Political Observer) and known by its initials,
OP. Pecorelli began his career as a lawyer specializing in commercial work
but he soon moved on to work in a very special kind of journalism, using
inside knowledge of business and political scandals to write blackmailing
articles couched in an allusive, hermetic style that could often only be
understood by the inner circles of power or the person directly concerned.
For those wishing to broadcast the blackmailing messages, OP, and a clutch
of other publications like it, were viewed as ‘taxis’: you paid their fee and
they took you wherever you wanted to go. Pecorelli’s first job in journalism
was for the magazine Mondo d’Oggi (Today’s World), whose editor, Paolo
Senise, was the son of the fascist regime’s chief of police, Carmine Senise.
Also on the staff was Nino Pulejo, who helped to hide the fascist Prince
Valerio Borghese from the partisans at the end of the war as a favour to
James Angleton, then director of the OSS in Italy. For a while, Pecorelli
was flanked as editor of OP by Nicola Falde, a ‘former’ officer in military
intelligence, was subsidised by SID, and ran a bitter campaign against the
secret service clique headed by General Gianadelio Maletti on behalf of
Maletti’s boss and personal enemy, SID director General Vito Miceli. The
rivalry within SID itself was just as intense as that between Maletti and
D’Amato.
One of Pecorelli’s early techniques for extracting payment, as
explained to the P2 Commission by Federico D’Amato, was to show his
intended victim an advance copy of his article. Pecorelli would explain that
he would be forced to publish the story unless the subject could help the
magazine out of a financial hole by agreeing to buy a painting from him, at
a suitable price. ‘It would appear not as a case of corruption but as the
purchase of a painting. Thus the matter could be more or less resolved,’
D’Amato told the commissioners.
One of Pecorelli’s more spectacular unpublished scoops was entitled
‘The Prime Minister’s Cheques’ and was to be put on the front page with a
photo of then Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti to illustrate it. According to

--- Sayfa 83 ---
testimony to Rome magistrates by one of Pecorelli’s journalists, Renato
Corsini, the article contained proof of the existence of a financial
relationship between Andreotti and Guido Giannettini.1 Given that
Giannettini had been implicated in the Piazza Fontana bombing and in the
secret service manipulation of terrorism, Andreotti might well have
preferred to buy one of Pecorelli’s paintings rather than see such a
relationship publicized. A close aide of Andreotti, Franco Evangelisti,
received a copy of the prospective magazine cover through the post and
subsequently prevailed upon a Rome property developer, Gaetano
Caltagirone, to pay Pecorelli 30 million Lire (£20,000) in order to prevent
publication.2
Andreotti was a popular target for Pecorelli’s literary barbs. In one
brief article he drew attention to the Christian Democrat politician’s
friendship with Michele Sindona by mixing up the two men’s names. ‘The
well-known financier Michele Andreotti has decided he will soon move,
lock, stock and barrel, to an unspecified locality abroad,’ Pecorelli wrote, at
a time when Sindona’s financial empire was running into trouble.
‘Meanwhile, Deputy Giulio Sindona is expected to return to Italy before
Christmas.’ (OP, 17 December 1974.)
On 2 January 1979, Pecorelli turned his attention to Gelli, publishing
an article about him entitled ‘Twice a Partisan’, in which he apparently set
out to dismantle media accusations about the Venerable Master’s right-wing
leanings. He began by pillorying the view expressed in four national
newspapers that Italian freemasonry was ‘nothing less than a tool of the
perfidious CIA’. ‘Businessmen, financiers, politicians, generals and
magistrates, by swearing allegiance to freemasonry would appear to have
put themselves at the service of the US intelligence agency, in order to
prevent the PCI from entering the sanctuary of power. How absurd this
theory is can easily be said.’ He then recapitulated the media charges that
Gelli was ‘an ex-Nazi, agent of the Argentine secret service, personal friend
of Lopez Rega and founder of the AAA death squads in Latin America,
linked to the CIA, to [John] Connally and to the American hawks.’ Having
summed up the accusations against Gelli with rather more force and
concision than the mainstream media, he then went on to rebut them by
publishing anecdotes about Gelli’s collaboration with the partisans and a
copy of the document signed by communist Resistance leader Italo Carobbi
to attest this. ‘So it is not a fascist, pro-American and coup-plotting Gelli

--- Sayfa 84 ---
that emerges but a Venerable Master who is a sincere democrat and ex-
partisan,’ Pecorelli wrote and concluded with a dig at Gelli’s well-known
‘relationship with the People’s Republic of Ceausescu’. It is, however, by
no means clear whether Pecorelli expected Gelli to be more embarrassed
about the revelation of his apparent left-wing contacts or at the eloquent
summary of his right-wing associations. A favourite Pecorelli technique,
and popular pastime of the Italian secret services, was to reveal an awkward
truth and then scoff at it as though it were untrue.
On 20 February 1979, Pecorelli published another article in which he
claimed to have been passed a copy of the Cominform report by a secret
service officer, Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Viezzer. He even gave a secret
service index number for the document. ‘It’s a long list of names that
someone one day betrayed,’ he wrote but promised that ‘we will not betray
them a second time. Because it is not our custom to reveal state secrets (and
this certainly seems to be one).’ The list Pecorelli was referring to was that
containing the names of fifty-six fascists betrayed to the police by Gelli at
the end of the war. However, Cominform was not the title of that document
but was the name given to the secret service report detailing Gelli’s alleged
spying for the communists. Pecorelli’s intention was, presumably, to let
Gelli know that he had that too.
On 20 March 1979, Pecorelli was shot dead as he got into his car in the
street below his office in a professionally executed, Mafia-style killing. His
diary showed that he had an appointment for ‘dinner Licio’ on the
following evening. He had so many potential enemies, though, that his
killer and those behind his death have never been identified. For what it’s
worth, Gelli himself has suggested that the murder has not been
investigated as seriously as it should have been. Ί don’t think the police
were really interested in clearing up the crime,’ he told me. ‘If I had been
investigating it, I would have gone through all the back numbers of the
magazine for the previous two years.’ From the sound of it, Gelli clearly
had his own idea of who, other than himself, might have been behind the
murder.
An interesting light has been shed on the background to Pecorelli’s
assassination by the testimony of Angelo Izzo, a right-winger serving a life
sentence for rape and murder. In 1975 he and two friends raped and tortured
two girls in a villa at the beach resort of San Felice Circeo. Afterwards they

--- Sayfa 85 ---
dumped their bodies in the boot of a car abandoned in a Rome street. Only
one of the girls survived the ordeal and the crime provoked great public
outrage at the time. During his detention, Izzo was taken into the
confidence of numerous imprisoned right-wingers and later passed on what
he had learned to the authorities. In 1986 he told Bologna magistrates that
Valerio Fioravanti, a right-wing terrorist who had been a television soap
opera star as a child, had admitted to him that he was responsible for
Pecorelli’s murder as well as the 1980 assassination of Piersanti Mattarella,
a Christian Democrat politician from Sicily who was shot dead in a Palermo
street.
At the origin of this discovery was the tension that existed in prison
between Fioravanti and another rightist, Roberto Nistri, both of whom were
friends of Izzo’s. Nistri explained to Izzo: ‘We don’t want Valerio in here
because he’s a killer for P2.’ ‘This seemed to me incredible, but Nistri
added that they knew for certain that Valerio was responsible for the
Pecorelli and Mattarella murders as well as for the murder of several French
bankers, a couple I think, although I don’t know anything more about this,’3
Izzo testified. Izzo said he had offered Fioravanti his support if the latter
decided to have the matter out with Nistri. Fioravanti had refused the
confrontation, suggesting instead that they might attempt to poison his
accuser. At this point Izzo asked Fioravanti for an explanation and
Fioravanti admitted his responsibility for the Mattarella and Pecorelli
murders. At first, Izzo said, Fioravanti gave a reductive account of the
murder, claiming that he had carried it out in order to do a favour for a
terrorist friend and to try out some new silencers. Fioravanti then went on to
describe the details of the action, saying he had shot the journalist with a
silenced 7.65 calibre pistol and that he had worn an elegant white raincoat
for the occasion so as not to attract attention to himself. He had another
terrorist to cover him and his brother, Cristiano, waiting for them nearby in
a car.
What is particularly interesting in Izzo’s testimony is his claim that
Fioravanti admitted to him that the murder was commissioned by Danilo
Abbruciati, a leading member of the Magliana band, a Rome underworld
gang with links to the Mafia, to P2 and to the Italian secret services.
Abbruciati was himself in contact with Cesare Valsania, described by Izzo
as ‘Gelli’s intermediary for his relations with the Rome underworld’.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
According to a magistrate who investigated Pecorelli’s murder, the
journalist was shot four times. Two of the bullets came from Italian-made
Fiocchi cartridges and the other two were Javelots, a rare type of French
munition. 400 Javelot rounds were subsequently found in an arms deposit
concealed in the basement of a Health Ministry building in Rome. The
deposit was jointly controlled by Egidio Giuliani, a right-wing terrorist who
developed close contacts with members of the extreme left and who appears
to have enjoyed the protection of the secret services, and by the Magliana
band. A link between the Magliana band and Pecorelli’s murder would be
highly significant since, as we shall discover, members of the band later
made use of his death as the basis for a series of blackmailing messages.
The Mattarella assassination was a similarly delicate affair. Izzo told
the magistrates that he had originally been told of the background to the
murder by Pierluigi Concutelli, the military leader of Ordine Nuovo and a
notorious ‘prison murderer’: a man serving a life sentence who continues to
kill behind bars because he has nothing left to lose by doing so. Concutelli
told him that the murder had been carried out by right-wingers but
commissioned by Stefano Bontade, a powerful Mafia boss and senior
freemason. ‘Concutelli told me that Mattarella had fallen foul of the Mafia
because, being the son of someone who had been involved in rumours and
scandals, he had distinguished himself through his extreme moral rigour in
order to try and clear his father’s name.’ In earlier testimony,4 Izzo had said
that both Concutelli and Fioravanti had told him that ‘the Mafia, business
circles linked to freemasonry and Roman members of the Christian
Democrat faction opposed to that of Mattarella’ were all interested in the
elimination of the Sicilian politician. Fioravanti had also told him that the
people who had commissioned the crime had been prepared to trust him
with the operation because they had received assurances about him from the
Magliana group.
The extreme sensitivity of the background to Mattarella’s murder is
also illustrated by the testimony of Fioravanti’s brother. Cristiano Fioravanti
told Palermo magistrates in 1986 that his brother had privately admitted
responsibility for shooting Mattarella. ‘If he admits that while continuing to
deny his involvement in the Bologna bombing, I will deduce that he is
innocent on the latter charge. But if he also denies responsibility for the
Mattarella murder, which, as I have said, I know he committed, I will
deduce that it is possible that he really was involved in the Bologna

--- Sayfa 87 ---
massacre.’5 It is remarkable that Cristiano Fioravanti, who had previously
been close to Valerio, whom he had followed into a life of terrorism, should
have made up his mind to level such serious accusations against his own
brother.
The word of ‘repentant’ terrorists should be treated with great caution.
Nevertheless, it is significant that two sensitive political assassinations such
as those of Mattarella and Pecorelli should be attributed to right-wingers
allegedly in contact with P2 and with the Magliana band. The Rome
underworld gang increasingly emerges as a sinister force operating in the
spheres of terrorism and political assassination as well as in the regular
criminal fields of kidnapping and drug dealing. In particular, Pecorelli’s
murder can be seen as persuasive confirmation of the accuracy and
importance of some of the revelations he published in OP. We will consider
them in greater detail in a later chapter.
Notes
1 P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 24, Rome,
1984, p. 442.
2   Ibid., pp. 476-7.
3   Angelo Izzo to G. I. Vito Zincani and Sergio Castaldo, 8 April
1986.
4   Angelo Izzo to P. M. Libero Mancuso, Paliano prison, 25
March 1986, p. 10.
5   Cristiano Fioravanti to G. I. Paolo Borsellino and Giovanni
Miccichè, Palermo, 23 March 1986, p. 2.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
[6]
THE COUP SEASON
Mino Pecorelli was in an ideal position to gain access to the most
sensitive information about Italy’s political scandals. As his diaries show,
he was in regular contact with senior figures in the secret services, the
police and Parliament. He was also a member of P2 and at one point it was
proposed that lodge members should supply OP with any information they
considered suitable for publication, so that the magazine would become a
kind of masonic in-house journal. Nothing came of the suggestion and
Pecorelli eventually resigned from P2 but he continued to be a prolific fount
of confidential information and remained in contact with Gelli. In January
1978 he published the secret service report which was the basis for the
prosecution of the participants in a 1970 coup attempt led by Prince Valerio
Borghese. The operation has gone down to history as a comic-opera coup
staged by naïve incompetents, which posed no real threat to the state.
Nearly fifteen years after the event a Rome appeal court acquitted all the
defendants and newspapers dubbed the event ‘the coup that never was’. It
was no mean feat on the part of the conspirators to succeed in occupying
the Interior Ministry, then return peacefully to their homes, and ultimately
to evade the judicial consequences of their actions. Recent revelations of
Mafia involvement in the conspiracy indicate that the threat may have been
more serious than the Italian public has been led to believe. The coup
attempt was one of a series of right-wing conspiracies which exercised an
unquestionable influence over the direction and shape of Italian politics.
The secret service report was sent to the Rome public prosecutor’s office in
July 1974 by Giulio Andreotti, then Defence Minister. It reveals a detailed
knowledge of the conspirators’ activities, some of it gathered by the secret
service before and during the coup attempt and some in its immediate
aftermath, and it is clear that several of the protagonists regarded members
of the secret service as their trusted confidants.
The coup leader, Valerio Borghese, was a renowned Second World
War naval commander who founded the right-wing Fronte Nazionale
(National Front) in 1968. It was intended to be, according to the secret
service report,1 a mass anti-communist organization and it advocated a coup
d’état to overthrow the government. Its first members were recruited from

--- Sayfa 89 ---
the ranks of former fascists and its first public manifestation was a meeting
at the Hotel Royal in Viareggio. Borghese addressed the gathering of about
200 people on the need for a moral and political revival of the country and
called for unity in the battle against communism. The organization put into
effect one of the concepts discussed at the Pollio Institute conference in
1965. It was divided into two basic types of organization: overt, public
groups known as Group A and a secret, military wing known as Group B,
which specialized in collecting weapons, recruiting people suitable for use
in ‘unscrupulous’ activities, and the preparation of hideouts or refuges. It
was also keen to recruit personnel from the armed forces and the Ministry
of the Interior.
On the night of 7 December 1970, Fronte Nazionale members from all
over the country gathered in Rome for the projected coup. The enterprise
was codenamed Operation Tora Tora after the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor, which took place on the night of 7 December 1941 and which
brought the United States into the Second World War. Who knows, the
conspirators may have hoped that their own Tora Tora might draw the
Americans into the anti-communist struggle in Italy? They were supported
by Delle Chiaie’s Avanguardia Nazionale and a group of nearly 200 armed
forest guards who arrived in coaches from the town of Cittaducale, a couple
of hours’ drive from Rome. They had been promised the support of three
army regiments and units from the police and carabinieri . They also
believed they had the backing of the Air Force. The plan was to seize
control of the Interior, Defence and Foreign Ministries, Parliament, and the
headquarters of the state broadcasting corporation, RAI, as well as other
key sites in Rome. It was also intended that Police Chief Angelo Vicari
should be ‘physically eliminated’ and the President, Giuseppe Saragat,
captured. The plan called for the arrest of left-wing political and trade union
leaders, who were to be shipped to captivity on the Eolian Islands, a tiny
archipelago off the north coast of Sicily, a feature reminiscent of the De
Lorenzo coup project of 1964, which had included plans for the detention of
left-wingers on the island of Sardinia.
One group succeeded in entering the Interior Ministry through the
complicity of the police guards on duty that night; they helped themselves
to weapons and sent out a lorry with a consignment of 180 machine-guns
for their associates. At around midnight, however, Borghese and the coup
leaders received a mysterious order telling them to call the operation off and

--- Sayfa 90 ---
a desperate scramble ensued to catch up with the various groups before they
went into action and to recover the weapons. One of the conspirators who
entered the Interior Ministry took the precaution of keeping a Beretta
machine-pistol as a souvenir. The weapon would later become a useful
instrument of blackmail, proving that the enterprise had indeed taken place
and that the plotters had achieved a degree of success that would not have
been possible without extensive official collusion. As a result, the coup
leaders were forced to have a replica weapon made and to substitute it for
the original in the Interior Ministry armoury. Borghese subsequently
explained that the decision to call off the coup was prompted by the last-
minute withdrawal of the complicity which was to have made possible the
occupation of the Defence Ministry, though not everyone found his account
entirely convincing. Members of Avanguardia Nazionale became suspicious
as to the true intentions of some of the coup leaders, particularly when they
discovered that one of the protagonists, a doctor named Salvatore Drago,
was a close friend of Federico D’Amato, head of the Office of Special
Affairs at the Interior Ministry. They feared that the coup might be a trap,
designed to eliminate the extreme right following the example of the Greek
colonels, who arrested extremists of both left and right after staging their
coup in 1967. Initially, both Miceli and Interior Minister Franco Restivo
denied there had ever been any penetration of the Interior Ministry building.
‘None of Delle Chiaie’s followers ended up in prison and this fact confirms
that D’Amato must have considered it prudent not to strike against people
who could have revealed the disturbing background to emerge from the
investigation of the Fronte Nazionale,’ the secret service report commented.
There were moments on the night of the 7th which resembled a
grotesque comedy. One group from Avanguardia Nazionale set off to
kidnap ‘an unknown personage’. Having gone to the wrong address, they
then proceeded to get stuck in the lift and were only able to get out early the
next morning, returning to base empty-handed. There was, however, a more
serious side to the coup, which is also brought out in the secret service
report. ‘The Fronte Nazionale had established long-standing links with the
USA, in the person of President Nixon, and with NATO units based in
Malta, for the execution of the coup,’ it declared. The contact between
Nixon and the conspirators, according to the report, was handled by an
American named Hugh Hammond Fenwich, who worked in Italy for the

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Selenia arms and electronics company. Four NATO ships were on standby
in Malta, ready to support the conspirators if requested, the report said.
The source of the information about the US connection was Remo
Orlandini, a wealthy builder and founder member of the Fronte Nazionale.
He was approached three years after the coup by a SID operative, Captain
Antonio Labruna, who recorded a number of conversations with him. The
candour with which Orlandini discussed the coup makes it clear that he had
no doubt that he was talking to someone sympathetic to the cause: not such
an unreasonable assumption in the circumstances. Labruna told him he
wanted to know exactly what had gone wrong so that the same mistakes
could be avoided in the future. On 12 February 1973, the two men met in a
secret service office in Rome. ‘Labruna: And the outside support, from
abroad? Orlandini: NATO and [West] Germany. At the military level,
because we don’t trust the civilians. Labruna: You must tell me the names,
everything, because I know a lot about the international scene. Orlandini:
Look, for America there’s Nixon, as well as his entourage.’2 At another
meeting in June, Orlandini told Labruna that a phone call to summon
international assistance had been made, as planned, from Rome to the
NATO base in Naples, to be relayed via Malta to Nixon in person but that it
appeared not to have been passed on from Malta. ‘The NATO fleet had
already started up its engines and was ready to depart and approach us . . .
whatever happened, we had it in support. That’s why I tell you you don’t
have the slightest idea of the scale and the seriousness of the thing.’3
A good idea of the outlook and policies of the coup plotters can be
gathered from the text of a proclamation Borghese intended to read on radio
and television once the coup had gone into effect. ‘The political formula
which has governed us for twenty-five years and brought us to the verge of
economic and moral collapse has ceased to exist,’4 the text ran. ‘The armed
forces, the forces of order, the most competent and representative men in
the nation are with us and we can assure you that the most dangerous
enemies, to be clear, those who wanted to enslave the fatherland to the
foreigner, have been rendered inoffensive.’ Borghese would have gone on
to tell his listeners that there would be no special laws passed but to assure
the members of the armed forces that he would no longer allow them to be
‘ridiculed, insulted, injured and killed with impunity’. Another document
confiscated from one of the conspirators in 1974 outlined the new
government’s policies. These included: ‘Maintenance of the present military

--- Sayfa 92 ---
and financial commitment to NATO and the preparation of a plan to
increase Italy’s contribution to the Atlantic Alliance,’5 and the appointment
of a special envoy to the United States to organize an Italian military
contribution to the Vietnam war.
One of the collaborators in the coup was a major in the carabinieri,
Salvatore Pecorella, who led a unit of sixteen paramilitary police in the
abortive attempt to seize the Defence Ministry. He was also the carabiniere
officer whose presence was requested by Gelli to witness the handover of
funds to right-wing terrorist Augusto Cauchi in 1974. According to a
number of accounts Gelli played an important role in the coup plot and may
have been in some way responsible for the last-minute decision to call the
attempt off. Paolo Aleandri, a right-wing terrorist who was too young to
participate in the coup but who was in contact in later years with two of its
protagonists, the brothers Fabio and Alfredo De Felice, told a Rome
magistrate that Gelli provided an obligatory channel of communication to
supporters of the coup among the carabinieri. Aleandri also reported that
the De Felice brothers had named Federico D’Amato of the Interior
Ministry as one of the people who ‘had pledged their support for the
Borghese coup and to the strategy of tension in general’, adding that
D’Amato was on intimate terms with Alfredo De Felice. According to
Fabio De Felice, there was a theatrical element in the Borghese coup but the
real essence of the project was to provoke the implementation of an
emergency, anti-insurrection plan held by the carabinieri , in what appears
to be a remarkable rerun of General De Lorenzo’s 1964 coup attempt.
‘Fabio De Felice told me that the author of this substantial part of the coup
was Giannettini,’ Aleandri said.6 Guido Giannettini was the right-wing
journalist and SID informant implicated in the 1969 Piazza Fontana bomb
atrocity. He provided an important link between the secret services and
certain right-wing terrorists, a role we will consider in more detail in the
next chapter.
Another aspect of the coup in which Gelli was active was the
subsequent manoeuvring to ensure the protagonists escaped conviction in
the courts. Aleandri liaised with him on behalf of several of the coup
plotters who went into hiding abroad while Gelli exercised his political
influence to encourage leniency on the part of the judiciary and to foster the
view that the Borghese coup was a trivial blip in the history of Italian
subversion. One of the coup exiles was Filippo De Iorio, a right-wing

--- Sayfa 93 ---
Christian Democrat and lawyer, who had been a close collaborator of
Andreotti’s in the early Seventies, before the coup scandal forced him to
flee abroad. De Iorio, whose name would later appear on the P2
membership list, would telephone Aleandri using the pseudonym
‘Marcelli’. Aleandri, in his turn, was able to relay encouraging news from
Gelli: ‘He told me to tell De Iorio not to worry because they were
negotiating a general solution for everyone at a political level.’7 At the same
time, Gelli set out to diminish the seriousness of the affair by discrediting
witnesses such as Orlandini. He warned secret service colonel Antonio
Viezzer, who joined his lodge in 1977, that Orlandini was untrustworthy,
when Viezzer sought Gelli’s views on the attempted coup. Gelli described
Orlandini as ‘unreliable, a teller of tall tales, and that is what I put in my
report,’ Viezzer told a Bologna assize court in 1982.8 It is understandable
that Gelli should want to discredit Orlandini given the sensitive nature of
the latter’s revelations to Captain Labruna.
Gelli was also dismissive of the episode when I asked him about it in
1989. He denied that there had been a coup attempt or that he had had
anything to do with the order to call it off. ‘That wasn’t a coup. If it was
anything it was just a prank. I say a prank because it started to rain and they
all went home.’ The P2 boss claimed he had not followed the affair as it
unfolded, although he admitted to being a close friend of Valerio Borghese.
Curiously, he did leave open the possibility of US involvement: ‘Certainly,
the Americans follow everything. Do you imagine they wouldn’t have
followed this? And then it was at a time when there was a serious threat,
that doesn’t exist today. The PCI was very well organized, it didn’t want to
seize power because if it had wanted to, it could have done. At that time,
the Americans kept Italy under very close observation.’9 Gelli is hardly
giving anything away here, but his hints appear to be based on the logic
adopted by many of the right-wing conspirators: if I am guilty then
everyone is guilty, right up to the top.
The public prosecutor at the Borghese coup trial chose to remain
sceptical of Orlandini’s claims about US support for the plot. ‘As well as
revealing many circumstances which have been amply confirmed by the
judicial inquiry, Orlandini has made allegations that cannot be checked.
Among them are those relating to the alleged collusion between the
conspirators and the President of the United States, Nixon, and the
leadership of the NATO fleet in the Mediterranean. Despite the manifest

--- Sayfa 94 ---
implausibility and vagueness of the claim, it has been investigated, but
without producing any results,’ Prosecutor Claudio Vitalone, a long-
standing ally of Andreotti’s and later to become a Christian Democrat
senator, wrote in his indictment.10 Vitalone might have been less convinced
of the ‘manifest implausibility’ of the US President fomenting coups in
foreign countries if he had read the memoirs of CIA Director William
Colby. One of Colby’s reminiscences concerns the CIA’s efforts to prevent
Salvador Allende from achieving power in Chile and to undermine him
once he was elected. ‘Certainly, in Track II in 1970 it [the CIA] sought a
military coup, at the direct order of President Nixon,’ he wrote.11 Vitalone
gave no account of the steps that had been taken to investigate the US
connection in the Borghese coup. He acknowledged that Orlandini had been
found in possession of secret documents on NATO and Italian troop
dispositions ‘that would have aroused the envy of the highest levels of
military command as well as of the most efficient espionage agencies’. But
he offered no explanation as to how Orlandini might have come by them.
The case against the plotters was gradually whittled away: 145 people were
originally charged but only seventy-eight actually brought to trial, forty-six
of whom were convicted by a Rome assize court, before the final blanket
acquittals on appeal. The investigation of the US role in the coup remained
open for a number of years but was eventually laid to rest without any
further inquiries being carried out. And the identity of a US company based
in Switzerland which allegedly financed the conspiracy was never
established.
Revelations by a number of Mafia bosses in the 1980s about attempts
to enlist Mafia support for the Borghese coup have added a new and sinister
dimension to the ‘coup that never was’. Mafia supergrass Tommaso
Buscetta was the first senior member of the Sicilian crime organization to
break its fearsome code of silence, known as ‘omerta.’ He told Palermo
Examining Magistrate Giovanni Falcone in December 1984 of Borghese’s
attempt to obtain the armed support of the Mafia for his anti-communist
coup. In exchange, Buscetta said, Borghese offered an amnesty for
imprisoned mafiosi. ‘Sectors of the government parties and other
institutions were ready to provide their support,’ he said. Despite the
enthusiastic backing of some important bosses, the project eventually
foundered. ‘Someone very high up wanted to know the names of all the
mafiosi who were to support the Borghese operation. Many bosses were

--- Sayfa 95 ---
against it; it could have been extremely risky. It would have given
unequivocal proof of membership of Cosa Nostra,’ he said. ‘Nothing was
done and the coup came to nothing, partly because there were a lot of
Soviet ships cruising in the Mediterranean at the time.’12
Buscetta’s revelations received authoritative confirmation in 1986
when the powerful boss Luciano Liggio told the Reggio Calabria assize
court of an approach from Buscetta to elicit his support. ‘They told me that
the secret services and the Americans were in favour. I told them to get lost
and as a result I was given a life sentence at Bari.’13 Liggio’s account was
particularly significant because Buscetta’s testimony had been kept secret
until then. Further confirmation came in 1987 from Antonino Calderone,
the brother of a Mafia boss who participated directly in the negotiations.
‘There was considerable perplexity on the part of Cosa Nostra because they
actually wanted the mafiosi to wear an arm band like the other conspirators.
Furthermore they wanted a list of the mafiosi who would be used. In
general the thinking was to guarantee a generic support for the coup but not
to get involved in practice. These proposals were put directly to my brother
by Prince Junio Valerio Borghese in Rome, where they met on a single
occasion,’ Calderone said.14
According to one of the coup’s participants, a small contingent of
Mafia men did actually take part in the operation. Ά column of mafiosi
arrived from Sicily: about twenty men,’ Gaetano Lunetta told L’Espresso
magazine (20 January 1989). ‘They were supposed to arrest Police Chief
Angelo Vicari in his home, but they went to the wrong apartment and the
action failed.’ Lunetta’s version is reminiscent of the secret service report
about a group of conspirators who intended to kidnap ‘an unknown
personage’ but went to the wrong address and ended up getting stuck in the
lift. Also, according to the secret services, Vicari was to have been
‘physically eliminated’, and who better for that task than a squad of twenty
mafiosi?
The main purpose of Lunetta’s interview with L’Espresso was an angry
rebuttal of the notion that the Borghese coup had been a figment of the
conspirators’ imagination. ‘It’s ridiculous when people talk about a
“presumed coup”. The Borghese coup . . . really happened: with comrades
from La Spezia and the Liguria region we were the absolute masters of the
Interior Ministry for about two hours, and I was there; we had the keys to

--- Sayfa 96 ---
all the rooms, the armoury, the telephone switchboards, telegraph, radio,’
Lunetta, who spent a year in prison for his involvement in the enterprise,
told the magazine. He said it was a mistake to consider it an ‘attempted’
coup. ‘The political objective of those who organized the attack was
achieved: the blocking of Aldo Moro’s policy, the ejection of the PCI from
the area of government, guarantees of a total loyalty to the Atlantic Alliance
and to the Americans. The truth is that the coup took place and was a
success.’
Lunetta claimed that on the night of the coup troops were on standby
to occupy key points in the city, the carabinieri were on alert and NATO
troops based in Verona had been moved south to encircle the capital. Like
Orlandini, he was convinced that it had been a serious business. His
description of the preparations for the coup also lend weight to that
assertion. Lunetta said he had been given a private tour of the Interior
Ministry by D’Amato’s friend Salvatore Drago two months before the
occupation went ahead. He claimed that representatives of SID, of the
carabinieri and of the three armed services had attended preparatory
meetings to discuss the coup. Also present was ‘someone who was pointed
out to me as the head of the CIA in Rome, a small but very energetic man’.
An explanation for the sudden decision to call the coup off, which
coincides with the accounts of both Lunetta and Orlandini, was furnished
by Sandro Saccucci, one of the coup leaders, in private conversation with
fellow members of the MSI. Saccucci was a former parachutist and MSI
deputy whose public appearances often degenerated into bruising political
affrays. It was he who was sent to head off the column of forest guards after
the order to call off the coup had come through. He succeeded in halting
them at Ponte Milvio, a bridge only ten minutes from the broadcasting
centre they were on their way to occupy. He told one party colleague
afterwards that the counter-order originated with the US State Department,
which had learnt of the coup at the last minute and hastily overruled the
CIA, which had already given its backing to the project. Other accounts,
however, have US Ambassador Graham Martin being kept abreast of
developments by Orlandini’s contact, Hugh Fenwich, and it seems unlikely
that Martin would have omitted to pass on this information to the State
Department. Orlandini himself claimed that the military attaché at the
embassy, James Clavio, had also been monitoring the conspirators’
activities and sounding out the views of Italian officers on the possibility of

--- Sayfa 97 ---
military intervention in the event of a political crisis. There is little doubt
that the plotters were a heterogeneous and divided group. Whether the coup
was called off because of second thoughts on the part of some of its leaders
or because someone was tipped off that the conspirators were about to be
arrested and used as scapegoats to justify a more moderate, centrist coup,
remains unclear. What is clear is that the plotters believed they enjoyed the
support of senior figures in the US government and that they were never
disabused. It is extremely unlikely that they would have pressed ahead with
the enterprise if the Americans had set their face against it. The Borghese
coup cost no lives, but some of the other subversive activities of the
extreme right were not so bloodless.
While Rome magistrates were investigating the Borghese coup a
parallel investigation in northern Italy was uncovering the activities of the
Rosa dei Venti (Compass Rose) conspiracy. According to some accounts,
the organization took its name from the compass rose, the star-like shape
which marks the four points of the compass and which has been adopted as
the symbol of NATO. Others suggested that it was a loosely knit association
linking twenty, and later more, right-wing subversive organizations. What is
certain is that the Rosa dei Venti was involved in coup-plotting in the early
Seventies and was financed by a number of wealthy northern industrialists.
It also appears to have enjoyed the usual support of the NATO security
establishment. It was in the course of the Rosa dei Venti investigation that
Padua Examining Magistrate Giovanni Tamburino took the unprecedented
step of arresting the head of the Italian secret service, General Vito Miceli.
The Court of Cassation ruled that the case should be handled in Rome and it
was subsequently combined with the Borghese investigation. The more
deferential Rome magistrates reduced the charge against Miceli from
conspiracy to one of aiding and abetting a conspiracy and he was eventually
acquitted.
One of the principal sources of information about the Rosa dei Venti
was a young right-wing trade unionist named Roberto Cavallaro. Posing as
a magistrate in the military justice system Cavallaro travelled the country
contacting right-wing military officers to canvass their support for a coup.
His high-level contacts in the secret services were sufficient to give him
unfettered access to military bases without his being exposed as a fraud. He
provided a detailed account of his activities to Tamburino and to other
magistrates as well as in a lengthy interview to L’Europeo magazine (i7

--- Sayfa 98 ---
October 1974). ‘Italians don’t know that one fine morning they could have
woken up with a coup already enacted,’ he told the magazine. ‘They don’t
know that everything had been prepared a long time in advance, that the
technical means were ready, that operational meetings were held with
American officers, that we had the agreement of NATO headquarters, that
the army had been put on alert. They don’t know that the “organization”
was about to implement the plan. They can’t know it. I know it because I
was part of that “organization”, because I had been working for a long time
for a change in the management of power in Italy.’
Cavallaro claimed that what he referred to as ‘Organization X’
conditioned and made use of a number of right-wing groups including the
Rosa dei Venti. ‘It was headed by the secret agencies of the state, the secret
services, including foreign secret services.’ He claimed that the
‘organization’ had a legitimate structure whose purpose was the protection
of the institutions of the state and described how it became operational to
respond to disturbances and to restore order. ‘What happened is this: when
disturbances did not occur, they were artificially created by the
“organization” through its parallel groups, which are all those right-wing
extremist groups (but there are also some on the extreme left, you know)
currently on trial.’ Cavallaro traced the origins of the ‘organization’ to
1964, since when ‘everything that happens (from the meeting of the Pollio
Institute in 1965 to the most recent events) has been along its chosen
course’. He claimed that two foreign powers were informed of the
imminent coup, as well as NATO headquarters. ‘If I am guilty then
everyone in the pyramid is guilty, right up to the summit. Otherwise we are
all innocent,’ he said.
Cavallaro’s account is one of the most detailed ever offered of the
inner workings of the strategy of tension. His claim that left-wing groups
were among those which, sometimes unwittingly, worked on behalf of the
‘organization’ is particularly significant. His view was endorsed by
Tamburino in an interview with the socialist newspaper L’Avanti (16 July
1978). ‘What do you think of the new “face” of subversion that has
replaced the political bombings? In other words the Red Brigades and
(Workers’) Autonomy?’ the magistrate was asked. Ί believe that the
hypothesis of a two-pronged assault on our institutions headed by a single
organizational structure may best explain what we are experiencing at the
moment,’ Tamburino answered. He went on to point out how fascist

--- Sayfa 99 ---
violence had given way to that of the Red Brigades just at a time when left-
wing parties were close to assuming a role in government. The upsurge in
BR activity naturally put the PCI under extreme pressure as well as tending
to discredit the party in the eyes of the public. Tamburino also drew
attention to the importance of Padua as a centre of political extremism; the
city had been the home base of the right-wing terrorist cell implicated in the
Piazza Fontana bombing before becoming a centre of operations for the
leftists of Autonomia Operaia. It remains an important military base for the
strategic north-eastern sector of the country.
Arrested with Cavallaro was Lieutenant-Colonel Amos Spiazzi, who
revealed to magistrates the existence of the ‘Parallel SID’ or ‘SuperSID’, an
anti-communist security organization made up of military personnel and
civilians, which was not the same as the secret service but which in large
part coincided with it. Spiazzi’s cooperation with the magistrates came to an
abrupt halt after a judicial confrontation with one of his superior officers,
General Antonio Alemanno. ‘You must say that everything you did was
done as individuals. You must not involve others,’ Alemanno, head of the
SID internal security office, told him.15 Nine years later Spiazzi told the P2
Commission how he received an order on the night of the Borghese coup
instructing him to mobilize troops specially selected for their political
reliability and take up positions in Sesto San Giovanni, a working-class
suburb of Milan and a heartland of communist electoral support. As the
fully armed unit approached Milan from Cremona, where his regiment was
based, Spiazzi received a second order countermanding the original one and
telling him to carry out a regular training exercise.16 The coup was off.
One of Cavallaro’s revelations to Tamburino concerned the
involvement in the Rosa dei Venti conspiracy of the Sicilian financier
Michele Sindona. At the time, Sindona was still a respected figure in the
business world and Tamburino viewed Cavallaro’s allegations with
considerable scepticism. In later years it would emerge that Sindona’s
activities had led him into contact not only with conservative business and
political figures in Italy but with the Americans, the Mafia and freemasonry.
It was during an investigation into Sindona’s affairs that the Milan
magistrates stumbled across the P2 membership lists at Gelli’s office near
Arezzo. Sindona was born at Patti in Sicily in 1920. He studied law at
Messina University and began his business career during the war, selling
agricultural produce in a lorry bought from American forces who had

--- Sayfa 100 ---
landed on the island in 1943. He later moved to Milan where he worked as
a tax adviser to wealthy Italians and laid the foundations of his own
financial empire, which would eventually straddle the Atlantic when he
added the Franklin National Bank to the two Italian banks he already
owned. His prestige was greatly boosted when he became a financial
adviser to the Vatican, counselling the Holy See on how best to transfer its
considerable investments out of Italy.
Cavallaro told Tamburino of a meeting held at a villa near Vicenza in
March 1973 and attended by Sindona, an important politician, an American
General Johnson and three senior officers from the Italian Navy and Air
Force. He said the villa ‘probably belonged to Sindona’.17 Further
information about Sindona’s participation in the coup plots emerged during
a confrontation between Spiazzi and Cavallaro staged in the presence of
Judge Tamburino. ‘Spiazzi: Sindona’s name was mentioned by [Dario]
Zagolin, who told me the first time I met him that the Genoa connection
[several of the Rosa dei Venti’s paymasters came from Genoa] went very
high, right up to Sindona. It is not true however that Cavallaro talked about
an alleged coup by Andreotti. Cavallaro: I confirm that both [Giuseppe] De
Marchi and Spiazzi talked about it.’18 In another deposition Cavallaro
claimed that Andreotti had been planning a coup, with money from
Sindona, which was aborted after some of the conspirators began to suspect
his intentions. ‘Spiazzi told me that the coup was abandoned because he
suspected that Andreotti would have dealt a blow to the right and one to the
left, seizing power without sharing it.’19 Investigators discovered that one of
the principal financial backers of the Rosa dei Venti was a Genoa-based
moped manufacturer, Andrea Piaggio, who kept a large portion of his secret
funds in a Swiss bank (Finabank, Lugano) owned by Sindona.20 The secret
service report published by Pecorelli records a payment by Attilio Lercari,
Piaggio’s administrator, of 19 million Lire (£12,000) to three of the Rosa
dei Venti conspirators in June 1973. Overall, Piaggio made 200 million Lire
(£130,000) available to the group. Further evidence of Sindona’s
involvement in coup-plotting was offered by his general manager Carlo
Bordoni in an interview with Il Mondo magazine. Bordoni claimed that
Sindona had financed Italian military leaders planning a coup with the
backing of NATO. ‘In order to understand the purpose of the coup you must
remember the relationship that Sindona had established in the United States
with President Richard Nixon, with the ambassador to Italy, John Volpe, . . .

--- Sayfa 101 ---
and above all with David Kennedy, ex-Treasury Minister and President of
Fasco, Sindona’s holding company,’ Bordoni said.21
Sindona’s financial empire collapsed in 1974, shortly after the
Watergate scandal had forced President Nixon from office, and only a year
after being publicly hailed as ‘the saviour of the Lira’ by Prime Minister
Andreotti. Despite his bankruptcy, Sindona, who joined P2 in 1977, did not
lose his taste for bizarre reactionary conspiracies. The most mysterious
occurred between 2 August and 16 October 1979, when Sindona
disappeared from New York, where he was awaiting trial for the collapse of
the Franklin National Bank. Following his disappearance, a number of
messages were sent to his Italian lawyer claiming that he had been
kidnapped by a left-wing terrorist group called Giustizieri Proletari
(Proletarian Avengers), who were pressuring him to reveal sensitive
information about his associates in Italian business and politics. It later
emerged that the kidnap was a fake and that Sindona was actually in hiding
in Sicily as a guest of the Mafia. Even stranger, a number of witnesses
claimed that the purpose of Sindona’s visit was to organize a separatist,
anti-communist coup in Sicily. According to an FBI report: ‘The uprising
was intended to block what the conspirators saw as the spread of
communism in Sicily. Following the secession of Sicily from Italy, the
island would have been offered to the United States as a location for
Mediterranean naval bases.’22 According to the witnesses the enterprise had
the backing of Italian freemasons, the Mafia and the American government.
Antony Caruso, one of the people who accompanied Sindona on the trip,
later told Panorama magazine (9 March 1981): ‘Sindona’s lawyers intend
to prove that he left the United States and went to Italy on behalf of the
American government.’ The ploy was not enough to enable Sindona to
avoid conviction in an American court for the fraudulent bankruptcy of the
Franklin National Bank and he was sentenced to twenty-five years’
imprisonment.
Sindona had returned to New York from Sicily with a deliberately
inflicted wound in his leg which was supposed to pass as a gunshot wound.
What exactly he was doing during his absence has never been clear, other
than attempting to force his influential friends to rally round with a little
judicious blackmail. The Italian magistrates who first investigated the affair
viewed the secessionist plan with considerable scepticism. More recently,
however, Palermo magistrates have highlighted the existence of links

--- Sayfa 102 ---
between the Mafia and right-wing terrorism and have begun to take a more
serious look at Sindona’s Sicilian activities. It is possible that his political
scheme was in itself an attempt to blackmail the US authorities by reference
to their backing for previous coup plots in Italy. Alternatively it is possible
that some kind of Sicilian uprising could have provided an excuse for a
military takeover in Rome. It is extremely unlikely that anyone in the US
government would have backed a separatist coup in Sicily unless the rest of
Italy had already fallen to the communists. Another possible interpretation
is that Sindona may have been negotiating with the Mafia for the
unimpeded construction of a cruise missile base later to be sited on the
island near the town of Comiso.
Sindona was extradited to Italy in 1984 and in 1986 he was sentenced
to life imprisonment for having ordered the murder of Giorgio Ambrosoli,
the Milan lawyer who was the court-appointed liquidator of his Italian
banking empire. Sindona died on 22 March 1986, four days after the court
verdict, after drinking a cup of poisoned coffee. A magistrate’s inquiry
ruled that he had committed suicide. On 27 September 1984, Francesco
Pazienza deposited with his American lawyer a curious handwritten
document entitled ‘How Sindona will be eliminated’. Written before
Sindona’s extradition, the document speculated that if Sindona was put in a
normal prison he would be murdered by his fellow prisoners, but if it was a
high security prison and he was kept in isolation (as he was), he would be
given a poisoned cup of coffee by one of the two branches of the Italian
secret services. ‘If Sindona were to die in a “clean” and sudden manner it
means that the Americans have entered the game.’ Pazienza claimed that
only the Americans could provide the Italians with sophisticated poisons
capable of killing people without leaving any suspicious traces that might
be detected at an autopsy. ‘The Italians don’t know, or don’t have the
chance of using, anything more than arsenic or cyanide.’ Explaining why
the Americans might be interested in Sindona’s demise, Pazienza claimed
that Sindona had not gone to Sicily in 1979 of his own volition. He said
Sindona’s son, Nino, had told him in 1983 that ‘his father didn’t go to Sicily
for pleasure but on behalf of elements in the Carter administration’.
Pazienza was right in predicting that Sindona would die by drinking
poisoned coffee. According to his argument, though, it must have been the
Italian secret services, rather than the Americans, who were responsible for
his death: the poison used was cyanide. In actual fact, the magistrates who

--- Sayfa 103 ---
investigated his death found persuasive evidence that Sindona had
deliberately taken his own life. He had dissolved half a gram of cyanide in a
large cup of coffee, a sufficient quantity to give the drink a repellent taste
and odour. He had then drained the cup to the bottom, despite the fact that
the drink immediately caused a burning sensation and traces of burning
were found inside his mouth. There was no way he could have failed to
notice the poison and yet he persisted in drinking it all. Though these facts
reduce Pazienza’s apparent powers of clairvoyance, they do not diminish
the interest of his document or its effectiveness as an instrument of
blackmail.
Another group interested in Sindona’s elimination, according to
Pazienza, was the Vatican. ‘It would eliminate “the other one who knows”.
Calvi was the other “other”.’ The third ‘interested party’ was Andreotti. In a
separate document entitled Andreotti Operation OSSA, Pazienza claimed
that he had been sent to New York in 1980 by General Santovito, head of
military intelligence, to ensure that Sindona was not about to talk about his
relationship with Andreotti. OSSA, Pazienza said, stood for Honoured
Society Sindona Andreotti. During his trip to New York Pazienza had two
meetings with an unnamed interlocutor who assured him that Sindona had
been ‘convinced’ to keep quiet. In another document called ‘More on the
possible elimination of Sindona’, Pazienza suggested that Sindona’s death
might make Gelli either stronger or more vulnerable. He said that Gelli had
acquired part of Sindona’s sensitive ‘material’ in 1979. ‘The elimination of
Sindona would make Gelli the only possible blackmailer of Roman high
society on the Sindona-Vatican-DC (Christian Democrat Party)-Andreotti
affairs. We shall see,’ he wrote. Pazienza deposited these documents at the
Bologna bomb trial with the obvious intention of incorporating blackmail in
his own defence. He refused to offer the court any further elucidation of
them. Sindona too had not been averse to blackmail, frequently hinting that
he was in a position to make revelations capable of damaging the
relationship between the United States and Italy.23 This had not kept him out
of prison, either in the United States or Italy, but that does not necessarily
mean that he was only bluffing. A first-hand account of United States
participation in Italian coup plots would certainly have put a strain on
bilateral relations. Whatever the truth, he took the secret of it with him to
the grave, leaving some of his sensitive information, as Pazienza suggests,
to be inherited by Gelli.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
The relationship between Giulio Andreotti and the coup plotters and,
for that matter, his relationship with Gelli, have never been fully clarified.
Several witnesses have testified that Gelli frequently spoke on the phone in
their presence to someone he claimed was Andreotti. There is also an often-
published photograph which shows the two standing together in evening
dress and beaming smiles. Andreotti stated in a 1989 interview (Panorama ,
22 October 1989) that he had met Gelli because of the latter’s role as a
director of the Permaflex mattress factory in Frosinone, which would mean
their acquaintance dates from 1965 at the earliest, as the factory was
inaugurated in that year. According to Gelli, however, the two first met in
1958.24 Andreotti described how he had met Gelli later, in Argentina when
Juan Peron returned to power, and was amazed at the deference with which
Gelli was treated by the Argentine President, an observation that supports
Arrigo Molinari’s assertion, examined earlier, that Gelli may have been in
some way instrumental in presenting Andreotti to Peron. ‘Gelli also had one
of the places of honour at Reagan’s inauguration eight years ago,’ Andreotti
told the interviewer. He then added the barbed comment: ‘Subsequently
something must have happened inside the clique. This is an area in which I
have no competence and I have no wish to acquire it.’ Surprisingly, for
someone who as Defence Minister held responsibility for the secret services
over many years and at a time when the secret services were, in their turn,
on intimate terms with Gelli, Andreotti declared that he had no reason to
think that ‘Gelli was someone to avoid’.
In contrast to this somewhat lukewarm testimonial, Gelli professes the
highest regard for Andreotti. ‘Everyone has an idol. Some people admire
film stars, others sports stars like [the soccer player Diego] Maradona. I
have a great admiration for this particular politician,’ the P2 boss told the
author.25 Gelli rounded off his potentially embarrassing tribute by saying: Ί
consider him to be very intelligent. He is able to turn negative events into
positive events, even when these concern other countries.’ Gelli showed no
eagerness to explain these cryptic words, merely confirming that the ‘other
countries’ in question were Western allies. It would perhaps be fanciful to
take this as a reference to the negative events of terrorism, instigated by
Italy’s principal Western ally, which had the positive effect of propping up
centrist governments, many of them presided over by Giulio Andreotti.
Gelli said he had met Andreotti ‘just as much as the other politicians’, a
claim that suggests considerable familiarity, given the numerous witnesses

--- Sayfa 105 ---
who have testified to the close relations the masonic conspirator enjoyed
with many of Italy’s most influential political leaders.
Andreotti was too shrewd a politician to share the views of the more
reactionary of the coup plotters but it is possible that he may have played
along with them in order to get them to show their hand and then have them
arrested, at the same time as exploiting the coup threat to condition political
parties on the left. Alternatively, he may have thought that if the United
States decided that a coup along the lines of the Greek colonels’ was the
appropriate remedy for Italy’s ills it would be preferable if he were the man
to administer the medicine. He was undoubtedly one of the people best
placed to keep abreast of the plots, having been Defence Minister, and
therefore responsible for the secret services, from 1959 to 1966 and again in
1974, a crucial year for coup projects. He was also Prime Minister for most
of 1972 and half of 1973 and is not a man who could be suspected of
naivety or incompetence.
According to Paolo Aleandri, it was a common rumour among rightists
that Andreotti had been considered by the Borghese coup plotters to be a
kind of beacon or reference point within the political establishment.26
General Miceli offered a non-committal comment on this delicate subject
during an interrogation by Judge Tamburino in 1974. ‘As for the rumours
about Andreotti’s leanings towards a coup, I can say that there is a literature
on the subject which has not been backed up by objective proof.
Anonymous documents about it were in circulation in 1972 and I believe
that D’Amato was in possession of a couple of reports which were passed to
me and which I sent on to the Prime Minister [that is to Andreotti.]’27
One of the protagonists in a campaign for constitutional change very
similar to that advocated in Gelli’s ‘Plan for Democratic Revival’ and an
associate of many of the supporters of the Borghese coup and other
interlocking conspiracies was Count Edgardo Sogno. Sogno advocated a
Gaullist-style presidency and a government of technocrats to tackle what he
saw as the moral and economic decline of the country. He became a
member of P2 in 1979. Born into an aristocratic family in Turin in 1915,
Sogno had been a hero of the Resistance, working with the forces of the
British Special Operations Executive and winning an American Bronze Star
for his bravery during the war. As such he was an ideal leader for the anti-
communist struggle, being untainted by fascist associations. After the war

--- Sayfa 106 ---
he became a diplomat, serving at the Italian consulate in Paris before
becoming director of the NATO Planning and Co-ordinating Group in
London in 1954. He returned to Paris, to the NATO Defence College, which
he addressed on one occasion on ‘The communist menace in Italy’. It was
during the 1950s that he made his contribution to the Cold War by founding
the Peace and Freedom Association (Pace e Libertà), which became a
vehicle for a rabidly anti-communist propaganda campaign. He was ably
assisted in this endeavour by Luigi Cavallo, a former communist journalist
and secret service agent provocateur . In the 1960s Sogno moved to the
United States, where he served in the consulate in Philadelphia and then as
a counsellor at the Washington embassy, before ending up as an ambassador
in Rangoon, Burma. He returned to Italy in 1970, just in time to play his
part in saving the country from chaos and communism.
In 1971 he formed a Committee for Democratic Resistance to promote
his constitutional reforms, which included a change to the electoral system
which he hoped would halve the number of communists in Parliament.
According to a secret service report, Sogno claimed to have the backing of
the Agnelli family for his project. The powerful Turin industrialists had
been childhood friends of the count. One well-informed account stated that
Sogno received financial support from Fiat, the Turin Industrialists’ Union
and ‘probably from Michele Sindona and the CIA’.28 A secret service report
declared that the Milan office of the United States Information Service
(USIS) ‘appears recently to have made a payment of 3 million Lire (£2,000)
to the Peace and Freedom Association for their anti-communist struggle,
which is already underway’.29 Pace e Libertà was an offshoot of a French
anti-communist organization, Paix et Liberté, which was founded in Paris
by a former NATO official, Jean Paul David, and financed in part by the
United States. One of the principal activities of the Italian branch was
spying on Fiat workers with communist sympathies and drawing up
intelligence dossiers on them. This was the work of Cavallo, who was paid
for it by both Fiat and the secret service Office of Economic and Industrial
Research, run by Colonel Rocca.
If Sogno’s was the respectable face of the coup conspiracies, Cavallo’s
was decidedly less attractive. He was born in 1920, the son of an
agricultural labourer, and spent part of the war in Berlin, studying German.
After the war he was sent to Paris as a correspondent for the Communist
Party newspaper L’Unità. His behaviour in Paris was, according to a secret

--- Sayfa 107 ---
service report, ambiguous, ‘raising suspicions that he was in contact with
the British and American embassies to which he appears to have supplied
information on the activities of the Italian and French Communist Parties’.30
In 1949 he was sacked by L’Unità and on 1 December the paper published a
note informing readers that Cavallo had failed to clarify certain aspects of
his past relationship with the Nazi authorities and warning party members
to steer clear of him. Cavallo then moved to New York as correspondent for
the Gazzetta del Popolo , a Christian Democrat newspaper based in Turin.
He remained in the United States until 1954, when he returned to Italy to
assist Sogno in the running of his anti-communist Peace and Freedom
organization.
The culmination of Sogno’s plans was to have been reached in August
1974 with the seizure of the presidential Quirinale Palace. President
Giovanni Leone would be forced to dissolve Parliament and appoint a
government of technocrats headed by Randolfo Pacciardi, another non-
communist Resistance hero and a former Defence Minister. The plan was
never implemented as the secret services had got wind of it but, more
importantly, because there was insufficient political and military support to
guarantee its success. Sogno and Cavallo were arrested in 1976 and charged
with trying to overthrow the government by violent means. The nature of
their project was clearly outlined in a number of documents confiscated
from Cavallo. The documents stressed the corruption and incompetence of
Italy’s current political leaders and recommended the retroactive abolition
of parliamentary immunity so that some of them could be tried for their
alleged crimes. The new military government aimed to divide its potential
opponents with a right-wing coup accompanied by progressive left-wing
policies ‘to split the anti-fascist block and eliminate the fascists from the
game’. The coup itself was to be staged ‘with the criteria of the Blitzkrieg;
on a Saturday during the holidays, with the factories closed for another two
weeks and the masses dispersed on vacation’.31 By 1974 the project had
increased in sophistication; it studiously avoided being tainted by overt
association with fascism and exploited the widespread perception that many
of the country’s rulers were deeply corrupt, just as the Red Brigades did in
later years. Other papers confiscated from Cavallo included NATO
documents marked ‘secret’ and ‘confidential’, relating to the years 1952-54.
Like Orlandini, he does not seem to have lacked for friends in the Atlantic
Alliance.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
Sogno and the other conspirators were eventually acquitted by Rome
Examining Magistrate Francesco Amato. Investigators were unable to
discover the full extent of Sogno’s contacts with Italian and foreign secret
services because Prime Minister Aldo Moro confirmed that a number of
secret service documents requested by the prosecution could not be released
since they were covered by state secrecy. Moro assured the magistrates, that
they ‘had no bearing on the present case’ but ‘might cause serious harm to
foreign citizens’. In reaching his verdict Amato explained that the
imposition of state secrecy had prevented him from establishing whether
there was any truth in the allegation that Sogno’s subversive activities were
carried out in association with Italian and foreign secret services. He ruled
that the withholding of the evidence could not be construed as proving guilt.
Before the case passed to Rome it had been rather more energetically
pursued by Turin Magistrate Luciano Violante. In November 1974 Violante
informed the SID authorities that he would like to question Lieutenant
Colonel Giuseppe Condo, one of the secret service’s prime sources of
information about Sogno’s coup plans. He was somewhat surprised to learn
that Condo had died of a heart-attack the week before. He was forty-two.
One informed source has suggested to me that of all Italy’s coup plots,
Sogno’s was the one with the greatest chance of success. This is perfectly
believable, given Sogno’s high-level US and NATO contacts. It is also
likely that the decision to call off the coup was taken at the highest NATO
level. Only at that level would it have been known that the Western security
establishment had a subtler alternative up its sleeve. In 1974, the Red
Brigades were beginning to come into their own. As we shall see, their
activities would bring about, in effect, a long, slow, secret, centrist coup;
Sogno’s coup under a different guise.
Yet another holder of the Bronze Star and a coup plotter in contact
with Sogno and with members of the Rosa dei Venti was Carlo Fumagalli.
During the war Fumagalli was the leader of a non-communist partisan
group operating in the mountainous Valtellina region in north-east Italy and
resupplied by American parachute drops. He was wounded four times in the
course of the war but his record was not entirely without blemish and
showed traits that would emerge again in his later career. Many of his
followers were smugglers or other common criminals, he had a tendency to
dispense summary justice, and one report refers to strange weekend truces
when his men would emerge to dance and fraternize with the fascists. In

--- Sayfa 109 ---
1962 he formed the Movimento d’Azione Rivoluzionaria (Revolutionary
Action Movement) or MAR, a latter-day partisan group which operated
mainly in the Valtellina area. The group financed its political activities
partly through kidnaps and dealing in stolen cars and paintings. Its political
objective, like that of Sogno, was a presidential republic with a two-party
system to replace the system of proportional representation that produced a
proliferation of small political parties and had given Italy thirty-two
governments in the preceding twenty-seven years. ‘This sort of democracy,
which I call parliamentary dictatorship, has led to corruption and to all the
forms of moral and material degradation that afflict the nation,’ Fumagalli
told magistrates in Brescia in 1974. He advocated ‘a rapid and bloodless
coup’ and though unable to achieve it himself he was prepared to give his
support to others. ‘There are without doubt a number of different groups
preparing for a coup . . . I am certain that if one doesn’t succeed, sooner or
later another will,’ he told the magistrates. He also spoke of American
contacts who told him in 1970 that their country would never accept a coup
directed by the fascists and still less by the left. ‘The Americans would only
support a Christian Democrat or centre coup,’ he said, something that
coincided ‘with my own political credo and my own programme’.
Fumagalli assured the magistrates that he was opposed to the use of
bombings against the civilian population in order to spark off a civil war.
Instead, his group specialized in demonstrative actions, in particular the
destruction of electricity pylons. Other accounts, however, call into question
the sincerity of these scruples about violence. The secret service report
published by Pecorelli refers to a coup planned for June 1973, which was to
be sparked off by Fumagalli’s group creating a situation of tension in the
Valtellina area, while other groups extended it into Liguria and further
south. ‘The state of civil war would have forced the armed forces to
intervene to assume power,’ the report said. For some reason, however, the
Valtellina group failed to move. According to one witness, Mauro Colli, the
coup was supported by Interior Minister Paolo Taviani, deputies from the
Christian Democrat and Socialist Parties and Sindona, among others. The
Mafia was also interested in the change of government but ‘would be
eliminated once the thing was done’. Colli also maintained that Fumagalli
claimed to be a CIA agent. There is considerable evidence to indicate that
Fumagalli enjoyed the protection of both the Italian secret service and the
police, and in particular of the Interior Ministry’s Office of Special Affairs.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
In one respect Fumagalli was well ahead of his time. That was in his
desire to use the forces of the left to provoke the military coup. According
to Alessandro D’Intino, a young right-wing extremist, Fumagalli intended
to concentrate his group’s attacks on communist targets so as to ‘force the
communists to bypass the institutions of the state, thus provoking a civil
war and finally obliging the special units of the armed forces to intervene,
not against the guerrilla groups but against the communists, to prevent them
from seizing power’. This plan was based on contacts with army officers
who promised to mobilize armoured troops in the Veneto region ‘only if
Fumagalli’s guerrillas succeeded in getting the communists to come out into
the open’. D’Intino told Brescia magistrates that Fumagalli ‘counted
heavily on the actions of extreme left-wing groups such as the Red
Brigades’ in the early stage of the conflict to get the communists fully
involved.32 The use of left-wing extremism, either to provoke a military
coup or simply to discredit the Communist Party, would be the hallmark of
a new and more sophisticated phase in the management of Italian terrorism.
Fumagalli appears to have been happy to work with a motley band of
supporters. Among those who were to help create an atmosphere of tension
in Valtellina prior to the planned 1973 coup were members of the fascist
groups Avanguardia Nazionale and Ordine Nuovo, but he was also happy to
collaborate with people of left-wing sympathies. According to the
testimony of Francesco Piazza,33 Fumagalli was in contact with
Giangiacomo Feltrinelli and even received subsidies from the Marxist
millionaire. Feltrinelli was killed in 1972 while trying to blow up an
electricity pylon on the outskirts of Milan. The pylon was on land owned by
Feltrinelli himself and less than 300 metres from a garage cum breaker’s
yard owned by Fumagalli. According to Piazza, Feltrinelli had an animated
discussion with Fumagalli on the night before his death and was actually in
the company of several of Fumagalli’s followers and possibly even of
Fumagalli himself when the accident happened. ‘As I got to know him
better Fumagalli spoke to me about his revolutionary programme, about the
need to overthrow the system through armed violence . . . and to get all the
extremist left-wing groups involved in this type of revolution,’ Piazza told a
Brescia magistrate. He said Fumagalli considered himself to be firmly anti-
communist and anti-fascist but did not attach great importance to the
political colouring of the groups involved in bringing about the revolution.
This is the kind of ideological flexibility typical of the secret service agent

--- Sayfa 111 ---
provocateur. Another curious link between Fumagalli and left-wing
terrorism is the claim that he instigated a Red Brigades arson attack on a
Pirelli test track in Milan. The attack, on the night of 25 January 1971, was
one of the Red Brigades’ earliest actions and destroyed three Pirelli-owned
lorries. Brescia Public Prosecutor Francesco Trovato reported that
Fumagalli’s henchman Gaetano Orlando boasted of being responsible for
the Pirelli sabotage.
According to General Gianadelio Maletti, director of the SID counter-
espionage office in the early 1970s, five coups were attempted in that
period, only two of which posed a serious threat to the security of the state.
In 1980 a typewritten document giving a chronology of terrorism between
1968 and 1976 was confiscated by police from Maletti’s home.34 The 1968
entry contained a postscript entitled ‘The Guard Dogs’. It began by asking,
‘Is Italy the master of its own destiny?’ and went on to consider the role of
foreign secret services in Italy, with the CIA, DIA (Defence Intelligence
Agency) and FBI at the top of the list. ‘To what extent do our allies have an
interest in maintaining an inefficient, corrupt and therefore weak ruling
class in power? . . . the “sabotage” experienced by Italy, an “awkward”
industrial rival of its Western partners in the 1960s.’ The final entry, for
1976, also contained, in telegraphic style, some interesting reflections on
who may have been behind the strategy of tension. It opened: ‘Pike Report
and Church Report. Maletti [himself] and Labruna in prison. The coup plots
originate a long way off (1947-48 . . .) and they go far. The hypotheses of
urban guerrilla warfare . . . of the intervention of groups secretly trained by
the “Parallel SID”: who are the puppetmasters operating in Italy to keep the
country tied to “choices” made 30 years ago?’ It is unlikely that Maletti
kept this document simply as an aide-mémoire and, given that he had
followed his boss Miceli into prison for protecting right-wing extremists, he
probably had a very shrewd idea of the answer to his questions. The
document concluded: ‘The hypothesis (which in fact is no such thing) of
powerful forces operating in Italy, determining its choices and its destiny,
comes again to mind. The PCI and “Eurocommunism” are a last-ditch
attempt at a “national autonomy” albeit of a Marxist character: but how far
can Berlinguer push it?’ The answers to these questions would go a long
way towards explaining the origins of the strategy of tension and Maletti
was as well placed as anyone to provide them. His document is a menacing
reminder of the damaging revelations he could make if he were so minded.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
As Maletti’s document suggested, the Pike report does indeed provide
some possible answers to his questions about the strategy of tension. The
House of Representatives’ Select Committee on Intelligence, under the
chairmanship of Otis Pike, carried out an unprecedented review of covert
action undertaken by the United States in a ten-year period stretching from
1965 to 1975. What the committee found was that the activities of the
American intelligence services were often incompetently managed and
sometimes contrary to the United States’ real interests. The committee
devoted particular attention to a study of US financial assistance to centre
and right-wing parties at the time of the 1972 parliamentary elections in
Italy. An incomplete version of its report was leaked to the left-wing Village
Voice newspaper in New York (20 February 1976) and to the Washington
correspondent of La Stampa. The report found that US foreign policy
lacked a long-term direction and that the government had often resorted to
covert action by the CIA as a short-term solution to problems that really
required long-term remedies. It found that the overall picture did not
support the contention ‘that covert action has been used in furtherance of
any particular principle, form of government or identifiable national
interest’. Particularly expensive or politically sensitive projects required
review and approval by the Forty Committee, made up of elder statesmen
and senior government officials. But Pike and his colleagues found that the
executive branch of government ‘does not have a clear definition of what
constitutes a large or politically sensitive operation’ and that the Forty
Committee had effectively become little more than a rubber stamp.
Alarmingly for those on the receiving end of US covert operations, the
committee discovered that the CIA had often ‘been ordered to engage in
covert action over the Agency’s strong prior objections’. This appears to
have been the case in the 1972 election aid to Italy. Far from the CIA
running out of control, Pike wrote, it had actually been ‘utterly responsive
to the instructions of the President’, but tended to give weak expression to
its misgivings and was ‘afflicted with a “can do” attitude’.
The Pike report gives a good idea of the scale of CIA financial
assistance to non-communist parties in Italy, revealing that the US had
shelled out more than $65 million in the twenty years from 1948 to
1968. The vast bulk of these funds went to a single party, undoubtedly
the Christian Democrats. Despite this massive aid, the beneficiaries suffered

--- Sayfa 113 ---
repeated electoral reverses and American observers concluded that ‘another
“quick fix” was needed to see our clients through the next vote’. The details
of the 1972 electoral assistance, reviewed in some depth by the committee,
are highly revealing. Pike found that the ‘US, perhaps needlessly, expended
some $10 million in contributions to political parties, affiliated
organizations, and twenty-one individual candidates’. The assistance began
in 1970, coinciding exactly with the period of the Borghese coup, and was
initiated by Ambassador Graham Martin, ‘who later persuaded the assistant
to the President for national security affairs [Henry Kissinger] to authorize
him, rather than CIA, to select funding recipients and otherwise control the
programme’s implementation’. This highly unusual arrangement was, not
surprisingly, unpopular with the CIA, which expected to be in control of
most covert action undertaken abroad.
Interestingly, it was while the CIA and the ambassador were
squabbling over who should control the funds that President Nixon was
‘indirectly approached by prominent international businessmen, who were
former nationals of the allied country. Their communications to the
President were not available to the committee.’ It is hard to escape the
conclusion that these unidentified ‘businessmen’ may have had the final say
on who ultimately got to control the funds. Ambassador Martin, ‘by all
accounts a man of unusual force, successfully extracted from the assistant
to the President the commitment that he would have total control of the mix
and implementation of the project. Thus, the ambassador, who had been in
the country less than two years and did not speak the language, would
determine which individuals and organizations would receive US funds.’
Not surprisingly, ‘The results of the aid were mixed and short-lived.’ It is
equally hard to avoid the suspicion that the unidentified businessmen were
people of the calibre of Gelli and Sindona. As we have seen, Gelli fitted the
description by a State Department official of an international businessman
with ‘excellent access to higher echelons’ of the government, who had
undertaken fund-raising abroad on behalf of the Republican Party. Sindona
fits the bill equally well, being a wealthy financier, friend of Nixon’s
Treasury Secretary David Kennedy and ardent anti-communist. Both might
understandably be described as former Italian nationals: Gelli had dual
Argentine and Italian nationality and Sindona was spending ever-increasing
periods of time in the United States in the run-up to his purchase of the
Franklin National Bank. It would also appear that their contacts with the

--- Sayfa 114 ---
President were of a highly sensitive nature, given that information about
them was withheld from the Pike Committee, despite the fact that the
committee’s report was not intended for publication.
The CIA strongly opposed Martin’s running of the project, fearing that
exposure would bring down the pro-Western government in Italy, a risk that
the ambassador himself acknowledged. The Agency was also unhappy with
Martin’s choice of recipients. They advised him against giving money to
SID director General Vito Miceli and warned of Miceli’s links to Pino
Rauti, the Ordine Nuovo founder. Miceli’s own arrest for subversive
conspiracy makes him a singularly unwise choice as a recipient of US
funds. ‘The ambassador was unmoved by CIA warnings that the man was
clearly linked to antidemocratic elements of the right and went ahead with
the funding.’ Miceli got more than $800,000, supposedly to be used for ‘a
propaganda effort’. It is difficult not to see the phrase ‘propaganda effort’ as
a euphemism for ‘subversive conspiracy’.
The row between the Rome CIA station chief and Martin at times
reached comic levels. A cable from the station chief to CIA headquarters at
Langley, Virginia, dated 11 February 1970, gives a good idea of the tension
between the two. ‘Chief of station expressed the view that ambassador
[deleted] should first clarify this point in personal exchange with CIA . . .
He [ambassador] thereupon accused chief of station of dragging his feet in
contacting [foreign intelligence officer (presumably Miceli)] and said if this
continued beyond today he would “Instruct Marine guards not to let you in
this building and put you on the airplane.” Chief of station said he thought
this a bit extreme and expressed view that ambassador [deleted] could
hardly object to what appeared legitimate Headquarters question. He did
object and with vigour.’
The CIA is not an organization noted for its squeamishness but it
seems clear that its opposition to Martin’s running of the covert action
programme in Italy went beyond mere irritation at seeing its own role pre-
empted and involved deep-rooted anxieties about the way in which the
money was being used. Another cable from the station chief to Langley on
11 February voiced these worries. ‘Ambassador [deleted] insists that unless
he proceeds quickly “certain people” will push the White House into a
disastrous programme. The name of [an international businessman who
contacted the White House] finally emerged. If you think the [right-wing

--- Sayfa 115 ---
foreign intelligence officer’s] programme is bad, you should see the kind of
stuff [international businessman] is trying to sell. In the ambassador’s view
“[international businessman] is further to the right than [right-wing
politician].”’ The cable also noted that the State Department was unhappy
about ‘these channels to the White House’. Large sectors of the US
government were obviously worried at the contact between these unnamed
businessmen and the White House. US funds were being channelled
directly to individuals involved in subversive conspiracy at a time when
Italy was rife with coup plots and right-wing extremists were carrying out
bomb attacks on the public in order to provide an excuse for military
intervention. The conclusion is inescapable that the ‘international
businessmen’ whose anonymity it was so important for the White House to
protect were wholly unpresentable figures from Italy’s right-wing terrorist
establishment: if not Gelli or Sindona then someone else equally unsavoury.
Another individual who fits the bill and who ties President Nixon into
the heart of the Borghese coup conspiracy is Italo-American businessman
Pier Talenti. According to French author Frederic Laurent,35 Talenti had
been one of Nixon’s press attachés during his 1968 presidential election
campaign and as a result enjoyed a permanent right of access to Nixon’s
office. A letter cabled from Nixon to Talenti on 7 November 1972 expresses
fulsome gratitude for Talenti’s fund-raising efforts in Italy which had helped
to secure Nixon’s re-election that year. The letter is now in the Nixon
Library at Alexandria, Virginia. The library also contains a letter, dated 19
July 1969, from Talenti to Nixon offering his services in the anti-communist
struggle in Italy. Nixon replied four months later (on 14 November 1969) in
a letter beginning ‘Dear Pier’ but thanking Talenti in a non-committal
manner for his offer. It has all the hallmarks of having been written merely
for the record. If Remo Orlandini is to be believed,36 the White House did
indeed take up Talenti’s offer of assistance. According to his account to
Captain Labruna, a certain Pierfrancesco Talenti, whose father spent a lot of
his time in America and who owned a large factory on the outskirts of
Rome, had taken over from Hugh Fenwich as the link-man between the
White House and the Borghese conspirators. It was important that no one
should be told about this, said Orlandini, because Talenti had agreed to
provide transport for a new coup attempt and would also set up a
communications link between his factory and Washington when the
appropriate time came.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
While the Rome CIA station chief was opposing Ambassador Martin’s
management of covert operations in Italy, another CIA man, James Jesus
Angleton, was monitoring developments in the Borghese coup with a
probably much more benevolent eye. According to L’Espresso (8 February
1976), Angleton arrived secretly in Italy shortly before the Borghese coup
was due to go into effect and left again shortly afterwards. Angleton had
been responsible for rescuing Borghese from Milan at the end of the war,
saving the fascist warrior from almost certain execution by the partisans,
and escorting him to Rome in a US Army jeep, where he was handed over
to the US military command. The two remained firm friends thereafter.
According to Federico D’Amato, who ought to know, ‘Borghese’s greatest
American friend was Angleton’.37 Whether or not this clouded Angleton’s
judgement in regard to Borghese’s political project is not clear. It is safe to
assume, though, that had the American spymaster thrown his weight behind
the coup attempt it would probably have been more successful.
What does emerge clearly is that American government thinking in
regard to the strategy of tension in Italy was by no means monolithic and
that the CIA took a distinctly doveish attitude towards Ambassador
Martin’s covert activities. This does not mean that the CIA was taking the
moral high ground but merely that they were sufficiently shrewd to realize
that a centrist coup or the mere threat of a coup would serve the interests of
the United States better than a takeover by the extreme right, with all the
difficulties of international condemnation and popular resistance that that
might entail. Martin, on the other hand, appears to have become deeply
embroiled in the contorted thinking of the ‘international businessmen’. The
lesson to be drawn from the controversy, perhaps, is that when the United
States needed to undertake deep cover operations within the field of
European terrorism, it may sometimes have preferred to rely on less formal
and more secret organizations than the CIA. These might be irregular
offshoots of the CIA or of the less well-known Defence Intelligence
Agency (DIA) or even of the FBI which has the advantage that, officially, it
‘does not operate outside the United States’.
Notes
1   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 16,
Rome, 1987, pp. 154-204.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
2   Norberto Valentini, La Notte della Madonna , Le Monde,
Rome, 1978, P. 55·
3   Ibid., p. 135.
4   Quoted in Vittorio Borraccetti (ed.), Eversione di Destra,
Terrorismo, Stragi , Franco Angeli, Milan, 1986, p. 83.
5   Ibid., p. 84.
6   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
1, Rome, 1985, pp. 47-55.
7   Paolo Aleandri to the author, 22 June 1989.
8   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
1, Rome, 1985, p. 121.
9   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
10   Vittorio Borraccetti, op. cit., p. 85.
11   William Colby, Honourable Men, Hutchinson, London, 1978,
p. 305.
12    La Repubblica, 17 August 1986.
13    Il Giornale, 21 April 1987.
14    L’Espresso, 20 March 1988.
15   Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in Italia, Editori
Riuniti, Rome, 1984, p. 114.
16   Ibid., p. 119.
17    L’Unità, 22 June 1981.
18   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
1, Rome, 1985, p. 659.
19   Pietro Calderoni (ed.), Servizi Segreti , Tullio Pironti, Naples,
1986, p. 70.
20    L’Unità, 22 June 1981.
21   Quoted in Pietro Calderoni, op. cit., pp. 71-2.
22   Quoted in Giuliano Turone and Gherardo Colombo, Sindona,
Gli Atti dei Giudici di Milano, Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1986, p. 207.
23   Corriere della Sera, 23 March 1986.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
24   Licio Gelli to the author, 13 October 1989.
25   Licio Gelli to the author, 13 October 1989.
26   Paolo Aleandri to the author, 6 June 1989.
27   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
1, Rome, 1985, p. 435.
28   Norberto Valentini, op. cit., pp. 173-4.
29   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
2, Rome, 1985, p. 220.
30   Ibid., p. 223.
31   Ibid., pp. 287-8.
32   P. M. Francesco Trovato, Requisitoria, Brescia, 15 March
1976.
33   Achille Lega and Giorgio Santerini, Strage a Brescia Potere a
Roma, Mazzotta, Milan, 1976, pp. 214-25.
34   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
2, Rome, 1985, pp. 52.5-36·
35   Frederic Laurent, L’Orchestre Noir , Stock, Paris, 1978, p.
254.
36   Norberto Valentini, op. cit., pp. 55-6.
37   Federico D’Amato to the author, 8 October 1989.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
[7]
COVERING UP FOR THE BOMBERS
The succession of coup plots which kept the political system under
constant pressure in the early 1970s was accompanied and punctuated by a
series of indiscriminate bombings against the public. These in turn were
part of a wider campaign of bomb attacks on railway lines, electricity
pylons, public and private property, which served to maintain political
tension at fever pitch. Despite nearly two decades of judicial inquiry, the
identity and purpose of the bombers and their relationship with the coup
conspirators remain for the most part shrouded in mystery. One explanation
for this lies in the tireless efforts of the secret services to undermine the
investigations of the judiciary and protect suspects from prosecution.
One of the earliest manifestations of sustained political terrorism in
post-war Italy had occurred in the mountainous Alto Adige or South Tyrol
region on the north-east border, and events there appear to have provided a
model for later terrorist practice. German-speaking residents of the region
carried out Fumagalli-style bombings against electricity pylons and other
inanimate targets in the early 1960s in support of their call for local
autonomy. They naturally attracted the close attention of the Italian secret
services and there has been considerable speculation about the extent to
which the secret services may have actually incited the violence. Years
later, Roberto Cavallaro of the Rosa dei Vend told Judge Tamburino: ‘If
there hadn’t been a [Georg] Klotz [an autonomist leader] in Alto Adige,
another Klotz would have to have been invented.’1 Many of the security
officials who played an equivocal role in later events, including Amos
Spiazzi, first cut their teeth on terrorism in the South Tyrol. It is perhaps not
entirely surprising that north-east Italy, bordering on communist Yugoslavia
and with consequently heavy troop concentrations, should have been a
breeding ground for terrorism of both right and left.
In 1983 Spiazzi told the P2 Commission of a conversation he had with
a superior officer while he was serving in the Alto Adige at the height of the
autonomist terrorism, who remarked on the fact that there were no
bombings in the area under his control. Spiazzi asked the officer whether he
was pleased and was told that ‘for reasons of a global character’ it was not a
good thing. He went on to tell the Commission how he had arrested two

--- Sayfa 120 ---
carabinieri belonging to SIFAR whom he had caught planting a bomb.
‘While I was taking them to Bolzano to hand them over to the regional
command I was met by carabinieri and police who took them from me . . .
the next day I was sent back to Verona and that was the end of my work in
Alto Adige.’2 The idea of secret service personnel becoming directly
involved in planting bombs is not hard to accept given the industry with
which they protected right-wingers involved in terrorism. In 1972 the left-
wing newspaper Lotta Continua (7 November) published an article
claiming that the police had been responsible for placing a bomb outside the
Palace of Justice in Trento. The bomb, left on a window-sill on 18 January
1971, had failed to explode. ‘We are aware of the existence of a secret SID
report on the bomb at the law courts, which states that the inquiry had been
pursued to the point where it became apparent that the bombing had been
organized “by another police force”, so it was decided to discontinue the
investigation,’3 Lotta Continua claimed. The paper was prosecuted for ‘the
publication of false information liable to disturb public order’ but finally
acquitted. It emerged that the Trento police had blackmailed a convicted
criminal into planting the device. It is significant that this sinister police
activity should have taken place in this north-eastern city. Several of the
officials involved would later turn out to be linked to the P2 lodge and to
have played an important role in other murky episodes of the strategy of
tension. And it was at Trento University in the late 1960s that some of the
future leaders of the Red Brigades first met and began to get actively
involved in politics together. It is by no means improbable that this took
place under the attentive and benevolent gaze of the secret services.
The first major bombing of the coup season came at 4.30 in the
afternoon on 12 December 1969, in the crowded lobby of the Banca
Nazionale dell’Agricoltura in Milan’s Piazza Fontana, a stone-throw from
the city’s famous cathedral. Seventeen people were killed and eighty-eight
injured in the blast. Later in the afternoon, three other bombs exploded in
Rome, one in a pedestrian underpass which injured fourteen people, and
two more on the Victor Emanuel monument which houses the tomb of the
unknown soldier, causing damage but no injuries. A fifth device failed to
explode and was found by an employee in the Banca Commerciale Italiana
in Milan.
Initially, the investigation focused on anarchist and left-wing circles in
Milan and Rome. Later, however, it emerged that some of those circles had

--- Sayfa 121 ---
been infiltrated by members of the extreme right, who were, in their turn, in
contact with the secret services. Eventually, the prime suspects became two
right-wing publishers and booksellers from Padua, Franco Freda and
Giovanni Ventura. The pair were responsible for a series of twenty-two
failed or minor bombings carried out between 15 April and 12 December
1969. One of them, at a Milan trade fair on 25 April, injured twenty people.
The Piazza Fontana massacre appeared to be the culmination of this
bombing campaign. Freda summed up his political philosophy in a book
entitled The Disintegration of the System . To lay the foundations of the
‘true state’, he wrote, it was necessary to subvert the current political
system. ‘The sickness represented by bourgeois society is incurable: no
therapy is possible, not even a surgical operation would be effective; we
must speed up the haemorrhage and bury the corpse.’ Nothing new could be
built, he said, as long as ‘even the ruins were still standing’. And he called
for an alliance with the far left for an all-out assault on the bourgeois state.4
Two other suspects in the conspiracy were right-wing journalists
Guido Giannettini and Pino Rauti. Rauti was the man whose name was
linked to Ambassador Martin’s $800,000 payment to General Miceli to
finance a ‘propaganda effort’. He was born in southern Italy in 1926, fought
for the fascist Salo Republic during the war, and in 1956 founded the
terrorist Ordine Nuovo organization. In the 1950s he worked for the right-
wing Rome newspaper 11 Tempo , itself a recipient of generous US funding.
He was eventually acquitted of involvement in the bombing after an
investigation into his activities lasting fifty-one months. In January 1990,
his implication in the strategy of tension a faint memory, Rauti was elected
secretary of the MSI. Giannettini, a specialist reporter on military affairs
and habitué of the extreme right over many years, also enjoyed good US
contacts. In
1961, he was invited to give a lecture at the US Marines’ College in
Annapolis on ‘Techniques and possibilities of a coup d’état in Europe’,
which was attended by officials from the Pentagon and the CIA.5 Both were
informants of Italian military intelligence and were accused of providing a
link between the bombers and the secret services. More specifically, they
were accused of having attended an important meeting with Freda in Padua
on 18 April 1969, at which the secret services had allegedly given the green
light to the Padua group’s bombing campaign. It was also at this meeting
that the participants had developed what they called ‘the second line’

--- Sayfa 122 ---
strategy: right-wingers were to infiltrate extreme left-wing groups in order
to provoke them to violence or falsely implicate them in terrorist activities
carried out by the right. This was to be one of the guiding principles of
right-wing terrorism.6
Seven years after Piazza Fontana, in March 1976, General Gianadelio
Maletti and Captain Antonio Labruna were arrested by magistrates
investigating the Milan bombing. The director of the SID counter-espionage
department and his principal agent were accused of protecting suspects in
the first major bombing of the strategy of tension. One of the suspects,
Marco Pozzan, a right-wing sympathizer and school janitor from Padua,
was hidden in a secret service office in Rome for several days in early 1973
while a false passport was prepared for him and he was subsequently
escorted to safety in Spain by a secret service officer. Pozzan’s false
passport was issued in the name of Mario Zanella, a name which features
on the P2 membership list. The real Mario Zanella has never been
identified, nor has this strange choice of name on the part of the secret
services ever been satisfactorily explained. It was Pozzan who had
implicated Rauti in the bombing, claiming that the founder of Ordine
Nuovo had attended the crucial meeting in Padua on 18 April. SID
presumably feared that he might make other embarrassing revelations. The
officers who assisted Pozzan in his escape tried to argue that they had been
unaware of his true identity but had been promised that he could help them
in locating Stefano Delle Chiaie in Spain. According to their account he
simply vanished once they arrived in Spain.
Pozzan/Zanella’s account of the affair was slightly different. In a three-
page document made available to the investigating magistrate, Pozzan
described how he had been questioned several times by the secret services
before leaving Rome. They had been particularly interested, he said, in the
depositions the magistrates had ‘forced’ him to make about the role of Pino
Rauti, which were ‘obviously false’ and which he had subsequently
retracted. ‘Before agreeing to help me get abroad,’ Pozzan wrote, ‘Tonino
[Captain Labruna] said he had to get authorization from his boss, who, in
his turn, had to seek it from someone else, Andreotti, I believe.’7 Far from
disappearing in Spain, Pozzan claimed that he had spent the first night in
the same Madrid hotel as his SID escort, had been asked to hand back his
false passport and was then left on his own.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
Maletti and Labruna were also accused of helping Giannettini to
escape to Paris after learning that a Milan magistrate had been alerted to his
role in the affair. Even after a warrant had been issued for his arrest,
Labruna remained in contact with him, meeting him from time to time and
supplying him with money.
The two SID officers were also charged with planning the escape from
prison in Monza of Giovanni Ventura, one of the suspected bombers. The
warrant for the officers’ arrest stated that they were instrumental in
providing Ventura’s family with a key to his cell and two canisters of
narcotic gas. Ventura did not actually go through with the escape attempt as
he was understandably anxious about what might happen to him once he
was free. Concrete proof of the escape plan was provided by Ventura’s
sister, Mariangela, who in January 1976 handed over to the examining
magistrate a copy of the key to her brother’s cell and one of the gas
canisters. She no longer had the other canister, she said, as she had decided
to test its contents on a couple of kittens. The creatures had been wracked
by agonizing convulsions and had to be destroyed and in her agitation she
had thrown the canister away. The planned break-out was confirmed by
Stefano Delle Chiaie in an interview with Panorama magazine (4 May
1976). He told the publication that he had been approached by Captain
Labruna in November 1972 to see whether he was able to give hospitality to
Freda and Ventura in Barcelona and then to assist them in leaving Europe,
once Labruna had successfully organized their escape. The arrest warrant
stated categorically that the actions of Maletti and Labruna were part of a
‘wider criminal plan aimed at preventing the judicial authorities from
throwing light on the tragic terrorist events which bloodied Italy in 1969’.8
Despite the fact that neither of the officers was working in the counter-
espionage office at the time of the bombing, and so they could hardly have
been covering up a personal responsibility in the affair, they refused to
collaborate with the magistrates or provide any convincing explanation for
their actions.
Seventeen years after the bombing the Court of Cassation sentenced
General Maletti to one year’s imprisonment and Captain Labruna to ten
months for their attempts to sabotage the investigation. The same court
definitively acquitted the three principal suspects, Guido Giannettini and
the fascist publishers Freda and Ventura. Two previous trials had sentenced
all three to life imprisonment for carrying out the bombing but they were

--- Sayfa 124 ---
finally acquitted ‘for lack of evidence’. The secret services had done their
work well, making it impossible to determine with absolute certainty who
was responsible for planting the bomb and who was involved in the Piazza
Fontana conspiracy. The court did, however, confirm fifteen-year sentences
on Freda and Ventura for subversive conspiracy, a charge relating to the
series of non-lethal bombings between April and December 1969. The
Piazza Fontana case was the first major example of secret service
intervention to undermine a terrorism investigation but it was by no means
the last. General Maletti had a reputation as one of Italy’s more
democratically-inclined secret service officers and yet he did not shrink
from participating in the cover-up. The repetition over the years of this
secret service role leads one ineluctably to the conclusion that the Italian
secret services were active participants, if not protagonists, in the strategy
of tension.
The cover-up has continued for two decades, involving secret service
officers with no personal connection to the original wrongdoing who were
brought in to clean up the intelligence service following the P2 scandal.
Catanzaro Prosecutor Domenico Porcelli has described how the
appointment in 1984 of Admiral Fulvio Martini as head of SISMI initially
introduced a new atmosphere of collaboration between the Piazza Fontana
magistrates and the military intelligence service. Martini informed one of
the magistrates that the secret service had had seven informers, besides
Giannettini, infiltrated into the ranks of the extreme right at the time of the
bombing. He said he would have no difficulty in revealing their identities
and details of the information they provided at the time. Subsequently,
however, the investigators were disappointed to learn that the names had
once again been covered by official secrecy. They were simply assured that
they had no bearing on their case. Porcelli also revealed that on the day
before the bombing a known right-winger, who identified himself as a SID
agent, was questioned by police because he was found waiting in his car in
a no-parking area near Piazza Fontana. The renamed, supposedly reformed
and democratic SISMI was unable to offer any assistance in clarifying his
relationship with the secret service or explaining what he might have been
doing in central Milan on the eve of the attack.9 As a result of these
difficulties, the associations representing victims of the bombings and their
relatives have become convinced that current state secrecy laws are one of
the principal impediments to justice and they have been campaigning for

--- Sayfa 125 ---
their abolition, at least in regard to indiscriminate bomb attacks on the
public. The frequency with which judicial investigations have foundered on
the rocks of official secrecy is in itself eloquent testimony to the close
contacts that existed between the secret services and right-wing terrorism
and that can still not be made public today.
In an address to a conference on the judicial response to the right-wing
bombings Porcelli highlighted the continuity of the secret service cover-up
and the conservative political programme underlying it.10 He cited
numerous examples from the Piazza Fontana investigation of secret service
and police intervention to thwart the efforts of the magistrates. These
included the suppression of evidence that could have linked the bag that
contained the bomb to a shop in Padua, Freda and Ventura’s home town,
which had sold four of a similar type only two days before the bombing.
Police and officials from the Interior Ministry’s Office of Special Affairs
actually interviewed the owner of the shop and one of his employees four
days after the explosion but neglected to inform the magistrates of the
result. Fragments of imitation leather from the cases that contained the
Rome bombs were sent to Germany for tests which confirmed they were
similar to the material used in the manufacture of the four German-made
bags sold in the Padua store. Police chiefs in Rome and Milan were told of
the results but, again, no one informed the magistrates. Three senior police
officers were subsequently charged with suppressing evidence. Carabinieri
who seized explosives that had once been in the possession of Giovanni
Ventura and his brother Angelo had them destroyed before they could be
tested to establish whether they were of the same type as those used in the
1969 bombing. The decision was taken on grounds of safety despite the fact
that the explosives had been found in open countryside, taken to a
carabinieri barracks where they were stored for a week and then taken back
into the country to be destroyed. And the list could go on.
In a speech marking the twentieth anniversary of Piazza Fontana, the
president of a parliamentary committee investigating the right-wing bomb
massacres, a cautious Republican Party senator named Libero Gualtieri,
stated that the judiciary had identified at least forty instances of collusion
between the secret services and right-wing terrorists (La Repubblica , 13
December 1989). It is clear from the frequency and continuity of these
secret service interventions that they were not, as is often claimed,

--- Sayfa 126 ---
occasional aberrations by isolated individuals, but were related to the
fundamental nature and purpose of the Italian security services.
Like Carlo Fumagalli and several other leading Italian terrorists,
Giovanni Ventura claimed privately to be working for the CIA. He said as
much repeatedly to his friend, and later principal accuser, Guido Lorenzon.
Publicly he was keen to pose as a man of left-wing sympathies and thus
tarnish the left by association with terrorism in accordance with the ‘second
line’ strategy. ‘Did he ever put pressure on you to change your story?’
Lorenzon, a schoolteacher and member of the Christian Democrat Party,
was asked in a newspaper interview (Paese Sera , 30 March 1981). ‘No. He
only wanted me to say he was a left-winger . . . Having a left-wing label
was his constant objective.’
In December 1971 magistrates discovered a number of documents in a
safety deposit box held in the name of Ventura’s mother and aunt in the
Banca Popolare in Montebelluna. It contained, among other things,
documents on Italian and international politics and on the organization of
the United States intelligence services. One typewritten sheet was titled
‘Agents of the American secret services in Italy since 1968’. It contained a
list of thirteen names, including that of Hugh Montgomery, who was at one
time CIA station chief in Rome.11 Some of the documents were marked with
codes that gave the impression that they originated with a regular
intelligence service. They included reports drawn up for SID by Guido
Giannettini. SID’s claim that the documents had nothing to do with the
Italian secret service but were based merely on newspaper reports was
dismissed by Prosecutor Porcelli as a blatant lie. One of the reports, marked
KSD/VI M, stated: ‘Italian political and economic circles supported by
foreign circles (certainly including the Americans) have decided on the
replacement of the centre-left government in Italy by a substantially centrist
alternative.’ The document, dated 4 May 1969, listed a number of detailed
steps to be taken including ‘a possible wave of terrorist attacks to convince
public opinion of the dangers of maintaining the [government] alliance with
the left (industrial groups in northern Italy would finance the planting of a
few bombs by isolated neo-fascist groups)’.12 The Italian secret services
understandably did not want to be associated with such prescience.
The Catanzaro assize court devoted considerable attention to an
analysis of some of the Montebelluna documents. In particular, it accepted

--- Sayfa 127 ---
Giannettini’s claim that he had supplied Ventura with reports on largely
imaginary plans to shift Italian politics to the right, if necessary by resorting
to violence, in order to help the latter in his attempts to infiltrate left-wing
extra-parliamentary groups. The court added, which Giannettini could
obviously not admit, that the probable purpose of the documents, shown by
Ventura to his left-wing contacts, was to alarm the extreme left and provoke
it in turn to acts of violence. Giannettini’s suggestion that the reactionary
project had received the assent even of leading moderate figures in Italian
politics would have been particularly effective to this end, since it would
have driven the leftists to give up all reliance on the democratic process.
Giannettini had been working as a SID informant since 1967, a fact
that was steadfastly kept secret from the magistrates, until it was finally
revealed by Defence Minister Andreotti in an interview with Il Mondo
magazine (20 June 1974). In March 1973 Giannettini wrote to General
Maletti giving a detailed account of his work for SID and, more to the
point, outlining the areas where he would be capable of making
embarrassing revelations. The defensive nature of the document was made
even more apparent the following year when Giannettini gave a copy to
Loreto D’Ambrosio, the Milan magistrate investigating the Piazza Fontana
bombing. In it the fascist journalist explained how he was hired by SID
after producing a confidential report on ‘the background to the CIA
response to the rise of the left in Europe’.13 He went on to enumerate the
various reports he had written for SID. These included one in 1968 on
American and British control over international protest movements, and a
report in 1973 on ‘the activities of the Office of Special Affairs in relation
to the so-called “black terrorist connection”’. Giannettini also explained
how he had made use of Ventura to gather intelligence on left-wing
organizations. Especially significant were his veiled calls for military
intervention to avert a long and disastrous civil war. After describing the
political crisis facing Italy, he wrote: ‘All this shows what responsibilities
weigh upon each one of us and leads us to consider a limited and routine
interpretation of our duties to be no longer valid.’ This was the prevailing
view among military coup plotters and the suggestion is clear that large
sectors of SID, and perhaps even Maletti himself, sympathized with it.
Giannettini concluded by warning that ‘Everything that happens in our
country-it’s my duty to bring it to your attention-is manipulated from

--- Sayfa 128 ---
abroad by the German, British, Israeli and American secret services. The
only thing missing is an authentically Italian policy and cause.’
Maletti and the Catanzaro assize court considered this letter to be an
attempt on Giannettini’s part to blackmail the military intelligence service.
It is hard to imagine how it could have been effective if there were no
substance to his hints. The court clearly believed there was, citing the
‘scandalous protection’ he received from SID, even after the issue of a
warrant for his arrest, as proof that he had not been acting merely on his
own account in his ‘criminal contacts’ with Freda and Ventura. The court
ruled that members of the secret service had been prepared to exploit the
political consequences of the neo-fascist bombings and that Giannettini
represented the point of contact between the political and military level of
the conspiracy and the actual bombers.
Hints at the kind of sensitive information he might be prepared to
reveal were a constant feature of Giannettini’s defence. They alternated,
however, with promises of silence, particularly at times when he felt
physically threatened. One such moment came on the afternoon of 8 August
1974, when, tired of being on the run, he gave himself up at the Italian
embassy in Buenos Aires. He swiftly assured the local SID representative
that he did not intend betraying any secrets: ‘In particular, to be quite clear,
when I am asked if I was a link between a military conspiracy and certain
executors I will deny it. Certainly, because it’s not true, because above all it
would damage the armed forces, and me personally even more.’14
Giannettini promised he would stick faithfully to what had already been
made public by the Minister of Defence. Seventeen years after the Piazza
Fontana bombing, this defensive strategy would reap its reward with
Giannettini’s definitive acquittal. In recent years the former secret agent
cum journalist has found work in Rome with Italfin 80, a company with
interests in newspaper publishing owned by Giuseppe Ciarrapico. The latter
is a wealthy businessman of right-wing sympathies and a close associate of
Giulio Andreotti.
Secret service sabotage of the Piazza Fontana judicial investigation is
one of the reasons why the magistrates ultimately failed to secure
convictions. Another possible explanation, outlined by author Walter
Rubini, is that politicians who were opposed to the strategy of tension and
were privy to some of the details of the bomb plot preferred to use that

--- Sayfa 129 ---
information in order to reach a secret political accommodation with the
plotters rather than to denounce them publicly. According to Rubini,
Defence Minister Luigi Gui, a close supporter of then Foreign Minister
Aldo Moro, ordererd a SID inquiry into the bombing. The upshot of this
was a report by carabiniere Colonel Pio Alferano, delivered to Gui on 22
December, which revealed for the first time the involvement of the extreme
right in the atrocity. The following day Moro had a private meeting with
President Giuseppe Saragat, a right-wing exponent of the Social Democrat
Party (PSDI). Saragat had been tempted by the idea of declaring a state of
emergency and wanted to use the tension created by the bombing either to
have the Socialist Party (PSI) ejected from the government coalition or to
force the socialists to fall in with a hardline anti-communist stance on the
part of the government. Moro, on the other hand, advocated a much more
moderate solution to Italy’s political problems and was keen to widen
support for the government to embrace as many parties as possible. He
decided to use the contents of the Alferano report to make Saragat back
away from his favoured radical, right-wing solutions. In return, according to
Rubini,15 Moro agreed that the report should be kept secret and not passed
on to the judiciary.
Rubini’s account is by no means implausible. The fact that the Italian
justice system has almost invariably failed to obtain convictions against
those responsible for the country’s right-wing bombings does not
necessarily mean that the entire political class had approved the strategy of
tension and willingly participated in the cover-up. If Moro did decide to use
information on the Piazza Fontana bombing for a covert political deal, his
decision may partly have sprung from a sense of responsibility towards the
NATO security establishment which he perceived as being in some way
involved in the strategy. It was for this reason that Moro, as Prime Minister,
frequently imposed state secrecy on sensitive aspects of secret service
involvement in terrorism. When, for example, General Miceli appealed to
Moro to free him from the constraints of official secrecy so that he could
answer magistrates’ questions about the so-called ‘Parallel SID’, Moro
refused to do so. When Moro was himself asked by magistrates about the
existence of the Parallel SID, he replied: Ί am not aware of the existence
among the secret services of the state of an organization with the task of
subverting the state.’16 If such an organization did not exist, it is hard to
understand why Miceli could not be freed from state secrecy in order to

--- Sayfa 130 ---
answer questions about it. If it did exist, Moro’s sense of his duty as a
statesman would prevent him from ever admitting it. Rubini’s account
renders all the more significant the remarks made by Moro on the political
background to the Piazza Fontana bombing while he was a prisoner of the
Red Brigades. As we shall see in a later chapter, a document recording
Moro’s comments on the subject was captured by the carabinieri after his
death. Extraordinarily, the Red Brigades had chosen not to publish it.
A small-scale but typical example of the agent provocateur tactics of
the secret services occurred in November 1972, when an arms cache
including explosives and timing devices was found in an abandoned farm
near the town of Camerino in central Italy. The following day two
newspapers broke the news, attributing the weapons to left-wing extremists
on the basis of the documents found with them, and a number of leading
left-wingers were subsequently arrested. Right-wing journalist Guido
Paglia, a former member of Avanguardia Nazionale, writing in the Bologna
newspaper Il Resto del Carlino (11 November 1972), was able to reveal that
the documents ‘clearly indicated the political colour of the owners of the
arsenal’. He had, however, jumped the gun, unfortunately for the
plausibility of the whole scheme, as the documents were in code and were
only officially deciphered three days later. Stefano Delle Chiaie made his
contribution to the truth in his interview with Panorama magazine (4 May
1976) four years later. ‘Those arms, explosives and coded documents were
planted by Labruna to unleash an anti-communist crusade,’ he told the
magazine. ‘If Labruna denies this as well, then we will remind him, naming
names, who provided the arms and explosives and who prepared the coded
documents for him,’ he added.
Further subversive activity by Labruna, prior to the 1972 general
elections that had caused the US embassy such anxiety, was revealed in a
defensive memorandum by his secret service colleague Lieutenant Colonel
Antonio Viezzer. Viezzer accused Labruna of being involved in planting
explosive devices outside various offices of the neo-fascist MSI ‘to help the
party and to alienate the electorate from the PCI and from the left-wing
parties in general, who would be seen as terrorists responsible for the
bombings’.17 Mino Pecorelli, ever well informed, appears to have been
aware of Labruna’s terrorist activity from an early stage. An article entitled
‘The epic adventures of Admiral Labrunne’ (OP, 9 November 1973)
referred to Labruna’s ‘specialization in pyrotechnical studies’ and his

--- Sayfa 131 ---
‘innate tendencies towards the pyromaniac and bomber’. The article was
one of a series attacking Labruna and Maletti, almost certainly on behalf of
SID director General Miceli and as part of a bitter personal feud between
two rival secret service factions. A Rome magistrate opened an
investigation into these allegations in 1989, some seventeen years after the
event. Miceli, Maletti and Labruna were all sent judicial letters notifying
them that they were under investigation.
While the secret services were busily engaged in burying the
unpalatable truths of terrorism, the political establishment was able to
exploit the judicial system to the same effect. Active and independent-
minded magistrates, such as those investigating the Rosa dei Venti
conspiracy, were relieved of the case. The Court of Cassation ruled that the
investigation should be handled in Rome as it spread wider than the narrow
jurisdictions of the Padua and Turin magistrates who first brought the case
to light. Cases could also be assigned to individual magistrates likely to take
a politically sensible view and, unsurprisingly, there was a high
concentration of these in the country’s political capital. Magistrates with a
narrow, local jurisdiction found it difficult to see the full ramifications of
nationwide, or
even international, conspiracies. And
magistrates
investigating individual acts of terrorism were often unaware of the political
conspiracies underlying them. Institutionally, the appropriate place to draw
all the threads together was Rome, where the magistrates tended to be most
malleable. The only other people to have a comprehensive, nationwide
overview of terrorism were the secret services and the Interior Ministry, and
they could be relied on to keep their conclusions to themselves rather than
to use them in the furtherance of justice.
Bologna Prosecutor Claudio Nunziata has analysed the way in which
the investigation of the Borghese coup and the Rosa dei Venti, which were
combined into one major inquiry to be handled in Rome, failed to get to the
bottom of either conspiracy and paved the way for the final mass
acquittals.18 ‘In substance, the public prosecutor [Claudio Vitalone] admits
there is a connection between the bombings and the subversive plots but he
avoids investigating to what extent the strategy of bombings and terrorism
fits into the coup plot. Nor was this problem considered by those
investigating the bombings,’ he observed. The only people to attempt to
understand the connection, according to Nunziata, were Judges Tamburino

--- Sayfa 132 ---
of Padua and Violante of Turin, and they had the case taken away from
them by the Court of Cassation.
On 17 May 1973, a self-professed anarchist, Gianfranco Bertoli,
hurled a hand-grenade into a crowd outside the Milan police headquarters,
killing four people and injuring twelve. The crowd was gathered for the
unveiling of a plaque to the memory of Police Chief Luigi Calabresi, who
had been assassinated by an unidentified gunman the year before. In 1988 a
former member of the left-wing Lotta Continua organization confessed to
participating in the attack and accused other members of the group of
planning and carrying out the murder. Calabresi was the man held
responsible by many for the death of Giuseppe Pinelli, an anarchist railway
worker who fell to his death from a window of the central police station
while he was being interrogated as a suspect in the Piazza Fontana
bombing. The grenade attack could be seen as further revenge for Pinelli’s
death, so who could doubt the anarchist motives of the attacker? Bertoli
claimed that he had intended to murder Interior Minister Mariano Rumor,
present at the ceremony, but he had waited until Rumor’s car had driven
past him before throwing the grenade. That was not the only mysterious
thing about Bertoli; it subsequently emerged that he had worked for SIFAR,
as well as for Cavallo and Sogno’s anti-communist Peace and Freedom
Association. He also turned out to have been in contact with several
members of the Rosa dei Venti and as a result was accused of subversive
conspiracy by Judge Tamburino. In the end, though, Bertoli was sentenced
to life imprisonment for his grenade attack and was consigned to judicial
history as a ‘lone nut’.
The first phase of right-wing terrorism reached a climax in 1974, a
year marked by two major bombings against the public and three coup
attempts. The first massacre of the year came on 28 May in the main square
of the northern industrial city of Brescia, not far from Milan. A bomb
exploded in a litter bin in Piazza della Loggia during a demonstration by
trade unionist and other anti-fascist organizations to protest against a series
of minor bombing incidents in the area, culminating in the death of a right-
winger blown up by his own bomb a week earlier. Eight people were killed
and ninety-four injured. An hour and a half later the local police chief
ordered firemen to clear and hose down the square, causing, in the words of
Examining Magistrate Domenico Vino, ‘the possible loss of vital evidence
and arousing alarming questions as to the haste of the operation’.19 Brescia

--- Sayfa 133 ---
was one of the operational zones of Carlo Fumagalli, who had been arrested
by magistrates from the city only three weeks earlier, along with more than
a dozen of his followers. As with Piazza Fontana, the judicial investigation
of the Brescia bombing has been long and tortuous. In May 1987 three
right-wingers accused of planting the bomb were acquitted for lack of
evidence at the conclusion of the fifth trial to examine the case. ‘Repentant’
terrorist Sergio Calore had no doubts as to the objective of the bombing.
‘All the bombings had a single purpose: to create social tension and prepare
the conditions for intervention by the army,’20 he told the Brescia court.
On 12 May, Italians had voted in a referendum on the proposed
abrogation of the country’s divorce law. Fifty-nine per cent had voted for
the law’s retention, a bitter defeat for the Christian Democrat Party, the
Vatican and other conservative forces who had campaigned energetically
for its abolition. Michele Sindona had contributed generously to the
Christian Democrat campaign while Gelli, anticipating the worst, had given
money to Augusto Cauchi, the Tuscan terrorist leader and secret service
confidant. Gelli’s position was somewhat paradoxical, since freemasonry
was nominally in favour of a secular state and consequently should have
supported the divorce law. He was not alone, however, in seeing wider
political implications to a victory of the left in the referendum. Cauchi and
his band were ready to take to the hills and become ‘partisans in reverse’,
while others, such as Sogno and Cavallo, were preparing their coup.
A second major bombing in the summer racked up the political tension
still further, making 1974 the only year in Italian history to be characterized
by two such outrages. On 4 August, at about the same time as Sogno and
Cavallo’s summer holiday coup was due to go into effect, a bomb exploded
on the ‘Italicus’ Rome-Munich express train as it left a tunnel near the
village of San Benedetto Val di Sambro, not far from Bologna. Twelve
people were killed and 105 injured by the blast and subsequent fire. In
December 1986 two Tuscan neo-fascists, Mario Tuti and Luciano Franci,
were given life sentences for the bombing by a Bologna court. The P2
Commission stated emphatically that the secret lodge had provided ‘the
essential economic, organizational and moral background’ to the bombing.21
There was keen expectation of a coup in masonic circles at this time. One
mason, Angelo Sambuco, told Grand Master Lino Salvini of his intention to
take his family abroad on holiday. Salvini replied that ‘he would not be
leaving Florence because he was expecting a coup’.22

--- Sayfa 134 ---
One of the fortunate side-effects, for those hoping to see a military
takeover, of the persistent secret service interference with judicial
investigations of the bombings was that the apparent incompetence of the
authorities increased the unpopularity of the current government, which
inevitably came to be seen as incapable of protecting the public from
terrorist violence or securing its perpetrators for justice. The most brutal of
all the techniques in the armoury of the saboteurs of justice was the physical
elimination of potential witnesses, a technique not infrequently used and
with rare efficacy. The implications are particularly grave when this activity
takes place in prison, an environment, at least in theory, under the total
control of the state. One of the most sinister examples was the murder in
Novara prison of Ermanno Buzzi, a right-wing extremist sentenced to life
imprisonment by a Brescia assize court for the Piazza della Loggia bombing
who had shown signs that he intended to make sensational revelations in the
run-up to the appeal hearing. He was strangled with shoe-laces in a corner
of the prison exercise yard by two senior right-wingers, Mario Tuti and
Pierluigi Concutelli, on the morning of 13 April 1981. Buzzi had been in
Novara prison less than forty-eight hours and was killed on the first
occasion he stepped into the exercise yard. He had fought hard to avoid
being transferred from a prison in Brescia, fearing for his life, and his last
words, to his lawyer before his departure were along the lines: ‘It’s all over
for me, I am going to fatal Novara.’23
The following year Concutelli struck again, strangling Carmine
Palladino, a friend of Stefano Delle Chiaie and thought to have had inside
information about the Bologna station bombing. Palladino was murdered on
10 August 1982, in the same ‘blind’ corner of the prison exercise yard. If
the prison administration failed to learn from experience Concutelli did not:
this time he used nylon cord from a volley-ball net and wrapped it round the
metal supports of a ping-pong net so as not to ruin his hands, as he had done
with Buzzi. Palladino had been in Novara for ten days. It will probably
never be known for sure whether these potential witnesses transferred to
their appointment with death were the victims of an incompetent prison
administration or of a conscious design. It would certainly not be beyond
the wit of the secret services to pilot inconvenient witnesses into oblivion.
Another potentially important witness was eliminated under
mysterious circumstances in 1982. According to La Repubblica newspaper
(21 February 1988), right-wing extremist and Delle Chiaie associate

--- Sayfa 135 ---
Pierluigi Pagliai had decided to return to Italy from Bolivia, where he
worked for the Bolivian security services, and tell magistrates all he knew
about the fascist bombing campaigns. At this point a joint CIA/Italian secret
service operation was mounted to arrest Pagliai in Bolivia. On 10 October
Pagliai was shot in the neck by a Bolivian policeman, ostensibly while
resisting arrest. According to La Repubblica , however, Pagliai was actually
getting out of his vehicle with his arms raised and the shooting was ‘a
veritable execution’. Only three hours after undergoing surgery for his
wound, Pagliai was bundled on to a plane and flown to Italy where he died
in Rome on 5 November. The Alitalia aircraft that flew the Italian police
contingent out to Bolivia and ferried the captured Pagliai back to Rome
gave a lift on the first leg of its return journey, from Santa Cruz to La Paz,
to a group of plainclothes Bolivian police commanded by a tall, blond
American agent. This was the unit responsible for Pagliai’s arrest. During
the flight, according to several witnesses, the American began distributing
wads of banknotes to his men.24 The decision to transport Pagliai from
Bolivia to Italy despite the severity of his wound has itself given rise to
questions: at best it was irresponsible, at worst something closely akin to
murder. ‘Episodes have been uncovered which call into question the role of
the secret services of Bolivia, the United States and Italy,’ La Repubblica
said. It also claimed that suspicions had emerged that ‘the Italian
government has invoked state secrecy to cover certain circumstances
relating to the railway bombings, which had been reported by Pagliai to the
American embassy in La Paz’. Both the US and Bolivian authorities refused
to co-operate with the Italian judicial investigation into Pagliai’s death.
Francesco Pazienza also touched on this subject in an interview with a
Swiss newspaper (24 Heures, 13 April 1986) while he was awaiting
extradition to Italy in a New York prison. Ί ask the simple question: why
did the American administration collaborate with the Italian secret services
in the murder of Pierluigi Pagliai?’
On 31 May 1972, a booby-trapped car exploded near the village of
Peteano in north-east Italy, killing three carabinieri and seriously injuring a
fourth. This incident has produced one of the most bizarre and exemplary
police cover-ups in the history of Italian terrorism. Several of its
protagonists had previously played an inglorious role in the Trento bombing
case, the background to which had been revealed by Lotta Continua
newspaper. Peteano is also the only bombing for which an individual

--- Sayfa 136 ---
terrorist has admitted responsibility and in so doing provided a detailed
insider’s account of the workings of the strategy of tension. The account is
all the more convincing because its author has refused the label of
‘repentant’ terrorist and has not sought any judicial benefit from his
collaboration with the authorities, simply taking the opportunity to
denounce some of his erstwhile comrades as tools of the secret services.
The man’s name is Vincenzo Vinciguerra, a virulent fascist of psychopathic
ruthlessness, who is currently serving a life sentence for Peteano and other
terrorist crimes.
On the evening of 31 May an anonymous caller informed the
carabinieri in the town of Gorizia that a Fiat 500 with two bullet-holes in
the windscreen had been abandoned in a gorge not far from a road near
Peteano. Three carabinieri patrol cars were sent to investigate and the men
were killed when one of them opened the bonnet, triggering a powerful
bomb. The call was made from a telephone in a bar in the nearby town of
Monfalcone. The caller, it later emerged, was one Carlo Cicuttini, the
secretary of a local section of the neo-fascist MSI. Cicuttini escaped to
Spain, where he enjoyed the solicitous protection of the Franco-era police
and secret services. MSI party leader Giorgio Almirante was subsequently
charged with sending Cicuttini money to enable him to have an operation
on his throat to prevent his voice being identified with the recording of the
mysterious caller to the carabinieri . Almirante, who died in 1988, was
never brought to trial: the charges against him were waived as the result of
an amnesty before they could be tested in court.
The bombing was one of a series of terrorist incidents, including a
bomb attack on the home of a local MSI member of Parliament. The series
culminated in a failed hijacking at Trieste airport, which had been intended
as a fund-raising exercise. All were the work of an active local group of the
terrorist Ordine Nuovo organization. Despite the fact that this was clear to
some of the investigators from the start, the inquiry was entrusted to the
carabinieri , who focused their attention instead on left-wing extremists. In
order to set the inquiry off in this unlikely direction, the officers running it
had no hesitation in inventing information implicating members of the left-
wing group Lotta Continua in the attack. The false information was
attributed to a police informer, Marco Pisetta. Pisetta had been in contact
with the founder members of the Red Brigades and with Feltrinelli’s group,
Gruppi di Azione Partigiana (Partisan Action Groups) or GAP. He had been

--- Sayfa 137 ---
arrested in Milan on 2 May 1972, and had subsequently collaborated with
police, enabling them to find a number of Red Brigades hideouts. He was
released after a few days and was later contacted by Lieutenant Colonel
Michele Santoro of the carabinieri in Trento, his home town. He was
prevailed upon to provide further evidence to Milan magistrates
investigating left-wing terrorist activity, who interrogated him in Santoro’s
home in Trento. It was at this point that Santoro took the opportunity of
adding an invented reference to possible involvement of members of the
Lotta Continua group in the Peteano bombing to a report on Pisetta’s
evidence which he sent to SID headquarters in Rome. Santoro had known
Pisetta for some time as the latter had previously been in trouble with the
police for a number of bomb attacks against public buildings in Trento.
According to the testimony of one of Santoro’s brother officers, Santoro had
been ‘working on the embryonic Red Brigades organization and had an
informant who, I subsequently learned, was Marco Pisetta’.25 Pisetta
provided the secret services with detailed and accurate information about
the Red Brigades which could have been used to nip the terrorist
organization in the bud. Instead he was used falsely to implicate other left-
wing sympathizers in the Peteano bombing.
The left-wingers accused of the bombing were acquitted at their trial as
there was not a shred of genuine evidence against them. The investigators
then shifted their attention to a group of local criminals, who were equally
unconnected with the bombing. The studious care with which they avoided
considering the possibility of right-wing involvement in the bombing
originated with instructions received from the officer commanding a
division of the carabinieri based in Milan, General Giuseppe Palumbo.
Santoro and other officers involved in the cover-up formed part of a clique
closely associated with the general, who had flirted with right-wing
conspiracies since General De Lorenzo’s coup attempt in 1964 and became
a member of P2 in 1977. Palumbo denied having joined the lodge and an
internal Defence Ministry inquiry accepted his word as ‘a senior officer
with many years’ service’. The P2 Commission took a somewhat sterner
line. At the end of Palumbo’s interrogation by the commission, the
president warned him: Ί must tell you, General Palumbo, with considerable
disappointment and, I believe, speaking for the whole commission, that you
deserve to be arrested for your deposition [as was within the commission’s
power], not for its obvious reticence but for the innumerable lies it

--- Sayfa 138 ---
contained: if we have not done so it is out of respect for the carabinieri
force and not because your attitude did not deserve such a measure.’26
The carabiniere cover-up over Peteano was not limited to accusing
totally innocent people of the crime but also extended to the suppression of
evidence and the fabrication of trial documents. Nor did the fact that the
victims of the bombing were carabinieri deter other carabinieri from
protecting the bombers. In 1987, three officers accused of perverting the
course of justice were given prison sentences ranging up to ten years.
Michele Santoro was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment.
Even more alarming than this was the strange fate to befall a witness
who came forward with valuable information, which could have led to the
early identification of the anonymous telephone caller. A man writing under
the assumed name of Antonio Minussi sent six letters to the prefect of
Gorizia, providing a detailed description of two right-wing extremists who
made a call from a bar in Monfalcone on the night of the bombing. The
writer suggested a meeting with the Gorizia public prosecutor, which the
latter failed to attend. ‘Certainly the investigators attach no importance to
the testimony of the only person capable of unmasking the criminal and of
undermining any possible alibi in the event of his arrest,’ Minussi observed
bitterly in one of his letters. He also pointed out, prophetically, that ‘it is
very dangerous to collaborate with the police to combat either common or
political delinquency’.27
These letters remained buried in a file until 1983 when a new and
scrupulous investigation succeeded in tracing their author, an accountant
living in Monfalcone and working for a local government office in Trieste.
The man’s real name was Maurizio Roitero and he had died, in somewhat
mysterious circumstances, seven years earlier. Roitero had been found dead
in a room next to his office at about 5 p.m. on 11 November 1976. He was
slumped in an armchair, with his shoes off and his feet resting on another
chair. He was holding a pornographic magazine, his flies were undone and
his penis hanging out, but he had not bothered to lock the door. It was
assumed he had suffered a heart-attack and he was buried without an
autopsy. Seven years later, Examining Magistrate Felice Casson ordered an
autopsy, which failed to uncover any traces of poison. Casson’s written
indictment highlighted the fact that Roitero’s ‘strange’ death occurred at a
time when six local underworld figures were on trial for the Peteano

--- Sayfa 139 ---
bombing and criticism of the investigators was particularly intense. There is
no proof that Roitero was murdered but all the indications are that he was
fully justified in his cautious approach to the original investigating team.
The most significant thing to emerge from the Peteano investigation is
the testimony of the bomber, Vincenzo Vinciguerra. Vinciguerra has
consistently refused to provide information to the magistrates that might
implicate any of his comrades in crime but he has admitted responsibility
for his own terrorist actions and taken it upon himself to denounce those
terrorists he suspected of working for the secret services. He attributed
responsibility for the strategy of tension to ‘a structure parallel to the secret
services and dependent on the Atlantic Alliance; Italian political and
military leaders were perfectly aware of it. It was a structure trained for
sabotage operations in the event of a Soviet invasion. The personnel was
recruited in circles where anti-communism was at its strongest, that is to say
on the far right.’ The members of this secret organization ‘had also been
used for domestic purposes by national and international forces, and by
international forces I mean principally the United States of America’.28
Vinciguerra claimed that all the indiscriminate bombings against the public,
from Piazza Fontana on, were attributable to a single organizational
structure. The only exception in the catalogue of murder, he said, was the
Peteano bombing, which was intended as a protest against the secret service
manipulation of the forces of fascism; but even that bombing ‘was covered
up by the aforementioned organizational structure’.29
He explained that the political purpose of the bombings was to
provoke popular rage to justify subsequent repression, leading to the
declaration of a state of emergency. The effect would be to shore up the
vacillating strength of the government: ‘the whole thing obviously in an
international context and in the framework of Italian membership of the
Western system of alliances.’30 He was particularly critical of his own
organization, Ordine Nuovo, many of whose members, he said, belonged to
the secret NATO anti-communist structure and were willingly manipulated
by the secret services. He explained that the decision to cover up his own
role in the Peteano bombing was prompted by the undesirability of
admitting that such an attack on the armed forces in the crucial north-
eastern sector of the country could have come from the right: as far as
public perceptions were concerned, there should only be one kind of
terrorist threat to the state and that was the threat from the left.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
In his indictment, Judge Casson expressed some scepticism about
Vinciguerra’s description of the Peteano bombing as a break with the
manipulators of terrorism, pointing out that Vinciguerra subsequently made
use of ‘untrustworthy’ Ordine Nuovo members in order to make good his
escape from Italy. What’s more, an attack on the carabinieri was just the
sort of provocative action that the public would assume to be the work of
‘red’ terrorists.
Vinciguerra has repeatedly denied that Stefano Delle Chiaie’s
Avanguardia Nazionale organization, to which he migrated in 1974, had the
same kind of underhand relationship with the secret services as Ordine
Nuovo. In an interview with Panorama magazine (29 March 1987), he
made his position clear: Ί have no difficulty in admitting that Ordine Nero
(an offshoot of ON) was a group invented by the secret services. There is
proof of this. But there is no proof against Stefano Delle Chiaie.’ It was
therefore particularly significant when Vinciguerra informed the Bologna
bomb trial that he had decided not to speak to the judicial authorities any
more, while confirming his previous statements. He explained that if he
continued to assist the magistates he would be ‘violating a principle of
equity, which prevents me from accusing people from a certain world who
have been in the service of agencies of the state in favour of people who
have presumably done the same things and to whom I am linked by
important human ties’. The reference to Delle Chiaie and Avanguardia
Nazionale was clear. Vinciguerra concluded: Ί believe that these people too
have been in contact with state agencies without, however, in my opinion,
agreeing to participate in a strategy of bomb massacres.’31 Such an
admission, after years of protecting Delle Chiaie from charges of collusion
with the secret services and police, carries considerable weight.
Magistrates who have had dealings with Vinciguerra have been struck
by a certain prickly integrity about the man and he remains true to his own
ferocious personal code as virtually the last ‘political soldier’ of fascism.
He told magistrates how he had discussed the physical elimination of
Augusto Cauchi because of his alleged secret service links while the two
were in hiding in Spain. ‘The proposal remained just that, since Cauchi,
having been pressed hard for a clarification, replied by protesting his total
good faith and even started to cry. As a result humanitarian reasons
prevailed, much against my own personal view.’32 He was not short of
damaging revelations to make about the people he believed to be willing

--- Sayfa 141 ---
participants in the management of the strategy of tension. He told Venice
magistrates of a visit to Padua by Captain Labruna in November 1972, after
Peteano and the hijack attempt. Labruna had discussed the two incidents
with Ordine Nuovo leader Massimiliano Fachini, warning him to ‘stop this
mucking about’. According to Vinciguerra, Labruna ‘wrongly believed that
I was hierarchically dependent on Fachini’.33 The allegation, if true, is of
extraordinary gravity: it shows an amazingly flippant attitude to the murder
of three carabinieri and indicates that the secret services already knew who
was responsible for Peteano only six months after the bombing. Another
proponent of the strategy of tension who did not meet with Vinciguerra’s
approval was Carlo Fumagalli. Ί consider Carlo Fumagalli to be an agent of
the American secret services, linked to Italian military and political circles
who shared a common past in the anti-communist Resistance and who were
working to bring about an authoritarian change in our country, that would
have been simultaneously anti-communist and antifascist,’34 he told
magistrates.
Perhaps the gravest implications of the Peteano affair stem from the
way in which an informant in the Red Brigades was used to lay the blame
for the bombing falsely on the left while the genuine information he
provided was not used to prevent the rise of left-wing terrorism. The fact
that men like Michele Santoro, members of a P2-influenced clique
repeatedly implicated in right-wing conspiracies and in the perversion of
justice, were the first representatives of the secret services to have contact
with the Red Brigades justifies the deepest suspicions about the subsequent
course of ‘red’ terrorism. Vinciguerra himself had something to say on the
manipulation of left-wing terrorism. ‘What happened in Argentina, where
the heads of the Montoneros [left-wing guerrillas] had links with the
military junta, has happened in Italy. The logic was the same in Argentina
as in Italy, that is to create organizations that are officially against the state
but which are, in their turn, led by men linked to the state,’ he told Florence
magistrates. ‘When I say there is a parallel between Italy and Argentina I do
not do so only on the basis of logic but because I believe there is a group of
people who link the Italian situation to the Argentinian and I say that of this
group the person known to the public is Gelli.’35 From the moment he
started making these revelations Vinciguerra was subjected to a campaign
of official harassment in prison. This fact, acknowledged by Judge Casson

--- Sayfa 142 ---
in his indictment, testifies to the official disquiet such revelations are liable
to cause.
It is clear then that the secret services spent the early part of the
1970s falsely implicating the left in right-wing atrocities and using
rightists to infiltrate the extreme left, to manipulate it and provoke it to
violence. It would not be surprising, therefore, if the birth of ‘genuine’ left-
wing terrorism was viewed with considerable satisfaction in the national
security establishment. Nor should it be surprising, given the secret
services’ record, if even ‘genuine’ left-wing extremism were found to
contain a liberal sprinkling of infiltrators and had been piloted into the
service of a conservative political project.
Notes
1   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 1, Italo
Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1981, p. 33.
2   Quoted in Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in
Italia , Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1984, p. 119.
3   Ibid., p. 220.
4   P. M. Libero Mancuso and Attilio Dardani, Requisitoria,
Bologna, 13 May 1986, pp. 54-5.
5   Frederic Laurent, L’Orchestre Noir , Stock, Paris, 1978, p. 193.
6   P. M. Libero Mancuso and Attilio Dardani, op. cit., pp. 99-100.
7   Catanzaro assize court sentence, 23 February 1979, p. 306.
8   G. I. Gianfranco Migliaccio, arrest warrant, Tribunale di
Catanzaro, 27 March 1976.
9   Domenico Porcelli, in ‘Problematiche sulla Trattativa dei
Processi di Strage’, Quaderni del Consiglio Superiore della
Magistratura, Rome, 1986, pp. 135-6.
10   Ibid., pp. 131-2.
11   Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 3, Tome 1, Italo
Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1983, p. 94.
12   Catanzaro assize court sentence, 23 February 1979, p. 158.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
13   Quoted in Roberto Pesenti (ed.), Le Stragi del SID , Mazzotta,
Milan, 1974, pp. 54-66.
14   Catanzaro assize court sentence, 23 February 1979, p. 763.
15   Walter Rubini, Il Segreto della Repubblica , Edizioni FLAN,
Milan, 1978, pp. 85-6.
16   Norberto Valentini, La Notte della Madonna , Le Monde,
Rome, 1978, p. 204.
17   Quoted in Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., p. 225.
18   Vittorio Borraccetti (ed.), Eversione di Destra, Terrorismo,
Stragi, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1986, pp. 79-80.
19   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 3, Tome
2, Italo Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1983, p. 563.
20    La Repubblica , 7 February 1987.
21   Report of the P2 Commission, Rome, 1984, p. 93.
22   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe , Vol. 3, Tome
2, Italo Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1983, p. 616.
23   G. I. Giampaolo Zorzi, Sentenza-ordinanza contro Cesare
Ferri ed altri, Brescia, 23 March 1986.
24   Memorandum from Aw. Alberto Seganti (Pagliai family
lawyer) to G. I. Luigi Gennaro, Rome, undated.
25   Venice assize court sentence, President Renato Gavardini, 25
July 1987, P· 399·
26   Ibid., p. 507.
27   Ibid., p. 563.
28   Ibid., p. 498.
29   G. I. Felice Casson, Sentenza-ordinanza, Venice, p. 123.
30   Ibid., p. 424.
31   Vincenzo Vinciguerra to G. I. L. Grassi, Prato prison, 18
November 1987.
32   Vincenzo Vinciguerra to G. I. G. Zorzi, Rebibbia prison, 6
May 1985.
33   G. I. Felice Casson, op. cit., p. 426.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
34   Vincenzo Vinciguerra to G. I. G. Zorzi, Rebibbia prison, 6
May 1985.
35   Vincenzo Vinciguerra to G. I. Rosario Minna, Viterbo prison,
2 December 1986.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
[8]
OPERATION GLADIO
In August 1990 the veil of official secrecy and lies which had
concealed the true nature of Colonel Rocca’s civilian ‘support units’ and the
Parallel SID referred to by several of the witnesses in Judge Tamburino’s
investigation into the Rosa dei Venti was finally drawn aside. What
emerged was Operation Gladio, a secret NATO resistance network trained
to go into action in the event of an Eastern Bloc invasion of Italy or
domestic communist subversion. What made the revelation particularly
delicate was the fact that something very like Gladio had been encountered
in so many investigations into right-wing terrorism and coup plots. In the
past, the judicial inquiries in this direction had always been blocked by the
imposition of state secrecy.
On this occasion it was the investigations of two Venice magistrates,
Carlo Mastelloni and Felice Casson, that forced the government to admit
what the magistrates had already discovered. The first official admission,
still not entirely truthful, came on 3 August, when Prime Minister Giulio
Andreotti told a parliamentary commission investigating the failure to get to
the bottom of Italy’s right-wing bomb massacres that a NATO stay-behind
network had existed but had ceased operations in 1972. Andreotti promised
to send the commission further documentation on the subject. On 18
October the Prime Minister sent the commission a secret service report
entitled ‘The So-called Parallel SID-Operation Gladio’. It was initially
returned to him by the commission president, Libero Gualtieri, who
suggested that the document constituted a breach of NATO secrecy. A
censored version was then sent back to the commission and later the
original document, or something very close to it, was made public.1
The document revealed that the resistance network had been set up
immediately after the war and later formalized, in 1956, in a secret
agreement between SIFAR and the CIA. Its members were trained for
information-gathering, sabotage, communications and in helping key
personnel to escape from enemy-controlled territory. Senior members of the
network attended courses run by the Training Division of the British
Intelligence Service. It was clear from the report that the organization had
been in large part financed and controlled by the CIA. The report also

--- Sayfa 146 ---
revealed that 139 arms caches had been buried at secret locations for use by
Gladio members in the event of an invasion. That operation began in 1963,
just one year before General De Lorenzo’s projected coup. The secret
services began digging up the dumps in 1972 after one of them had been
discovered by accident. Despite all official assurances, public suspicions
have focused on the prevalently right-wing membership of Gladio and the
fate of the arms and explosives supplied to the organization. Andreotti’s
report revealed that two cases of weapons had gone missing and that a
further ten could not be recovered after the place where they had been
buried had been built over. Somewhat grotesquely, two of them had been
incorporated into village cemeteries after these had been enlarged.
The sensitivity of the Gladio organization, named after the Italian word
for a Roman short-sword, can be gauged by the repeated official denials of
its existence. Andreotti had himself denied the existence of such an
organization on a number of occasions in the past, and Moro had done the
same thing with particular persistence and vigour. On 5 November, after
Andreotti had already released details of Operation Gladio, a NATO
spokesman in Brussels issued yet another official denial: ‘An organization
of this kind does not and never has existed within the framework of the
NATO military structure,’ the spokesman told reporters.2 The following day
a different spokesman issued an embarrassed retraction, saying the previous
announcement had been ‘a mistake’ and that NATO had no comment to
make on the subject.3 In fact, a similar stay-behind network had been set up
in most of the countries of Western Europe, including Austria, Yugoslavia
and neutral Switzerland.
Andreotti, President Francesco Cossiga and senior members of the
secret services have all given repeated assurances as to the legitimacy of
Gladio and the democratic credentials of its members. Andreotti’s report to
the parliamentary commission stressed that Gladio members were recruited
from people loyal to the Constitution, with no criminal record, who were
not involved in active politics or members of extremist organizations.
Another report sent to the commission stresses the importance of the human
qualities of the ‘gladiators’. ‘The human factor remains of paramount
importance, both for the qualities that must distinguish the directors of the
operation and for the idealistic commitment of operational members who
join the stay-behind programme.’4 P2 boss Licio Gelli revealed a more
down-to-earth view of the organization when he was questioned about it by

--- Sayfa 147 ---
a journalist from the Belgian newspaper Le Soir . Gelli said that Gladio had
nothing to do with NATO but had been set up by the CIA immediately after
the war. The Agency had decided to help the enfeebled Italian Army to face
up to the menace of a Soviet invasion by recruiting ‘patriots who knew how
to fight,’ he said. ‘They found them among the former soldiers of the
Republic of Salo.’ So among Gladio’s first recruits, according to Gelli, were
the fascist veterans of Mussolini’s last stand. Gelli was also in no doubt that
Gladio had a dual role, to fight the Soviet invader and to prevent the
invasion from taking place ‘by stopping the Italian Communist Party from
achieving power’. {Le Soir , 15 November 1990.) This dual role is
confirmed in the second report, dating from 1959, received by the
parliamentary commission on terrorism, which specifies that Gladio would
go into operation in the event of Italian territory being occupied or of
internal subversion.5 Given that many secret service officers considered
anyone belonging to the PCI and many members of the Socialist Party to be
dangerous subversives, it is quite possible that Gladio’s leaders felt counter-
measures were necessary throughout the Sixties and Seventies.
The insistence by Andreotti and Cossiga on the absolute legitimacy of
Gladio provoked, in the autumn of 1990, one of the gravest political and
institutional crises ever seen in Italy. Their statements effectively pre-
empted the conclusions of the Venice magistrates, of the parliamentary
commission on terrorism, of the parliamentary commission on the secret
services and of a commission of five Constitutional Court judges which was
appointed by the government to examine the issue on 5 December.
Cossiga set the ball rolling in October by stating that as an
undersecretary in the Defence Ministry he had himself been involved in the
administration of Gladio. He expressed satisfaction that the secrecy
surrounding the organization had been maintained for forty-five years.
Subsequently Judge Casson wrote to the President inquiring whether he
would be prepared to give evidence relating to his experience of Gladio, a
request which Cossiga immediately turned down as incompatible with his
office. The President then became embroiled in conflict with the Supreme
Council of the Magistrature which had proposed discussing the issues
raised by his refusal to testify before Casson. Cossiga wrote to the Council,
of which he is officially the head, peremptorily ordering it not to discuss the
issue and not to question his decision to ban the debate.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
At the beginning of December Cossiga threatened to stand down
temporarily from the Presidency unless the Cabinet endorsed his view on
the legitimacy of Gladio* This followed a magazine interview in which
Socialist Finance Minister Rino Formica had expressed grave reservations
on the subject. Andreotti managed to resolve the crisis by getting the
Cabinet to pass a resolution affirming the legitimacy of Gladio, on which
the Socialists abstained. Cossiga continued to make passionate speeches in
defence of the secret organization and passionate attacks on anyone who
questioned his judgement, to such an extent that some newspapers began
publicly to question his sanity. The President was particularly stung by
massive public demonstrations organized by the PCI and calling for the
truth about Gladio and the right-wing bombings. These featured a number
of colourful attacks on both Andreotti and Cossiga. A popular, if
imperfectly rhyming, chant was: ‘Cossiga Francesco, you’re worse than
Ceausescu!’ But the President’s provocative campaign continued, with
public words of praise for coup plotter Edgardo Sogno, a visit to pay his
respects after the death of General Vito Miceli, and a friendly public
greeting to former secret service officer and Gelli associate General
Giovanni Allavena. The upshot of all this was a request by the tiny
Proletarian Democracy Party for Cossiga’s impeachment on charges of high
treason, a request that was immediately rejected by the relevant
parliamentary committee.
But the problems are by no means over for Cossiga. He played a
leading role in the censorship of reports into secret service abuses in the
1960s, censorship that may have been partly designed to preserve the
secrecy surrounding Gladio and which might explain the President’s
extreme nervousness on the subject today. Captain Antonio Labruna has
alleged that he was called on in September 1969 to edit recordings of
evidence given to several different government commissions investigating
the coup plot hatched in 1964 by General Giovanni De Lorenzo. Acting on
the instructions of SID director Eugenio Henke and, Labruna claims, of
Under-secretary of Defence Francesco Cossiga, he eliminated sensitive
items of information and edited the tapes so that the censorship would not
be noticed. On the basis of Labruna’s testimony L’Espresso magazine (i6
December 1990) has alleged that a profound ‘cleaning’ of the tapes took
place in order to protect particular individuals and political interests.
‘Information concerning Gladio and all the mechanisms for the repression

--- Sayfa 149 ---
of “communist subversion” also disappeared,’ the magazine claimed. The
role of the CIA in the affair will almost certainly have been discreetly swept
under the carpet as well.
General Aldo Beolchini, who presided over one of the inquiries into
secret service abuses, has attributed the failure of the government to take
firm action at the time to the blackmailing power of SIFAR’s archives. As
we have seen, he believes that failure paved the way for further illegalities
over the following decades. He told La Repubblica (21 December 1990)
recently that General De Lorenzo had succeeded in getting much of the
political class under his thumb. ‘He accumulated dossiers of false and true
information. He threatened to use both. And all, or almost all, gave in to
that aggressive and power-hungry maniac. You should have met him!’ He
laid the primary responsibility for the cover-up on Aldo Moro, who was
Prime Minister at the time. ‘De Lorenzo inserted a lie about Moro’s private
life into his file, but at the same time he had another enormous file on
Freato [Moro’s secretary], on his wealth, on the payments he could depend
on.’ According to Beolchini there was even a file on Andreotti, ‘but it was a
miserable little file. Andreotti is cunning and he must have succeeded in
wriggling out somehow.’
Andreotti’s response to the Gladio crisis, in contrast to that of Cossiga,
has been much more cool and sophisticated. When providing false
information he has always taken care to attribute responsibility for it to
someone else, usually the secret services, whose job it is to lie in the
interests of the state. He outlined the details of the Gladio organization in a
masterly speech to the Senate on 8 November, referring to the ‘unproven
hypothesis’ of a connection between ‘members of these defensive
organizations and the tragic events of terrorism’. ‘No one can doubt that
any possible wrongful use of such a structure can only have occurred
outside the framework of ministerial directives,’ he assured the senators. It
is ironic that Andreotti, who has presided over Italy’s most secret defence
arrangements for longer than any other politician, should be the man to
oversee the final unveiling and dismantling of Gladio. Consummate
politician though he is, it is possible that even his reputation will be
tarnished before the last stone is turned. Born in 1919, he has held twenty-
eight Cabinet posts and at the beginning of 1991 had been Prime Minister
six times. He is a man of great charm, ready wit and subtle intelligence who
is admired and detested in almost equal measure by the people he governs.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
With characteristic sticking-out ears and a hunched back, he is a gift to
caricaturists, and his career has itself been a kind of caricature of the
Byzantine quality of Italian political life. A regular church-goer and habitué
of the higher echelons of the Vatican, he has also been suspected of
involvement in some of the most nefarious events of Italy’s recent, troubled
history. If he succeeds in convincing the Italian public that all was well with
Gladio and the sinister sister organizations that lurked in its shadow, he will
have pulled off his greatest conjuring trick yet.
There are many reasons for suspicion, however. The very title of the
document sent by Andreotti to the parliamentary commission, ‘The So-
called Parallel SID-Operation Gladio’, takes the organization to the heart of
Judge Tamburino’s investigation into the Rosa dei Venti and related coup
plots. There are also reasons for suspecting a link with General De
Lorenzo’s Piano Solo, aside from the coincidence that the Gladio arms
deposits were laid down in the year before the coup project went into effect.
It has now been acknowledged that the secret training camp at Capo
Marrargiu in Sardinia was the official training centre for Operation Gladio.
In the event of the Italian mainland being occupied by enemy forces, Gladio
sabotage and resistance operations were to be run from the Sardinian base,
which could also have become the site for a government in exile. The 1959
secret service report on Gladio sent to the parliamentary commission states
that the CIA had specified ‘on 7 October 1957, that support for the base “is
considered in the war plans of the United States of America”’.6 It is
therefore somewhat embarrassing that several secret service witnesses have
testified that left-wing subversives to be rounded up in the course of
General De Lorenzo’s 1964 coup were to have been sent to Sardinia and
interned in that very base. What is more, the base itself was set up in 1963,
just one year before the planned coup.
The link between Gladio and the Rosa dei Venti conspiracy has been
explicitly made by Roberto Cavallaro, encouraged by Andreotti’s decision
to lift state secrecy on the subject. Operation Gladio? We used to call it
Organization X, or, in jargon, Rosa dei Venti. But seeing what the Prime
Minister told the commission on terrorism, I think it’s all the same thing,’
the former coup conspirator told Panorama magazine (4 November 1990).
He claimed that several of his colleagues had ‘Cosmic’ level security
clearance, which can only be issued at the highest levels of the Atlantic
Alliance. He said the organization had been given the task of infiltrating

--- Sayfa 151 ---
extremist groups in order to create a situation of tension requiring the
intervention of the armed forces, in the event of significant electoral
advances by the left. His colleagues, he said, had infiltrated both right-and
left-wing groups. Ί knew for a fact that a large number of terrorists, both red
and black, acted on the orders or under the influence of the secret services,’
he told the magazine. These claims are of the greatest importance, since
much of what Cavallaro and others like him told Judge Tamburino more
than fifteen years ago now appears to have been confirmed by the
government.
Despite all official assurances to the contrary, there is a strong
suspicion that a complete list of Gladio members, if that should ever be
made public, would contain numerous names of right-wing extremists,
possibly of people implicated in acts of terrorism. Magistrates in Brescia,
for example, have begun examining the possibility that Gladio may have
been in some way involved in the 1974 Piazza della Loggia bombing. Judge
Casson’s investigations have revealed that the gladiators were unusually
thick on the ground in that part of the world. One particularly encumbering
name discovered by Casson on the cover of an almost empty secret service
file pertaining to a Gladio member is that of Gianfranco Bertoli. The secret
services insist that it is just a coincidence and that the person involved has
nothing to do with the man who attempted to blow up the Interior Minister
with a bomb in 1973. It is significant that Vincenzo Vinciguerra, one of the
first insiders to lift the veil on secret service manipulation of terrorism, has
drawn attention to Bertoli’s attack as a particularly good example of secret
service-inspired terrorism. He has also claimed that he was himself invited
to carry out an assassination attempt on the same minister some two years
earlier. The proposal was put to him, he told magistrates, by two members
of Ordine Nuovo whom he suspected of being in contact with the secret
services.7 Much of what Vinciguerra had alleged in the past appears to meet
with confirmation in Andreotti’s revelations about Gladio.
Perhaps where Gladio gets closest to direct involvement in terrorism is
with the Peteano bombing, carried out by Vinciguerra himself. It may have
been to preserve the secrecy of Gladio that the secret services organized
their heavy-handed cover-up over the affair. On 24 February 1972, at
Aurisina in north-east Italy, not far from Peteano, some children playing in
the woods discovered one of the Gladio arms caches and reported their find
to the carabinieri . A week later, more arms were found in a cave nearby. In

--- Sayfa 152 ---
both cases, it appears, the dumps had been interfered with and some of the
explosives were missing. The then commander of Gladio, General Gerardo
Serravalle, used this incident as a pretext to recommend the dismantling of
all the Gladio dumps. As we shall see, he had come to suspect the
democratic reliability of many of his own men. The remaining explosives
were immediately detonated by the carabinieri and the secret services
busied themselves in concealing the true nature of the arms caches,
encouraging investigators to pursue the theory that the weapons belonged to
international arms traffickers rather than to the guardians of Italian
democracy. Three months later, on 31 May 1972, Vinciguerra staged the
Peteano bombing and there is a strong suspicion that the explosives used in
that attack may have originated in one of the Aurisina dumps. When Casson
attempted to investigate this hypothesis some eighteen years later, he was
told by the carabinieri that all the documentation relating to the discovery
had been destroyed.8 It is quite possible that the secret service cover-up over
Peteano may have been intended simply to preserve the secret of Gladio.
But it is hard to avoid the suspicion that the anti-communist organization
may have been more directly involved in the bombing and that someone in
the know may have tipped off members of Vinciguerra’s group about where
they could obtain their explosives.
Some of the most serious doubts about the reliability of the gladiators
stem from the testimony of General Serravalle, commander of the
organization from 1971 to 1974, who was one of the first secret service
officers to lift the veil of secrecy about the organization in evidence to
Judge Mastelloni. Serravalle has described how, shortly after his
appointment, he made a point of meeting some of the men under his
command and was shocked by the extremist views that many of them
expressed. Rather than waiting for a Soviet invasion, half of the gladiators
were eager to set about eliminating Italian communists without delay. Ί
found myself, an officer in the service of the Italian Republic, at the head of
an armed band,’ the general told the parliamentary commission on
terrorism.9 He was even more specific in the course of a television
interview: the Gladio arms dumps, he said, were ‘an absolute threat to the
stability of the country’.10 The discovery of the Aurisina dump provided
him with a convenient excuse to recommend the dismantling of all the arms
caches on the grounds that they were no longer secure. But he did not share
his suspicions with his secret service superiors because he had so little faith

--- Sayfa 153 ---
in them. ‘Miceli [SID director] was a man of honour, but I was afraid of the
other people around him, who had been in SIFAR and were involved in
Piano Solo,’ he told me.11
As a result of Serravalle’s recommendation most of the dumps were
dug up and the weapons were transported to the base in Sardinia using a
secret service plane, Argo 16. This aircraft exploded in flight near Venice
on 23 November 1973, and Judge Mastelloni has been conducting an
investigation into the hypothesis that it was sabotaged by the Israeli secret
service to punish the Italians for their policy of releasing captured
Palestinian terrorists. The plane had also been used to provide released
Palestinians with free passage out of Italy. Serravalle, however, has publicly
speculated that the sabotage may actually have been carried out by
aggrieved members of Gladio in revenge for the decision to dismantle their
dumps. He was himself due to have flown on the plane on the day of the
crash. That the commanding officer could suspect his own men of
attempting to murder him speaks volumes about the Gladio membership.
Serravalle’s suspicions received apparent confirmation from General
Giuseppe Cismondi, who had been his deputy in the Gladio organization.
On 30 November 1990, the Corriere della Sera published an interview with
Cismondi in which the general was harshly critical of the decision to
dismantle the dumps and expressed his support for General De Lorenzo, ‘a
fine man, whose reputation has been unjustly blackened’. The following
day, 1 December, the communist newspaper L’Unità quoted Cismondi as
describing how he nearly lost a case of Tocai wine, as well as his own life,
on the Argo 16 plane. After a change of plan Cismondi had had the wine
unloaded from the aircraft and he had taken it to Rome where he drank it
later that day. ‘You drank the wine despite the fact a secret service plane
had just gone down?’ the journalist asked. ‘He gave a slightly crooked
smile: “It’s always right to drink a toast, especially when the mother-in-law
dies.”’ The Unità correspondent commented in astonishment: ‘It may have
been a slightly unfortunate joke or perhaps a coded message?’
Despite all this, Serravalle finds it hard to believe that his own men
were involved in terrorism and, as yet, no concrete proof of this has been
found. He has speculated that Gladio may have been made public ‘because
it was the presentable part of the whole thing. I am afraid that by fixing the
searchlights on Gladio the shadows behind it will grow and will serve to

--- Sayfa 154 ---
conceal the “usual suspects”.’12 The decision to remove the Gladio arms
caches was not communicated at the time to the CIA. This may have been a
gesture of independence on the part of the Italians, or it may have been
because hardliners in the CIA would have disapproved of the decision, but
it could also have reflected a suspicion that the Agency supported the use of
Gladio members to carry out acts of terrorism.
The view that more dangerous organizations may have operated in the
shadow of Gladio is shared by former Socialist Party leader Francesco De
Martino, who was leader of the party when it participated in a coalition
government with Moro’s Christian Democrats in the early Sixties. He
believes that one of the purposes of coup plots and right-wing terrorism was
to put pressure on the Socialists to become obedient junior partners of the
Christian Democrats and to abandon their insistence on a programme of
radical reforms. ‘My conviction’, he told La Repubblica newspaper (4
December 1990) ‘is that alongside the so-to-speak national organization
[Gladio], set up by De Lorenzo, there was another, quite different
organization, linked to foreign agencies.’ De Martino confirmed that
blackmail was a factor in the government’s decision to conceal the reality of
De Lorenzo’s coup plot, a decision he personally had opposed. He told the
paper that Moro had warned his Socialist predecessor Pietro Nenni that if
he insisted on pursuing the SIFAR scandal ‘mountains of mud would have
poured out on to individuals and parties, including the Socialist Party, in
connection with which photocopies of cheques and other not very edifying
stories were beginning to circulate’. He said he believed that certain
Christian Democrat leaders may have made use of the subversive activities
of right-wing generals to try and bring the recalcitrant Socialist Party into
line. And he made it clear that he thought the secret services operating in
the shadow of Gladio were linked to the American secret services, ‘which
don’t always follow the line pursued by their government’. ‘It may be easy
to dismantle Gladio but it will be much harder to get to the bottom of the
mechanism that served to torment the political life of our country over the
last twenty-five years,’ he warned.
There is good reason to suspect, as Roberto Cavallaro has alleged, that
members of Gladio or like organizations have succeeded in infiltrating left-
wing groups. And it would now appear that the organization may even have
played a role in the Red Brigades’ kidnap of Aldo Moro, the man who had
done so much to protect it during the 1960s. One element to emerge

--- Sayfa 155 ---
recently concerns the sale by a secret service office, the Special Units
Group, known by its Italian acronym RUS, of a cast-off photocopying
machine which ended up in the possession of the Rome column of the Red
Brigades. The AB DIK photocopier was sold as unserviceable in 1977 and
ended up in perfect working order in a Red Brigades printing shop in Via
Pio Foà. Neither magistrates nor the parliamentary Moro Commission
appear to have shown much interest in this curious coincidence and the
head of the secret service office, Colonel Federico Appel, was never
questioned about it and is now, conveniently, dead. For one thing, the true
nature of the RUS was never apparent to the commission. SISMI director
Giuseppe Santovito lied to the parliamentarians, insisting: ‘It’s nothing
special. It’s an administrative office for conscript soldiers: drivers and radio
operators are known as special units.’13 It would take the emergence of
Gladio and the testimony of General Serravalle for the true nature of the
RUS to become clear: it was an administrative office for the Gladio training
school in Sardinia, protected by the highest levels of official secrecy. It
might be objected that the secret services could hardly have thought of a
clumsier way of providing the Red Brigades with a photocopier than to sell
them one of their own, almost directly. But stranger things than this have
happened.
On 18 March 1978, two days after the kidnap of Aldo Moro, an
unnamed secret service officer granted an interview to La Repubblica
newspaper. He described the kidnap operation as a technical jewel, ‘so
perfect as to seem almost artistic’. The kind of people capable of carrying it
out were either highly trained soldiers or civilians ‘who have undergone
lengthy commando training in specialized bases’. The officer went on to say
that the organization responsible for the kidnap was very solid, ‘both in its
genuinely ideologically motivated members and in the sectors that are
controlled by other directors, for other purposes, which paradoxically
coincide’. What the anonymous officer appears to be suggesting is that the
Red Brigades were divided into two sections, the ‘genuine’ revolutionaries
and the secret service infiltrators, and that those responsible for the Moro
ambush had received specialist military training. In Sardinia, perhaps?
Once again, Mino Pecorelli is able to offer an illuminating insight into
what was going on in the world of secret politics. On 5 September 1972,
Christian Democrat deputy Arnaldo Forlani issued an alarming warning,
which he subsequently retracted, in the course of a speech in the north-

--- Sayfa 156 ---
western port of La Spezia. ‘The reactionary right has set in motion perhaps
the most dangerous operation it has mounted since the Liberation and the
plot has also enjoyed international support,’ Forlani said. ‘This operation is
not yet over. We have concrete evidence that the operation is still under
way.’14 Pecorelli returned to discuss this speech in an article published in
OP in 1974 (17 December 1974). He claimed that then Prime Minister
Giulio Andreotti had been using his own personal collaborators within the
secret services to manipulate the far right. ‘The most likely hypothesis is
that the Prime Minister wants to continue to use the lever of right-wing
disorder to guarantee for himself, that is for the man who represents a “shift
to the right”, the possibility of remaining in Palazzo Chigi [the Prime
Minister’s office],’ Pecorelli wrote. ‘Forlani and Rumor have discovered
this . . . That is why the Christian Democrat secretary spoke out.’
More interesting than this explanation for Forlani’s surprising outburst,
however, is the evidence that Pecorelli was already aware of the existence
of Gladio, sixteen years before it became public knowledge. The OP editor
claimed that Andreotti’s contact with the far right had been established
through a secret service colonel, identified only by the first letter of his
surname: V. ‘This colonel was, until a short time ago, commander of the
secret service’s sabotage department, which trains in Sardinia and has
unlimited availability of explosives. It will be noted, in fact, that in all cases
of right-wing bombings the explosives almost never turn out to be stolen.’
In the (much rarer) cases of left-wing bombings, Pecorelli said, the
explosives used were always stolen. He claimed that Colonel V. had been
passing on explosives to right-wing extremists on behalf of Andreotti, who
wanted to increase right-wing subversion. The allegation echoes the claim
made by Giuseppe De Lutiis, which we have already seen, that Capo
Marrargiu graduates were allowed to keep the arms and explosives provided
during training.
Pecorelli’s apparent familiarity with Gladio takes on a peculiar
significance in the light of one of his most enigmatic pieces of coded
writing. On 23 May 1978, he published what appears to be an eyewitness
account of the scene in Via Caetani, where the body of Aldo Moro was
dumped in the boot of a car, parked next to the high wall which runs down
one side of the street. A ‘blonde woman’ is present among the bystanders at
the scene and comments that behind the wall lie ‘the remains of the Theatre
of Balbus, Rome’s third amphitheatre’. She continues: Τ read in a book that

--- Sayfa 157 ---
in those days runaway slaves and prisoners were taken there so that they
could fight one another to the death. Who knows what there was in the
destiny of Moro that his death should be discovered next to that wall? The
blood of yesterday and the blood of today.’ Pecorelli is talking about
‘gladiators’ in the context of Moro’s death, but until mid-1990 very few
people could have understood what he meant. Few better than the secret
service journalist will have known of Moro’s role in preserving the secrecy
surrounding Gladio by censoring reports into the SIFAR scandal and
blocking the investigation of Judge Tamburino into the Rosa dei Venti. But
he also appears to be hinting that the gladiators were in some way
implicated in Moro’s murder.
There are indeed many reasons for viewing the Gladio organization
with the deepest of suspicion. For one thing, not all of Italy’s elected rulers
were informed of its existence by the head of the secret services. President
Giovanni Leone is reported to have been furious on learning that he had
been kept in the dark about it. ‘They tell me that there are 10,000 armed
civilians on the loose in Italy,’ Leone is quoted as saying. ‘As usual I am a
president of shit, who is the last person to hear these things.’15 Nor is it
reassuring to learn that the gladiators were in large part armed with Eastern
Bloc weapons. Secret service director Admiral Fulvio Martini told the
parliamentary commission on terrorism that the Gladio arms dumps
contained Kalashnikovs and other Soviet weapons, as well as explosives
from Czechoslovakia.16 It is interesting to remember, in this context,
Richard Brenneke’s claim to have bought weapons in Czechoslovakia on
behalf of the CIA. It is hard to imagine what advantage the gladiators could
derive from the use of Eastern Bloc weapons in the event of a Soviet
invasion. Their use for acts of terrorism in peacetime, on the other hand,
would conveniently point the finger of blame at the communist bloc. It
would be interesting to know, for example, how many of Gladio’s Soviet-
made weapons ended up in the hands of the Red Brigades.
The OP article linking Moro’s destiny with the gladiators has received
indirect support from Francesco De Martino, who told La Repubblica (30
December 1990): ‘Today one might even argue that Moro’s death may have
been facilitated by this practice of letting things slide, of not punishing
those who deserve it.’ Pecorelli’s suggestion that the gladiators were in
some way involved in Moro’s murder may seem far-fetched but there are
other elements that support it, as we shall discover.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Notes
1   L’Unità Special Supplement, 14 November 1990, pp. 6-7.
2   ANSA, Brussels, 20.44, 5 November 1990.
3   AGI, Brussels, 6 November 1990.
4   SIFAR Special Forces and Operation Gladio, Report prepared
for SIFAR director, Rome, 1 June 1959, p. 7.
5   Ibid., p. 2.
6   Ibid., p. 2.
7   Vincenzo Vinciguerra to G. I. Felice Casson, Venice, 14 August
1984.
8   Leo Sisti, L’Espresso , 2 December 1990.
9   Gianni Cipriani, L’Unità , 21 November 1990.
10   Telefono Giallo, RAI3, 28 November 1990.
11   General Gerardo Serravalle to the author, 2 December 1990.
12   Ibid.
13   Chiara Valentini, L’Espresso , 9 December 1990.
14   Sandra Bonsanti, La Repubblica , 17 November 1990.
15   Franco Giustolisi, L’Espresso , 18 November 1990.
16   Giovanni Maria Bellu, La Repubblica, 16 November 1990.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
[9]
STILL COVERING UP
One of the clearest and most plausible rationalizations of the right-
wing bombings, which explains the intelligent political purpose that lay
behind them, is provided by a secret service report on the background to the
1970 Borghese coup attempt. The report cites a conversation between an
unnamed military officer and Prince Prospero Colonna, a member of Prince
Valerio Borghese’s National Front organization. According to the report,
Colonna told the officer that Borghese ‘had already prepared a plan of
provocation with a series of large bomb attacks to ensure that the military
intervention of the right would take place in a climate of general
reprobation for the “red” criminals; he also added that in some cases
innocent victims are, unfortunately, necessary.’ The officer’s reaction
typified the military’s tendency to play down the threat of right-wing
terrorism. He considered Colonna’s speech to be ‘the empty talk of a
chatter-box’.1
In the light of Colonna’s rationalization, the last two major bombings
to inflict wanton death and destruction on the Italian public were something
of an anomaly. As so often in the past, the target was the railway system:
one bomb, in August 1980, destroying the second-class waiting room at
Bologna station, the other, in December 1984, blasting a train as it travelled
through a tunnel in Tuscany. What was strange about them, though, was that
there was no longer any immediately intelligible purpose to the bombings.
The coup season was definitively closed. There was no longer any question
that such atrocities might provoke a civil war, the declaration of a state of
emergency, or military intervention to restore order. And the Communist
Party was no longer a threat; its electoral support was beginning to tail off
and any question of its being brought into the government had been shelved
with the death of Aldo Moro in 1978. What then was the purpose of these
massacres?
It seems clear that some, at least, of those involved in the bombings
came from the same right-wing roots as those responsible for the strategy of
tension bombings a decade earlier. Once again the secret services were
active in their efforts to sabotage the judicial investigations, outdoing
themselves over Bologna but somewhat less energetic over the train

--- Sayfa 160 ---
bombing. By 1984 both their capacity and their desire to cover up for the
bombers appear to have diminished as the terrorists’ motives moved further
away from the original ones of the strategy of tension. The 1980 bombing,
however, provoked some of the most blatant, and risky, attempts at judicial
sabotage ever seen in Italy.
One of the most striking was a secret service operation codenamed
‘Terror on the trains’, mounted just six months after the bombing. On 13
January 1981, a suitcase containing explosives and a submachine-gun was
found on a train at Bologna station. The discovery followed a tip-off from
SISMI, who were able to specify the exact type of suitcase and the carriage
in which it would be found. Four days earlier, SISMI had reported that one
of their sources had informed them of an imminent campaign of train
bombings organized by a group of Italian fascists in conjunction with
French and German right-wingers. The whole episode lent weight to the
theory that the station bombing was the result of an international
conspiracy, an idea put forward by Licio Gelli himself and passed on by the
secret services to the Bologna magistrates shortly after the massacre. The
argument appeared particularly convincing since the suitcase explosive was
similar to the type used in the August bombing.
It later emerged, however, that the suitcase had actually been planted
by two secret service officers, General Pietro Musumeci, a member of P2,
and Colonel Giuseppe Belmonte. The two were found guilty of conspiring
to sabotage the Bologna bomb investigation by a Rome assize court in
1985. That verdict was modified on appeal the following year. The appeal
court decided that although the officers were guilty of planting the
explosives they had done so merely with the intention of pocketing the 300
million Lire (£150,000) reward that SISMI had paid to its non-existent
source and in order to improve the intelligence agency’s standing relative to
its rival, SISDE, which had recently achieved a number of operational
successes. The court decided that the officers could have had no interest in
side-tracking the Bologna investigation as it was making no progress at the
time. Bologna magistrates tend to disagree. They pointed out that three of
their prime suspects were then in prison and one of them, criminologist
Aldo Semerari, appeared to be on the verge of a nervous breakdown and
had been threatening to make revelations about the political background to
the bombing. Semerari was released from prison shortly afterwards. He was
kidnapped and murdered by members of the Neapolitan Camorra in March

--- Sayfa 161 ---
1982. Examining Magistrate Vito Zincani rejected the notion that the
operation was mounted simply as an excuse for theft. He saw it instead as
part of ‘a determined plan to confuse the evidence in order to prevent the
identification of the people responsible for the Bologna bombing’.2
Zincani’s view was also shared by the parliamentary committee responsible
for overseeing the activities of the secret services.
One alarming aspect of the secret service hoax was the provenance of
the MAB submachine-gun found in the case. It was part of a stock of
weapons which had been modified by a right-wing group from north-east
Italy and had subsequently been stored in an arms cache in the basement of
a Health Ministry building in Rome: the same arms cache from where some
of the bullets used to kill Mino Pecorelli are believed to have come. The
arms were used by the Magliana band from the Rome underworld, by right-
wing extremists and sometimes even by the left. One of those who
administered the arms store was Egidio Giuliani, a right-winger whose
terrorist career has all the hallmarks of the agent provocateur . Giuliani had
been in contact with Europa Civiltà (Europe Civilization), a right-wing
study group frequented by freemasons and secret service informants. His
politics moved apparently to the left over the years and he was happy to
supply arms to members of the Red Brigades and to undertake joint
operations with left-wing terrorists. But when a fellow right-winger visited
his home he found Giuliani’s taste in books was still the same as ever: the
works of Julius Evola and other rightist gurus still lined his shelves.3 The
Bologna prosecutor stated categorically that the Health Ministry arms cache
belonged to Giuliani4 but in 1989, a Rome prosecutor preparing a case
against Magliana members considered responsible for the basement
armoury had barely heard of Giuliani and assured me that he was not one of
the defendants.5 It seems the authorities may have turned a benevolently
blind eye towards the activities of Giuliani, who was charged with
involvement in a bomb attack on the offices of the Milan City Council a
mere five days before the Bologna bombing. Strangely, he was acquitted
before even being brought to trial, as the examining magistrates decided
that although he had supplied the explosives used in the Milan bombing, he
did not necessarily know what they were to be used for.6
Control over one of Rome’s principal arms deposits, from which
weapons were loaned on an occasional basis to terrorists of the left and
right as well as to common criminals, would have given the secret services

--- Sayfa 162 ---
an ideal vantage point from which to track criminal activity in the capital.
The fact that the secret services should be able so easily to dispose of the
Health Ministry weapons for their own secret operations illustrates the close
relationship between SISMI and the Magliana/Giuliani group. This is
particularly grave given that the Magliana band were in contact with the
Mafia, with terrorists of both colours and with members of P2 and were
from time to time the source of alarming blackmailing messages based on
inside knowledge of some of the most sensitive terrorist operations.
The planting of the hoax suitcase has its own sinister codicil, involving
once again the convenient death of a potentially embarrassing witness.
Shortly after the discovery of the case, SISMI reported that the two airline
tickets it contained, in the name of non-existent French citizens, had been
bought in Bari by Giorgio Vale, a right-wing terrorist and member of NAR
(Armed Revolutionary Cells). Subsequent investigation would reveal that
Vale had not in fact bought the tickets. Vale was killed on 5 May 1982,
when police raided his apartment on the outskirts of Rome. According to
the official version, Vale opened fire on the police before turning his pistol
on himself and shooting himself in the head. Forensic tests, however,
showed no traces on the terrorist’s hand to indicate that he had indeed fired
the pistol. The explanation that someone might have washed Vale’s hands
during the course of an autopsy was hastily put forward. His parents and
friends remain adamant that Vale was not the kind of person to commit
suicide. Further complicating the affair are two anonymous phone-calls
announcing Vale’s arrest, which were made to the Italian news agency
ANSA and the Messaggero newspaper on 6 and 7 March. In the second
call, a spokesman for NAR threatened reprisals against the police if news of
Vale’s arrest was not made public. It would certainly have been
inconvenient if Vale had been arrested and set about demolishing part of
SISMI’s fantasy background to the suitcase on the train, and this at a time
when the Bologna magistrates still had no reason to doubt the secret service
version of events.7
If the reason for the Bologna blast was not to pave the way for a
military takeover, then there must be some alternative explanation. A
number of theories have been put forward, some more plausible than others,
and some with the obvious intention of creating confusion. Gelli himself
has recently suggested that the explosion may have been caused by the
accidental detonation of a consignment of explosives while they were being

--- Sayfa 163 ---
transported through Italy by a group of Arab terrorists.8 A similar view has
been expressed by other figures from the P2/secret service establishment
and it should therefore be considered with some suspicion.
Another not entirely reliable account has been offered by Elio Ciolini,
a collaborator of the French secret services who had been in contact with
Stefano Delle Chiaie in South America. Ciolini was in prison in
Switzerland for fraud when he contacted the Italian authorities, offering
them information about the Bologna bombing if they paid his bail for him.
He initially convinced magistrates that the decision to commission the
bombing was taken at a meeting of a secret masonic lodge in Monte Carlo
attended by an assortment of Italy’s business and political leaders and that
its purpose was to distract public attention from the privatization of
Montedison, a major state-owned petrochemical company. The takeover
was to be financed partly with American funds and the bombing would
distract the attention of political forces likely to oppose such a move.
Ciolini named several right-wingers from France and Germany whom he
accused of having participated in the organization of the bombing. He
subsequently went on to embroider his account until he succeeded in totally
discrediting it and himself. He could not, though, have embarked on the
project without a fund of first-hand knowledge about Stefano Delle Chiaie,
who remains one of the suspected participants in the conspiracy behind the
bombing. According to one account, the antics of this bizarre ‘supergrass’
delayed the Bologna inquiry by as much as two years. Ciolini’s role
followed the pattern of other superwitnesses employed by the secret
services to undermine terrorism investigations: they start by telling a story
that is true or at least plausible and then go on to add more and more
falsehoods until truth and falsehood become indistinguishable and the
reliable leads they may have touched on are definitively discredited.
Though Ciolini’s word is wholly unreliable, he did offer an interesting
portrait of himself in an interview with L’Europeo magazine (30 May
1987). Ί have always considered myself to be a suitable instrument for
blocking the rise of communism, both in Italy and abroad,’ he said. Ί have
worked to this end without ever following my own initiative, but always
carrying out orders.’ This is a curious autobiography for someone who had
been actively involved in blocking the investigation into the Bologna
bombing. Ciolini’s comment about Delle Chiaie is also revealing: ‘He was
doing the same work as me, under the mask of a right-wing extremist. But

--- Sayfa 164 ---
he’s a good man, an idealist.’ In 1984 and 1985, Ciolini appears to have
found refuge in the United States, where he allegedly enjoyed the protection
of an FBI agent named Steve Vitale.9
The international terrorist connection mentioned by Ciolini was further
bolstered by information coming from another unlikely source. Once again,
the material was part of a complex SISMI disinformation campaign. What
is especially significant about the episode is that two of its protagonists, the
SISMI representative in Beirut Colonel Stefano Giovannone and Al Fatah
leader Abu Ayad, also played a leading role in another still more delicate
aspect of PLO-Italian relations, which we will examine in a later chapter.
Abu Ayad, alias Salah Khalaf, was Yasser Arafat’s deputy in the leadership
of Al Fatah, the largest faction in the Palestine Liberation Organization. He
was also responsible for the Fatah intelligence service. Giovannone, a grey-
haired, slightly plump man who looked like a well-scrubbed businessman,
was SISMI representative in Beirut from 1972 until the mid-1980s, when he
became embroiled in a succession of secret service scandals. His death in
1985 extricated him from mounting legal difficulties and doubtless relieved
the anxieties of many people in the intelligence world. Throughout his
career as a secret service officer, he enjoyed an excellent political and
personal relationship with many PLO leaders.
On 19 September 1980, Giovannone’s friend Ayad granted an
interview to an obscure Italian-language Swiss newspaper, Il Corriere del
Ticino. The interviewer was an Italian journalist named Rita Porena, one of
Giovannone’s informants. Ayad told her that the PLO had arrested a number
of German right-wingers who had been undergoing training in a military
camp run by the Christian Falangist militia near the Lebanese town of
Aqura, north-east of Beirut. The Germans belonged to a terrorist group
headed by Karl Heinz Hoffman, a name which had been connected to the
Bologna bombing by Ciolini. Some eleven months before the interview,
according to Ayad, a group of Italian fascists had joined the Germans on
their guerrilla training course. The Italians said that their principal enemy
was the Communist Party and that they were planning a major bombing in
Bologna, a city governed by the communists. ‘When the massacre occurred,
we immediately connected the bombing to what we had learned about the
plans of the Italians from the Aqura camp,’ Ayad commented.10

--- Sayfa 165 ---
Ayad’s information was later supplemented by a number of SISMI
reports. In one, dated 23 January 1981, SISMI stated that it had questioned
two of the Germans mentioned in the interview and been told that a group
of six to eight Italians had been undergoing training near Aqura in July
1980, only a month before the bombing, and that their leader had spoken of
a forthcoming attack on Bologna in his farewell speech. By that time Ayad
had already modified his previous account, bringing the timing of the
Bologna reference into line with the SISMI version and claiming that he
had been mistaken in placing the incident some ten months earlier.11 On 17
April 1981, SISMI explained that despite having spoken to the two
Germans it was unable to provide details of their identity or addresses as the
meeting had been arranged by an intermediary. Years later, Giovannone
admitted that the secret service had known the identity of the Germans cited
by Ayad all along. According to the Bologna prosecutors, this information
was kept from the judicial authorities in order to prevent them from
discovering that the whole affair was part of a propaganda war being waged
between the PLO and the Falangists.12 The SISMI reports resulted in an
examining magistrate from Bologna making two fruitless and confusing
visits to Beirut in pursuit of a non-existent international connection to the
bombing. The consequences of this disinformation campaign suited both
Giovannone and Ayad. For the PLO it represented an opportunity to tarnish
the reputation of its Falangist enemies through association with the Bologna
bombing, while for Giovannone it was a chance to contribute to the P2-
orchestrated sabotage of the judicial investigation. It seems clear that the
two men worked hand in glove throughout the whole affair.
Other accounts of the bombing have emerged in the world of the
extreme right and offered a motive for it which was endorsed by the
Bologna assize court prosecutors. One of these was put forward in the
extremist magazine Quex (March 1981), which suggested that the bombing
was the work of agents provocateurs seeking to establish their authority,
‘from positions of power, over the whole area of the extreme right and to
dismantle those groups devoted to spontaneous action, which were escaping
from their control’. Another suggested that the massacre was designed to
provoke police repression against the right and thus force unity on the
various terrorist groups which had been steadily drifting apart. It was also
designed as a warning message ‘to those political, military and economic
forces, which had been linked in the past to right-wing extremism in the

--- Sayfa 166 ---
context of coup plans and the strategy of tension’.13 Interestingly, another
account which originated with Pierluigi Pagliai in Bolivia, who was
subsequently killed in a joint CIA/Italian police operation, suggested that
the bombing had been organized by Stefano Delle Chiaie in order to
radicalize and reunify the world of Italian neo-fascism. Another witness
claimed that it was Gelli who had ordered the bombing as a kind of re-
enactment of the Italicus massacre, in order to ‘send a warning to those
political and military circles which had supported a military coup in 1974-5
and which were beginning to move away from Gelli and the forces of P2 as
the period of the strategy of tension came to an end’. Gelli and his
associates, according to this account, represented the link between the
political and military circles involved in the coup attempt and the low-level
neo-fascists who had carried out their orders.14 These various interpretations
are by no means incompatible with one another.
Yet another explanation for the bombing has emerged since the
original assize court trial. It makes a link between the station bombing and
the explosion in flight, one week earlier, of an Itavia DC-9 passenger jet
flying from Bologna to Palermo. It has now been ascertained that the secret
services organized a complex and far-reaching cover-up of the
circumstances surrounding both incidents. The two cover-up operations ran
in parallel for almost a decade. It has even been suggested that the Bologna
bombing may itself have been a part of the Itavia cover-up. At 8.59 p.m. on
27 June 1980, the Itavia jet with eighty-one people on board crashed into
the sea near the island of Ustica, 100 kilometres north of the Sicilian coast.
Initial accounts spoke of structural failure as the probable cause of the crash
but the next day the possibility that it was the result of a terrorist bomb was
introduced. An anonymous caller claiming to represent the right-wing
terrorist group NAR told the Corriere della Sera that one of its members,
Marco Affatigato, had been on board the flight ‘on a mission’. His body
could be identified, the caller said, by the particular type of watch he was
wearing. The assumption the public was invited to draw was that Affatigato
was carrying a bomb with him which had detonated accidentally.
It would take nine years for a judicial inquiry to establish that the plane
was almost certainly brought down by a missile, probably fired by a NATO
fighter aircraft. A parliamentary inquiry into the affair found that radar
records of the event had been tampered with, withheld from the
investigators or destroyed. Air Force officers claimed that the radar at

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Marsala in Sicily, for example, failed to record the last minutes of the flight
because a simulated training exercise happened to coincide with the
disaster. Their account would not begin to waver until some nine years after
the crash. Licio Gelli has drawn a parallel between the missing radar
records and documents belonging to Aldo Moro which disappeared during
his kidnap. He clearly intended to suggest that both regarded sensitive
secrets of the Italian state.15
Radar records that only came to light in 1990 appear to indicate
intense military activity in the skies over north and central Italy on the night
of the crash. One member of the parliamentary commission has estimated
that there were as many as thirty-three military aircraft in the area between
7.30 p.m. and 10 p.m. There are also traces of a plane flying in a curious
circular pattern east of the island of Corsica: an airborne radar and
communications aircraft directing operations? Despite all this activity
neither the Italian Air Force nor any of Italy’s NATO allies have been able
to assist the investigators in establishing what was going on that night.
Members of the parliamentary commission are convinced that they have
been lied to. On the night of 27 June the American aircraft carrier the USS
Saratoga was at anchor in the Bay of Naples. According to the US
authorities neither the Saratoga nor any of its escort ships were using radar
powerful enough to record what was happening only 100 or so kilometres
away in the sky above Ustica. The parliamentarians are also convinced that
a NATO radar centre in Verona, which collates information from the entire
Italian air defence system, must have recorded the last moments of the
doomed plane. This information, too, has been denied to them. On 20 June
1990, the director of SISMI, Admiral Fulvio Martini, told the commission
that he believed his colleagues in the French, American and British
intelligence agencies had all lied by saying that they had no relevant
information, in response to his requests. ‘If they were in some way involved
in this, that is the answer they would have given,’ he told the commission.16
Rino Formica, a Socialist, who was Transport Minister at the time of
the crash, has hinted at the reasons of state that may lie behind the Ustica
cover-up. C I don’t want to suggest that the DC-9 was shot down
deliberately, but if it was an accident then why didn’t they say so
immediately?’ he said. Obviously because the cause was even more
important than the accident itself.’17 Alfredo Galasso, a lawyer representing
the victims’ families, has suggested that the plane may have been downed

--- Sayfa 168 ---
by a missile fired in the course of ‘an all-out air battle’.18 The scenario that
has begun to emerge is of an aerial dogfight between planes from France,
the United States and Libya.
Several witnesses have spoken of the involvement of a number of
NATO countries, led by France and the United States, in an operation to
overthrow the government of Colonel Moammar Khadafy. The plan
involved an attempt to shoot down a plane carrying the Libyan leader from
Tripoli to Warsaw on the night of the crash and the simultaneous dispatch
from Corsica of a plane carrying arms and mercenaries to support an
uprising by anti-Khadafy dissidents. Khadafy was warned of the plot by
members of the Italian secret services, who wanted to protect lucrative trade
ties with the Libyan regime, and Libyan fighters were sent to intercept the
NATO planes. The DC-9 was shot down in the resulting mêlée.
There can be no doubt that relations were strained between Libya and
the countries allegedly involved in the plot. France was at loggerheads with
Libya over Chad, where, two months earlier, it had sent troops to back
Prime Minister Hissene Habré against the Libyan-backed forces of
Goukouni Oueddei. On 4 February a mob had burnt down the French
consulates in Tripoli and Benghazi and France had responded by expelling
the Libyan ambassador from Paris. On 11 May four Libyan diplomats had
been accused of involvement in terrorism and expelled from the United
States and a further four were expelled from Britain the following day. Italy,
too, was at odds with Libya, over relations with Malta and oil exploration
rights in the Mediterranean. At the beginning of August troops loyal to
Khadafy crushed a revolt by soldiers of the Libyan 9th Brigade based in
Tobruk: a delayed start to the insurrection that should have begun on June
27 ?19
A MIG 23 fighter bearing Libyan markings crashed in a mountainous
area of Calabria, southern Italy, almost certainly on the same night as the
Ustica disaster. The authorities have always insisted that it came down three
weeks later, on 18 July, and therefore had no connection with the Ustica
affair. The body of the pilot and the aircraft were hastily returned to Libya.
It has been reported that Fiat managing director Cesare Romiti intervened to
ensure that the operation ran smoothly.20 At the time, Libya was one of the
largest shareholders in the Italian car manufacturing firm and Fiat were not
able to buy out the Libyan shareholding until the late 1980s. If someone

--- Sayfa 169 ---
from the Italian secret services did warn Khadafy of the plot against him,
one of the motives may have been to protect Fiat from the consequences of
a sudden rupture in relations between the two countries. Investigators now
believe that the Italian Air Force may have sent one of its own jets to fly
low over the site of the crashed MIG and drop incendiary bombs in order to
create the impression among local people that the crash occurred on 18 July,
and no earlier.
Bologna magistrates have discovered that the anonymous caller who
mentioned Affatigato’s name to the Corriere della Sera was employed by
SISMI.21 Since Affatigato had not been on the Itavia flight, SISMI were at
liberty to use his name again, this time putting it forward in their reports to
the Bologna magistrates as a suspect in the station bombing. The detailed
information they used to implicate him in the two affairs, including his
ownership of a Baume et Mercier wrist-watch, came from one of their
informants, Marcello Soffiati, a right-wing extremist who also worked for
the CIA and had undergone weapons training at Camp Derby, a US military
base near Livorno.22 Affatigato himself had been in contact not only with
the Italian secret services, but also with SDECE, the French secret service,
and with the CIA. He was a well-established figure in the world of right-
wing terrorism and his name served, in the first instance, to create the
impression that the Ustica plane had been brought down by a bomb carried
on board and subsequently to link the Ustica incident with a right-wing
bombing at Bologna station. The suspicion therefore arises as to whether
the secret services may not have organized a ‘genuine’ right-wing bombing
at Bologna station in order to reinforce the idea that the Itavia disaster was
caused by a bomb, rather than a missile, and thus strengthen the alibi of
whichever NATO air force had been responsible for the disaster. It has been
suggested that the intention of the Bologna bombers was to carry out a
massacre of traditional strategy of tension proportions, with a dozen or so
victims. According to this theory, it was only the unforeseen collapse of the
waiting-room roof that caused such unexpectedly high casualties on 2
August.
A compelling reason for concealing the true dynamics of the Ustica
incident is the fact that in 1980 NATO was trying to convince European
public opinion of the need to deploy a new generation of short-range
nuclear missiles to counter the Soviet SS-20S. In a number of countries,
governments were encountering considerable difficulties over this issue and

--- Sayfa 170 ---
the revelation that a NATO fighter had been responsible for the deaths of
eighty-one innocent civilians might well have tipped the balance against
acceptance. This at least may have been the calculation made by members
of the NATO security establishment. The motive for the bombing, then,
would have been a weighty one: the security of the entire Western alliance.
Given the Affatigato/secret service link to both Ustica and Bologna
and the lengths to which the secret services went to cover up responsibility
for both tragedies, this theory is by no means farfetched. There is yet
another element which supports it. On 13 January 1981, SISMI reported
that the T4 explosive its agents had planted as part of the ‘Terror on the
trains’ operation was the same as that used at the station. T4 is a military
explosive used in missile warheads and it is therefore possible that the
choice of explosives at Bologna was designed to replicate the chemical
traces left by the missile that destroyed the Itavia jet. What makes this
report somewhat sinister is that at the time SISMI identified its own
explosive as being T4, and the same as that used at Bologna, the Bologna
explosive had not yet been identified and would not be officially confirmed
to be T4 until nearly a year later, on 6 December 1981.23
A different, but equally sinister, construction was put on these events
by Italian police chief Vincenzo Parisi, a former head of the domestic
intelligence service, SISDE. In testimony to the parliamentary commission
he spoke of the shooting down of the Itavia jet as a deliberate terrorist act,
which he also linked to the Bologna bombing. Ά terrorist act serves to send
a message. If the message is not understood, it is repeated,’ he told the
inquiry.24 The hypothesis that appears to emerge from Parisi’s admittedly
somewhat unclear testimony is that both Ustica and Bologna may have been
organized by the French to punish the Italian secret services for betraying
their plot against Khadafy. A possible connection between the French and
the Bologna bombing has recently been made by no less a person than
Marco Affatigato. In an Italian television interview he claimed that Paul
Durand, an officer in the French domestic intelligence service, the
Renseignements Généraux, had been arrested in Bologna on the day of the
bombing or the day after. He had later been returned to France on an Italian
military aircraft in ‘an exchange of spies’. Other of Affatigato’s allegations
were considered too sensitive, or too farfetched, to be broadcast and the
material was handed over to Rome magistrates.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Durand’s name had cropped up in earlier investigations into the
Bologna bombing as he had been travelling in Italy in July 1980 and been
in contact with members of the Italian far right. It had been thought,
however, that he had returned to France well before 2 August. It has been
suggested that SISMI’s decision to blame Affatigato for the bombing, given
that he was in France at the time and was known to work for the French
secret services, was a coded way of indicating that they held the French
responsible for the atrocity.25 An Air Force employee who was working in
one of the radar stations that did actually follow the sequence of events
leading up to the Ustica crash told his family the following day: ‘There has
been a disaster. We were on the point of war, and we’re still on alert now.’26
At this point it is unclear whether the war that was about to break out was
against Libya or against France. The airman was later found hanged and
magistrates have recently opened an investigation into his apparent suicide.
Some of these theories may appear contradictory and far-fetched, but
they are nevertheless underpinned by a number of concrete facts: the reality
of the insurrection against Khadafy and the secret service cover-ups. On 11
September 1980, Le Monde reported the sudden resignation of Colonel
Alain de Marolles after only a year as director of the Information Division
of the French secret service. Le Monde was at a loss to explain his
unexpected departure but speculated that it might have had something to do
with a recent uprising in Libya.
None of the theories put forward to explain the origins of the Bologna
bombing enjoyed the kind of convincing corroboration that might come
from a full confession by one of the protagonists and they could therefore
all be mistaken. They do at least have the virtue of fitting the
incontrovertible fact that the secret services were actively involved over an
extended period in undermining the judicial investigation, following a
pattern of behaviour that had been established with the very first bombing
of the strategy of tension. It is quite possible that the atrocity had several
distinct purposes, to disguise the reality of the Ustica incident and to draw
together the forces which had previously been united by the strategy of
tension. Given that the political circumstances which had created that
strategy no longer existed, it was reasonable to suppose that many of those
who had participated in the security establishment’s terrorism conspiracy
might plan to return to civilian life and might even be tempted to write their
memoirs or collaborate with the judicial authorities. Implicating them in a

--- Sayfa 172 ---
fresh outrage, and one of such gravity, would effectively put a stop to such
ideas. Many right-wingers would be forced to go on the run and few would
be tempted to explain how they had become accomplices in such slaughter.
Even more telling would be the message the bombing sent to the senior
political and military figures who had acquiesced in the P2 strategy of
terrorism management: we served you well in the past, so you cannot
abandon us now. Whether the bombing was carried out primarily for
international or for domestic reasons there are certainly people in authority
in Italy who know and it is high time they shared their knowledge with the
public.
If the purpose of the Bologna bombing was not immediately apparent,
the motive for a train bombing in 1984 was, at first sight, even less clear.
But if the Bologna blast was designed to send a message, so too, it appears,
was the destruction of a train as it travelled between Florence and Bologna
on the night of 23 December 1984. At 7.06 p.m., a remote-controlled bomb
exploded in one of the rear carriages of a Naples-Milan express train as it
travelled through a 19 kilometre-long tunnel near the village of San
Benedetto Val di Sambro, killing fifteen passengers and injuring 267. It was
in exactly this same tunnel, some ten years earlier, that a bomb on the
Italicus train had killed twelve and injured 105 people. That bomb had
come at the height of the coup season and has been explicitly linked to the
activities of the P2 lodge. It is hard to escape the conclusion that the
Christmas 1984 bombing was a deliberate re-run of the Italicus atrocity,
presumably intended as a reminder to all who had supported the 1974 coup
plots of a shared complicity.
What was unusual about the 1984 bombing was the composition of the
gang held responsible for it and the relative speed with which they were
brought to justice. On 25 February 1989, a Florence assize court sentenced
five men to life imprisonment for the bombing. Three of them were
members of the Neapolitan Camorra and the other two members of the
Mafia. The court held that they had staged the bombing in association with
a group of right-wing terrorists in order to create the impression that
terrorism was still a major problem and so divert police resources away
from the battle against organized crime, which had been making notable
breakthroughs at that time. Particularly significant was the life sentence for
Mafia boss Pippo Calo. Calo was a major figure in Cosa Nostra, a member
of its governing body, the Commission or Cupola. He was born the son of a

--- Sayfa 173 ---
Palermo butcher, rising over the years to become the head of that city’s
Porta Nuova Mafia family. In the early 1970s he moved to Rome, where he
became one of the Mafia’s treasurers, investing some of its vast earnings
from drug-dealing in legal business ventures. He became, in effect, the
Mafia’s ambassador to Rome, cultivating political and secret service
contacts and encountering such figures as Francesco Pazienza and Flavio
Carboni, who gravitated around the P2-controlled Banco Ambrosiano and
its president, Roberto Calvi.
Calo’s influence within the Rome underworld was further increased
when he came into contact with the leaders of the local Magliana band,
whom he soon came to dominate. The criminal gang was based on the
working-class suburb of Magliana and numbered among its members loan-
sharks, kidnappers and drug-dealers. It was originally a loosely-knit
association of minor and relatively unferocious Roman criminals, but as the
Seventies wore on, its leaders came progressively into contact with Calo
and other representatives of the Sicilian Mafia and with envoys of the
Neapolitan Camorra and they became increasingly ambitious and ruthless.
Members of the gang were in contact with local right-wing terrorists, who
used the gang to recycle stolen goods and hot money and also bought drugs
from them. As the activities of its leaders moved steadily upmarket, they
became increasingly involved in political corruption and came ever more
into contact with the secret services, who had always had a particular
interest in the weaknesses and foibles of Italy’s political class. Magliana
member Domenico Balducci, for example, made a number of unexplained
flights on the SISMI-owned airline. He naturally travelled under an
assumed name, as he was on the run from the police at the time. Joint
control over the Health Ministry arms supermarket, with Egidio Giuliani,
also gave the gang the chance to keep tabs on who was shooting whom in
the capital.
This wide range of contacts and activities made the Magliana band into
a purely criminal equivalent of the P2 organization, and it has sometimes
been described as the military arm of P2. Contact between P2 and the
terrorists and criminals gravitating around the Magliana band was
maintained by people such as Aldo Semerari, the criminal psychiatrist and
P2 member, who enjoyed ready access to imprisoned gang members
because of his work. Another link was provided by Cesare Valsania, a loan-
shark who was born in Castiglion Fibocchi, the site of Gelli’s Giole

--- Sayfa 174 ---
mattress factory. Contacts with the secret services were guaranteed by
individuals such as Francesco Pazienza and Flavio Carboni. As a result the
Magliana band became a criminal extension of the P2 lodge, active in the
areas of common crime and terrorism during the course of post-war Italy’s
most politically turbulent decade. It is not therefore surprising that the gang
came into possession of some highly sensitive secrets relating to political
violence in the country and equally unsurprising that it chose to make use of
that knowledge for purposes of blackmail.
An idea of the extensive influence of the Magliana band can be
gathered from the testimony of one of its former members, Fulvio Lucioli,
who told a Bologna magistrate that the judiciary in Perugia was
investigating a possible connection between the band and justice officials in
Rome. Ί have named people linked to the Magliana band including a deputy
director of Rebibbia prison and certain Rome magistrates; this is why my
statements are currently with the Perugia court.’27 This impression is
strengthened by the account of Angelo Izzo, who told the same magistrate
that a leading member of the gang, Danilo Abbruciati, had contrived to send
him a knife ‘as soon as he heard that I was in prison, in the special wing’.
However reassuring it may have been to have a knife, life in the special
wing at Rebibbia was not all that arduous for a well-connected member of
the criminal fraternity, according to Izzo. ‘Since [Francis] Turatello [a
major underworld boss] was there and had masses of money, we were
constantly having parties with caviar and other sophisticated foods, so
solitary confinement was just a phrase from the rule-book.’28
The personal influence of Calo was also considerable. While living in
Rome he claimed to be an antiques dealer and made use of a number of
aliases: Mario Salamandra, Mario Aglialoro, and he even appropriated the
name of one of his followers, Luigi Faldetta. According to Mafia boss
turned supergrass, Tommaso Buscetta, Calo once had a man killed because
he had repeatedly failed to turn up for appointments with him.29
The evidence of Calo’s involvement in the 1984 bombing is unusually
concrete and convincing. Police found Semtex explosive of the same type
as that used on the train concealed in a house owned by Calo in the
Umbrian countryside at Poggio San Lorenzo. They also found remote-
control devices similar to the one used to detonate the bomb. Calo had
noted in his diary the payments he had made for the house and under the

--- Sayfa 175 ---
rubric ‘Radio’ the sum of 18,000 Lire, an abbreviated note of the 18 million
Lire he had paid to a German electronics engineer, Friedrich Schaudinn, for
six such devices.30 Secret service attempts to throw the investigators off the
track were not as extensive or as effective as in the past. One reason may
have been that several of SISMI’s leading judicial saboteurs were already in
prison or under investigation for their role in obstructing the Bologna
investigation. It has even been suggested that the bombing may have been
intended to ease the position of the arrested SISMI officers at the same time
as increasing the workload of the Bologna magistrates, who were initially
responsible for investigating the 1984 bombing as well as the station blast.
The logic was that if secret service officers were in prison but bombs
continued to explode, then any idea that they were in some way linked to
the original 1980 bombers must be mistaken; the latter were still at large
and still active and could therefore have no possible link with the
imprisoned SISMI men.
Anomalous though the Bologna and Christmas bombings may have
been in terms of the traditional objectives of the strategy of tension, it is
possible to see them both as an appeal for the continuation of the secret
service cover-up. Many of those thought to have been responsible for the
Christmas bombings have been brought to justice, but the higher levels of
political responsibility for the strategy of tension have still to be fathomed.
The extreme ruthlessness of the men who organized the Christmas
bombing is illustrated by the thoroughness with which they set about
eliminating potential witnesses. The bomb is believed to have been placed
on board the train at Florence station by a seventeen-year-old youth,
Carmine Lombardo, a junior member of the Camorra. Lombardo was
murdered shortly afterwards and the two men responsible for his death were
killed in their turn also.31 Despite these precautions the underworld bombers
were sentenced to life imprisonment on the basis of apparently solid
evidence. On 15 March 1990, a Florence appeal court confirmed the life
sentences on Calo and one of his leading lieutenants but acquitted three
members of the Neapolitan Camorra of involvement in the bombing. The
verdict thus attributed responsibility for the massacre to the Mafia but
eliminated much of the right-wing component to the conspiracy, which had
been mediated through the political contacts of the Camorra, according to
the assize court verdict. Nevertheless, the verdict marked an important
break with the tradition that bomb trials nearly always end with convictions

--- Sayfa 176 ---
in the assize court but with blanket acquittals on appeal. A Rome assize
court had noted ruefully that when Magliana band member Domenico
Balducci offered his assistance to film producer Carlo Ponti in resolving
differences with the Italian legal authorities over outstanding taxes owed by
himself and his wife, Sophia Loren, he warned that there was little he could
do at the level of the Rome prosecutor’s office or the assize court. ‘Good of
him to say so,’ commented the assize court judge. The opportunities for
sweetening the magistrates were greater, Balducci said, at the court of
appeal and Court of Cassation (Supreme Court) stage.32
Given the Magliana band’s contacts with P2 and the secret services, its
involvement in the 1984 train bombing and the brokering of the Pecorelli
and Mattarella murders, it is clear that the group had participated in some
most unsavoury instances of mercenary terrorism. It is for this reason that
any message coming from the group that appears to hint at the possession of
sensitive insider’s knowledge of terrorist events, and the Christmas 1984
bombing seems to constitute just such a message, should be treated with the
greatest attention. The Magliana band’s messages concerning the
kidnapping of Aldo Moro, perhaps the most delicate terrorist act of all, offer
considerable food for thought; we will come to them in a later chapter.
Notes
1   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 21,
Rome, 1987, p. 332.
2   Giuseppe De Lutiis (ed.), La Strage , Editori Riuniti, Rome,
1986, p. 273.
3   Paolo Aleandri to the author, 22 June 1989.
4   Pietro Calderoni (ed.), Servizi Segreti , Tullio Pironti, Naples,
1986, pp. 193-4.
5   P. M. Andrea De Gasperis to the author, 16 June 1989.
6   P. M. Libero Mancuso and Attilio Dardani, Requisitoria,
Bologna, 13 May 1986, p. 522.
7   Adalberto Baldoni and Sandro Provvisionato, La Notte Più
Lunga della Repubblica , Serarcangeli, Rome, 1989, pp. 401-2.
8   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
9   Letter from Aw. Federico Federici to Francesco Pazienza,
deposited at Bologna assize court, 12 November 1986, pp. 15-16.
10   P. M. Libero Mancuso and Attilio Dardani, op. cit., p. 782.
11   11   Ibid., p. 788.
12   Ibid., pp. 791-2.
13   Ibid., p. 770.
14   Ibid., p. 773.
15   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
16   Andrea Purgatori, Corriere della Sera , 21 June 1990.
17   Giovanni Maria Bellu, La Repubblica , 2 June 1990.
18    L’Espresso , 1 July 1990.
19   Antonio De Marchi and Valerio Gualerzi, Rinascita , 10 June
1990.
20   Pierluigi Ficoneri and Mario Scialoja, L’Espresso , 18
November 1990.
21   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 8 October 1989.
22   G. I. Felice Casson, Sentenza-ordinanza a carico di Carlo
Maria Maggi ed altri, Venice, 2 September 1984, p. 94.
23   Sandro Provvisionato, L’Europeo , 20 October 1989.
24   Samarcanda, RAI3, 29 November 1990.
25   ANSA, Rome, 15.24, 18 October 1990. ‘Ustica, On. Staiti su
audizione Parisi.’
26   Franco Scottoni, La Repubblica , 23 December 1990.
27   Fulvio Lucioli to P. M. Libero Mancuso, Paliano prison, 22
March 1985.
28   Angelo Izzo to P. M. Libero Mancuso, Paliano prison, 22
March 1985.
29   Sentenza contro Giunio Bruto Baccari ed altri, Tribunale
Penale di Roma, Presidente Gianvittore Fabbri, 9 May 1988, p. 237.
30   Ibid., pp. 100-1.
31   Giuseppe Peruzzi, Corriere della Sera , 20 February 1986.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
32   Sentenza contro Filomena Angelini ed altri, Tribunale Penale
di Roma, Presidente Giancarlo Millo, 8 February 1986, p. 75.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
[10]
MANIPULATING THE LEFT
Finally, the profound difference that exists-even at a psychological
level-between the two methods of moving the ‘wooden actor’ should be
emphasized: the puppet constitutes a prolongation of the puppetmaster’s
hand, a direct amplification of his movements; it is given life by the arm
and fingers of the person manoeuvring it. The marionette, in contrast, is
moved in an indirect manner, which I have heard compared by some
marionettists to the act of playing a stringed musical instrument: and it
therefore requires attention of a rational type.
Italo Sordi, Introduction to Pëtr Bogatyrëv’s Il Teatro delle
Marionette
(The Marionette Theatre), Brescia, 1980
If many right-wing terrorists were glove puppets, with their
manipulator’s hand inserted up their backs and controlling their every
move, left-wing terrorists were more like marionettes, dancing on the end of
invisible strings; their manipulation was an altogether subtler art. The ideal
for the secret service marionette-masters was, after all, to use left-wing
extremists to serve their conservative cause without any direct contact or
collusion. This was their greatest theatrical exploit, to have their genuine
adversaries unwittingly follow the secret service script. Nevertheless, a
number of people involved in left-wing terrorism appear to have been in
direct contact with Western secret services, marionettes controlled by real,
if barely discernible, strings.
The story of secret service manipulation of left-wing terrorism is
highly controversial and will certainly never be told in full. Its implications
are, if anything, even graver than the manipulation of right-wing terrorism,
with its litany of coup plots and random bombings. Setting aside issues of
morality, the manipulation of left-wing extremism turned out to be a
brilliantly executed and remarkably successful operation. It made possible a
kind of centrist, institutional coup which thrust the PCI firmly back into
opposition at a time when the Reds seemed not just to be coming out from
under the bed but laying claim to the master bedroom.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
Left-wing terrorism in Italy had its roots in the international wave of
student protest which began on American campuses during the Vietnam
War and reached its peak with the Paris riots in the spring of 1968. Italian
students
emulated
their
overseas
counterparts
with
sit-ins
and
demonstrations, which climaxed in the autumn of 1969, in conjunction with
a period of particularly acute industrial unrest. The protest movements of
the late 1960s became a breeding ground for the terrorists of the 1970s.
Thousands of people joined extremist left-wing organizations such as
Potere Operaio (Workers’ Power), Autonomía Operaia (Workers’
Autonomy), and Lotta Continua (Continuous Struggle) in the hopes of
bringing about a Marxist revolution. Their activities ranged from street
disturbances to terrorism and murder and many of them subsequently
graduated to membership in full-time terrorist groups such as the Red
Brigades, Prima Linea (Front Line), or a galaxy of smaller groups. Without
a large pool of discontented and rebellious youth to call on for recruits and
logistical support, the Red Brigades could never have survived so long or
achieved their military successes.
The fear of a military coup, the perceived impossibility of peaceful
democratic change, and an idealized recollection of the wartime Resistance
all acted as effective recruiting sergeants for the terrorist organizations. It
would be absurd to suggest that such a widespread popular upheaval,
sparked off in part by genuine social and economic problems, could be
deliberately engineered by the secret services. It is possible, however, that
the secret services used the extremist political and terrorist groups and
guided the course of events to thwart the growing demand for political
change and to undermine the rising strength of the Communist Party. After
all, they would have been failing in their job if they had not attempted to do
so.
Experts on left-wing terrorism tend to fall into two opposing camps:
the conspiracy theorists and those who maintain that Italian terrorism was
an entirely home-grown and spontaneous phenomenon, wholly immune
from the kind of secret service manipulation which is generally
acknowledged to have taken place on the right. For understandable reasons,
the direct protagonists in the story tend to take the latter view. The police
and secret services are not encouraged to talk in public about delicate
intelligence operations, while the terrorists cling to the last vestiges of their
revolutionary credibility and are not keen to admit that they were

--- Sayfa 181 ---
outmanoeuvred in the great game of intelligence. This attitude has been
succinctly expressed by Alberto Franceschini, a founder of the Red
Brigades and considered by some to have been the real leader of the
organization in its early years. Franceschini was born in Reggio Emilia in
1947 of working-class parents who were strong Communist Party
supporters. Both his father and his grandfather had suffered for their
opposition to fascism and he had followed in the family tradition by
working for the youth wing of the PCI. He abandoned the party in 1969,
disillusioned by its ‘revisionist’ moderation, and set out on the path of
revolutionary struggle. In his autobiography he described his reaction to the
news, received in prison, that the Red Brigades had kidnapped Aldo Moro:
‘We immediately reject the idea that it could be a “provocation” by some
secret service. Not out of political reasoning, but from the feeling of nausea
we have built up over the years towards arguments of the type “who
benefits?” “who’s behind it?” n Since writing the book, Franceschini has
himself come to entertain doubts about this episode and about the whole
history of his terrorist organization.
It is by no means easy to settle the debate between the conspiracy
theorists and their opponents. Sometimes both sides use the same facts,
presented in a different light, to support their own contentions. The
conspiracy theorists point out the tendency of the Red Brigades to mount
their major operations at sensitive moments in Italian political life:
kidnapping a magistrate, Mario Sossi, shortly before the important divorce
referendum in 1974, seizing Aldo Moro just as the PCI was on the point of
giving its support to a government of national unity. The result, they
observe, is to discredit the left at crucial junctures in Italian political life.
Their opponents simply argue that the Red Brigades, being a political
organization, were bound to choose such moments for their armed
intervention, in order to have the maximum impact. The way in which
terrorism produced government repression and authoritarian laws was
viewed by many terrorists as a necessary stage on the path to civil war and
ultimate revolution. Some of their critics see this intermediate stage as the
real, effective goal of the terrorists, dancing to the tune of the secret
services and their conservative political masters. At times, in the turmoil of
the 1970s it may actually have seemed that a Marxist revolution was
possible in Italy. It is less easy to believe, however, that the intelligent
leaders of the extreme left, many of them university professors, can have

--- Sayfa 182 ---
been sincerely convinced of this: in an important NATO country and with
the Army waiting in the wings for an excuse to intervene.
An additional difficulty in deciding whether the leadership of the
extreme left were acting in good faith or according to a hidden agenda
stems from their fierce hostility towards the PCI, viewed as a revisionist
organization that had sold out the dreams and ideals of true communists.
Moro’s policy of an ‘historic compromise’ leading to an alliance with the
PCI was as fervently opposed by the Red Brigades and the extreme left as it
was disliked by the reactionary members of the P2 masonic lodge. This
certainly created the potential for the extreme left to be used as unwitting
tools of the secret services, even if they were not actually infiltrated and
controlled by them. There can be little doubt, however, that the secret
services had infiltrators in place in the principal terrorist organizations, who
were able to steer the course of the armed struggle on their behalf at crucial
moments in its history. For the rest, it was enough that the terrorist
organizations existed and acted according to their natural inclinations.
The relationship between terrorist organizations and the extremist
political groups that gave them logistical and moral support has also been
the subject of considerable controversy. The role of the left-wing
intellectuals who rose to prominence in the extremist but legal political
organizations, and who were in their turn in contact with groups like the
Red Brigades and Prima Linea, is particularly contentious. According to
Padua Public Prosecutor Pietro Calogero, some of these intellectuals sought
to impose their own strategic direction on the whole area of left-wing
extremism and were, at least partially, successful. Some of them have also
come to be suspected of having been conduits for secret service influence.
The leaders of Autonomía Operaia, for example, were accused of
responsibility for specific Red Brigades crimes, including the Moro kidnap,
but were eventually acquitted. It was Calogero who first indicted them, and
the expression ‘Calogero theorem’ has entered the Italian language,
unfairly, as a synonym for a mistaken prosecution thesis. The main dispute
between Autonomía Operaia and the Red Brigades was over tactics. The
Autonomía leaders believed that the correct road to civil war and revolution
was through ‘mass illegality’ rather than through the terrorist activity of a
small, militaristic élite, which was liable to provoke a police clamp-down
damaging to the legal extremist organizations while leaving the Red

--- Sayfa 183 ---
Brigades virtually unscathed in hiding. Another cause of disagreement was
the tendency of Autonomía Operaia to consider the traitorous Communist
Party as the principal enemy of the far left, while the Red Brigades
preferred to concentrate on their traditional bete noire , the Christian
Democrats. The relationship was also characterized by strong personal
rivalries, as the original Red Brigades leaders resisted attempts by some of
the more self-important left-wing intellectuals to establish their authority
over all the revolutionary organizations. In many ways the situation closely
resembled that prevailing among the right-wing extremist organizations:
disputes over tactics, personal rivalries, varying levels of secrecy and
military commitment, but all basically marching in the same direction.
This view has been expressed by Milan Examining Magistrate Guido
Galli. ‘The existence of a dialectic between the Red Brigades and other
armed organizations should not create the impression of irreconcilable
differences or strict compartmentalization between them: the various
organizations exchange men, materiel , and information and, despite the
diversity of their immediate objectives, often elaborate their short and
medium term plans together,’ he wrote.2 Galli was shot dead by gunmen
from Prima Linea on 19 March 1980.
One of the sorriest roles in the drama of Italian terrorism was played
by the radical university professors, Toni Negri, Franco Piperno and Oreste
Scalzone, who preached violence and revolution to their students, were in
contact with members of the Red Brigades, but ultimately succeeded in
convincing the courts that their own direct involvement in terrorist activity
was, at most, marginal. They were happy for others to risk their skins in the
struggle while they stayed at home to concoct a programme of political pie-
in-the-sky to underpin the improbable revolution. In his book Dominion and
Sabotage, Negri wrote a panegyric to proletarian violence and described
how he felt the warmth of the working-class community enfold him every
time he covered his face with a mask to participate in street violence. When
the time came to answer for such activity in court those words were a mere
fantasy. His political credo was also fairly fantastic. Our task is the
theoretical restoration of the refusal of work. The refusal of work is, above
all, sabotage, strikes, direct action,’ he wrote. And he had no difficulty in
justifying the violence that was being so widely practised at the time. ‘Let
us have an end to the hypocritical bourgeois and reformist opposition to
violence. Let us speak clearly of it as a necessary, central ingredient of the

--- Sayfa 184 ---
communist programme.’ In the same book, Negri, a middle-class professor
of politics from Padua University, extolled the virtues of the working-class
struggle. ‘Our sabotage organizes the proletarian assault on the sky,’ he
wrote.3 In retrospect, it is extraordinary that so many young people could
have been swayed by the hysterical rantings of these ‘cattivi maestri ’ or
preachers of evil.
After spending eight years in exile in Canada, Piperno, a physics
professor from the University of Cosenza, returned to Italy in 1988 and
succeeded in getting his sentence for subversive activity reduced to a mere
four years. Several former members of the Red Brigades have told
magistrates that they believed Piperno tried to impose his political
leadership on the Red Brigades and succeeded, to an extent, in influencing
the activities of the terrorist organization by the control he exerted over
certain of its members. His founding of the political magazine Metropoli
was also seen as an attempt to establish domination over all the
organizations of the revolutionary left. One of Piperno’s colleagues in
Potere Operaio has described the Calabrian physics professor as being the
leader of the more aggressive wing of the organization and supportive of the
Red Brigades’ decision to embark on all out armed struggle from the early
1970s. Negri, on the other hand, was the chief proponent of caution, calling
for a more gradual approach to revolution so as to ensure full participation
by the masses.4
Like Negri, Piperno eventually managed to convince his judges that he
had no involvement in the Moro kidnap. During the kidnap he was
contacted by representatives of the Socialist Party, who were attempting to
carve out a political identity for themselves by dissociating themselves from
the other intransigent members of the government coalition and negotiating
for Moro’s release. Piperno insisted that he was not in contact with the Red
Brigades at the time but was merely approached by the Socialists for help in
interpreting Moro’s letters from captivity. It seems surprising that the
Socialists should have required such assistance when a direct channel to the
Red Brigades was what they were really after. Suspicions were heightened
by the fact that Piperno helped his friends Valerio Morucci and Adriana
Faranda to find accommodation in Rome shortly after the kidnap. The
couple had participated in the Moro operation and left the Red Brigades
shortly afterwards because they disagreed with the decision to kill the
Christian Democrat president. Piperno had also been incautious enough

--- Sayfa 185 ---
publicly to welcome the ‘geometric potency’ displayed by the Red Brigades
in the slaughter of Moro’s bodyguard. A handwritten note found in Mino
Pecorelli’s office after his murder also suggested a closer involvement of
Piperno in the kidnap. Titled ‘How the Mafia-BR, CIA/KGB-Mafia contact
takes place’, it read: ‘The BR [Red Brigades] heads are living in Calabria.
The leader who organized the kidnap and wrote the first BR communiqués
is Prof. Franco Piperno, prof, of physics at Cosenza Univ.’5 The document
does not prove Piperno’s involvement, but coming from Pecorelli, it should
not lightly be dismissed.
One of the most articulate proponents of the idea that left-wing
terrorism was actually manipulated by right-wing forces is Angelo Ventura,
a professor of history at Padua University, who was shot in the legs by a
left-wing group in 1979 for having the temerity to express this view.
Ventura has argued that conservative elements within the state decided to
use left-wing terrorism as a way of continuing the strategy of tension and
gave it free rein in order to discredit the Communist and Socialist Parties
and the trade unions. Without official protection, he claimed, ‘extremist
violence could not have spread with impunity for an incredible decade and
red (and black) terrorism could not have developed almost undisturbed until
the Moro kidnap. Terrorism could have been strangled at birth, at least from
1972, and reduced to a sporadic phenomenon.’6 Ventura has highlighted the
delusionary quality of Negri’s political ideas and the conflict between his
followers and the traditional parties and organizations of the left. ‘It is
natural that the party of armed struggle and civil war should not meet the
working class and the masses on its road but encounter instead the
protection and the assistance of the secret centres of power in Italy and
abroad, which have an interest in destabilizing the country and
overthrowing its democratic institutions,’7 he concluded.
This view is supported by Pietro Calogero. In his indictment of the
Autonomía Operaia leadership he pointed out that the hostility of the
terrorists towards reformists and trade unionists was ‘the aspect that, more
than any other, links “red” terrorism to “black” terrorism and may have
made it the ideal instrument of an astute and perverse reactionary plan,
embedded in the heart of the state and fed, perhaps, by domestic and
international political forces.’8 He described Negri as one of the driving
forces of the revolutionary left and an essential reference point for the
terrorists.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
Many students of left-wing terrorism have been struck by the modest
intellectual level of captured terrorist leaders and speculated about the
existence of an as yet undiscovered terrorist intelligentsia, who wrote the
Red Brigades’ political documents for them and planned overall strategy.
Calogero has linked this ‘superstructure’ to what Negri has referred to in his
writings as the ‘informal party’ or the ‘invisible party’, which Calogero
described as a kind of central planning organization for terrorism in Italy.
The magistrate also expressed the view that terrorist funds exceeded the
sums that could be raised by the terrorists themselves through robberies and
kidnaps, giving rise to the suspicion that they were able to rely on
additional secret subsidies. Calogero cited documents indicating the
existence of an agreement between Potere Operaio, a forerunner of
Autonomía Operaia and also headed by Negri, and the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) for the provision of military training in
Lebanon to members of the Italian revolutionary group. The documents,
dating from 1971, illustrated Potere Operaio’s international links and the
direct involvement of Negri in the procurement of terrorist training for his
followers.9
There are a number of reasons for believing that Negri himself may
have played an active role in the conservative-inspired manipulation of left-
wing terrorism. For a start, there is his own political development, from
membership of the Christian Democrat Party in the 1950s, to the Socialist
Party in the early 1960s, and to leadership of the radical left by the end of
the decade, attacking the PCI from its left. In the course of this evolution in
his political thinking one thing did not change: his virulent anti-
communism. A biography of Negri published by Il Giorno newspaper (4
November 1979) quotes a friend from his student days: ‘Toni has been
everything in his life except one thing: communist. On the contrary, he has
always been profoundly, viscerally anti-communist.’ One reason for this
hatred of the PCI could well be the death of his elder brother, killed in 1943
by communist partisans while fighting for Mussolini’s last-stand Republic
of Salo. According to Il Giorno , the death of his brother had a profound
and traumatic effect on the ten-year-old Negri. A blank spot in Negri’s life,
about which very little is known, is the period of his studies in the United
States, financed by a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. He made a
number of return visits to the country and does not appear to have had any
difficulty in obtaining a visa. This in itself is strange. At a time when

--- Sayfa 187 ---
members of the Communist Party were routinely denied visas, the leader of
an extremist political organization to the left of the PCI was able to come
and go at will.
All this adds up to a somewhat anomalous identikit for a leader of the
extreme left. For readers of Pecorelli’s magazine, OP, the seed of doubt
about Negri’s real motives was sown by an article published in 1975. In his
usual cryptic, elliptical style, Pecorelli hinted that Negri was about to play
an important role in a conservative plot devised by the secret services. If
true, and given Pecorelli’s secret service contacts there is little reason to
doubt it, it is an extraordinary revelation. One can only assume that
Pecorelli felt justified in making it because of the limited circulation of his
magazine and the coded language in which it was couched. Nevertheless, it
is the kind of scoop which established his reputation for dangerous
unpredictability and which may ultimately have led to his death.
Ά film entirely dedicated to the life of the economist J. M. Keynes will
shortly be shot by the young film-makers of the Experimental Centre in
Rome,’ the article (16 September 1975) opened. Practised readers of
Pecorelli will have understood the Experimental Centre (Centro
Sperimentale in Italian) to be a coded reference to a secret service office
(Centro di Controspionaggio, frequently referred to by its initials, CS). The
subject matter of the ‘film’, the life of the economist John Maynard Keynes,
whose philosophy combined conservative and socialist strands, indicated
the political colouring of the ‘story’. Pecorelli went on to reveal that the
film had an exceptional cast, ‘who will not be professional actors’ (not
professional secret service personnel). ‘It has been decided instead to use
people from the worlds of business, culture and politics, where it is
considered there is a wide availability of photogenic individuals who are
spontaneously drawn to the new style of acting. The protagonists of the film
will be Professor Antonio Negri, holder of the chair of political sciences at
the University of Padua, and the “independent” trade unionist Vito Scalia,
an expert on the world and needs of the workers.’ Scalia was a Christian
Democrat union leader trying to challenge the traditional dominance of the
PCI and the Socialist Party over the trade union movement. He has been
publicly accused of receiving money from the CIA. The linking of Negri’s
name with that of a man competing for influence among trade unionists on
behalf of the right is remarkable. It also suggests that the reactionary

--- Sayfa 188 ---
developments in Italian society prompted by left-wing radicalism may well
have been the conscious aim of people like Negri.
Pecorelli went on to underline the incongruousness of the Negri/ Scalia
pairing: ‘Some malicious gossips, having learnt of Professor Negri’s
“revolutionary” past, have expressed doubt about the completion of the
film, even suggesting to the director that he should never shoot scenes
where the two characters are called upon to act together. The production’s
press office, on the other hand, has pointed out that the two actors are on
excellent terms with one another. Besides, both Scalia and Negri-it has been
said-have long been aware of the requirements of the script and have
accepted every nuance and detail of the screenplay.’ The message is clear:
Negri’s role has been written by the secret services and there is every reason
for the inverted commas around his ‘revolutionary’ tag. Pecorelli’s intuition
has found support, as we shall discover, from an informed and most
surprising quarter.
A Rome police report dated 6 March 1979, refers to the possible
existence of links between Negri and the Hyperion language school in
Paris, suspected of being a co-ordinating centre for terrorism in Italy and
elsewhere in Europe. Investigations were continuing, the report said. They
were never completed, as an article giving details of the inquiry appeared
on the front page of the Corriere della Sera newspaper the following month
(24 April 1979), prompting the French authorities to withdraw their co-
operation. The French showed their pique by destroying all the telephone
intercepts carried out till then and informing their Italian colleagues that
there was nothing suspicious about the language school so far as they were
concerned.10 The ‘indiscretion’ of an officer in the domestic secret service,
SISDE, had effectively torpedoed the investigation, drawing a protective
veil around the Hyperion.
The school was founded in 1976 by Corrado Simioni, Vanni Mulinaris
and Duccio Berio, three of the fathers of left-wing terrorism in Italy. They
had been together in the Collettivo Politico Metropolitano (Metropolitan
Political Collective) in Milan, a forerunner of the Red Brigades
organization. When Renato Curcio left the CPM to set up the Red Brigades,
Simioni, Mulinaris and Berio founded their own terrorist organization, the
Superclan. The name, given them by the Red Brigades, was an abbreviation
of Superclandestini (Superclandestine) and referred to their obsession with

--- Sayfa 189 ---
secrecy. They believed that the masses were not yet ready for revolution but
that, to prepare for the day, they should infiltrate their members into all the
organizations of the extreme left. According to one former Superclan
member, the organization was known to its affiliates as ‘the Company’ or as
‘the Red Aunts’ and the ‘Superclan’ tag was seen as a calumny invented by
the Red Brigades. He related that a leading Superclan member had
expressed the view that ‘the BR were a military organization without a
leadership and that the Company was capable of providing the BR with
leadership and for that purpose had already infiltrated some of its men into
the Red Brigades organization’.11 During its short history as an active
terrorist outfit, the Superclan concentrated most of its energies on fund-
raising armed robbers.
Simioni’s concern with money and the large quantities he seemed to
have at his disposal aroused the suspicion of several of his comrades. Red
Brigades founder Alberto Franceschini took a personal dislike to him.
‘Elegant and smartly dressed, he was always driving around in Maseratis,
arguing that a guerrilla, to conceal himself and spread confusion, should
behave like a perfect bourgeois,’ Franceschini wrote in his autobiography.
After seeing the movie Queimada , the Red Brigades dubbed Simioni
Tingles’. ‘In the film Marlon Brandon plays “l’ingles”, the liberal
intellectual who first organizes the revolt and then its bloody suppression.’
Franceschini distrusted the Super-clan so much that he insisted that its
members be kept on the fringes of the Red Brigades when some of them
asked to be admitted to the organization. After his arrest, the first message
he had smuggled out of prison to the BR leaders who were still at large
concerned the Superclan and warned them ‘to be extremely wary of any
comrades coming from Corrado [Simioni’s] group’.12
Simioni’s chequered career amply justifies the suspicion. He was born
near Venice in 1934 and began his political career in the Socialist Party,
where he was known for his anti-communism. He was expelled from the
party for unspecified ‘immoral conduct’, after which he became involved in
cultural activities on behalf of the United States Information Service
(USIS). He also spent a couple of years in Munich, where he claimed to be
studying theology, but other accounts have him working for the CIA-
financed Radio Free Europe, which broadcasts to Eastern Europe from that
city. His name appears on a list of CIA agents operating in Italy that came
into the possession of the left-wing newspaper Lotta Continua in the late

--- Sayfa 190 ---
1960s. Whatever he was doing, his experience abroad had turned him into a
radical left-winger.13 Renato Curcio was given a strong personal reason for
distrusting Simioni when the Superclan leader tried to persuade Mara
Cagol, Curcio’s wife, to participate in an expedition to blow up the US
consulate in Athens without informing her husband. Cagol told Curcio
about the approach and he talked her out of going. Another Italian girl and a
Greek Cypriot were sent in her place and the two were killed when their
bomb exploded prematurely on 2 September 1970.14 According to some
accounts, the explosives were part of the same stock which cost
Giangiacomo Feltrinelli his life as he attempted to blow up an electricity
pylon on the outskirts of Milan in 1972.
The role of the Hyperion language school, with an office on the
prestigious Quai de la Tournelle close to Notre Dame cathedral in central
Paris, tallies with Prosecutor Pietro Calogero’s description of a terrorist
command structure, dictating the course of political violence in Italy.
According to several ‘repentant’ terrorists, the school handled international
relations and weapons procurement for the Red Brigades after the arrest of
their original leadership. ‘The fact is that the Hyperion was created to
provide protection to various fugitives and that function enabled its
directors to establish contact with many terrorist organizations,’ Red
Brigades member Michele Galati told magistrates after his arrest. Galati
said the school was in contact with the IRA, ETA and the PLO and was able
to purchase arms for the Red Brigades from minority factions within the
Palestine Liberation Organization. He described how Moretti had
personally forbidden him from using Vanni Mulinaris for terrorist actions in
the Venice region, where Galati operated. ‘Moretti told me that there was no
question of letting Mulinaris run any risks because he was responsible for
international contacts and arms procurement.’15
The Red Brigades leader who was responsible for weapons
procurement, and made regular trips to Paris for that purpose, was Mario
Moretti. Before joining the Red Brigades, Moretti had been a member of
Superclan. He rose to prominence after the arrest in 1974 of the founding
fathers of the Red Brigades and it was he alone who handled the Paris
connection. For a while he was even suspected of being a secret service
agent by his fellow BR members because of the almost miraculous way in
which he avoided arrest when all around him were being caught by the
police. His early contact with Superclan, his connection with the Hyperion

--- Sayfa 191 ---
and his refusal to clear up the mysteries surrounding the Moro kidnap,
which he personally directed, give further cause for doubt about his
revolutionary purity.
In 1980, journalist Guido Passalacqua raised the question of the true
identity of the Red Brigades leadership in an article for La Repubblica (12
April 1980). ‘There is someone higher up, one, two, three people who
decide the terrorist campaigns . . . A decidedly impenetrable leadership if
one considers that, according to the leaks, Mario Moretti provided the only
link with the operational terrorists.’ Passalacqua was shot in the legs as a
‘class enemy’ on 7 May, less than a month later. Shortly after his article,
Socialist Party Secretary Bettino Craxi picked up the baton, speculating to
parliamentary journalists that the ‘grande vecchio’, the grand old man who
pulled the strings of terrorism, may have been ‘someone who started out in
politics at the same time as us’ and who ‘perhaps today is in Paris, working
for the armed party’.16 Though Craxi subsequently denied he had him in
mind, many recognized Corrado Simioni in the portrait.
Aside from the ill-judged secret service interview with the Corriere
della Sera , there are other elements that confirm the equivocal nature of the
Hyperion and the impression that its members enjoyed official protection.
With high outgoings and little income, Italian investigators were puzzled
that the school could operate at all, let alone support the lavish life-style to
which Simioni was accustomed. A further report by the Rome police (1
January 1980) expresses scepticism at statements made to the French police
by some of the school’s ‘employees’. The author is surprised at the
‘abnegation’ of Duccio Berio, in charge of public relations for the
Hyperion, ‘who says he receives no salary and adds that he makes an
annual contribution of 3,500 francs to the school from his own savings’.
The report was also sceptical of Corrado Simioni’s claim that he received
no payment for his work as cultural adviser to the school, despite having a
family to maintain and renting two apartments for a total of 5,400 francs a
month. Journalists from Le Point magazine gained a similar impression
when they investigated the school, noting that the former Hyperion offices
in Rue Lesieur had been described as ‘very luxurious and almost empty of
clients’.17 The Italian investigators were scarcely reassured when they
discovered that an Italian businessman had paid the school 20 million Lire
(£13,000), the equivalent of a year’s rent of the Hyperion’s Paris premises,
shortly after his brother had been kidnapped by the Calabrian Mafia. They

--- Sayfa 192 ---
were also surprised when they found they were unable to approach a
weekend villa, said to be owned by the Hyperion, where Simioni was
staying, because it was so heavily guarded. Two police officers on a mission
to check out the London branch of the school were discouraged to discover
that their hotel rooms had been thoroughly searched during their absence.18
The officers interpreted it as a warning to desist from their inquiries and
returned to Italy after consultations with the magistrate who had sent them.
By a strange coincidence, the school opened an office in Rome shortly
before the kidnap of Aldo Moro and closed it again the following autumn.
After Moretti’s arrest in 1981 contact with Paris was delegated to Giovanni
Senzani, another Red Brigades leader strongly suspected of having secret
service contacts.
One of the Hyperion’s protectors was, curiously enough, a man called
Henri Groues, better known in France as l’Abbé Pierre, a Catholic priest
renowned for his work in favour of the poor and homeless. Groues was also
a Resistance hero, a former deputy and in 1989 was a candidate for the
Nobel Peace Prize. In 1972, however, according to the Italian police, he had
been ‘in contact with several members of the Red Brigades including
Renato Curcio’.19 L’Abbé Pierre repeatedly activated his high-level contacts
in France and Italy in favour of the members of the Hyperion group, who he
insisted were the innocent victims of political persecution. One of the
people familiar with the group has spoken of l’Abbé Pierre’s influential
friends in France and of a boast by Simioni that he could ‘even contact
Giscard d’Estaing for me if I needed it’.20 Groues had one particularly
strong reason for his solicitude on the Hyperion’s behalf: his niece
Françoise Tuscher was president of the Hyperion Cultural Association.
Tuscher, along with her husband Innocente Salvoni, had lived in Milan in
1969, where they had belonged to the Sinistra Proletaria organization, an
offshoot of the Collettivo Politico Metropolitano. It was in the framework
of Sinistra Proletaria that she had met the three principal animators of the
Hyperion project, Berio, Mulinaris and Simioni. According to the Italian
police, she and her husband had been leading members of Superclan and
Salvoni was at one stage suspected of having participated in the Moro
kidnap, although he was later eliminated from that inquiry. A Le Point
journalist who interviewed her in 1979 took a less indulgent view of her
than did her uncle. ‘She says she doesn’t know Negri. But she seemed to

--- Sayfa 193 ---
know much more than she was letting on. She seemed to me to be playing
the idiot.’21
There is also evidence that the Hyperion had other protectors, more
powerful and more sinister than l’Abbé Pierre. One highly significant clue
is to be found in the letter, dated 20 October 1978, with which Prosecutor
Calogero initiated the whole Hyperion investigation. Clearly acting on
detailed information, much of which would later prove to be well founded,
the Padua magistrate instructed the Rome police to investigate the
relationship between Toni Negri and the French (Workers’) Autonomy
organization and other groups suspected of terrorist activity, as well as the
relationship between Negri and the Hyperion. Most telling of all was his
request that the police ascertain whether Hyperion and an affiliated
company known as Les Gentils Fantômes, which ostensibly specialized in
the discreet cleaning of Parisian apartments, could be construed as ‘the
centre of political and strategic control over the Red Brigades or other
similar terrorist organizations operating in Italy, their logistical and
organizational base, or their principal source of finance’. Even more
significantly, the letter continued by asking the police to establish whether
the two companies were in any way connected with ‘politicians or political
parties, Italian or foreign intelligence services’, and whether these had
provided start-up capital for the companies. Calogero’s attempt to answer
these questions was stymied by the timely secret service leak to the
Corriere della Sera , but later investigations have established that his
original information was alarmingly accurate.
One such investigation was conducted over seven years by an
examining magistrate from Venice, Carlo Mastelloni. Mastelloni’s inquiry
focused on arms deals between the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Red Brigades, mediated by the Hyperion group. It attracted world-wide
media attention in 1984 when Mastelloni issued an arrest warrant for Yasser
Arafat, claiming that the PLO leader had authorized several arms shipments
to the Red Brigades. In his final report, however, Mastelloni recommended
that Arafat should be acquitted for lack of evidence. Far more sensitive,
though, was Mastelloni’s conclusion that the arms traffic between the PLO
and the Red Brigades had been protected and perhaps even sponsored by
the Italian secret services and the CIA. This view is not openly spelt out in
the report but hinted at in a somewhat elliptical manner. The delicacy of the
subject was underlined by Mastelloni’s apparent conviction that anyone

--- Sayfa 194 ---
interested in obtaining a more than superficial understanding of his findings
could not be a bona fide journalist but must himself be working for a secret
service.
One of the most effective ways for a secret service to influence or
control a terrorist group is by controlling the supply of arms to it. It is
particularly significant then that the supply of arms to the Red Brigades
should have passed through the mediation of members of the Hyperion, a
group strongly suspected of having secret service links.
A key figure in the arms traffic between Palestinian groups in Lebanon
and Italian terrorist organizations, Mastelloni’s investigation reveals, was
Colonel Stefano Giovannone, the SISMI officer in Beirut who collaborated
with Abu Ayad in a disinformation operation over the Bologna bombing.
One curious episode, described by Mastelloni, shows how Giovannone
reacted to the arrest of two members of Autonomía Operaia who were
caught in possession of a consignment of missiles at Ortona in east central
Italy in October 1979. Giovannone immediately persuaded George
Habbash, leader of the hardline Marxist Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PFLP) to issue a statement saying that the weapons belonged to
the PFLP and were merely in transit in Italy in an operation that had the
approval of the Italian embassy in Beirut. The operation certainly appears to
have had Giovannone’s approval, though not the approval of the Italian
ambassador in Beirut: a Jordanian student arrested in connection with the
missiles a few days after the Autonomía members was described by
Mastelloni as being an ‘infiltrator of Giovannone’s or “of interest” to
him.’22 Given the evidence that the PFLP was providing guerrilla training in
Lebanon to Autonomía Operaia, it is not unlikely that they were also
providing them with arms, with the tacit assent of the Italian secret service.
It would certainly have been much less embarrassing all round for the PFLP
to claim that the arms were in transit rather than to admit to this state of
affairs.
Still more sensitive was Giovannone’s role in regard to arms deals
between the PLO and the Red Brigades. In the summer of 1979 Mario
Moretti sailed to Lebanon in a yacht with three Red Brigades companions
to collect a consignment of arms from the PLO. The yacht was the Papago
and belonged to a psychiatrist from Ancona, Massimo Gidoni, who was
also a member of the Red Brigades and acted as skipper on the journey,

--- Sayfa 195 ---
which included a stop-over in Cyprus. According to several former BR
members, the deal had been organized through the good offices of the
Hyperion and involved the immediate redistribution of some of the
weapons to the Basque terrorist group ETA, to the Irish Republican Army
and to the German Red Army Faction. The arms were provided free but
some of them were to be kept available for use by the PLO and the Red
Brigades undertook to use their own weapons in operations against NATO
and Israeli targets. The weapons not for use by the Red Brigades were
marked with pale blue labels and the name ‘Francis’ was written on the
crate. They did, however, receive twenty-five Sterling submachine-guns,
Energa grenades, munitions and explosives for their own use.23 Mastelloni’s
inquiries established that an RPG7 rocket-propelled grenade launcher
provided for BR use came from a Fatah workshop in Lebanon and that the
Sterling submachine-guns were part of a stock of weapons ceded to Fatah
by the Tunisian government in 1968.24 Though Mastelloni eventually
decided to acquit Arafat of responsibility for the Papago arms consignment,
he recommended that his deputy, Abu Ayad, should be sent for trial.
In February 1981, Turin magistrates sent two police officers to Beirut
on a secret mission to gather information from the Lebanese police and
from Christian sources about the relationship between the PLO and the Red
Brigades. Giovannone learnt of the mission by intercepting cable traffic
between the Beirut embassy, for whose security he was responsible, and the
Italian Foreign Ministry. He immediately tipped off his contacts in the PLO,
who promptly called a press conference to denounce the visit as being part
of a plot to murder senior PLO officials. As a result of this publicity, the
police fact-finding mission proved utterly fruitless.25 Giovannone justified
his decision to torpedo the police visit, and earlier attempts to cover up the
fact that the PLO had been supplying the Red Brigades with arms, by
saying that Arafat had previously denied the existence of any such
relationship and a political decision was taken to spare him embarrassment.
A more plausible and more sinister explanation can be found by careful
reading of Mastelloni’s report.
In the course of his investigation, the Venice magistrate discovered that
SISMI director Giuseppe Santovito, a member of the P2 masonic lodge who
earlier in his military career had been suspected of participating in a 1974
coup plot, had set up a special and highly unusual unit within military
intelligence, which he placed under his own direct supervision. The unit,

--- Sayfa 196 ---
which included Giovannone, was active between April and October 1979,
exactly the period during which Moretti was organizing his Lebanese arms
shipment. Another member of the unit, Lieutenant Colonel Silvio Di
Napoli, was charged with assisting the arms traffic between the PLO and
the Red Brigades.
Di Napoli refused to clarify the nature of the special operations in
which he had been involved, stating merely that he had undertaken three
foreign missions and that the resulting intelligence had been passed on to
allied security services. He said the missions were covered by state secrecy,
a view that was upheld by the Italian Prime Minister in 1985, prompting
Mastelloni to acquit him of the charge.26
Giovannone too ran into legal difficulties for his role in the special
SISMI unit and he too was forced to invoke state secrecy. As Mastelloni
continued his inquiry into the PLO-BR arms deals, he discovered evidence
of what he called a ‘paradoxical’, secret, tripartite traffic in weapons
between the Italian government and the PLO and between the PLO and the
Red Brigades.27 The secret service explanation for this paradox is that the
Italian government had struck a deal with the PLO following a number of
Palestinian terrorist atrocities in Italy in the early 1970s, which gave the
PLO a virtually free rein to pursue its activities in Italy provided it
undertook to prevent future attacks on Italian targets. Nevertheless, it is
hard to believe that the Italian secret services could have considered that
arming the Red Brigades, who were busily engaged in a violent attempt to
subvert the Italian state, fell under the terms of this agreement.
Another, more plausible explanation emerges from the pages of
Mastelloni’s report. In it he outlines the thesis that Giovannone had been
entrusted by the Italian government with the role of mediator in secret
contacts between the CIA and the PLO leadership and that this had resulted,
in 1976, in a secret agreement between the CIA and Fatah secret services.28
Numerous diplomatic and secret service witnesses whom Mastelloni
interrogated invoked state secrecy on this subject. It is not difficult to
understand why, when one considers, as Mastelloni points out, that the
Americans had signed an agreement with Israel in 1975 in which they
undertook to avoid any political contact with the PLO.29 What is
particularly sinister is the fact that the secret CIA-PLO agreement, mediated
by Giovannone, should emerge in the context of an investigation into arms

--- Sayfa 197 ---
trafficking between the PLO and the Red Brigades. Mastelloni states clearly
that testimony about ‘the de facto secret service level accord between the
USA and the PLO was considered relevant to the present investigation into
the historic, political and logistical relationship between the Red Brigades
organization and the PLO . . .’30 The unstated but inescapable conclusion is
that the arms deals between the PLO and the Red Brigades formed part of
the secret accord between the PLO and the CIA. Mastelloni’s discoveries
cast a curious light on a handwritten note confiscated from General Maletti
in 1980. The document was one of more than 100 giving a brief agenda for
the regular meetings Maletti held with the director of the military
intelligence service, which he kept at his home. On 25 March 1975, one of
the topics for discussion was: ‘BR-PLO co-ordination, our brilliant action,
report on it.’31 It would appear that the brilliant secret service action was
likely to have involved the promotion of BR-PLO co-ordination rather than
its prevention.
In December 1990 a Venice assize court acquitted all fourteen
defendants accused of complicity in the PLO-BR arms trafficking. The
public prosecutor had already watered down Mastelloni’s case, calling at
the end of the trial for guilty verdicts for only four of the accused. The court
may not have been convinced by the prosecution evidence, but it is hard to
escape the conclusion that a discreet veil has been drawn over a particularly
sensitive chapter of Italy’s terrorist history. For virtually the first time,
secret service officers and left-wing terrorists had been placed in the dock
together.
It comes as little surprise then to discover that Duccio Berio, one of the
Hyperion triumvirate, had taken the precaution of writing to his father-in-
law in 1972 about an attempt by the secret services to recruit him as an
informer. The recipient of the letter was Alberto Malagugini, a lawyer, who
acted for Berio, and was a prominent member of the PCI. In it Berio
described how he had been approached by a man claiming to be an agent of
military intelligence, then known as SID, who had asked for information
about the CPM and Sinistra Proletaria political organizations to which he
had belonged and which later gave birth to the Red Brigades and Superclan.
Berio wrote that he had agreed to tell the man what he knew about the two
organizations ‘but that my opinion is that the terrorist activities that he
attributed to offshoots of these groups are in fact part of a plan of
provocation, the proof of which can be seen in the move to the right which

--- Sayfa 198 ---
is currently under way in our country’.32 This looks remarkably like an
attempt by Berio to get on record the fact that he had collaborated with the
secret services and, if that was not enough to resolve any legal problems he
might encounter, he had also hinted at his knowledge of the right-wing
design behind apparently left-wing terrorism. As a member of Hyperion in
later years, he would be ideally placed to observe the process in action.
Who knows, the agent, who gave his name as Ballini, may even have been
the person who recruited Berio to the cause? Corrado Simioni suggested
much the same thing in a 1985 interview with L’Espresso magazine. Most
of the interview was devoted to Simioni’s insistence that he had never been
remotely involved in terrorism. At the end he was asked whether he
believed the armed struggle was over in Italy. ‘In my opinion it ended years
ago, when they arrested Curcio and the other [BR] founders. The rest,
including the Moro case, was something else: the triumph of military
technocracy.’33 This is not quite the same thing as saying that the Moretti
Red Brigades were manipulated by conservative forces, but it is not far
from it.
The Moro Commission tried repeatedly to persuade the Italian police
and secret services to resume their investigation into the activities of the
Hyperion and was unconvinced by the reply that this was not possible given
the refusal of the French secret service to cooperate. SISMI director
General Santovito reacted in a surprisingly limp manner when questioned
about the school. One of the commission members drew attention to the
failure to mount an independent secret service investigation of Simioni after
the initial setback caused by the Corriere della Sera revelations: Ί must tell
you that the thing is becoming so strange that I am beginning to suspect
that, in fact, you never investigated him because he is your own man,’ the
commissioner observed. Instead of protesting that this was arrant nonsense,
or even denying it was true, Santovito replied mildly: Τ will try to give
greater satisfaction. Obviously my information is insufficient. . .’34 A police
report from the end of 1979 offers a more credible explanation for SISMI’s
inactivity: ‘It is suspected that the Hyperion language school is the most
important CIA office in Europe.’35
The foundation stone of the Red Brigades organization was laid at a
meeting in Pecorile, a town at the foot of the Apennines, in August 1970.
From then on, the group’s history would be a parabola, with arrests and
setbacks only spurring its members on to ever increasing levels of violence.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
The first activities were low-key: sabotage in factories, burning directors’
cars and culminating in the first kidnaps. A company director would be
seized on the street, bundled into a van and then photographed with a pistol
pointed at his head and a placard round his neck bearing slogans such as
‘Bite and run’ and ‘Strike at one to educate 100’. He would be released
shortly afterwards, bruised and very frightened but otherwise none the
worse for his experience.
The first major Red Brigades operation was the kidnap on 18 April
1974 of Mario Sossi, a right-wing magistrate from Genoa. He was held for
five weeks and then released without the Red Brigades obtaining any
concessions from the authorities. The bizarre activities of the secret services
during this period came to light two years later when Tempo magazine (20
June 1976) published a detailed account of the affair. According to the
magazine, secret service chief Vito Miceli had planned to kidnap Giovanni
Battista Lazagna, a left-wing lawyer in contact with the Red Brigades, and
force him to reveal the location of Sossi’s prison. However, according to an
unnamed SID official this ostensible plan concealed a somewhat different
reality. ‘Lazagna, who did not know the prison where Sossi was being held,
could never have told us where it was. The hiding place would in fact have
been “discovered” by someone who already knew it. It would have been
surrounded and there would have been shooting. And inside they would
have found the corpses of the Red Brigades, of Sossi and of Lazagna.’ The
plan was never put into effect, partly because of opposition to it from within
the secret service. This account later received authoritative confirmation
from several secret service officers. If true, it is a significant precedent that
the secret service should have known the whereabouts of Sossi’s prison but
done nothing to secure his release, while planning instead, in the best
traditions of the strategy of tension, to engineer a massacre.
The article was accompanied by an interview with former
counterespionage chief Gianadelio Maletti, who described how he had
received reports in 1975 of a reorganization of the Red Brigades under more
aggressive leadership. ‘They were recruiting terrorists from all sides and the
leaders remained in the shadows, but I wouldn’t say you could describe
them as leftists,’ Maletti said. The interviewer asked him whether he would
agree with a description of the Red Brigades provided by an anonymous
secret service officer, which divided the organization into three levels: the
young fanatics, the Eastern Bloc agents and ‘further in, in the most secret

--- Sayfa 200 ---
compartment, the infiltrators of the Interior Ministry and Western secret
services’. Ί would say yes, broadly,’ Maletti replied. Maletti had reported
this analysis to the Interior Minister in 1975 and been promptly fired for his
pains. Whatever the level of secret service involvement with the Red
Brigades at the time of Sossi’s kidnap, the magistrate was clearly shaken by
his experience. He no longer had any faith in either the police or the
carabinieri and sought instead the protection of the finance police, who
provided him with a round-the-clock guard on his return to Genoa.
The Red Brigades committed their first murders on 17 June 1974,
during a raid on the Padua office of the neo-fascist MSI. According to their
own account, the killings were an accident. Two Red Brigades members,
Fabrizio Pelli and Roberto Ognibene, entered the office early in the
morning in order to steal documents. They encountered two neo-fascist
sympathizers, whom they were forced to shoot when they attempted to put
up a fight. Pelli has since died in prison, but Ognibene has described how
one of the two victims actually grabbed the barrel of the pistol he was
pointing at him and started to struggle. However, according to Prosecutor
Lorenzo Zen, there was no sign of a fight in the office. ‘Everything was in
order, even piles of cyclostyled paper which would have been spread
around if there had been a bit of movement.’36 Sixteen years later, the
dynamics of the event had still not been fully clarified.
Many people initially imagined that the killings were part of an
internal struggle within the extreme right. They were unconvinced by the
Red Brigades communique claiming responsibility for the murders. It
accurately stated: ‘The Padua MSI, which has produced groups and
individuals involved in anti-proletarian terrorism, has controlled the black
conspiracies since the Piazza Fontana bombing.’37 The fact that one of the
victims, a travelling salesman named Graziano Giralucci, had acted as a go-
between linking secret agent Guido Giannettini to the Padua terrorist group
led by right-wingers Franco Freda and Giovanni Ventura only added to the
suspicions. The second victim was Giuseppe Mazzola, a sixty-year-old
security guard employed by the office. His son told magistrates: ‘When I
bent over my father, I touched the back of his neck. It was soaking wet. It
was not blood but sweat. He was soaking, as though he had sweated for a
long time, terrorized, waiting for his execution.’38 The Red Brigades’
involvement with homicide had got off to an inauspicious start, under
circumstances which would make it virtually impossible to know whether

--- Sayfa 201 ---
the killings were an accident, the result of a secret service plot or of an
internecine neo-fascist feud.
In June of the following year the Red Brigades were given their first
‘martyr’. Mara Cagol, a founder of the original terrorist nucleus and wife of
Renato Curcio, was killed on 5 June, in a shoot-out with carabinieri at a
remote farmhouse in north-east Italy. The accounts of her death which
circulated among the Red Brigades afterwards had it that she had been
wounded while trying to escape and had then been finished off in cold
blood by one of the carabinieri . The Red Brigades were holding a wealthy
businessman, Vallarino Gancia, kidnapped the previous day. One
carabiniere died in the shooting and Gancia was rescued unhurt. Only two
months earlier, on 18 February, Cagol had led a bold raid on Casale prison
and succeeded in freeing her husband. Despite the patently inadequate
security arrangements surrounding the imprisoned Red Brigades leader-the
prison director described the jail as being ‘as secure as a hen-house’-that
enterprise and her death ‘in battle’ turned Mara Cagol into a romantic
heroine and an inspiration for future generations of terrorists. From the
moment of her death onwards, however, there would be less romance and
more violence in the Red Brigades’ struggle.
On 8 June 1976, the group carried out its first deliberately planned
murder, shooting dead Public Prosecutor Francesco Coco and his two
bodyguards in the centre of Genoa. Coco had distinguished himself by
taking an uncompromising line during the Sossi kidnapping but, given his
wide judicial experience, the Mafia might have been just as interested in his
elimination as the revolutionary left. From then on, the story of the Red
Brigades would be littered with an ever-increasing number of corpses.
Moro’s five bodyguards in 1978 and Moro himself, killed in cold blood
after fifty-five days; four terrorists killed by the carabinieri in a Genoa
apartment on the night of 28 March 1980. By the end, the Red Brigades had
embarked on an indiscriminate killing spree, simply to prove they still
existed, and virtually anyone was a valid target. Before their almost total
dismantling in 1982, the line between revolutionary and agent provocateur
had become so fine as to be non-existent. Since then, the bedraggled
leftovers of the revolutionary movement have continued to kill sporadically
but without the remotest prospect of achieving political change, justifying
their new murders with the claim that they have embarked on ‘a civil war of
long duration’.

--- Sayfa 202 ---
By the late 1970s, the Red Brigades had unleashed an authentic reign
of terror. The Milan column of the organization selected their targets on the
basis of the most superficial research and trivial considerations. They
included doctors, hospital workers and company directors. Some of the
potential victims became so worried about their chances of being shot in the
legs that they adopted the habit of carrying a tourniquet with them at all
times, just in case. On one occasion the BR shot and wounded a Fiat
director whom they had mistaken for a Siemens director living in the same
block of flats. On learning of their mistake, they simply rewrote the
communiqué claiming responsibility for the attack, to give the impression
that the victim was indeed their intended target. On another occasion, the
terrorists asked an employee of the Ercole Marelli company to carry out
research on one of the firm’s directors whom they had already murdered, so
that they could explain the motive for the assassination in their propaganda.
Ί did the research in the factory and I realized that almost everyone said [the
victim] was a fine person, even though he was personnel director, so I
began to think that the BR had caught a crab in hitting this target,’ the man
later told Milan magistrates. In 1980 the Red Brigades shot dead Falck
company director Manfredo Mazzanti. According to the examining
magistrate’s indictment: ‘Mazzanti was chosen from a long list of Falck
directors published by the magazine Panorama, principally because his
photo had been published in the in-house factory newspaper . . . making
him easier to identify than the others.’ The magistrate expressed his dismay
at the ‘ease and superficiality with which the terrorists decide to cut short
human lives’.39
One of the most extreme examples of this utter disregard for the value
of human life was seen in Turin. On 21 October 1982, a Red Brigades
commando raided a bank, disarming the two security guards and forcing
them to lie on the floor before shooting them dead in cold blood. On the
scene, the Red Brigades left leaflets claiming that one of their recently
arrested members, Natalia Ligas, was a police spy. The whole operation,
and in particular the murder of the guards, was designed to attract
maximum publicity for their communiqué. Without the double murder, the
robbery and the communiqué would have had less impact. This was
terrorism in its purest form: armed propaganda that is intended to hasten the
onset of civil war and revolution but which is equally likely to turn a
society in on itself and block political change.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
This steady process of degradation in the terrorist experience has been
described by former BR member Enzo Fontana. ‘We were like Theseus, we
entered a labyrinth of mirrors to carry our assault to the heart of the
Minotaur, of the capitalist, imperialist state. The subversive Theseus fed
himself, as he advanced through the labyrinth, on abstract ideas, words,
weapons, human flesh, the same food as that of the Minotaur. And finally
he found it, it was not at the centre of anything, but it was there, there in a
mirror that reflected a changed Theseus, more heavily armed and ferocious
than the one who had begun the adventure. Theseus had entered the
Minotaur and the Minotaur had entered Theseus, where, in reality, he had
always been.’40
The choice of targets by the Red Brigades and their Prima Linea
cousins has been the subject of considerable discussion. Often their victims
were chosen from the most honest, efficient and progressive representatives
of the state. Often too, conservative forces such as those embodied in the P2
masonic lodge shared a direct interest in the victim’s elimination. It has
been suggested this may have been the case in the murder of Examining
Magistrate Emilio Alessandrini, shot dead by Prima Linea gunmen in Milan
on 29 January 1979. Alessandrini was a strange target for a left-wing
terrorist group. He was best known for the dogged and courageous way in
which he had handled the investigation into secret service involvement in
the Piazza Fontana bombing. Shortly before his death he had been given
responsibility for an investigation into the financial affairs of the Banco
Ambrosiano, the Milan bank headed by P2 member Roberto Calvi. He had
also voiced suspicions about the involvement of Toni Negri in the Moro
kidnap. His murderers have stated that he was chosen simply because he
was well known and a relatively easy target. This explanation for the
assassination of a man renowned for his investigations of right-wing
terrorism shows a staggering political obtuseness. Any organization capable
of it was liable to alienate its own potential supporters and to play the role
of agents provocateurs even without being manipulated from outside.
Marco Donat Cattin, the son of a powerful Christian Democrat politician
and leader of the assassination squad, later admitted that Prima Linea knew
so little about Alessandrini that they had to wait for the newspapers on the
day after his death in order to draw up a document justifying his murder.
Alessandrini’s widow has publicly expressed her doubts about the motives

--- Sayfa 204 ---
of her husband’s killers and subscribed to the view of terrorism as a
phenomenon manipulated from on high.
Another terrorism widow, Carol Beebe Tarantelli, an American who
has been elected to Parliament in Italy as a member of the Independent Left
political grouping, takes a similar view. Her husband, the left-wing
economist Ezio Tarantelli, was murdered in Rome by the Red Brigades in
1985. She underlined the right-wing consequences of left-wing terrorism in
an interview with Il Messaggero newspaper (30 June 1988). Τ think they
are “objectively” on the right. Objectively is a word they love. Objectively
means that acting in the way they did they served the interests of someone
who is against the left. I have always thought so, even before people started
to talk about it openly. I don’t know who this someone is but he certainly
exists.’
Another Red Brigades murder with potentially crossed motives is cited
by journalist Luca Villoresi in an article about the Hyperion language
school (.Repubblica , ι February 1983). Girolamo Tartaglione, a magistrate
and director general of penal affairs in the Justice Ministry was shot dead
by the Red Brigades in Rome on 10 October 1978. He had requested an
urgent meeting with Justice Minister Francesco Bonifacio in order to
communicate with him on a serious matter. He had also confided to friends
that he had understood many things about the Red Brigades and that he
could no longer think of them as ‘a fruit of the season’. Tartaglione was
murdered before he got a chance to speak to the minister. After gunning
him down on his doorstep, his assassins made off with his briefcase. When
they abandoned their getaway car, however, they forgot the bag. In breach
of the most elementary security precautions they were sent back to retrieve
it and, as luck would have it, the car had not yet been found by the police.
‘Did some well-informed insider alert Moretti to the danger? What was
there in the briefcase that could be so important?’ Villoresi asked.
If the Red Brigades were in contact with the secret services and the
upper echelons of the state it would not be surprising if some of their
victims were chosen for reasons quite independent of the Red Brigades’
own concerns, nor would it have been unduly difficult to ensure that the
‘contact’s’ candidate for elimination drew the short straw. At the very least,
the terrorists’ selection criteria show a remarkable similarity to the canons
set out by secret agent Guido Giannettini in his book Techniques of

--- Sayfa 205 ---
Revolutionary War, ‘Selective terrorism is carried out by eliminating
particular men carefully chosen for a series of motives: either because they
can be used by the enemy, or because their disappearance paralyses (or
slows down) the enemy’s organizational machine; or because, being
moderate and moderators, they prevent the accentuation of the struggle by
the other side; or even, finally, because their removal will provoke harsh
reprisals which increase the tension, creating an irreversible process leading
to civil war.’41 This passage from Giannettini’s manual, written in 1965,
could easily have guided the Red Brigades in their later years. Giannettini
himself hinted at the manipulation of left-wing terrorism in a memorandum
written while flying back to custody in Italy from a period of exile abroad,
in August 1974. He divided Italy’s terrorist history into three phases
stretching from 1967 to the year of writing. Third phase (1973-1974): both
right-and left-wing groups have operated . . . among the left-wing groups,
the Red Brigades. A parallel manipulation of secret right-and left-wing
groups by a single command centre cannot be ruled out. The techniques
used are designed to provoke chaos and civil war.’42 These observations
were a preface to Giannettini’s defence against charges of involvement in
the Piazza Fontana bombing and were presumably designed to remind his
erstwhile secret service masters of his ability to make damaging revelations,
should the need arise.
The watershed between the relatively mild and relatively idealistic Red
Brigades of the early years and the blind terror of the later years came in
1974 with the arrest of Renato Curcio and Alberto Franceschini, two of the
movement’s founding fathers. Their removal from the scene gave the
ambitious Mario Moretti control over the organization and paved the way
for his policy of constant military escalation, culminating in the Moro
kidnap. The arrests were the fruit of a successful infiltration of the
organization by the carabinieri . It is worth bearing in mind the observation
of author Gianfranco Sanguinetti that nothing is easier for the secret
services than to infiltrate a terrorist group and supplant the original
leadership ‘either through certain timely arrests or through the killing of the
original leaders, which generally occurs in a shoot-out with the police,
prepared for the operation by their infiltrators’.43
The successor to Marco Pisetta, the first known infiltrator of the Red
Brigades, was an ex-Franciscan friar named Silvano Girotto. Girotto had
acquired the nickname ‘Brother Machine-gun’ for his exploits as a left-

--- Sayfa 206 ---
wing guerrilla in South America. It is fairly clear that from the very start his
revolutionary persona was a fraud, created for him by a secret service,
probably the CIA. On his return to Italy he set about gaining admission to
the Red Brigades. He was assisted in this aim by a profile of him as a left-
wing revolutionary published in Candido (14 May 1974), a right-wing
magazine linked to the Italian secret services. It appeared during the Sossi
kidnap under the title: ‘This is the man who could save Sossi.’ After a
couple of exploratory meetings with Red Brigades leaders, Girotto was
admitted to the organization, which decided to make him responsible for
terrorist training. Both meetings had been watched and photographed by
plainclothes carabinieri and after a third, on 8 September, Curcio and
Franceschini were arrested at Pinerolo near Turin. Their capture changed
the Red Brigades profoundly; from then on the tactics of the organization
were increasingly violent and its principal enemy was no longer the
Christian Democrat Party and the right, but the revisionist traitors of the
PCI and the policy of the historic compromise. The new BR policy would
bring it increasingly into line with the thinking of Toni Negri.
There were a number of anomalies about the Pinerolo incident. Most
glaring was the question why Curcio and Franceschini were arrested at all,
thus blowing Girotto’s cover. Had the ex-friar been allowed to continue his
infiltration, the entire organization could very probably have been rounded
up. When questioned about this by the Moro commission, General Dalla
Chiesa, who commanded the operation, offered the lame explanation that he
was obliged by law to arrest suspected criminals as soon as they were
identified. Dalla Chiesa was not a man noted for his attention to legal
niceties and it is hard to believe that he really gave higher priority to such
scruples than to the defeat of the Red Brigades.
In 1988 Panorama magazine (12 June 1988) published some of the
photos taken by the carabinieri at the meetings between Girotto and the
Red Brigades leaders. They were dug up by the magazine from the
documents presented at the trial of the original nucleus of the Red Brigades,
which began in Turin in 1976. Though Mario Moretti had attended one of
the meetings, there was no photo of him in the file. It is possible that it had
simply been mislaid; or that some friendly hand had removed it. While
Moretti was still at large the fewer photos of him there were in circulation
the easier it was for him to avoid capture. A photo had certainly existed. It
was shown to Franceschini after his arrest by Turin Magistrate Giancarlo

--- Sayfa 207 ---
Caselli, with the words: ‘Try asking yourself why they decided to make the
arrests when it was you and Curcio [who attended the meeting]. You’re not
the only one to have met Girotto, the man in the photo met him too.’
Franceschini’s reaction was, Ί could not understand what Caselli was trying
to tell me: perhaps he was insinuating that Mario was protected by the
carabinieri?’ 44
Stranger still was the phone call to a Red Brigades supporter on 5
September, warning that Curcio would be arrested in two days’ time. The
source of the call has never been established. Some Red Brigades members
have assumed it came from the Israeli intelligence service, which had
recently approached the Red Brigades with an offer of arms and assistance.
Mossad had an obvious interest in the destabilization of Italy as it helped to
ensure that Israel would not be supplanted as the United States’ most
dependable ally in the Mediterranean region. Others have suggested that it
may have been Girotto himself, out of fear. Another alternative has the call
coming from P2 members in the Milan carabinieri with an interest in
protecting the Red Brigades and putting a spanner in the spokes of their
rival, Dalla Chiesa. Whoever called the Red Brigades, the message was
passed on to Mario Moretti, who assumed responsibility for relaying it to
Curcio and Franceschini. He was unable to contact them and arrived an
hour late at the meeting-place, after the two had already been arrested. In
his book, Franceschini remarked that Moretti did exactly the opposite of
what he should have done on that occasion. ‘Instead of dashing backwards
and forwards through half of Italy, as he said he did, he could simply have
waited for us on the road to the meeting-place (he knew which route we
would take and even the car we would use) to warn us of the danger.’45
Moretti, of course, was the principal beneficiary from the arrests and
the whole episode has a distinctly fishy odour. In evidence given to
magistrates in October, Girotto implicitly confirmed the later Tempo
account of the secret service plan to end the Sossi kidnap with a massacre.
‘Curcio told me that they had intended to execute Sossi but then the BR . . .
had learnt from a reliable source in the Interior Ministry that the carabinieri
had been ordered to kill everyone, including Sossi.’ All in all, the reflection
of Turin Public Prosecutor Luigi Moschetta seems amply justified: ‘There
was someone at a high level who was concerned that the Red Brigades’
activities should continue . . . We can believe that the BR had an informant
in the Interior Ministry’s Office of Special Affairs.’46

--- Sayfa 208 ---
If the Red Brigades had their informants within the institutions of the
state, the state too had its own infiltrators in the terrorists’ ranks. Marco
Pisetta told the Moro Commission that he was surprised that the Red
Brigades were not wound up on the basis of his information in 1972 and
Girotto, if he had been allowed to continue his penetration, could have
dismantled the whole organization two years later. After this date, little is
known about the identity of the Red Brigades infiltrators. This is partly
because it would be extremely embarrassing for the authorities to admit
their existence, given that the Red Brigades continued to commit actions of
the utmost gravity, yet nothing was done to avert them. There can be little
doubt, though, that there were infiltrators in place. ‘Infiltrating the Red
Brigades was relatively easy at the ideological level,’ according to one of
Dalla Chiesa’s collaborators. ‘We had carabinieri who spoke and thought in
“brigadese” after studying the leaflets and documents . . . and frequenting
the subversive milieu for years. But then came the insurmountable barrier,
the test of armed violence. We couldn’t ask our carabinieri to shoot
someone in order to enter the BR. The only place where the infiltrators
were exempt from the weapons test was in prison.’47 This at least is the
official version. It is nevertheless significant that carabinieri had been
frequenting the world of subversion for years, giving the lie to the official
claim, trotted out after every major Red Brigades outrage, that the secret
services were in disarray and had no channels to the terrorists. The
extremist group Potere Operaio was so leaky it prompted journalist Giorgio
Bocca to remark, ‘Of every four Potere Operaio activists, two are
policemen.’48 A colonel in the Rome carabinieri and secret service agent
even admitted to the Moro Commission that he had an informant in contact
with the Red Brigades in the capital throughout the Moro kidnap. He
claimed the contact produced no useful information whatsoever during that
traumatic period.49
Moretti himself is a candidate for the role of infiltrator in the Red
Brigades. Like Negri, his upbringing and youthful political convictions
were a far cry from those he professed in later life. After the death of his
father, he was educated at boarding-school, the fees being paid by a wealthy
Milanese aristocrat, the Marchesa Anna Casati-Stampa. While at school he
was a member of a right-wing Catholic youth group and after studying at
the Catholic University in Milan he got a job with the Sit-Siemens
electronics company. His local parish priest helped him with a reference

--- Sayfa 209 ---
stating that ‘he professed sound religious and political ideas’. He was
remembered at Siemens for delivering a strong speech condemning the
trade unions at a workers’ meeting, and this just a year before becoming a
full-time revolutionary.50 His luck in avoiding arrest, which lasted him until
April 1981, his secret international travel, his contacts with the Hyperion
and his evasiveness over the true dynamics of the Moro operation would all
add to the suspicions in later years. In the autumn of 1990 repentant
terrorist Michele Galati revealed to magistrates that Moretti had actually
been put on trial by fellow BR members in prison immediately after his
arrest. He was accused of being a spy and faced death if found guilty.
In the event, Galati said, he was neither acquitted nor convicted but set
to one side and isolated by his companions.
Licio Gelli, the P2 boss, made his own eloquent contribution to the
debate over the manipulation of Italian terrorism in 1981. In March of that
year the P2 membership lists had been found and Gelli had been forced to
flee the country. On 4 July, his daughter was stopped as she arrived at Rome
airport and a wide range of documents found in the false bottom of her
suitcase. The most interesting was the photocopy of a document entitled
‘Stability Operations, Intelligence-Special Fields’, marked Top Secret, and
published under the authority of General W. C. Westmoreland, chief of staff
of the US Army. It was General William Westmoreland who commanded
US military forces, with conspicuous lack of success, during the early
stages of the Vietnam War. Dated 18 March 1970, and described as
Supplement Β to Field Manual 30-31, the twelve-page booklet described
how US Army intelligence operatives should respond to communist
insurgencies in Allied countries. The Field Manual itself, clearly intended
for application in South-east Asia, was also concealed in Maria Grazia
Gelli’s case. Parts of the supplement had been published in a Turkish
newspaper in 1976 and subsequently in other European publications.
Excerpts from it had been published in Italy by L’Europeo magazine (27
October and 3 November 1978) in the context of a discussion of the Moro
affair and the possibility that an international plot lay behind it. US
authorities denied the authenticity of the document. Given its contents this
is hardly surprising.
‘This Top Secret classified supplement FM 30-3iB, owing to its
specially sensitive nature, is not a standard issue in the FM series,’ the

--- Sayfa 210 ---
document stated in its introduction. Operations in this special field are to be
regarded as strictly clandestine, since the acknowledged involvement of the
US Army in HC [Host Country] affairs is restricted to the area of co-
operation against insurgency. The fact that US Army involvement goes
deeper can in no circumstances be acknowledged.’ In a section on
‘Penetration of the Insurgent Movement’, the document stated that US
Army intelligence should ‘endeavor to identify agents infiltrated into the
insurgency by HC agencies responsible for internal security with a view to
establishing clandestine control by US Army intelligence over the work of
such agents.’ Furthermore, ‘It should endeavor to infiltrate reliable agents
into the insurgent leadership, with special emphasis on the insurgent
intelligence system directed against HC agencies.’ Supplement Β also
recommended that ‘Where the existence of separate HC archives not
officially accessible to US personnel is known or suspected, careful
consideration should be given to the possibility of operations designed to
gain the desired access.’
The most sensitive remarks came in a section titled ‘Agents on Special
Operations’. This section warned that Host Country governments may
sometimes be lulled into a false sense of security by a temporary halt in
insurgent violence or be prone to passivity and indecision in the face of
communist subversion. ‘In such cases, US Army intelligence must have the
means of launching special operations which will convince HC
governments and public opinion of the reality of the insurgent danger and of
the necessity of counteraction. To this end, US Army intelligence should
seek to penetrate the insurgency by means of agents on special assignment,
with the task of forming special action groups among the more radical
elements of the insurgency. When the kind of situation envisaged above
arises, these groups, acting under US Army intelligence control, should be
used to launch violent or non-violent actions according to the nature of the
case.’ The section concluded: ‘In cases where the infiltration of such agents
into the insurgent leadership has not been effectively implemented, it may
help towards the achievement of the above ends to utilize ultra-leftist
organizations.’51
All the indications are that the document is authentic and it is highly
significant that Gelli should be in possession of it. What is particularly
significant is that he chose to send it into Italy at a time when his
organization was being publicly disgraced and he needed all his powerful

--- Sayfa 211 ---
friends to rally round to his assistance. It is unclear whether he intended the
document to be seized by the police or whether he meant to have copies of
it sent to a few selected recipients. P2 member Federico D’Amato was head
of the Italian border police at the time, so he may have imagined that his
daughter would be able to slip unmolested into the country. Gelli’s response
when questioned about the document was somewhat evasive but,
nevertheless, extremely revealing. ‘Well, I don’t know. I can’t even
remember it. It was a plan to destabilize certain communist countries, I
think, well done, but it was already old, out of date. Perhaps it was posted to
me anonymously and I attached no importance to it. But it was stuff I was
sending to myself. It was to test whether my correspondence was being
confiscated.’ He had not, then, meant to suggest that the Americans had
been responsible for destabilizing Italy, as well as countries in South-east
Asia? ‘No, good heavens, no. I think that the Americans’ interest in Italy
has always been very great and that many Italians have not understood the
gratitude they owe the Americans. I say it, and I am someone who fought
against them. The Italians don’t know how much they should thank the
Americans for what they did after the war, from the Marshall Plan
onwards.’ What about the theory of the strategy of tension, that the country
was destabilized in order to stabilize it to the right? Gelli coughed, then
replied: Ί wouldn’t rule anything out, because there were plenty of dirty
tricks at that time. . . There have been dirty tricks in the past, there are today
and there will be tomorrow, because we haven’t reached an equilibrium.
You see, dictatorship and democracy always march side by side, because
democracy is being undermined by dictatorship and dictatorship is always
being undermined by democracy.’52 Despite his curiously worded denial,
the message Gelli intended to convey, when he entrusted Supplement Β to
his daughter, seems startlingly clear: this is what has happened in Italy. The
document fits the story of Italian terrorism to a ‘t’. And Gelli, as head of the
anti-communist security agency P2, knew it.
Notes
1   Alberto Franceschini, Mara, Renato e Io, Mondadori, Milan,
1988, p. 150·
2   Guido Galli, quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe ,
Vol. 4, Tome 2, Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1985, p. 503.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
3   Quoted in Il Messaggero , 10 April 1979.
4   Gianni Canova to G.I. Luigi Nunziante and P.M. Pietro
Calogero, Padua, 19 May 1979.
5   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 17,
Rome 1987, p. 86.
6   Quoted in Giorgio Galli, Storia del Partito Armato , Rizzoli,
Milan, 1986, p. 143.
7   Quoted in Giovanni Palombarini, 7 Aprile: Il Processo e la
Storia, Arsenale Cooperativa, Venice, 1982, p. 176.
8   P.M. Pietro Calogero, Requisitoria, Padua, 1981, p. 114.
9   Ibid., pp. 820-22.
10   Luca Villoresi, La Repubblica , 1 February 1983.
11   Antonio Carlucci, Panorama , 25 May 1986.
12   Alberto Franceschini, op. cit., pp. 43-4.
13   Luca Villoresi, La Repubblica , 29 January 1983.
14   Marcella Andreoli, L’Europeo, 10 September 1983.
15   Ibid.
16   Quoted in Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, Operazione
Moro, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1984, p. 271.
17    Le Point , unpublished notes on Hyperion.
18   Marcella Andreoli, L’Europeo, 29 March 1982.
19   Rome police report, 3 January 1980.
20   G.I. Carlo Mastelloni, Sentenza-ordinanza, Venice, 1989, p.
40.
21    Le Point , unpublished notes on Negri affair.
22   Carlo Mastelloni, op. cit., pp. 257-60.
23   Ibid., pp. 9-11.
24   Ibid., pp. 23-7.
25   Ibid., p. X08.
26   Ibid., pp. 277-83.
27   Ibid., p. 412.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
28   Ibid., p. 489.
29   Ibid., p. 495.
30   Ibid., p. 508.
31   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 21,
Rome, 1987, p. 182.
32   Antonio Carlucci, Panorama, 25 May 1986.
33   Sandro Acciari, L’Espresso , 13 January 1985.
34   Marcella Andreoli, L’Europeo, 10 September 1983.
35   Luca Villoresi, La Repubblica , 29 January 1983.
36   Franco Giustolisi, L’Espresso , 27 May 1979.
37   Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 81.
38   Marco Sassano, SID e Partito Americano , Marsilio, Padua,
1975, p. 126.
39   G.I. Antonio Lombardi, Sentenza-ordinanza a carico di
Roberto Adamoli pp. 96, Milan, 19 May 1983, p. 392.
40   Giorgio Bocca, Noi Terroristi, Garzanti, Milan, 1985, pp. 9-
10.
41   Quoted in Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in
Italia , Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1984, p. 168.
42   Quoted in Gianni Flamini, Il Partito del Golpe, Vol. 3, Tome
2, Bovolenta, Ferrara, 1983, p. 636.
43   Gianfranco Sanguinetti, Del Terrorismo e dello Stato, Milan,
1980, p. 28.
44   Alberto Franceschini, op. cit., p. 121.
45   Ibid., p. 118.
46   Quoted in Giuseppe De Lutiis, op. cit., pp. 247-8.
47   Giorgio Bocca, op. cit., p. 197.
48   Quoted in Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 49.
49   Mimmo Scarano and Maurizio De Luca, Il Mandarino e
Marcio, Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1985, p. 174.
50   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 22.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
51   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione , Vol. 7, Tome 1,
Rome, 1987, pp. 287-98.
52   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
[11]
THE MORO KIDNAP
The Ghost of Hamlet’s father:
Now, Hamlet, hear:
‘Tis given out that, sleeping in mine orchard,
A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abus’d.
William Shakespeare, Hamlet , Act 1, Scene 5.
The kidnap and murder of Christian Democrat Party leader Aldo Moro
has given rise to more suspicions about the true nature and objectives of the
Red Brigades than any other single incident. Moro’s removal from the
political scene took place at a time when he was pursuing a policy of
alliance with the Communist Party. That policy was opposed by the US
government, the P2 masonic lodge and Italy’s left-wing extremists, and it
died with him. Four trials and the testimony of a number of ‘repentant’
terrorists have failed to clarify crucial aspects of the affair. The account of
the kidnap that has emerged from the trials has in the past been dismissed
by Mario Moretti, the Red Brigades leader who commanded the operation,
as an official cover-up. More recently, Moretti has joined the chorus of
voices insisting that there is nothing more to be learned about the affair. His
conversion is in itself grounds for the deepest suspicion.
Moro was kidnapped on the morning of 16 March 1978, as he drove to
Parliament for the opening of a confidence debate on a newly formed
government of national unity, which would enjoy the support of the PCI for
the first time since 1947. Moro’s car was approaching a crossroads, where
Via Mario Fani meets Via Stresa, in the residential suburb where he lived,
when a white Fiat 128 with diplomatic number plates reversed around the
corner into its path. The sudden manoeuvre forced his driver to brake
abruptly and the escort car, following close behind, rammed into the back of
them. Two men from the white car and a further four who had been waiting
in the street, wearing the uniforms of Alitalia airline pilots, opened fire on

--- Sayfa 216 ---
Moro’s bodyguards, killing all five of them. Only one guard succeeded in
returning the fire, loosing off two shots. Three of the bodyguards were not
killed outright but were finished off at close range.
Of the ninety-one shots fired by the terrorists, the majority were fired
by just two people, one of them responsible for forty-nine and the other for
twenty-two shots. One of the witnesses to the scene described the principal
gunman as calm and determined, showing ‘complete mastery of his
weapon’,1 a submachine-gun. A ballistics report on the attack described it as
a textbook operation, perfectly planned ‘both to leave Moro unharmed and
to prevent the accidental wounding of accomplices’. It also noted that the
professional skill of the principal gunman did not correspond to that of any
known Red Brigades member.2 A strong candidate for the role of expert
marksman at the Via Fani shooting is Giustino De Vuono, a member of the
Calabrian Mafia and former soldier in the French Foreign Legion, from
which he was expelled for being excessively violent. He escaped from
prison, where he was being held for involvement in a 1975 kidnapping
organized by Autonomía Operaia, shortly before the Moro operation. De
Vuono was among the twenty suspects whose photos were issued to the
media by the police on the day of the kidnap. One witness also identified
him as ‘strongly resembling’ a man dressed as a street-sweeper seen leaving
one of the Red Brigades’ Rome bases.3 He was subsequently eliminated
from the inquiry but there are grounds for suspecting the security services’
report which placed him conveniently out of the country at the time of the
ambush.
The first Moro trial convicted ten BR members of involvement in the
Via Fani attack. In June 1988 Rome magistrates issued arrest warrants for
two more terrorists, Alessio Casimirri and Alvaro Loiacono, to account for
the last outstanding members of the Via Fani commando. Loiacono, who
was living in Switzerland, was suspected of being the principal Via Fani
gunman, according to press reports.4
And, just in case he failed to fit the bill, Casimirri, who was also in
hiding abroad, was described as a crack marksman too. Many of the Rome
magistrates responsible for the case in recent years have held tenaciously to
the view that there is nothing of any moment left to be discovered. Public
Prosecutor Domenico Sica told 11 Messaggero newspaper on the tenth
anniversary of the kidnap (i6 March 1988), ‘There are no hidden truths in

--- Sayfa 217 ---
the Moro affair. Everything that could have been discovered has been
discovered . . . I am convinced that what remains to be learned is absolutely
insignificant as regards the substance of the whole terrorist affair.’ And this
only three months before two new names were added to the official tally of
Via Fani participants.
On 9 May, after fifty-five days in captivity, Moro’s bullet-riddled body
was found in the boot of a red Renault 4 car abandoned in Via Caetani, a
central Rome street half-way between the headquarters of the Christian
Democrat and Communist Parties. He had been shot eleven times, ten times
with a Browning 7.65 mm ‘Skorpion’ submachine-gun and once with a 9
mm pistol.5 Ballistics experts found that two of Moro’s entry wounds were
not aligned with the bullet holes in his clothes, while the other nine were.
This led them to deduce that the first two shots were fired while Moro was
alive and able to move and the others on a separate occasion, after he was
unconscious or dead. Surprisingly, although the evidence pointed to Moro
having been shot while he lay in the back of the car, there were hardly any
traces of blood, leading to the assumption that he may have initially been
laid on a plastic covering, which was subsequently removed. His wounds
had been staunched with paper handkerchiefs to prevent the outflow of
blood or body fluids.6 No Red Brigades member with direct knowledge of
the circumstances of his death has contributed any information about it to
the authorities. Prospero Gallinari has been named by ‘repentant’ terrorists
as the man who actually carried out the murder, a charge he has neither
confirmed nor denied. Gallinari was arrested in September 1979, suffering a
bullet-wound to the head in the process, but recovered and is currently
serving a life sentence in prison.
Moro’s captivity proved a drawn-out national agony for the Italian
people. He was not a particularly popular politician, being closely
associated in the public mind with the thirty years of corrupt and
incompetent government over which his party had presided. He was also
remembered for his censorship, as Prime Minister, of reports into secret
service abuses, for his determined defence of party colleagues implicated in
the Lockheed affair and for the dubious characters who handled the
financial affairs of the small Christian Democrat faction loyal to him.
Despite all this, many people still had a high regard for Moro. The
questionable financial practices some of his assistants were involved in
were not considered to be for his personal enrichment but merely to provide

--- Sayfa 218 ---
the money without which it was not possible to operate in Italian politics.
His personal following in the party was small because he was more
interested in public service than in power for power’s sake. Yet, as a result
of his shrewd intelligence and a talent for compromise allied to strongly
held political and religious convictions, he had, by 1978, become the key
figure in Italian political life.
Aldo Moro was born in the south eastern province of Puglia in 1916.
He studied law at Bari University, where he was president of the Federation
of Catholic Students (FUCI), becoming president of the national
organization in 1939. His first important ministerial post was as Justice
Minister in 1955. In 1959 he was elected to the powerful position of
Christian Democrat Party secretary and in 1963 became Prime Minister for
the first time. By the time of his kidnap, Moro would have held that office
in five different administrations. The foundation-stone of his political creed
was a belief in dialogue and the conviction that all sectors of opinion should
be represented in Parliament and find expression in the political life of the
nation. It was this conviction that conferred on him the crucial role of
mediator between his own party and the PCI at a time of acute political
tension. His solution to the problems posed by the growing electoral
strength of the communists, against a background of industrial unrest and
terrorism, was a government of national unity, the only one capable, in his
opinion, of coping with the mounting crisis. Moro’s plan for a ‘historic
compromise’ with the PCI was to be implemented in three distinct stages:
the communists were to pass from a period of non-opposition, or
benevolent neutrality, to one of active external support for the government
and finally to power-sharing, with communist ministers representing their
party in the Cabinet. It was only the close personal relationship that Moro
enjoyed with PCI secretary Enrico Berlinguer that made this project
possible and Moro’s removal effectively brought the experiment to an end.
It was this cynical, world-weary idealist, with his shock of white hair
brushed back from his forehead, his features a melancholic, introspective
mask familiar from countless television news reports, who was seized from
a Rome street on 16 March 1978. Whatever the public thought of him, the
mental anguish imposed upon him and his family over the next fifty-five
days would be played out as a macabre and gruelling drama beneath its
fascinated and horrified gaze. The traumatic effect of the tragedy was
heightened by the periodic release to the press of letters from Moro to his

--- Sayfa 219 ---
family and colleagues and of the Red Brigades’ own communiques, on two
occasions accompanied by photos of their captive in front of a BR flag. The
Red Brigades agreed to deliver more than twenty of Moro’s letters to their
recipients and produced a total of nine communiques, which were generally
distributed in a number of different cities. Officially, there is no indication
that the police succeeded in intercepting or following any of the numerous
couriers who must have been involved in this activity on the Red Brigades’
behalf.
In his letters, Moro sought to persuade his party colleagues to
negotiate the release of terrorist prisoners in exchange for his own freedom
and he reacted angrily on learning that many in the outside world thought
that he was writing under coercion or the influence of drugs. The Christian
Democrat leader summed up his argument in a letter to his party: ‘How can
you deduce that the state will fall into ruin if, once in a while, an innocent
person survives and, in return, another person goes into exile rather than to
prison?’7 The Red Brigades obviously had an interest that this message
should get through, and the blackmailing pressure was reinforced by their
own announcements that Moro was undergoing a ‘people’s trial’ and, in
communique no. 6 published on 16 April, that he had been condemned to
death. Moro too stepped up the pressure, telling party secretary Benigno
Zaccagnini that he held him personally responsible for his predicament for
having persuaded him to accept the presidency of the party. ‘So here I am
on the point of dying for having said yes to you and to the DC. You have a
very personal responsibility for it. Your saying yes or no now is crucial. But
you should know that if you take me away from my family, you will have
done so twice. You will never free yourself from the weight of this
burden.’8 This last prediction proved prophetically true, since Zaccagnini
emerged a broken man from the Moro tragedy. The full human dimension
of the drama emerges in Moro’s moving, final letter to his wife. ‘Kiss and
caress everyone for me, face by face, eye by eye, hair by hair. To each I
send an immense tenderness through your hands. Be strong, my sweet, in
this absurd and incomprehensible trial. These are the ways of the Lord.
Remember me to all our relatives and friends with immense affection, and
to you and all of them I send the warmest embrace as the pledge of my
eternal love. I would like to know, with my small, mortal eyes, how we will
appear to one another afterwards.’9

--- Sayfa 220 ---
In late April the Red Brigades proposed an exchange of prisoners,
demanding the release of thirteen left-wing terrorists, including Renato
Curcio and Alberto Franceschini, in return for Moro’s life. The list, made
public in communique no. 8, was almost certainly intended to be
unacceptable. It contained the name of Cristoforo Piancone, a Red Brigades
member who had been wounded and captured only a week earlier, as he
participated in the murder of a prison officer in Turin. The government
remained firm in its refusal to negotiate with the terrorists until the end,
supported in this by the PCI. It did however explore the possibility of a
unilateral gesture of clemency in the hope that the Red Brigades would
reciprocate. Senate leader Amintore Fanfani had decided to broach the
subject formally at a meeting of the Christian Democrat Party leadership on
9 May, the day of Moro’s murder. There has been speculation that this
apparent softening of the Christian Democrat position may have actually
hastened Moro’s demise. Though much ink has been spilt on the subject, it
will never be known whether the possibility of negotiating Moro’s release
ever really existed. Throughout the kidnap the Socialist Party stood out as
the champions of a negotiated solution. There can be little doubt that
Moro’s family and friends succeeded in opening secret channels of
communication with the Red Brigades and that the Socialists were also able
to communicate with the kidnappers through the Autonomía Operaia
leaders Franco Piperno and Lanfranco Pace. Examining Magistrate
Ferdinando Imposimato believes that many aspects of the negotiations have
remained obscure. In an interview with La Stampa newspaper (11 March,
1988), he cited the account of a Genoese terrorist, Carlo Bozzo, according
to which ‘Moretti met the Socialist (Claudio) Signorile. It strikes me as
absurd, but I went to the Transport Ministry and left Signorile a series of
written questions. He has never replied.’
Moro’s policy of seeking an accommodation with the PCI had
encountered powerful and long-standing opposition. This was made
particularly explicit during a visit he made to the United States as Foreign
Minister in September 1974. One of his collaborators, Corrado Guerzoni,
has described a traumatic meeting with Henry Kissinger during which the
US Secretary of State attempted to dissuade Moro from pursuing a political
course which he considered profoundly dangerous and mistaken. Moro’s
pro-Arab foreign policy also added to the suspicion with which he was
viewed in US government circles. The next day he was taken ill in St

--- Sayfa 221 ---
Patrick’s Cathedral and when he returned he told me repeatedly that he did
not intend to resume political life for a long time, without telling me the
reason,’ Guerzoni told the Rome assize court.10 Moro also insisted that
Guerzoni should inform the press of his intention to withdraw from politics.
According to another account, Moro held a secret evening meeting with an
unnamed US intelligence official, who warned him of the determination
within the security services to block the implementation of his policies. In
the course of this meeting, which took place during the same US visit, he
was advised that groups on the fringes of the official secret services might
be brought into operation if he did not abandon his policy of negotiating
with the communists.11 Moro’s wife, Eleonora, confirmed these threats to
her husband in testimony to the Moro Commission. ‘It’s one of the few
occasions when my husband told me exactly what had been said to him,
without telling me the name of the person concerned. I will try and repeat it
now: “You must abandon your policy of bringing all the political forces in
your country into direct collaboration. Either you give this up or you will
pay dearly for it.”’12 After his collapse in St Patrick’s, Moro decided to cut
short his visit by four days and returned to Italy on 29 September. His
personal doctor has testified to the state of anxiety Moro was in at this time:
‘He was actually afraid that he might not be able to embrace his family
again, this was his worry.’13 Less than a week before the Italian delegation
arrived in America, Kissinger had given public expression to the US
position in a meeting with Congressional leaders intended to head off
criticism of CIA activities in Chile. His views were reported in the New
York Times (27 September 1974), only two days before Moro decided to
curtail his US visit. ‘At that meeting, he reportedly defended the need for
covert activity by asserting that despite criticism of the CIA, if Italy went
communist, there would be criticism that the United States had not done
enough to save her,’ the paper wrote. Other, Italian accounts of the briefing
quoted the Secretary of State as saying: ‘You blame us for the CIA’s
activities in Chile. But wouldn’t you blame us even more if we allowed
Italy to fall to the communists without doing anything to prevent it?’
(L’Unità , 28 September 1974.) The message can hardly have been lost on
the visiting Italian delegation.
The Christian Democrat leader replied to his American critics in an
article he wrote for 11 Giorno newspaper in early 1978 but decided not to
have published. It was printed after his death by the communist newspaper

--- Sayfa 222 ---
L’Unità (29 May 1978). In it he pointed out that American criticisms of his
policy had produced controversy and tension but that this was acceptable
from an ally, provided they were expressed through the appropriate
channels. He took exception, however, to indiscreet government pressure
which ‘might disturb and embarrass the sincere friends of America’. Moro
explained that an alliance with the communists was essential to save Italy
from political paralysis and ended his article with an appeal to ‘the
prudence, intelligence, open-mindedness of those on whom the highest
responsibilities fall’. The article is written in the cautious and roundabout
style characteristic of Moro but it is significant that he withheld it from
publication, considering the subject too delicate for public discussion, only
a few months before his kidnap by the Red Brigades. During this period
Moro was acutely aware of the need to explain his policy to the US
government and to overcome its objections. ‘Shortly before 16 March I
spoke to him at length: we discussed the possibility of his travelling to
America to enable him to explain the realities of the Italian situation at the
highest level,’ his party colleague Luigi Granelli told La Repubblica (17
August 1978). ‘He was well aware of the need for our link with the United
States and knew that their objections had to be taken seriously, not
underestimated. But he also had an extraordinary sense of national dignity.’
Clearly, one of Moro’s major preoccupations in the run-up to his kidnap
was US opposition to the ‘historic compromise’.
Warnings against the dangers of admitting the PCI to the government
had been repeated periodically in the years leading up to 1978. In 1976 the
right-wing magazine Il Settimanale , two of whose editors were members of
P2 and whose ‘lively formula’ was singled out for praise by Gelli in his
Democratic Revival Plan, published an interview on the subject with
Democratic presidential candidate Henry Jackson (3 March 1976). The
hardline anti-communist senator warned of the dire consequences if the PCI
were to achieve power in Italy. Ί have studied the problem in detail and I
can say that the United States would not stand idly by,’ he told the
magazine’s New York correspondent. Jackson warned that any European
country that admitted the communists to government would be immediately
expelled from NATO. ‘Let it be quite clear that, if disastrous consequences
are to be avoided, the Italian communists must not enter the government,’
the presidential hopeful told Italian readers three months before they
themselves were due to vote in their own general elections.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Threats directed personally at Moro came from another P2-influenced
publication, Mino Pecorelli’s OP. The magazine (2 July 1975) referred to
the Christian Democrat leader as ‘Moro . . . bondo’ (Mori. . . bund) and
asked ‘Is Moro the only minister who must die at ι p.m.?’ borrowing the
title of a historical novel by Giulio Andreotti, 1 p.m.: The minister must die.
The following year Pecorelli returned to his theme (9 January 1976) with a
cartoon of Moro wearing a Christian Democrat badge with a hammer and
sickle superimposed on it and captioned: ‘The saint of compromise. Virgin,
martyr and . . . sacked.’ He added, in a comment on the collapse of Moro’s
government: ‘Today the last possible centre-left government that could
painlessly have buried Berlinguer’s strategy has been assassinated with
Moro.’ Moro is the only victim of Pecorelli’s literary attentions whose
name is so frequently associated with the idea of death. Pecorelli’s allusions
have a prophetic ring to them, which is all the more striking in the light of
what he wrote after the politician’s kidnap. One of the most remarkable of
Pecorelli’s prophetic writings was a brief note which appeared on 13
September 1975, a year after Moro’s traumatic visit to the United States.
Under the title ‘Expert America jokes and predicts’, OP reported: ‘An
official visiting Rome with [President] Ford told us: “I see darkness.
There’s a Jacqueline in the future of your peninsula.”’ The implication is
clear; someone in Italy was going to meet the same fate as President John F.
Kennedy.
A precedent to the Moro operation had been planned by the Red
Brigades in the summer of 1974. In June, shortly after the conclusion of the
Sossi kidnap, Alberto Franceschini travelled down to Rome to investigate
the possibility of seizing Giulio Andreotti, then Defence Minister. He found
Andreotti an easy target, walking the city streets without an escort. He
returned to northern Italy to report the good news to the BR leadership,
Moretti, Curcio and Cagol, and on 8 September he and Curcio were
arrested. As far as possible, Franceschini tried to avoid contact with the
Rome column of the Red Brigades as he had already learned that they were
not entirely reliable. Rules of compartmentalization were rarely observed
and their favourite fund-raising activity was stealing pieces of ancient
statuary. When Franceschini tried to convince them that the members of a
revolutionary force should not be living like grave robbers, they would
merely reply: ‘You’re right, comrade, but in the meantime see if you can
place this head for me.’14

--- Sayfa 224 ---
By the time of his kidnap in 1978 Moro and the head of his bodyguard,
Oreste Leonardi, had become increasingly worried by indications that they
were being watched and followed and by a sense of impending threat. Their
attempts to draw the attention of the authorities to the danger elicited no
response and do not even appear to have been put on record. Moro was
particularly alarmed by the kidnap in April 1977 of the son of a former
secretary of the Socialist Party. Francesco De Martino was, like Moro, in
the running for the State Presidency at the time. The kidnap of his son and
the payment of a ransom for his release effectively ended his hopes of
achieving that office. Moro was struck by the political background to the
kidnap and subsequently became extremely anxious for the safety of his
own children, insisting that they should be given a police bodyguard. With
his access to sensitive government information and given the connections
between P2 and underworld figures involved in the kidnap business, it is
significant that the De Martino kidnap should have made such a strong
impact on Moro.
His sense of foreboding increased in the run-up to March 1978. A
number of incidents had given rise to the suspicion that Moro was being
kept under surveillance. Mrs Moro told the assize court that the head of her
husband’s bodyguard had noted the number of a car he had frequently seen
following them. He had asked the police to investigate the matter, but to no
avail. She also claimed that her husband had requested a bullet-proof car
but the request had been turned down because of the cost. A telephone tap
produced in evidence at the trial showed that Francesco Cossiga, Interior
Minister during the kidnap, had discussed this subject with one of Moro’s
assistants, Nicola Rana, four days after the discovery of Moro’s body.
‘Cossiga: “Sorry if I’m disturbing you. Late yesterday evening I had to
issue a denial. . . because La Nazione [newspaper], a certain Paglia, whom I
don’t know. . . said that Moro had asked me for a bullet-proof car in his
presence and that I had refused.” Rana: “Eh!” [A whistling noise obliterates
the rest of the conversation.]15
According to the widow of bodyguard Leonardi, her husband had been
noticeably agitated in the period leading up to 16 March. One possible
reason for his anxiety emerges from Mrs Moro’s account to the court. She
described how Leonardi told her, about a fortnight before the kidnap, that
‘he had heard that one of the police departments responsible for these
matters had noticed that suspected Red Brigades members from other

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Italian towns had arrived in Rome. Worried about this discovery and
anxious to do their duty, they had asked their superiors what to do, whether
they should arrest them or follow them, and they had been told that they
should leave them be and not concern themselves with the matter’.16 The
official underestimating of the threat continued right up to the eve of the
16th, when police chief Giuseppe Parlato visited Moro’s offices and
reassured his collaborators that recent incidents that had aroused their alarm
were nothing to worry about and that the suspects involved were common
criminals.
In contrast, senior police officers were convinced that the kidnap was
the work of the Red Brigades from the moment they arrived at Via Fani,
thus arousing the suspicion of Eleonora Moro. ‘When I asked them what
had happened, they told me without hesitation: “It was the Red Brigades.”
So much so that I ventured to say: “But sir, how can you be so sure that it
was the Red Brigades? It could have been a hundred thousand things!” . . . I
still ask myself how these people could be sure and had decided without
hesitation,’17 she told the parliamentary commission. “How is it possible?
The day before the police chief says they were only muggers spotted in Via
Savoia [where her husband’s office was situated] and the next day in Via
Fani he tells me without a shadow of doubt: “It was the Red Brigades.”’18
The inadequacy of the official response to the kidnap exactly mirrors
that of the preventive measures taken beforehand. In the first few days the
Red Brigades were able to return to the Via Fani area and dump three of the
cars used in the operation under the noses of the police. A massive
mobilization of the security services, with 72,000 road-blocks, 37,000
dwellings searched and almost 6.5 million people questioned in less than
two months, brought no progress in the search for Moro’s prison. One had
the impression then . . . that they wanted to impress public opinion with the
quantity and visibility of the operations, totally regardless of the quality,’
novelist and Radical Party deputy Leonardo Sciascia wrote in his minority
report for the parliamentary commission.19 He observed that the
commission was told by the then head of the Rome police that he did not
have enough men to allocate to following suspects, at a time when more
than 4,000 police were bustling about in spectacular but fruitless operations.
Sciascia summarized the gist of his report in the words, ‘How did they
manage not to find Moro?’20

--- Sayfa 226 ---
In a normal criminal inquiry the activities of the police are directed
and co-ordinated by a public prosecutor. The magistrate initially in charge
of the Moro case was wholly unsuccessful in injecting intelligence and
vigour into the search. Luciano Infelisi received little help, however: no
colleague was assigned to assist him and he was not relieved of his normal
workload. Ί was unable to check the newspapers because I did not have the
time,’ he told the Moro Commission. ‘In the period in which I was directing
the inquiries, my office did not have a police officer at its disposal. I ran the
investigation with a single typist, without even a telephone in the room.’21
Infelisi complained to the commission that he received no useful
intelligence from the secret services throughout the fifty-five days of the
kidnap.
In practice, the search for Moro’s prison was co-ordinated by the
Interior Ministry and a special crisis committee, many of whose members
belonged to or later joined P2, the right-wing masonic lodge which opposed
Moro’s policy towards the PCI. Among the eight P2 members appointed to
the committee were the heads of the domestic and military intelligence
services, the head of the finance police and the regional commander of the
carabinieri. Given their political orientation it would not be entirely
surprising if they did less than their utmost to secure Moro’s release. The
minutes of the committee’s meeting on 17 March give an idea of the quality
of their contribution to the task in hand. SISMI Director Giuseppe Santovito
informed the group that he believed two Japanese and a West German had
participated in the Via Fani attack. He also drew the committee’s attention
to the imminent arrival of a ship from Cyprus at the port of Marina di
Grosseto.22 There is no evidence whatever that his contribution had any
grounding in fact. Santovito continued to provide the committee with
misleading information, reporting the next day on the need for increased
patrols on the Yugoslav border.23 On 24 October 1977, Parliament had
passed a bill reforming the secret services, replacing the Defence
Information Service (SID) with the Military Security Information Service
(SISMI) and the domestic Democratic Security Information Service
(SISDE). This reorganization would be used as an excuse to argue that the
security services were ‘without eyes and without ears’ at the time of the
Moro kidnap. The reform effectively led to the demolition of the most
reliable antiterrorism organization and to the appointment of P2 members at
the top of the new agencies. The Interior Ministry’s Anti-terrorism

--- Sayfa 227 ---
Inspectorate, which had been founded in 1974 and had worked effectively
to combat both right-and left-wing terrorism, was disbanded, while the
entire staff of SID was taken on by its successor agency. This discrepancy
was not a response to any lack of reliability on the part of the Anti-terrorism
Inspectorate’s staff. The Inspectorate had achieved notable successes and
had been engaged, since May 1977, on a comprehensive investigation of the
Red Brigades and other terrorist groups, which was left unfinished. Many of
the SID officials, however, were suspected of active involvement in the
strategy of tension. The result was to punish the honest servants of the state
and to leave the least honest as its only guardians against the terrorists. ‘The
commission has not been able to ascertain whether this happened as the
result of a pre-ordained plan to paralyse the domestic security service in the
run-up to Via Fani,’ the Socialists commented in their minority report to the
Moro Commission.24
Given the keen interest Gelli showed in military and secret service
appointments it is not unreasonable to suppose that he may himself have
played a role in the shake-up which placed his own supporters in key
security service posts. The director of the Anti-terrorism Inspectorate,
Emilio Santillo, was a strong candidate to head the new domestic
intelligence service. He had been responsible in the past for investigating
Gelli’s links with right-wing terrorism, producing three reports on the
activities of the P2 lodge. During the Moro kidnap he asked the Arezzo
police chief for information on Gelli, giving him to understand that he
suspected Gelli was in some way involved. He did not get the job. In
contrast, the man who was appointed, Giulio Grassini, was a member of P2
and actually turned to Gelli for information on the Moro case. ‘When I
joined SISDE at the end of September 1978, I was immediately informed
by Grassini that Gelli was a highly valued informant of the service because
of his knowledge of terrorism,’ a former SISDE officer told the Moro
Commission.25
The argument that the security services were in total disarray at the
time of the Moro kidnap is, in any case, not wholly convincing. As we have
already seen, the authorities had succeeded in infiltrating the Red Brigades
in 1972 and again in 1974. In 1978, their knowledge of the terrorist group
was by no means negligible. The day after Via Fani, newspapers published
photographs of twenty-two suspects being sought by police. Two of the
suspects were already in prison and the photos contained other errors, but

--- Sayfa 228 ---
eighteen showed genuine members of the Red Brigades, some of whom had
taken part in the Via Fani attack. The Moro Commission has pointed out
that police reports on political extremists active in Rome prior to 1978
contained the names of many people subsequently arrested for terrorist
offences. ‘These reports were the fruit of complex and time-consuming
work which has clearly involved dozens and dozens of police personnel,’ it
commented.26 It would seem, then, that the authorities were not quite as ill
prepared as they subsequently tried to make out.
Another arm of the state to perform distinctly below par during the
kidnap was the state-controlled telephone company SIP. The various Moro
trials reveal a litany of blunders and omissions on the part of people
responsible for carrying out telephone taps during the fifty-five days of
Moro’s captivity. This, after all, was one of the most promising methods for
identifying Moro’s captors and locating his prison. But the technique
appears to have produced virtually no useful intelligence whatever despite a
wide range of contacts between the kidnappers and the outside world.
Instead, numerous recorded conversations have been obliterated, tapes have
gone missing, surveillance has lapsed for ‘technical reasons’ just when the
Red Brigades needed to make important calls, and on one occasion a
policeman actually intervened in a conversation he was listening to,
repeating some of the words he had just heard, and so warning the people
under surveillance that their phone was tapped. ‘During the fifty-five days
of the Moro kidnap I observed a complete lack of collaboration with the
police as regards telephone tapping and the blocking of calls on the part of
SIP,’ Domenico Spinella, the head of Rome’s political police told the
parliamentary Moro Commission. Greater co-operation, Spinella said,
might have completely changed the outcome of the affair. ‘In my opinion
the attitude of SIP was one of absolute non-collaboration and even today
the judicial authorities ought to prefer charges.’27
Once again these failures have been explained away as being the result
of confusion and inefficiency, but there are reasons for suspecting that the
real reasons may be somewhat more sinister. The secret services have
always been strongly represented within a crucial public service such as the
telephone network. During the 1960s SIP officials collaborated actively in
large-scale illegal telephone tapping carried out by SIFAR in order to fill up
its archives with potential blackmail material. In 1974 the ever well-
informed Mino Pecorelli published an article about the government’s

--- Sayfa 229 ---
emergency communications network operated by SIP and controlled by the
secret services.
This parallel network enabled ministers, senior state administrators and
the military to remain in contact in the event of a breakdown of the public
telephone system. Pecorelli referred to two recent mysterious power failures
which he suggested may have been intended to test the emergency system,
and this at a time when right-wing coup plotters were particularly active.
‘The suspicion grows that these black-outs . . . are really exercises, the
finalization of programmes which for now remain obscure,’ he wrote.
Pecorelli referred explicitly to SIP as one of a number of ‘obscure
organizations, laden with shadows and in collusion with events and
activities on the borderline of legality’ (OP, 19 September 1974). It is
therefore interesting to learn, from a usually reliable source, that the SIP
emergency network was put on alert on 15 March 1978, the day before
Aldo Moro’s kidnap. Perhaps the state was not so unprepared after all?
There are a number of testimonies that appear to implicate Gelli in the
Moro affair. One of them was found among notes confiscated from the
home of Gelli’s secretary, Nara Lazzerini, who worked for the P2 boss in
Rome between 1976 and 1981. The document describes a meeting with
Gelli on the day of Moro’s kidnapping, news of which comes over the radio
as Lazzerini is driven by taxi from the station to Gelli’s headquarters in the
Hotel Excelsior, on the prestigious Via Veneto. Lazzerini wants to ‘freshen
up’ and is accompanied by Gelli to his bedroom. ‘While I am in the
bedroom to tidy myself up, Licio receives two people in the sitting room
whom I am unable to see, but I hear them say: “The major part is over. Now
we’ll see the reactions.” ‘ Questioned by a magistrate from Bologna,
Lazzerini was confident that she had not misheard. ‘The phrase struck me
and I noted it down that same morning in the hotel, taking advantage of the
fact that Gelli had left,’ she said, adding that she had received frequent
death threats in the year following Gelli’s flight from Italy.28 The P2
Commission found her evidence altogether too embarrassing and turned
down a proposal that she should be called as a witness. Christian Democrat
commissioner Bernardo D’Arezzo, in particular, opposed the suggestion ‘on
the grounds of the witness’s morality’: Lazzerini had been Gelli’s
mistress.29 This high moral stand contrasts with the remarkable patience
shown by the commission in the face of the lies and evasions of the secret
service chiefs who had belonged to Gelli’s lodge.

--- Sayfa 230 ---
A memorandum sent in 1982 to the office of the Florence public
prosecutor by Federico Federici, a Florentine lawyer and P2 member,
makes a similar claim. In it Federici said he had been told that Gelli reacted
to news of the kidnap with the words: ‘We have finally resolved the Moro
problem.’30 Federici, who died of a heart attack in 1988 while he was
defence lawyer for a number of suspects in the Bologna bomb trial, is by no
means a reliable witness. He was, however, close enough to Gelli to have
access to sensitive information and it is interesting that both he and
Lazzerini should have drawn attention to a possible link between the Master
of P2 and the Moro affair. As we shall see later, Gelli himself found it
expedient to do likewise, making it clear to the journalist Marcello Coppetti
that he was privy to inside knowledge about the kidnap.
Gelli may have been dropping a hint to this effect when he granted an
interview to the Corriere della Sera newspaper in 1980 (5 October). The
interviewer was a fellow lodge member, Maurizio Costanzo, and the article
appeared as part of a series on ‘The Discreet Charm of Secret Power’.
‘What is democracy for you?’ Costanzo asked half-way through the
interview. ‘I’ll tell you about a meeting I had with Moro when he was
Minister of Foreign Affairs,’ Gelli replied. ‘He said to me: “You mustn’t
hurry things. Democracy is like a saucepan of beans: to be good they must
cook very, very slowly.” I interrupted him, saying: “Be careful that the
beans don’t boil dry, Minister, because then you might burn them.”’
Reading between the lines, one may perhaps discern the message: I warned
Moro and we all know what happened to him.
There has been much speculation about what may have prompted Gelli
to break with his longstanding practice of discretion by granting the
interview. Some analysts have seen it as a blunder, the result of pride and
overweening vanity, that hastened the collapse of Gelli’s power. It is hard to
square this with the image of the cunning schemer so frequently evoked
elsewhere. By 1980 Gelli was under pressure from a number of judicial
investigations and newspaper allegations linking P2 to terrorism and other
crimes. Seven months earlier, Ronald Reagan had been elected President of
the United States. According to some accounts, he had decided to dispense
with P2 as a US intelligence tool in Italy since the lodge was becoming
dangerously discredited and in any case was too closely identified with the
secret services of the Carter era. If Gelli felt he was being dumped by his
erstwhile friends, the Corriere interview gave him a convenient opportunity

--- Sayfa 231 ---
to remind them of the services he had previously performed. Gelli himself
had no regrets about the interview when I asked him about it. ‘It wasn’t a
mistake and I would do it again today.
The aim was to defend ourselves against the defamatory accusations
which the press were already levelling at us. They tended to demonize us,
but we had nothing to be ashamed of.’31
Costanzo asked him if he was aware of an Interior Ministry report
alleging he was at the head of the most powerful organization in the
country. Ί have many friends, both in Italy and abroad. But there’s a wide
gap between having friends and having power. However, there is a basis of
truth in these rumours: having always acted in accordance with certain basic
ethical principles, I have succeeded in gaining the respect and friendship of
many people, even if, at the same time and inevitably, I have aroused
hostility.’ Gelli’s mention of his foreign friends and his ethical principles
may well have been a subtle reminder of his steadfast anti-communism. A
later question cited allegations that he was a fascist coup plotter who
subsequently ‘did not disdain the company of people of the opposite
tendency’ and invited Gelli to clarify his political orientation. Ί have often
been unable to remember my own name, so do not ask me to remember my
political orientation. Ask me another time. Perhaps then I will be able to
give you a less vague reply . . .’ This sibylline response seems to combine
an offer of silence with the threat of possible future revelations. Lest these
interpretations appear too fanciful, it is worth bearing in mind that Gelli
himself invited his intended audience to read between the lines. Costanzo’s
last question, which must surely have been included at Gelli’s own request,
was: ‘How used you to reply to the question: “What do you want to be
when you grow up?”’ Ά puppetmaster . . .’ came Gelli’s sphinx-like reply.
The Moro Commission raised the issue of P2’s role during the Moro
kidnap in its majority report. It highlighted the presence of lodge members
at the head of the security services and the fact that the organization
represented political and material interests that would have been severely
threatened if Moro’s policy of accommodation with the PCI had been
implemented. The commission said there was no proof that the failures and
omissions of the security apparatus during the fifty-five days of Moro’s
imprisonment were deliberate. But it added that very grave examples of
negligence had been recorded, ‘which appear to be inexplicable unless they

--- Sayfa 232 ---
were motivated by a desire not to see a positive conclusion to the drama or
by a substantial lack of interest in what was happening’.32 The commission
also declared that it did not exclude the possibility of direct P2 involvement
in the activities of the Red Brigades, given the shared objectives of
‘those who seek an authoritarian change and those who prepare the
ground for it with blind and irresponsible violence’.33 The commission
concluded that it should not rush to grave conclusions in the absence of a
serious investigation of this subject. The P2 Commission failed to carry the
investigation forward, giving the distinct impression that many of the
commissioners considered the matter was simply too delicate to tackle.
Their view was almost certainly well founded, as the writings of Mino
Pecorelli show. The P2 journalist with an unhealthy appetite for journalistic
scoops is an ideal guide to what was happening behind the scenes during
what was arguably the greatest political convulsion in post-war Italian
history.
Notes
1   In Quaderni della Giustizia, Ministry of Justice, Rome, October
1983, p. 72.
2   Quoted in Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, Operazione
Moro, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1984, pp. 70-74.
3   Ibid., p. 81.
4   Corriere della Sera , 10 June 1988.
5   In Quaderni della Giustizia, Ministry of Justice, Rome, October
1983, p. 53.
6   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 113.
7   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
no.
8   Ibid., p. 102.
9   Ibid., p. 122.
10   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 279.
11   Mimmo Scarano and Maurizio De Luca, 11 Mandarino e
Marcio , Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1985, p. 26.
12   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit. p. 280.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
13   Mimmo Scarano and Maurizio De Luca, op. cit., p. 27.
14   Alberto Franceschini, Mara, Renato e Jo, Mondadori, Milan,
1988, p. 106.
15   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 356.
16   Ibid., p. 39.
17   Mimmo Scarano and Maurizio De Luca, op. cit., p. 72.
18   Ibid., p. 88.
19   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
403.
20   Leonardo Sciascia to the author, 1986.
21   Report of the Moro Commission, Rome, 1983, pp. 68-9.
22   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, p. 50.
23   Ibid., p. 57.
24   Quoted in Mimmo Scarano and Maurizio De Luca, op. cit., p.
176.
25   Marco Nese, Corriere della Sera , 9 June 1988.
26   Report of the Moro Commission, op. cit., p. 53.
27   Moro Commission, Allegato alia Relazione, Vol. 5, No. 5,
Rome, 1984, p. 440.
28   Quoted in Giuseppe Ferrara, Il Caso Moro , Tullio Pironti,
Naples, 1987, p. 222.
29   Giuseppe De Lutiis (ed.), La Strage , Editori Riuniti, Rome,
1986, pp. 345-6.
30   Quoted in Giuseppe Ferrara, op. cit., p. 223.
31   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
32   Report of the Moro Commission, op. cit., p. 87.
33   Ibid., p. 181.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
[12]
THE PECORELLI VERSION
As we have seen, Pecorelli was responsible for publishing a series of
menacing articles in which Moro’s name was associated with the notion of
death. This may well have been part of a concerted P2 effort to pressure
Moro into abandoning his political programme. At the end of 1977 (7
December), he published another prophetic story, this time not aimed
personally at Moro but with a grim message of foreboding for Italian
society as a whole. Under the title ‘Fireworks mark the end of the festival’,
Pecorelli opened the short piece with a list of seven of Italy’s principal
political and financial scandals and an observation: ‘We’re seriously afraid
that Italian democracy will not be able to bear the weight of such filth.’ He
compared the situation to a fireworks display at a village festival. ‘Every
minute there’s a new Catherine-wheel, a new explosion of sound and
colour. But the party is nearly over. There will be a minute of oppressive
silence and then the last dull bangs. They are dark explosions, without
light.’ It is a gloomy forecast, only three months before Moro’s kidnap.
We have also seen how the OP editor was privy to sensitive
information and prone to be dangerously free with it, as in his revealing
article about the ‘cinematic’ career of Toni Negri. He was particularly
active at the time of the Moro affair and a change in the nature of the
publication, from daily newsletter to weekly magazine, coincided with the
kidnap. What Pecorelli wrote, both during Moro’s imprisonment and after
his death, offers a remarkable insight into events at the time. His account
has had relatively little impact on public perceptions of the affair because
the magazine had a limited circulation and was distrusted by many: startling
revelations jostle for space with incomprehensible messages and sheer
disinformation. But careful sifting pays surprising dividends.
Pecorelli was nothing if not well informed. During the kidnap he
published extracts from some of Moro’s letters to friends and political
colleagues, which were officially covered by judicial secrecy and which no
other publication had succeeded in obtaining. He also revealed, on
2 May, that ‘a second letter should have reached a holy personage at
the head of the religious hierarchy’. The existence of a second letter from
Moro to the Pope was not publicly acknowledged until 1980, when Giulio

--- Sayfa 235 ---
Andreotti, who became Prime Minister on the day of Moro’s kidnap,
confirmed as much to the Moro Commission. In another brief note, dated 4
April 1978, Pecorelli wrote: ‘We are informed by authoritative sources that
the Vatican has begun concrete negotiations.’ This claim was also
confirmed by Andreotti, but not until some ten years after the event.
Following Pecorelli’s death, internal documents on the structure and
organization of the Red Brigades were found in his possession, testimony to
the closeness of his relationship with the security services, if not to the
existence of a direct channel to the terrorists.
Pecorelli’s diary for the period reveals the identity of some of the
potential sources of his information. It shows he was in contact with Gelli
before, during-he had a meeting with him on 2 May-and after the kidnap.
During the fifty-five days he had at least three meetings with Prosecutor
Luciano Infelisi, who was supposed to be directing the investigations, and
three meetings with his boss, Giovanni De Matteo, head of the Rome
prosecutor’s office. Other well-connected individuals were deputy police
chief Emilio Santillo, whom he met five times, former secret service boss
Vito Miceli, and ex-counterespionage director Gianadelio Maletti, whom he
saw four times. Particularly useful must have been the days when he met
clusters of security service personnel, either at the same time or in quick
succession. One such was 10 May, the day after Moro’s body had been
delivered to the centre of Rome. The names of five security service
personnel are listed for an appointment in the late morning. Next to their
names Pecorelli had noted: ‘Major Boero SID officer from Trento (300
mil)’, a possible indication that the officer expected payment for his
expertise. If he felt so inclined, he could discuss what he had learned with
Gelli the following day; ‘Dinner/Licio’ was pencilled in for 10 p.m.1
These contacts led Pecorelli to some surprising conclusions, which
were spelled out in a remarkable series of articles, beginning while Moro
was still in the hands of his captors and continuing for a year after his death.
In an article dated 2 May, but which following the tradition of Italian
magazines would have been distributed a week earlier, Pecorelli analysed
the political significance of Moro’s kidnap under the title ‘Yalta in Via
Mario Fani’. He started by highlighting the country’s confused response to
the event. ‘Life is a dream wrote Calderón de la Barca, but nothing that is
happening around us today has anything to do with poetry. On the contrary,
the ambush in Via Fani bears the hallmark of a lucid superpower.’ Pecorelli

--- Sayfa 236 ---
described the seizing of Aldo Moro as ‘one of the biggest political
operations carried out in recent decades in an industrialized country
integrated into the Western system. The primary objective is without doubt
that of removing the Communist Party from the area of power, just when it
is preparing to take the final step into a direct participation in the
government of the country. It is a fact that there are people who do not want
that to happen .’ He said the superpowers had a common interest in
‘mortifying the rise of the PCI, that is of the leader of Eurocommunism, of
communism that aspires to become democratic and democratically lead an
industrialized country.’ He observed that such a development was
unwelcome to the Americans because it would upset the balance of
economic power within Italy and, even more so, because of its
repercussions on international relations. The article went on to make some
surprisingly sympathetic comments about the PCI. It acknowledged the
party’s commitment to democracy and its nationalistic desire to stand out
against ‘the servile obedience/ observance of the directives of the only great
power in the West: the United States of America’. The PCI was described as
a moderately pro-American party ‘rejecting the hegemony of the dominant
power in the name of a rediscovered right to national sovereignty’.
Such comments are astonishing, considering Pecorelli’s political
outlook and the privileged sources of his information. He went on to state
that the PCI’s participation in government would be ‘still less welcome to
the Soviets’. According to OP ‘The historic demonstration that democratic
communism can achieve power through popular consensus would represent
not only the collapse of the Soviet Communist Party’s ideological primacy
over the Third International but the end of Moscow’s imperial system.’
Pecorelli concluded: ‘Once again the logic of Yalta has prevailed over the
heads of the minor powers. It is Yalta that caused Via Mario Fani.’ There is
no denying that Pecorelli’s analysis of Soviet motives for opposing the
westernization of the PCI is grounded on common sense. It is worth noting,
however, that he deals with US motives first and in three paragraphs,
compared to a single paragraph on why a communist Prime Minister in
Italy would constitute ‘an even greater threat’ to the Soviet Union. After all,
the logic of Yalta had decreed that Italy lay within the US sphere of
influence.
Pecorelli spelled out the practical consequences of his analysis in
another, shorter article published in the same issue. Under the title ‘Renato

--- Sayfa 237 ---
Curcio does his duty too’, he observed: ‘The kidnappers of Aldo Moro had
nothing to do with the Red Brigades as they are commonly known. Curcio
and his companions have no connection with the great politico-technical
fact of the Moro kidnap.’ He said the request for an exchange of prisoners
put forward by Moro’s captors was merely a ploy to prevent the BR leaders
then on trial in Turin from denouncing ‘the web being woven above their
heads’. ‘In this phase, Curcio and Franceschini must supply a credible cover
before the eyes of the Italian masses for people whom they believe to be
their occasional allies.’ In exchange, Pecorelli wrote, they would receive
favourable treatment ‘when national pacification has been completed and a
great amnesty will cleanse all and consign all to oblivion’. Once again
Pecorelli had shown a remarkable prescience. Ten years later, the question
of an amnesty for terrorist offences was just beginning to come up for
debate. The truth about the Moro case is one of the more valuable chips in a
poker game being played by its protagonists as the latter generation of Red
Brigades leaders try to barter their silence in exchange for their liberty.
Pecorelli continued his analysis of the political background to the
Moro affair in an article published four months after Moro’s death (12
September 1978). He explained that an attempt to identify Moro’s
kidnappers should be based on their probable motives in relation to the
political programme that Moro represented. After reiterating the interest of
Washington and Moscow in halting the rise of Eurocommunism, he
observed that there was enough evidence ‘to be certain that the BR acted on
behalf of others, Italians or foreigners, Italians and foreigners’. He said the
Red Brigades’ activities were not ‘revolutionary’ in the traditional sense of
the word and that it was highly unlikely that their leaders aimed to become
ministers after overthrowing the existing government. ‘The BR do not
represent the missile’s principal rocket; they act as small steering rockets to
correct the course of spaceship Italy.’ He emphasized Italy’s role in an
international political system ‘in an epoch of limited sovereignty in the
West as much as in the East’ and commented: ‘Moro has always been one
of the principal navigating officers on spaceship Italy, having, what’s more,
ideas of his own on the course to be followed.’ The article ended by
predicting that General Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa of the carabinieri , who
had been given responsibility for co-ordinating the nationwide fight against
terrorism in August, would concentrate on arresting the lowly Red Brigades

--- Sayfa 238 ---
foot-soldiers, ‘leaving the important politicians in our country and abroad to
their untroubled slumbers’.
Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa was born the son of a carabiniere general
in Piedmont, north-west Italy, in 1920. One of his earliest missions, when
he became a carabiniere himself, was to command the paramilitary police
force in Corleone, a heartland of the Sicilian Mafia. His experience in
combating the Mafia would teach him much about the realities of crime and
power in his own country and he would return to his unfinished business
with the Mafia at the end of his life. Dalla Chiesa’s career was characterized
by a strong devotion to his military calling and an equal determination to
obtain results. A heavily built, pugnacious-looking man, he had achieved
notable successes against the Red Brigades as the head of the carabinieri
antiterrorism unit in 1974 and 1975. It was he who had been responsible for
the Girotto infiltration and the consequent arrest of Franceschini and Curcio
in 1974. The unit was disbanded after these early successes, for no apparent
reason. Only a month after his appointment in 1978 the carabinieri
discovered several important Red Brigades bases in Milan and made a
number of arrests. Commenting on this rapid success in an article titled
‘Why only now?’ (17 October 1978), Pecorelli highlighted the
‘inexplicable’ removal of Dalla Chiesa from his anti-terrorism role in 1975
and pointed out that ‘it was known by many that Dalla Chiesa had
maintained the privileged channels, sources of information, and contacts
that he had set up in the past’. Why, Pecorelli asked, had the general not
been appointed earlier, since he would almost certainly have been in a
position to take effective action against the BR? ‘Why was Dalla Chiesa not
called immediately after the Via Fani massacre, when Moro was still alive
in the hands of the Red Brigades?’ OP supplied its own blunt answer:
‘Before turning to the carabinieri , before unifying the command of anti-
terrorism activity in the hands of a real expert, they wanted to wait for the
grape to ripen and for the worst to be accomplished.’ Dalla Chiesa played
his own delicate role in the political mine-field of the Moro affair and that
role, as we shall see later, may even have cost him his life.
Pecorelli’s writings on the Moro affair went beyond theoretical
analysis of who may have been behind the elimination of the Christian
Democrat statesman. Some show an insider’s knowledge of the
circumstances of the kidnap, revealing facts that have subsequently been
confirmed by official investigations or making sensational allegations. One

--- Sayfa 239 ---
of the most extraordinary items, presented as a letter to the editor but almost
certainly written by Pecorelli himself, was published in the issue dated 17
October 1978. The letter is set out as though the reader was talking to
himself, asking a number of questions and then supplying his own answers.
It opens: ‘Sir, Allow a short note from one of your devoted readers, who,
following this summer, asked himself the question, “Cossiga knows
everything about Moro but doesn’t speak.” And answered himself, “He will
never speak, otherwise . . .” [sic]. 9 The letter continues: ‘He says: but the
minister knew nothing about it, DIGOS [the police] discovered nothing, and
the secret services . . . He replies: the police minister knew everything, he
even knew where he was held prisoner: in the area of the (Jewish) . . .
ghetto . . . [sic]. 9
According to one practised interpreter of Pecorelli, mention of ‘the
(Jewish) . . . ghetto’ was a coded reference to a Red Brigades base in Via
Gamillo Montalcini. The street is in the working-class suburb of Magliana,
colloquially referred to by the Romans as ‘the ghetto’, and Montalcini is the
name of a well-known Jewish family. The base in Flat ι, Via Montalcini 8,
was officially identified in 1985 as the prison where Moro was held during
the fifty-five days of his captivity. Some experts, however, believe it may
have been only one of several prisons and others doubt that it was his prison
at all. Whatever the-truth, Pecorelli appears to have anticipated the official
account by seven years.
One of the major mysteries of the Moro case gravitates around Via
Montalcini and its discovery. In 1988 it emerged that the police had been
informed by two residents of the Via Montalcini apartment block of the
presence of a red Renault 4, similar to the one in which Moro’s body had
been dumped, parked outside the building at some time prior to his death.
The exact date of the tip-off, thought to have been shortly after Moro’s
murder, has never been established. The fact that its existence only emerged
some ten years after the event appears to indicate considerable official
embarrassment about the circumstances under which the authorities
received it and the poor use they made of it. The Red Brigades’ flat was
occupied by a young couple, the terrorist Anna Laura Braghetti and a man
using the name Maurizio Altobelli, who has never been satisfactorily
identified. An initial investigation in July cleared the couple of suspicion,
partly because Braghetti had not hesitated to break the lock of her own
garage in a dispute with the previous occupant. He had promptly called the

--- Sayfa 240 ---
police, and the investigators concluded that a terrorist would not have
risked behaving in this high-handed manner. Given that Braghetti was a
member of the Red Brigades, it would appear that she was either somewhat
foolhardy or for some reason not afraid of the police. In October, the police
informed the residents that they would be raiding the suspect flat. A few
days later Braghetti and her companion moved out. A resident who called
the police to inform them that the couple were leaving was told by the
original officers that they were no longer on the case.2
The tip-off had originally been passed to Virginio Rognoni, who
succeeded Francesco Cossiga as Interior Minister following Moro’s murder,
by one of his Christian Democrat colleagues. Attempts by Examining
Magistrate Ferdinando Imposimato to obtain the full details of the original
investigation met with a partial and reticent response from the Interior
Ministry in 1982. The extreme secrecy surrounding the genesis of the Via
Montalcini investigation has led some people to suspect, as the OP letter
suggested, that the authorities knew the location of the prison even before
Moro’s death. On the very day of Moro’s seizure, the Rome carabinieri
were ordered to keep a look-out for a red Renault. The tip came from
Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Varisco, a close friend of Pecorelli’s who met
the journalist at least six times during the fifty-five days of Moro’s
imprisonment. Varisco was murdered by the Red Brigades on 13 July 1979,
a few days after resigning from the carabinieri. 3
Judge Imposimato has drawn attention to the mystery surrounding the
Via Montalcini base in numerous interviews with the press. He was
understandably perplexed at the Interior Ministry’s refusal to supply him,
the examining magistrate, with full details of the July 1978 police
investigation. In 1987 he told the author that Braghetti and Altobelli had
been seen making their departure from Via Montalcini in a vehicle with
American number plates, then modified this to ‘foreign’ plates. He may
have had this in mind when he discussed the mysteries of the Moro case in
an interview with the Corriere della Sera (28 April 1987). On that occasion
he emphasized the importance of understanding ‘the role of various secret
services in the history of terrorism’. Asked which countries he was thinking
of, he replied: ‘On this most delicate subject I can say nothing more.’ In
another interview, with the Catholic magazine {Il Sabato 4-10 June 1988),
he expressed his surprise at the location of the Via Montalcini base. ‘When
I discovered that Moro’s prison was there, in Via Montalcini, I asked

--- Sayfa 241 ---
myself: how could the BR have chosen a place like this, which is under the
total control of the Magliana band?’ This powerful Rome underworld
organization, with links to the Mafia and the Neapolitan Camorra, appears
to have played a disquieting role in the Moro affair; a subject that
Imposimato was not prepared to discuss. The man with probably the most
profound knowledge of the Moro case gave up his work as a magistrate
after his brother was murdered by the Mafia on 11 October 1983. He has
since been elected to the Senate on the Communist Party ticket.
Pecorelli’s ‘letter to the editor’ provided its own sinister explanation as
to why the authorities should be so reticent about the investigation into the
Via Montalcini base. It said Cossiga had been secretly informed of the
location of Moro’s prison by a carabiniere general while ‘the body was still
warm’. Continuing the interior dialogue, the letter ran: ‘He says: why did he
do nothing? He answers: the minister could not decide anything on the spur
of the moment [literally: on two feet], he had to consult a higher authority
and here is the puzzle: how much higher, perhaps even up to the lodge of
Christ in Paradise?’ The mention of the ‘lodge’ and the use of the idiomatic
expression ‘su due piedi ’ (on two feet) appears to be a cryptic reference to
P2. Given Gelli’s response to the kidnap and the activities of his followers
within the security services at this time, such an interpretation hardly seems
over-imaginative. After all, the author had made it clear he was presenting
us with ‘a puzzle’. The next day, according to the letter, the reply from the
higher authority was relayed to the carabinieri : there would be no attempt
at an armed rescue, lest Moro be killed by an accidental shot from his
rescuers or be executed by the terrorists. The letter stressed the potentially
devastating consequences if the truth of the matter should ever come out.
‘Nothing was done and Moro was eliminated, because if the story had come
out it would have made a noise like a bomb!’ This implies that Moro’s
elimination was essential to prevent the truth about the kidnap from
emerging and that, if that truth did emerge, it would have highly
destabilizing consequences. It was the second time that the letter mentioned
bombs. The first was as a figure of speech, but it gave the author the
opportunity to observe: ‘with bombs, at least for the moment, nothing can
be resolved.’ The hinted message seems to be that the Moro kidnap is a
continuation of the strategy of tension by other means. Perhaps most
remarkable of all, the letter went on to predict, in coded language, the

--- Sayfa 242 ---
assassination of General Dalla Chiesa because of his role in this affair. We
will consider this in a later chapter.
Another of the Moro mysteries of which Pecorelli had detailed
knowledge was the discovery of a Red Brigades base in Via Gradoli. The
Rome street had been under surveillance in connection with left-wing
extremism even before the kidnap. Two days after Moro’s seizure police
visited Via Gradoli 96 and knocked on the door of Flat 11, a Red Brigades
apartment occupied by Mario Moretti. Receiving no reply and after being
reassured by the neighbours that the occupant was a respectable gentleman,
the police abandoned their search. This official account of the visit contrasts
with the testimony of one of the neighbours, a woman, who told the police
that she had heard the sound of Morse code being transmitted during the
night. She even drew up a written statement to this effect, which she asked
the police to deliver to a senior officer of her acquaintance. The officer said
he never received it and the police who were allegedly entrusted with it
denied in court that such a document had ever been produced.4
The story became still more complex when a tip-off mentioning the
word Gradoli reached the police in early April. The information came from
a group of Bologna University professors, who claimed the name had been
thrown up during a session at a Ouija board, used to consult the spirit world
on the whereabouts of Moro’s prison. A police search in the central Italian
town of Gradoli drew a blank. When Eleonora Moro heard about this she
suggested that the tip could refer to the name of a Rome street but was told
by Interior Minister Cossiga that no such street was listed in the Yellow
Pages map of the city. The street exists and was listed. Mrs Moro and other
members of her family testified in court about this conversation with
Cossiga but the Interior Minister ‘firmly denied this circumstance’ when
questioned about it in his turn.5 He told the Moro Commission that he did
not feel he could blame the police for lacking the imagination to connect the
town of Gradoli with the Rome street of the same name.6
On 18 April the fire brigade were called to break into the Red Brigades
flat in Via Gradoli because water was leaking from its bathroom into the flat
underneath. The source of the leak was a shower attachment which had
been left full on and propped up on a broom handle with the jet of water
pointed at some cracked tiles above the bath.7 Contrary to all the rules of the
good terrorist, the flat was in considerable disorder and contained a

--- Sayfa 243 ---
spectacular display of Red Brigades memorabilia. The documents in the flat
were bundled up and were not examined for a matter of months,
fingerprints were never taken and the police did not attempt to keep the
building under discreet surveillance in order to try and catch its occupants.
Moretti himself reportedly arrived outside the building and was able to
make his escape undisturbed after seeing television cameras and a crowd of
curious bystanders gathered outside the police’s providential ‘find.’
It was Pecorelli who first revealed (OP, 25 April 1978) that the police
had already been to Via Gradoli ‘in the first ten days of the Moro kidnap,
following a valuable tip-off’. Pecorelli mistakenly gives the number of the
building as 92, rather than 96; either a simple error on his part or a
reference to a second terrorist base in the street which was never officially
discovered. Pecorelli had no doubt that the flooding of the bathroom was
deliberate. ‘The flooding is only a pretext dreamed up by the police to
distract the attention of the press from the person who twice, from Rome
and from Turin, provided information on the base. Information which might
have been decisive if it had been better used.’ He was even more specific in
another brief article in the same issue, claiming the discovery of the base
was ‘the result of a tip-off from the Rome underworld, despite the fact
Infelisi and the police maintain it was caused by a fortuitous flooding’. It is
quite possible that the tip-off, if it existed, came from a member of the
Magliana band, given the suspicions about the band being involved in the
kidnap in some way and the links between some of its members and the
secret services. Elsewhere in the magazine, Pecorelli, self-contradictory as
ever, suggested that the Red Brigades may have decided to attract attention
to the base by flooding it themselves. This would not have been as odd as it
might seem; if the BR thought the base was under police observation,
arranging for it to be publicly discovered would be one way of warning
other militants to steer clear. Had this been the case, though, one might have
expected the BR to admit it and so put an end to the damaging suspicion
and speculation aroused by the whole bizarre episode.
The Red Brigades leaders have consistently and vehemently denied
that the discovery of the Via Gradoli base was the fruit of anything but
chance. ‘The discovery of Via Gradoli was normal: I knew there was a
leaking water tank in a flat near ours and the administrator had been
informed. So it wasn’t P2 [behind it] but the dishonesty of Roman property
speculators,’ Moretti told journalist Giorgio Bocca. He gave full vent to his

--- Sayfa 244 ---
frustration at his inability to dispel the suspicions about the true role of the
Red Brigades. Ί can never convince the Italian bourgeoisie that the Moro
kidnap was something exclusively ours, organized by twenty or so mere
workers. You don’t want to admit this truth. You are always looking for the
person who commissioned it or the foreign brain behind it, which don’t
exist.’8 Another Red Brigades leader, Antonio Savasta, was equally eager to
provide a natural explanation for the base’s discovery. Unfortunately it
differs from Moretti’s. ‘The fall of Via Gradoli was due to two concomitant
factors,’ he told L’Espresso magazine (26 June 1988). ‘On the one hand the
large number of shirts owned by Moretti, for which reason his bath was
always full of rinsing shirts. On the other the virtual blindness and natural
carelessness of Barbara Balzerani [the woman living with Moretti at the
time]. Probably after having a shower and being late as usual for some
appointment, Balzerani put the shower attachment down hurriedly and
clumsily to rinse the same old shirts.’ Neither account squares with that of
the firemen who broke into the flat and found the shower attachment
propped up on a broom handle and switched full on.
Pecorelli poured scorn on the discovery in yet another article from the
25 April issue, describing how firemen and police were confronted by ‘an
unequivocal demonstration of the Red Brigades’ role in the Moro kidnap’.
He commented: ‘There’s no doubt, it’s them. Only the typewriter, at first
proudly presented as an IBM golf-ball [the type used for the BR
communiqués], is later reduced to a less incriminating model, perhaps so as
not to overdo the elements confirming the prime role played by the base in
question.’ He pointed out that even the man in the street knew the Red
Brigades’ rule about keeping compromising material packed in a suitcase
and ready for instant departure.
Mentioning the presence of airline pilots’ uniforms in the base,
Pecorelli made the curious parenthetical observation ‘(didn’t they actually
go in a helicopter to deliver Moro?)’. This seems to imply state involvement
in the kidnap as the Red Brigades, as commonly known, were not thought
to have had access to helicopters. It also ties in with the testimony of a
doctor who saw two of the Red Brigades’ get-away cars not far from Via
Fani between 9.10 and 9.20 on the morning of 16 March and who heard the
sound of a helicopter overhead at about the same time. Police helicopters
did not take off in response to the kidnap until after 9.30.9 Pecorelli had
voiced this suspicion in an earlier article (28 March 1978) in which he

--- Sayfa 245 ---
discussed events immediately following Moro’s capture. On to what means
of transport was the Christian Democrat president transferred? Ruling out a
helicopter, on to any other vehicle.’ The idea of government involvement in
the kidnap was suggested even more clearly in an article entitled ‘Diary of
the absolutely unreal’ (25 April 1978). In it Pecorelli cited ‘a strange
Freudian slip’ by a television announcer: ‘The people responsible for the
Moro kidnap met in Palazzo Chigi [the Prime Minister’s office] . . . sorry,
sorry!’
Other of Pecorelli’s writings were potentially embarrassing for the
government. On 4 April 1978, he wrote an article which indirectly supports
Mrs Moro’s contention that her husband had been denied his request for a
bullet-proof car. ‘Twenty-eight bullet-proof cars ordered by the Interior
Ministry for political and financial figures, potential targets of communist
terrorism, had been parked at the ministry for four months. But Minister
Cossiga chose to postpone the distribution of the vehicles.’ OP also kept a
close watch on the international ramifications of the affair, recording (25
April 1978) a visit to the United States by former secret service chief Vito
Miceli, where the P2 member gained the firm impression that the Italian
case was receiving the undivided attention of ‘certain American circles’.
Two months later (13 June 1978) the magazine reported that ‘the CIA,
asked for its assistance during the Moro kidnap, courteously declined the
invitation’. This last claim was confirmed by the director of SISDE,
General Giulio Grassini, in testimony to the P2 Commission in 1983.
Grassini said he had contacted the CIA Rome station chief to seek his
assistance, but to no avail. Τ can only imagine that they had nothing useful
to give us. Whatever the reason, we got no collaboration. The contribution
of the CIA was nil,’ he told the commission.10
In Pecorelli’s penultimate article dedicated to the Moro case (16
January 1979), titled ‘Shame on you, you clowns!’, he threatened to deal in
the future with a number of the unresolved mysteries of the affair. ‘We will
talk about Steve R. Pieczenik,’ he wrote, ‘the Deputy Secretary of State in
the US government, who participated for three weeks in the Interior
Ministry’s expert meetings, then returned to America before Moro was
killed, and reported to Congress that the measures taken by Cossiga on the
Moro affair were the best possible in the circumstances.’ The presence in
Rome of the thirty-four-year-old Deputy Assistant Secretary of State from
the State Department had been kept secret from the press, from most US

--- Sayfa 246 ---
embassy officials and from Italian officials outside Cossiga’s office.11
Pieczenik’s role appears to have consisted in strengthening the Italian
government’s resolve not to negotiate for Moro’s release by demonstrating
that ‘no man is indispensable to the viability of the nation state’.12
Some of the things Pecorelli chose not to publish are as illuminating as
what he did. In his diary under 3 April 1978 (during Moro’s captivity), he
had noted, ‘Cartoon: Zamberletti talking about the CIA.’13 No picture of
Christian Democrat politician Giuseppe Zamberletti being so indiscreet
ever graced the pages of the magazine. Pecorelli also had second thoughts
about an article titled ‘Moro: the head of the Italian government accuses the
United States’.14 A typewritten copy of the piece was found in the
journalist’s office after his death but it was never published. In it Pecorelli
related that a neo-fascist deputy, Ernesto De Marzio, had told parliamentary
colleagues and journalists that Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti had
expressed to him his worry at ‘the glacial coldness shown by the United
States over the kidnap of Moro’. But according to the article, Andreotti had
gone further, ‘stating unequivocally that it was “the Americans who
commissioned the kidnapping of Moro” ‘. Pecorelli goes on to scoff at the
idea: ‘The motive for this presumed and original transatlantic initiative was
not revealed. Probably Andreotti will find an appropriate opportunity to
provide further details on his grave accusations.’ This apparent mirth gives
a less accurate indication of Pecorelli’s true judgement on the story than the
fact that he decided to withhold it from publication. De Marzio, who was
head of Destra Nazionale, a pro-Atlantic offshoot of the MSI, has denied
that any such episode took place. ‘Andreotti would never have said
anything of the sort and least of all to me,’ he told me. Ί don’t think
Andreotti could ever have thought such a crude thing.’15 Pecorelli’s motive
for writing and then withholding this sensitive article remains unclear.
In his truculent article ‘Shame on you, you clowns!’, the OP editor
outlined a hypothetical scenario according to which Cossiga and others in
the Christian Democrat leadership were awaiting the imminent release of
Moro following successful negotiations. ‘But someone didn’t keep the
bargain . . . the “carabinieri ” (?) were to have checked that Moro was alive
and let the red car go. Then someone raised the price to an unacceptable
level because they wanted the anti-communist Moro dead anyway and the
BR killed the president of the Christian Democrat Party in the car, in the
centre of Rome . . . But we won’t speak of this because it’s a lunatic theory,

--- Sayfa 247 ---
without substance. We won’t say that the legionnaire’s name was “De” and
the butcher Maurizio.’ Whether secret negotiations were embarked upon
and what point they may have reached remain an open question. As usual
Pecorelli provides a detailed and confident version of his own, which finds
echoes in other unorthodox accounts of the kidnap, as we shall see. His
legionnaire sounds remarkably like Giustino De Vuono, at one time
candidate for the role of expert marksman in Via Fani but subsequently
eliminated from the inquiries. Maurizio could be Moretti, who used that
name with some of his contacts, or the as yet unidentified Maurizio
Altobelli. Whether or not Pecorelli had succeeded in identifying the latter
will never be known, as he was unable to fulfil his promise to return to the
topics touched on in this article. He was shot dead as he sat in his car in a
Rome street below his office on the evening of 20 March 1979. He had
been shot in the mouth, the Mafia’s way of punishing those who break its
code of silence.
As we have seen, there were many people who could have had an
interest in the elimination of Pecorelli but there is also considerable
evidence linking his death to the information he possessed about the Moro
affair. Former SID agent Captain Antonio Labruna told the P2 Commission
that he had received a phone call from Pecorelli on the day before his
murder. The journalist had told him that he was about to collect some
highly sensitive documents, which could put his life in danger but which he
did not intend to publish. According to another account, Pecorelli had
promised Prosecutor Luciano Infelisi new documents on the Moro case
shortly before his death. And then there was his published promise to
expound on the unsolved mysteries of the affair. Pecorelli’s sister Rosita
visited her brother’s apartment four days after his murder and found it in a
state of utter chaos, with papers strewn all over the place. ‘It looked as
though it had been visited by burglars,’ she said.16
The parliamentary Moro Commission wrote to the head of the Rome
public prosecutor’s office in 1980 asking him to supply them with copies of
all Pecorelli’s papers with a bearing on the Moro affair. The prosecutor
replied that none of the documents had any relevance to the commission’s
inquiries.17 The P2 Commission subsequently acquired the documentation,
enabling parliamentarians who served on both commissions to realize just
how inaccurate the prosecutor’s original response had been. Two days after
Pecorelli’s murder, an anonymous informant telephoned a senior Rome

--- Sayfa 248 ---
magistrate to inform him that the man behind the shooting was ‘a certain
Lucio Gelli, currently staying at the Hotel Excelsior in Rome, room 127’.
The caller went on to provide a series of accurate biographical details about
Gelli. ‘The motive for the crime was revelations made or about to be made
on the basis of exclusive documents concerning senior personalities.’ The
magistrate passed on the lead to carabiniere colonel Antonio Cornacchia,
the man whose infiltrator in the Rome Red Brigades provided no useful
intelligence during the period of the Moro kidnap and who himself joined
P2 in 1980. Cornacchia’s investigations produced a thirty-line report
correcting the spelling of Gelli’s first name and concluding that ‘nothing
negative has emerged regarding the aforementioned, at least for the
moment’.18 And there the matter rested for another three years, until a
number of ‘repentant’ right-wing terrorists began to give evidence
implicating Valerio Fioravanti in Pecorelli’s murder. Fioravanti, they said,
had carried out the shooting on Gelli’s behalf.19 He has still not been
charged with the crime, however.
Pecorelli’s relationship with Gelli was a complex one. We have seen
how he discussed the P2 boss’s fascist past and his relationship with
Romania in OP articles which Gelli would presumably have preferred
unpublished. These appeared in January and February 1979 not long before
Pecorelli’s murder. Tension between the two had come to a head on 18 May
1977, when the OP editor had written to Gelli to inform him of his intention
to resign from P2. ‘Dear Licio,’ he wrote, ‘. . . the brotherly assistance
among members of the Family has ceased, or perhaps it never existed . . .
Are there, by chance, grade A and grade Β brothers? Recognizing such
disparity, I notify you of my irrevocable decision to leave the Organization.’
The letter sounds rather as though Pecorelli had been disappointed in a
request for financial assistance. It is not clear whether he actually posted it
and in any case he expressed the hope that personal relations between the
two would remain unchanged.20 Judging by the frequency of their meetings
in subsequent years this appears to have been the case.
Given Gelli’s predilection for operating in the shadows he would not
have been unduly pleased with the coverage OP devoted to his activities.
One of the first references to Gelli (18 January 1972) speaks of ‘a very
efficient organization, brilliantly camouflaged, which is run by a Personage
whose identity we cannot reveal, since he is unknown to almost all the
enrolled members. This personage is the decisive factor in the most delicate

--- Sayfa 249 ---
and complex affairs of Italian political life.’ Another of Pecorelli’s barbed
references to the lodge appeared on 25 June 1977, apparently sycophantic
but perhaps not entirely reassuring for P2 readers: ‘It’s no good saying that
it’s a den of coup plotters and subversives . . . Politicians of all colours
belong to it, but all of the first rank. . . One could say that Gelli represents
what remains of the state.’ Another article was more forthright. Published a
week before Pecorelli’s death but dated 20 March 1979, it read:
‘Assassinations, bombings, coup attempts, the shadow of freemasonry has
hovered over them all: from Piazza Fontana to the Occorsio murder, from
the Borghese coup to kidnappings, to the flight of Sindona from Italy.’
Pecorelli rashly promised to return soon to the Sindona affair, another threat
he was unable to deliver on.
It is perhaps surprising that Pecorelli lived as long as he did,
considering his access to inside information and the apparently ill-
disciplined way in which he used it. He may actually have been seeking a
financial accommodation with Gelli at the time of his death. Several of his
articles hinted at the damaging revelations he was capable of making but he
had a dinner appointment with ‘Licio’ at 8.30 on the day after his murder
and another pencilled in for 23 March. Curiously, his appointments for 22
March are not known, as that page has been removed from his diary.21 It has
even been suggested that Pecorelli was under pressure from two opposite
quarters in the last weeks of his life. He was being threatened with death if
he published certain documents in his possession, while another group had
threatened to kill him if he did not.22
Notes
1   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 15,
Rome, 1987, pp. 769-92.
2   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, pp. 155-60.
3   Ibid., p. 23.
4   Ibid., p. 53.
5   Report of the Moro Commission, Rome, 1983, p. 40.
6   Quoted in Giuseppe Ferrara, Il Caso Moro , Tullio Pironti,
Naples, 1987, Ρ-349·

--- Sayfa 250 ---
7   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 185.
8   Giorgio Bocca, Noi Terroristi , Garzanti, Milan, 1985, p. 217.
9   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 32.
10   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
3, Rome, 1985, p. 528.
11   Robert Katz, Days of Wrath, Doubleday, New York, 1980, p.
54.
12   Corriere della Sera, 24 April 1978.
13   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 15,
Rome, 1987, p. 777·
14   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 17,
Rome, 1987, p. 432.
15   Ernesto De Marzio to the author, 30 June 1989.
16   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 258.
17   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 18,
Rome, 1987, pp. 116-17.
18   Ibid., pp. 113-14.
19   Ibid., p. 81.
20   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 15,
Rome, 1987, pp. 899-900.
21   Ibid., pp. 954-5.
22   Giuseppe Rosselli, Paese Sera , 26 May 1981.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
[13]
THE MAGLIANA MESSAGES
Pecorelli’s murder has been explicitly linked to the Moro affair in a
series of detailed and disquieting messages originating within the Rome
underworld. Three weeks after the journalist’s death a case was found
abandoned in a Rome taxi and was handed in to Colonel Cornacchia of the
carabinieri . It contained a Beretta 9 mm pistol, documents and other items
relating, by analogy, to the Moro kidnap. Together the contents appeared to
constitute a coded message to the security services and revealed an insider’s
knowledge of the circumstances of Moro’s captivity and murder. The bag
contained eleven bullets of 7.65 calibre and one larger-calibre round: Moro
was shot a total of eleven times, one of which was with a large-calibre
weapon. It also held an IBM golf-ball revolving head marked Light Italic
12, similar to the lettering used by the Red Brigades for their communiques
written during Moro’s imprisonment. There was also a key-ring with nine
keys attached (possible reference to the nine terrorists who participated in
the Via Fani operation); two Silvania flash cubes (two Polaroid photos of
Moro were sent to the newspapers while he was a prisoner); a packet of
Paloma paper handkerchiefs (these were the type used to staunch Moro’s
wounds); and three small white pills, a possible reference to the medication
Moro was taking.1 There were a couple of other items, of which the
meaning is somewhat more complex and which we will come to later.
The documents in the bag included ten pages torn out of the Rome
phone book and listing a number of government ministries. The pages
contained several handwritten messages using the same military code as
had been adopted by the Red Brigades for a communique delivered in
Rome on 20 May 1978. There were also four one-page documents, each
outlining plans for attacks on establishment figures. One states as its
objective the elimination of the bodyguards of the communist president of
the Chamber of Deputies, Pietro Ingrao, suggesting a possible plan to
kidnap him. Another proposes the kidnap of the son of a senior Rome
magistrate, Achille Gallucci. Yet another outlines a plan to kidnap a
prominent Milan lawyer, Giuseppe Prisco. Alarmingly for Prisco, it had
been rubber-stamped with an address stamp taken from his office and
contained details of his plans to participate at a reunion of Alpine soldiers

--- Sayfa 252 ---
the following week, the accuracy of which Prisco confirmed to the author. It
also contains faintly ironic references to the involvement of ‘the comrades
from Padua’. The document speaks of holding an ‘analytical debate’ on the
Padua comrades’ participation, at a planned meeting. The reference to the
Autonomía Operaia organization led by the intellectual Toni Negri, whose
revolutionary commitment Pecorelli had cryptically questioned, is clear.
None of these projects was ever put into operation. Nevertheless, the
documents cannot lightly be dismissed. They are written in the kind of
bureaucratic jargon associated more usually with the secret services than
with the Red Brigades. What’s more, the note on Gallucci gives his unlisted
home telephone number, dating from the late 1960s, a time when the Red
Brigades organization had yet to be established.2
Most striking though, only three weeks after his murder, was the page
headed ‘Pecorelli Mino (to be eliminated)’. The document gives Pecorelli’s
home and office address and a description of his Citroën GxL car, together
with its number plate. ‘Action to be taken before 24 March, allowing him
more time would be problematic. Under no circumstances should
responsibility be claimed. Lay a false trail instead.’ The document ended by
acknowledging responsibility for the murder and adding a menacing
comment: ‘Tuesday 20, 21.40, news arrived that the Operation had been
satisfactorily concluded: material recovered but unfortunately it is
incomplete, paragraphs 162, 168, 174, 177 are missing.’ The gist of the
message was to link Pecorelli’s murder to the Red Brigades and to the Moro
affair, at the same time as suggesting that the killing had been intended to
prevent Pecorelli from publishing particular documents, of which the writer
had detailed knowledge.
Another paragraph suggested that the journalist’s movements had been
kept under close surveillance for an extended period and launched another
coded message for those capable of deciphering it. Tuesday 6 March 1979,
the operation has been postponed because of a long conversation with a
senior carabiniere officer in the Piazza delle Cinque Lune area.’ The officer
was Pecorelli’s friend Colonel Antonio Varisco who, the intended recipients
of the message would be aware, lived in that central Rome square. Varisco
was the man who gave orders for the security services to keep a look-out for
a red Renault 4 on the day of Moro’s kidnap. His murder, on 13 July 1979,
has been attributed to the Red Brigades, though the killers’ choice of
weapon, a sawn-off shotgun, was more typical of the Mafia than of the left-

--- Sayfa 253 ---
wing terrorist group. The financial magazine Il Mondo (11 April 1980) has
tentatively linked Varisco’s murder to his investigation of Pecorelli’s death,
citing the opinion of an unnamed Christian Democrat deputy, who was a
friend of the slain magazine editor: ‘The feeling is that Colonel Antonio
Varisco had a lead to follow. But then they killed him too. Since then there
has been utter darkness.’ One of Varisco’s colleagues, Captain Antonio
Straullu, met a similar fate at the hands of right-wing terrorists of the
Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari (NAR). His signature appears on almost all the
reports on the investigation which followed the discovery of the bag and he
is said to have confided to a friend that he knew enough ‘to bring the palace
[Italian metonymy for the political establishment] down’. 3
The bag had been deliberately left in the taxi by a Rome underworld
figure, Antonio Chichiarelli, a skilled forger who specialized in faking the
work of modern Italian painters such as Giorgio De Chirico. Chichiarelli
had had a colourful and hectic career and the wide range of his criminal
contacts helps to explain the inside knowledge on which he was able to
draw in drafting his menacing messages. He had been in contact with
members of the Magliana band, with the ‘ndrangheta (Calabrian Mafia) and
with neo-fascist terrorists. He was a close associate of a chubby Rome
criminal named Luciano Dal Bello, who was also an informant of the
carabinieri and domestic secret service, SISDE. What’s more, there is
evidence that Chichiarelli was directly involved in the Moro kidnap and had
inside information on both the Pecorelli and Varisco murders. Years later
Dal Bello told Rome magistrates: ‘On the subject of the Pecorelli murder,
Toni, although he never went into detail, claimed to know a great deal about
the affair . . . Toni told me that he needed money for a lad who had been
involved in the Pecorelli case and he asked if I could cash some cheques for
him.’4 Another of Chichiarelli’s associates linked him to the assassination
of Varisco. On the subject of that murder, the only comment Toni made to
me was to say that he had buried the shotgun used to kill Varisco in his
garden,’ Chichiarelli’s accountant told the magistrates.5
Numerous witnesses have linked the enterprising forger with a
particularly important and obscure episode in the Moro kidnap. On 18 April
1978, the same day as the ‘fortuitous’ discovery of the Red Brigades’ Via
Gradoli base, what appeared to be a seventh communique since the seizure
of Aldo Moro was delivered to the authorities in Rome. It informed them of
the ‘execution . . . by “suicide”’ of the Christian Democrat president and

--- Sayfa 254 ---
told them that they would find his body in Lake Duchessa in the
mountainous Abruzzi region of central Italy. The document revealed a
macabre sense of humour, declaring that this would be the first of a long
series of ‘suicides’, which would ‘no longer be a prerogative of the Baader-
Meinhof Group’.6 From the outset it gave rise to scepticism. Some police
officers were convinced from the start that it was not a genuine Red
Brigades message, but scientific examination seemed to show that it had
been written on the same typewriter as the previous communiqués. A letter
from the head of the scientific department of the Rome police, dated 18
April 1978, states that the lettering of the communique was ‘exactly
analogous to that found in previous Red Brigades communiques’. It says
the handwritten title, ‘brigate rosse’, was different from that in previous
communiques but suggests that this may have been because it was done in a
hurry. In actual fact, the lettering is not exactly the same as in other BR
communiques: the length of tail in the letter ‘f’, for example, is not the
same, a difference immediately visible to the naked eye. Magistrates
investigating the case have since come to believe that the police deliberately
accredited a document which they knew to be false.
Despite the fact that the lake was covered in a thick layer of ice and
surrounded by undisturbed snow, a massive search was launched, with fire
brigade frogmen being lowered into the freezing water through holes
broken in the ice. Not surprisingly, nothing was found. A couple of days
later the Red Brigades delivered their ‘genuine’ communique no. 7,
denouncing the previous document as a fraud and a provocation. According
to the new message, the fake was ‘a lugubrious manoeuvre by the
specialists in psychological warfare’ and had been drawn up by ‘Andreotti
and his accomplices’. Given the impact on public opinion of the
announcement of Moro’s murder and of the mountain search, it is
somewhat surprising that the Red Brigades only got round to denouncing
the false communique after devoting the first eighty-six lines of their new
missive to other matters.7
It is vital to understand who was responsible for the false communiqué
as in effect it constituted a trial run, testing public reaction to the news of
Moro’s death. Red Brigades leaders have appreciated its significance and
provided varying accounts of its genesis. ‘Repentant’ terrorist Patrizio Peci
told the Moro Commission that a member of a minor left-wing group,
Azione Rivoluzionaria (Revolutionary Action), had admitted responsibility

--- Sayfa 255 ---
for the communiqué while they were sharing a prison cell.8 The man
involved was Enrico Paghera, and he in turn confirmed Peci’s account to
the Moro Commission, explaining that the communiqué was a stratagem to
relieve police pressure on Rome so that members of his group could leave
the city. Much later, however, Paghera admitted in an interview with
Panorama magazine (26 June 1988) that he had lied about this at the
request of an unnamed carabiniere captain, who had approached him while
he was in prison. Paghera added that the same officer had tried,
unsuccessfully, to persuade his group to claim responsibility for the murder
of Mino Pecorelli. He also claimed that he had become an informant of the
Interior Ministry through the good offices of an American citizen whom he
had met in prison. The American was Ronald Stark, who had been arrested
for drug trafficking in 1975 and who spent his time in prison, where he
remained until April 1979, cultivating the friendship of left-wing terrorists.
We will hear more of him later.
The idea that the false communiqué was a diversionary tactic to relieve
police pressure on the Red Brigades has been given credence by Mario
Moretti, who as organizer of the Moro operation should have been in a
position to know.9 But his account is not always very convincing.
Discussing the subject in an interview with Giorgio Bocca (L’Espresso, 2
December 1984), he showed an evasiveness and susceptibility that clearly
illustrate his grasp of its significance. Ί have read many interpretations of
that false communiqué. According to some, it was the secret services on
behalf of. . . Andreotti who wanted to tell Moro: we consider you a corpse
already. Or P2 that wanted to throw the investigators off the track, prolong
the kidnap and thus the destabilization.’ Moretti then launched into a
spirited attack on a leading political commentator who had had the temerity
to adopt the latter view. Without saying who actually was behind the
communiqué, he moved on to answer a question that had not been asked:
‘There was no premeditated permissiveness [on the part of the police]. We
were in the middle of a battle. We were killing one another. The war was
becoming ever more ferocious and no one took prisoners.’ The question of
the authorship of the false communiqué seems to have led Moretti
spontaneously and inevitably to the subject of secret service manipulation
of the Red Brigades.
The authorities had in fact discussed the possibility of writing and
distributing false Red Brigades messages. One of the people who proposed

--- Sayfa 256 ---
this tactic was Public Prosecutor Claudio Vitalone, a close political ally of
then Prime Minister Andreotti. One of the reasons for Vitalone’s suggestion
was that it would remove the guarantee of authenticity from the Red
Brigades’ communiqués (communiqué no. ι had concluded: ‘The
communiqués will all be typed on the same machine: this one.’) and so
make management of the whole operation more difficult for them. ‘Cossiga
approved the proposal and I was startled when the Lake Duchessa
communiqué came out, because it seemed like a belated application of my
suggestion but badly implemented in that the judicial authorities had not
been informed in advance,’ Vitalone told author Sergio Flamigni.10
According to Prosecutor Infelisi, however, the idea was rejected when the
secret services said that they were technically not up to the task. Mino
Pecorelli made his own confident assessment of the communiqué, which he
described as ‘anomalous’ and ‘rickety’ (OP 25 April 1978). ‘The seventh
message and the second seventh were both written by the BR. Our secret
services and the Interior Ministry’s brains trust would never have had the
imagination and the courage to attempt the “Duchessa bluff”. That means
that within the BR there are two factions pursuing different strategies (and
perhaps different aims). . .’ It is curious that he should attribute both the
false communiqué and its denunciation to the same authors. It is possible
that Pecorelli was deliberately helping to cover up the fact that the secret
services were responsible for the communiqué. Equally, he may genuinely
have believed that the Red Brigades themselves had drawn it up. He was
not necessarily wrong in suggesting this. There is one possible
interpretation that combines the apparently contradictory belief of Rome
magistrates that the police knowingly accredited a false document with
Pecorelli’s analysis: that the false communiqué was the work of a ‘secret
service faction’ within the Red Brigades.
It was actually Toni Chichiarelli, the underworld forger, who had
drawn up the false communiqué which started the authorities on their wild-
goose chase to an ice-bound lake in the Abruzzi mountains. Right-wing
terrorist Massimo Sparti told magistrates: ‘Toni told me that he prepared
Red Brigades communiqué no. 7 as a joke, to send the police running to
Lake Duchessa.’ His account was confirmed by Chichiarelli’s wife, Chiara
Zossolo: Τ know for a fact that the false lead to Lake Duchessa was the
work of my husband, who told me so while the story was unfolding, that is
while the television was broadcasting a report about it . . . I immediately

--- Sayfa 257 ---
believed his statement, partly because it related to an area very close to the
town where Toni was born.’ Another of Chichiarelli’s friends testified that
the forger had told him that he wrote the communiqué on behalf of the
organization to which he belonged. ‘Toni told me that he had been a
member of the BR and that he had played an important role in that
organization,’ the witness said.11 A discreet reference to Chichiarelli’s role
in the Duchessa affair was contained in the bag he had left in the Rome taxi:
it contained a map of the Abruzzi region including the site of the lake. On
the evidence so far, it would appear that Chichiarelli wrote the false
communiqué, was privy to secret information about both the Pecorelli and
Varisco murders, and had even been in contact with the Red Brigades. ‘Toni
showed definite extreme left-wing tendencies and claimed to be an admirer
of the Moretti line,’ his accountant later told the authorities. By abandoning
his case in the back of a taxi he sent a message to the security services that
linked Pecorelli’s death with the Moro affair and implicated, but in a crude
and unconvincing way, the Red Brigades in the journalist’s murder.
Giannino Guiso, a lawyer acting for Renato Curcio at the time of the
kidnap, has even suggested that Licio Gelli may have been involved in the
Lake Duchessa episode. ‘That was the dress rehearsal for Moro’s death . . .
The fact that this false document was considered credible, when in fact it
was an obvious fake, must signify something. Chichiarelli certainly didn’t
prepare it on his own initiative.’12 The fact that the police decided that an
‘obvious fake’ was a genuine BR document is indeed of the utmost
significance. It implies that Chichiarelli was acting on behalf of the secret
services in an operation that had the knowledge, approval and participation
of the police. What is even more grave is the evidence that Chichiarelli was
at the same time in contact with the Red Brigades and possibly even a
member of that organization. As we shall see, there is convincing evidence
that he actually came into contact with Moro during the kidnap.
Five years later Chichiarelli took the opportunity to drive home his
message still further in a spectacular and profitable manner, but one which
would ultimately prove fatal. On the evening of 23 March 1984, security
guard Franco Parsi finished his shift at the Brink’s security deposit on the
outskirts of Rome and returned to his home. He was approached in the
underground garage by four men who identified themselves as plainclothes
policemen and told him they had come to search his flat for drugs. Once
inside the apartment they said they were members of the Red Brigades and

--- Sayfa 258 ---
that they intended to rob the Brink’s vault. Parsi was forced to accompany
three of the gunmen to the Brink’s premises the following morning, while
the fourth remained behind, holding his wife and daughter hostage. The
raiders were escorted into the Brink’s building by Parsi, where they
disarmed two more guards and made off with a record-breaking 35 billion
Lire (£17 million) haul of cash and securities. Before tying up the three
guards, the gunmen emphasized the political aspect to the robbery by
putting one of them up against a wall and photographing him in front of a
red flag bearing the words ‘Red Brigades’ and an encircled five-pointed
star, symbol of the terrorist organization.
Before leaving, the ‘terrorists’ deliberately abandoned a number of
items, which were clearly intended to convey a symbolic message to the
investigators. These included an Energa rocket-propelled smoke grenade,
seven NATO 7.62 calibre bullets, seven short lengths of metal chain and
seven keys. The keys and chain appear to be references to the Moro
kidnapping and the repetition of the number seven a possible reference to
the false Red Brigades communiqué.13 The Energa smoke bomb seems to
have been a reference to the Varisco murder, during which two similar
grenades were set off by the officer’s attackers. It came from a stock of ten
American-made smoke bombs, which had once been stored in Egidio
Giuliani’s Health Ministry weapons cache. And it was Giuliani who had
supplied SISMI with the weapons and explosives for their ‘Terror on the
trains’ operation, intended to lead astray the Bologna bomb investigators.
The Energa smoke bomb appears to have been intended to convey the
following message: we know who killed Varisco and why. Also left behind
was a photocopy of a political document drawn up by the Red Brigades
leadership. It was unlikely to convince investigators that the heist was the
work of left-wing terrorists: it had obviously been copied from a
reproduction of the document in a book on the Red Brigades by journalist
Giorgio Bocca.14
The organizer of the robbery was Antonio Chichiarelli and he
continued to elaborate on his messages even after it had been successfully
completed. Two days later an anonymous caller told a journalist from the
Rome newspaper, Il Messaggero , that he would find some interesting
material in a litter bin in Piazza Gioacchino Belli. The journalist found an
envelope containing three more 7.62 calibre bullets and Brink’s payment
slips, proving beyond doubt that it came from the robbers. There were also

--- Sayfa 259 ---
a number of documents conveying a complex and menacing series of
messages. According to the examining magistrate, the documents create an
association between apparently unconnected events and the messages were
based on ‘such a detailed knowledge of people and situations that they can
only be alarming’.15 Continuing the unconvincing theme of Red Brigades
involvement in the robbery was a typewritten document claiming
responsibility for it on their behalf. Attached with sellotape to the top of the
page was another piece of paper bearing the words ‘Red Brigades’, the
organization’s symbol and a series of political slogans. On examination, this
fragment turned out to be an original, rather than a copy, and to be identical
to the heading of a document known as Red Brigades ‘coded communique
no. 1’. The communiqué referred to police operations in Via Gradoli and at
Lake Duchessa and had been distributed in Rome on 20 May 1978. What’s
more, it had been found in the same Piazza Belli bin after a phone call,
again to the Messaggero newspaper. The evidence is therefore
overwhelming that the person who claimed responsibility for the Brink’s
raid on behalf of the Red Brigades in 1984 was the author of the 1978
coded communiqué, or had at the very least been in contact with him. In the
1984 document, the author claimed responsibility for the ‘proletarian
expropriation’ of a ‘Sindona multinational’. The involvement of Sicilian
financier Michele Sindona in the Brink’s concern was not generally known
at the time and its mention again illustrates Chichiarelli’s access to
confidential information. The fact that massive robberies occurred at
Brink’s premises in London and Paris the following year gives rise to the
suspicion that the co-operation from insiders may have gone beyond the
corruption of a few lowly guards.
Also included in the package for the Messaggero were the originals of
the reports on Pecorelli, Gallucci and Ingrao which had been left by
Chichiarelli in the abandoned bag in 1979. The Pecorelli document had a
number of words added by hand at the bottom of the page: ‘To the archive
of the Central Military Command’ and ‘Sereno Freato’. The archive
reference smacks more of the secret services than it does of the Red
Brigades, while the reference to Sereno Freato evokes the Moro case once
again. Freato was Moro’s secretary and he provided the link between the
personally uncorrupt Christian Democrat leader and the disreputable
sources of finance without which it is virtually impossible for a major
political leader to operate. There can be no doubt that Chichiarelli was

--- Sayfa 260 ---
responsible for sending these documents to the Messaggero as one of his
accomplices was present when he telephoned the paper and others said they
saw him working with papers relating to the Red Brigades a few days prior
to the Brink’s raid.
Probably the most alarming items received by the Messaggero were
two fragments of Polaroid photographs showing the Red Brigades’ symbol
and the words ‘brigate rosse’. According to journalist Marcella Andreoli
(Panorama, 12 June 1988), the fragments correspond exactly to the photos
taken of Moro against the background of a Red Brigades flag during his
captivity. ‘There are even the same folds in the cloth and a shadow over the
bottom half of the second “s” in the word rosse, just where Moro’s head
was in the so-to-speak official Red Brigades photos. So it is plausible that
Chichiarelli may really have entered Moro’s prison with his Polaroid
camera in his hand.’ This extraordinary claim is supported by the evidence
of Chichiarelli’s accomplice Gaetano Miceli (to Rome magistrates, 14
November 1984): Ί remember seeing a Polaroid-type camera in Toni’s
possession . . . with which, according to Toni, he had not only photographed
the Brink’s employees during the robbery but he had also photographed
Moro while he was being held by the Red Brigades . . . Toni told me that he
had been a member of the Red Brigades and played an important role in
that organization . . . Toni had promised to show me the photos of Moro; he
told me later that he had destroyed the photos and the Polaroid.’ Miceli (no
relation of the secret service chief) repeated his allegations during a later
interrogation (30 March 1985): ‘On the subject of the Moro kidnap, Toni
told me he had photographed the parliamentarian with his Polaroid and that
he had kept a couple of the photos he had taken then.’ Sending the
fragments of the photos was a subtle reminder to the authorities of their
existence. The implications are enormous: that a member of the Rome
underworld in contact with the secret services was able to enter Moro’s
prison while he was still alive, that the secret services must therefore have
known the location of the prison (as Pecorelli had claimed), but that despite
this, nothing was done to secure his release.
This interpretation is reinforced by two of the more cryptic items
abandoned in the Rome taxi in 1979. One was a driving licence, with no
photo attached, in the name of Luciano Grossetti. This was a possible
reference to Chichiarelli’s associate Luciano Dal Bello, who acted as an
informant for both the domestic intelligence service and the carabinieri .

--- Sayfa 261 ---
Dal Bello is a man of heavy build and the root of the word Grossetti means
large. The other was a ferry ticket for the transportation of a car from the
southern port of Villa San Giovanni to Messina in Sicily. The ticket
immediately conjures up the idea of the Mafia but it also contains a cryptic
reference to the carabinieri . When questioned about it by magistrates (22
February 1985), Chichiarelli’s wife explained that the only time her
husband had been to Sicily was to attend the wedding of a carabiniere
officer, Major Raffaele Imondi, not long before the discovery of the bag.
Naturally, she insisted, the major had nothing whatever to do with the affair
‘and I can’t therefore understand why my husband left the ticket in the bag
with the clear and unconcealed intention of giving it a precise significance,
which obviously escapes me.’ The significance could well have something
to do with what Pecorelli had alleged in his ‘letter to the editor’ about the
carabinieri’s role in the discovery of Moro’s prison and the failure to free
him.
Chichiarelli’s documents appear to show a profound knowledge of a
number of complex and violent episodes. Aside from the detail of his
messages, there is a recurrent theme in them: that of false Red Brigades.
Chichiarelli himself had drawn up the false communique no. 7, to which he
repeatedly alluded; the bag left in the taxi implied, but in a crude and
unconvincing manner, that the Red Brigades were responsible for
Pecorelli’s murder; the BR ‘strategic resolution’ photocopied from Bocca’s
book and the original BR heading attached with sellotape to the leaflet
claiming responsibility for the Brink’s robbery were also unlikely to
convince the police that they were dealing with genuine Red Brigades
terrorists. With so many false terrorists about, the underlying suggestion
seems to be that even Moro’s kidnappers were not the genuine article. This
was just what Pecorelli had written (2 May 1978): ‘The kidnappers of Aldo
Moro have nothing whatever to do with the Red Brigades as commonly
known.’ And Chichiarelli’s allusive messages had insistently linked the
journalist’s death to the Moro case, implying, perhaps, that he had been
killed because of his coverage of it in OP.
Someone, at least, took Chichiarelli’s messages very seriously. He was
shot dead outside his home on 26 September 1984. His mistress, who was
with him at the time, was also seriously injured in the attack. A search of
his home subsequently revealed a large quantity of cash and financial
documents coming from the Brink’s robbery. With them in Chichiarelli’s

--- Sayfa 262 ---
safe was a video of a television documentary about the robbery, which had
been labelled ‘B-OK’, suggesting that the organizer of the raid had not been
unduly alarmed by its content. Immediately after Chichiarelli’s death, his
friend Luciano Dal Bello arranged for the removal of a considerable
quantity of documents that had been hidden in the forger’s attic. One of
those who helped in the clear-up operation told magistrates that Dal Bello
had asked ‘if we could help him remove from Chichiarelli’s house some
very sensitive material that belonged to Toni and which concerned, from
what he [Dal Bello] told me, his previous activity as a member of the Red
Brigades’.16 After Chichiarelli’s death, most of his accomplices were
arrested and much of the stolen money recovered. The surviving Brink’s
raiders have been tried and convicted for their role in the robbery at a trial
that studiously steered clear of the political aspects of the crime. The
defendants, in any case, knew little about Chichiarelli’s messages, an aspect
of the robbery that they had left entirely up to him.
From the testimony of Chichiarelli’s wife, Chiara Zossolo, it emerges
that she suspected Dal Bello of involvement in her husband’s murder.
Speaking of the bag full of messages left in the Rome taxi, she told
magistrates (21 February 1985): ‘My husband would certainly not have
been capable of conceiving and organizing an operation like that on his
own.’ She suggested that Dal Bello, ‘because of his considerable
intellectual abilities, was the only person capable of setting up an operation
of that type’. Dal Bello had informed his carabinieri contacts of
Chichiarelli’s role in drawing up the false Red Brigades communique no. 7
and this while Moro was still alive, lending strength to the theory that if
Chichiarelli knew the location of Moro’s prison the authorities would have
known it too. A junior carabiniere officer has admitted receiving the
information but claimed that he did not pass it on up the military hierarchy
because Dal Bello had told him that Chichiarelli was a ‘right-wing
lunatic’.17 Certainly, no investigation was made of this important lead.
Another carabiniere officer testified that Dal Bello had told him ‘that
Chichiarelli deserved to be punished because he was half-mad and a danger
to society’.18
One reason for not dismissing the surprising implications of
Chichiarelli’s messages is the range and nature of his contacts. According to
his accountant, Chichiarelli and Pecorelli had actually met one another.19
They may also have had a friend in common, a shady businessman named

--- Sayfa 263 ---
Ezio Radaelli. Pecorelli’s diary for 1977 shows frequent meetings with
Radaelli and occasionally a third person adds an extra interest to the
gathering. On 10 June, for example, Pecorelli had a morning appointment
with Radaelli and a certain Romagnoli. Given the OP editor’s excellent
relations with the secret services, it is likely that the man in question was
Sandro Romagnoli, a colonel in military intelligence.20 On 26 October, there
is an appointment for ‘Gelli/Radaelli’, while the day’s proceedings on
17 November open with ‘Licio/Ezio’. The meetings continued in 1978.
On 15 June, Pecorelli had a 10 a.m. appointment: ‘Excelsior (Radaelli/
Licio)’. Most interesting, though, in the context of the Brink’s story, was a
cutting from the left-wing newspaper Lotta Continua found in Pecorelli’s
office. Dated 22 August 1978, it reported the arrest of Radaelli for
trafficking in fake paintings, notably De Chiricos and Guttusos.21 It is not
unlikely that this business activity of Radaelli’s would have brought him
into contact with the Rome underworld’s most proficient forger of De
Chiricos.
Another document found in the OP offices was a copy of an
interrogation of Radaelli in the course of an investigation into his handling
of the forged paintings. In it Radaelli revealed his twenty-year friendship
with Sardinian businessman Flavio Carboni.22 Radaelli was still handling
Carboni’s relations with the press in the mid-1980s. This too has a certain
bearing on the Moro case. Carboni was the man who accompanied P2
banker Roberto Calvi on his ill-fated trip to London in 1982, which ended
with the president of the Banco Ambrosiano swinging by the neck from
scaffolding under Blackfriars Bridge. Carboni enjoyed a close relationship
with members of the Rome underworld gang based on the Magliana quarter
and also with the secret services. He even boasted of his attempts to
intercede on behalf of SISMI director Giuseppe Santovito when the latter’s
career was threatened by the discovery of his name on the P2 membership
lists. What makes this connection relevant to our story is the effort made by
the Sardinian businessman to enlist the help of the Mafia in identifying
Moro’s prison. Carboni had been activated by a Christian Democrat
Member of Parliament, Benito Cazora, on whose behalf he contacted
leaders of the Sicilian-American Mafia. Initially he was told that the Mafia
would be glad to help secure Moro’s freedom as its business activities had
been damaged by the massive mobilization of police throughout the
country. Later, Carboni reported that the criminal organization had changed

--- Sayfa 264 ---
its mind and he offered his own interpretation: ‘The Mafia is very anti-
communist and Moro is known as someone who supports communist
participation in the government.’23
Aside from his work as a forger, Chichiarelli used to boost his income
by hiring out weapons to the Rome underworld. According to Dal Bello, he
acquired some of the arms at a NATO air base near Naples and others came
from contacts in the Calabrian Mafia. Calabria, home to a particularly
ruthless brand of the Mafia known as the ‘ndrangheta , is a name that recurs
frequently in the Moro story. Giustino De Vuono, the crack gunman at one
time suspected of having done most of the shooting at Via Fani, hailed from
Calabria. The brother of one of the ‘ndrangheta’ s kidnap victims had made
a payment to the Hyperion language school. More importantly, Mario
Moretti signed the lease for the Via Gradoli apartment and set up the Rome
column of the Red Brigades in between two visits to southern Italy. Under
the name of Mario Borghi and accompanied by a woman named Giovanna
Curro, thought to be the terrorist Barbara Balzerani, he arrived in the
Sicilian port of Catania on 12 December 1975, where he stayed for several
days in two different hotels. On 31 December, Mr Borghi put his name to
the lease of the Via Gradoli flat, and on 6 February, he was back in the
south again, staying for a single night in the Grand Hotel Excelsior in
Reggio Calabria. Authors Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini have
highlighted this strange southern interlude, about which Moretti’s Red
Brigades colleagues were not informed. ‘It’s not the season for bathing, nor
are there Red Brigades columns to be founded or assisted in the extreme
south and in Catania in particular. There has never been any talk of
“revolutionary” projects in that city. It is however the period in which the
new Mafia . . . beginning from Catania, is laying the economic foundations
of its bloody rule.’24 The authors suggest a possible alternative motive for
Moretti’s winter break in the south: both Catania and Reggio Calabria are
close to American military bases housing sophisticated communications
terminals.25 Completing the Calabrian coincidences, Luciano Infelisi, the
magistrate effectively in sole charge of the Moro investigation, chose to
disappear for several days to the southern province on 25 March 1978,
without informing his superior. When he reappeared he told the astounded
press that he had been looking for a holiday home.26
A still more substantial Calabrian lead emerges from the interception
of a telephone conversation between Benito Cazora and Moro’s secretary

--- Sayfa 265 ---
Sereno Freato on 1 May 1978.27
Cazora : I need the photos of March 16.
Freato : The ones from the place, there . . .
Cazora : Yes, because they . . . [tape partially cancelled] it seems that
one of them is there, I was told from down south.
Freato : There aren’t any. Ah, the photos of them, of the nine?
Cazora: No, no. They telephoned me from Calabria to tell me that you
can make out an individual known to them in a photo taken on the spot that
morning.
Freato : That’s a problem.
Cazora : That’s why I called you yesterday evening.
Freato : What can we do? We’ll have to think a moment, consult, tell
the minister. There’ll be lots of them.
Cazora : A copy, you understand, maybe it’s in the papers of March 16
or 17.
A number of photos of the scene in Via Fani were taken by an amateur
photographer shortly after the shooting, from his flat overlooking the street.
His wife handed the film in to Infelisi, the pictures were examined by senior
police officers who decided they were of no value to the investigation, and
the film was subsequently lost. Another account, published in the
Communist Party newspaper L’Unità , however, describes the photos being
hugely enlarged in order to identify the first bystanders. ‘As well as passers-
by and the emergency services, a number of faces corresponding to known
Red Brigades suspects from the north have been spotted.’28 If the police had
succeeded in identifying suspicious individuals at the scene of the shooting
this might explain Cazora’s eagerness to get hold of the photos. From the
tenor of his conversation, though, one has the impression that the suspects
he had in mind hailed from the south rather than the north and were of a
rather different ilk to the Red Brigades. ‘It would seem that the Calabrians
wanted the photos for reasons that put them more on the side of the
kidnappers than of their victim,’ commented Sergio Flamigni, a communist
member of the Moro Commission and author of a book on the affair.29
As we have seen, it was Cazora who encouraged Carboni in his efforts
to secure Mafia help in the search for Moro. Cazora himself was in contact

--- Sayfa 266 ---
with members of the Calabrian ‘ndrangheta and in particular with one of its
leading exponents, Rocco Scrivà. At a meeting with Scrivà on 7 May,
Cazora was told that nothing more could be done to obtain Moro’s release.
Two days later Moro’s body was found in Via Caetani. Curiously, Pecorelli
had written the name ‘Rocco Zíngaro’ (Rocco the Gypsy) in his diary on
the day of Cazora’s appointment, suggesting that he too may have been a
party to the negotiations.30 He also appears to have been aware of the
background to the disappearance of the Via Fani photographs. ‘The roll of
film’ was one of the subjects he threatened to return to in his OP article of
16 January 1979, along with ‘the negotiations that were undertaken’ and
‘the jackals who raised the stakes’.
Hints that these Calabrian links may conceal a more sinister truth than
a mere good-faith attempt to secure Moro’s release have been dropped by
Camorra boss Raffaele Cutolo, the Neapolitan gangster who mediated
between the secret services and the Red Brigades for the release of
kidnapped local politician Ciro Cirillo in 1982. During a break in one of his
trials in 1987, Cutolo told journalists that his help had also been sought
during the Moro kidnap. Ί could have done something but I realized that
they perhaps didn’t want to save him. He was an honest man. They had a
lead that took them to Calabria . . . don’t make me say any more.’31 His
statement has all the hallmarks of a classic Mafia-style message to the
authorities: help me or I will talk. Adding substance to his threats, Cutolo
has hinted that one of his senior lieutenants, Vincenzo Casillo, who was
murdered in 1984, was already working for the secret services when Moro
was kidnapped. Ί have been wearing chains for all these years, and some of
them belong to other people. Now I’m getting tired of it,’ Cutolo
complained.32 Another prominent underworld figure has also suggested that
the authorities may not have done all in their power to facilitate Moro’s
release. Tommaso Buscetta, a Mafia boss turned supergrass, told Palermo
magistrates: Ί was asked to intervene. I was in prison in Turin in 1978 and
the Mafia was interested in intervening to save the life of the statesman. An
order for my transfer arrived suddenly and unexpectedly while I was
seeking information. I was sent to Cuneo prison where I didn’t know
anyone.’33 The implication is clear: that Buscetta’s transfer was designed to
thwart his efforts on Moro’s behalf.
It seems then that there were a number of attempts to use contacts with
criminal organizations to find and free Moro but that these failed for

--- Sayfa 267 ---
political reasons. There is also evidence, however, of direct criminal
involvement in the kidnap. We have seen how the forger Chichiarelli may
have had access to Moro’s prison but, as yet, it is unclear for whom exactly
he was working. Several witnesses have offered suggestions as to who was
pulling the strings. Chichiarelli’s wife, who insisted that her husband was
not capable of organizing his complex political operations off his own bat,
has spoken of meeting ‘a strange individual who spoke several languages’
and whom her husband brought home in 1978. Ί tried to forbid him from
meeting the aforementioned person but I know that Toni continued to see
him on his own account,’ Zossolo told the magistrates.34 His friend Dal
Bello has spoken of Chichiarelli holding several secret meetings at
Fiumicino airport with a man whose identity Dal Bello did not know.35
Chichiarelli’s accountant went further, claiming that the Brink’s robbery
had been commissioned by ‘a member of P2, linked to Michele Sindona’.
He also said that Chichiarelli had worked for Pippo Calo, the Sicilian
Mafia’s ambassador to Rome, who controlled the Magliana band and was in
contact with the secret services.36 A contact between Chichiarelli and Calo
is highly plausible. Chichiarelli’s mistress had a sister who had been the
lover of Nunzio La Mattina, one of Calo’s principal lieutenants who had
fallen from favour and been murdered on his boss’s orders.37 Given the
close links between the Camorra and the Magliana band it is also perfectly
credible that Cutolo might have had inside information on underworld
involvement in Moro’s kidnap.
If Calo had been in some way involved in the Moro kidnapping, and
the fact that the Via Montalcini prison was in an area controlled by the
Magliana band makes this all the more likely, he might well have decided to
use Chichiarelli as the conduit for a series of menacing messages based on
his knowledge of the background to the kidnap. The messages had a
political dimension that went beyond a simple request for immunity after
the Brink’s robbery. After all, the taxi episode using some of the same
information came five years before the robbery and at a time when the
authorities had made no real progress in their investigation of Pecorelli’s
murder. It is not inconceivable that the Christmas 1984 bombing, for which
Calo was sentenced to life blackmail implicit in Chichiarelli’s messages. As
we have seen, the bombing took place in the same railway tunnel as the
1974 Italicus bombing, in which the P2 masonic lodge was almost certainly

--- Sayfa 268 ---
involved. Once again, Calo may have been reminding powerful former
accomplices of a shared guilt.
Yet another element pointing to underworld involvement in the Moro
kidnap can be found in a finance police report dated 28 April 1978. ‘A
reliable confidential source has reported that the Red Brigades terrorist
Prospero Gallinari met a convicted criminal who is being sought in
connection with a number of kidnaps, in Rome on 15 November 1977, in a
bar on the Via Appia Nuova,’ the report said. ‘Gallinari asked him to
participate in a sensational, political kidnap. The convict did not agree to
the proposal, as he considered it not worth his while financially.38 If the
report is well founded it would certainly dent the myth of the Red Brigades’
revolutionary purity. There is no saying whether the professional criminal
subsequently changed his mind or whether other underworld figures agreed
to take his place.
In 1982, Rome magistrates Domenico Sica and Ferdinando
Imposimato questioned the Christian Democrat deputy, Benito Cazora,
about Carboni’s attempt to contact the Mafia for information on the kidnap.
Cazora began his reply by saying that Carboni had never spoken to him
about Domenico Balducci and Ernesto Diotallevi, two leading members of
the Magliana band. He went on to say that Carboni had told him that he
would contact the Mafia to try and discover if there was any connection
between organized crime and the kidnap. Subsequently, according to
Cazora, Carboni told him that he had been unable to gather any information
on the matter. Ί have never heard of Lorenzo Di Gesù, Mario Agliorolo
[sic] and Luigi Faldetta, whose names I hear for the first time today,’
Cazora said.39 This interrogation is important, not so much for Cazora’s
replies but for the questions he was asked and the context. Mario Aglioloro
is one of the pseudonyms used by Pippo Calo and the other two names
mentioned refer to Mafia associates of Calo. All three had close links with
the Magliana band and they had been involved in property deals with
Carboni in Sicily and Sardinia. They were therefore the kind of people that
Carboni might well have turned to for information on Moro’s whereabouts.
Given the suspicions about criminal involvement in the kidnap, it is
significant that Cazora should be questioned, first about two members of
the Magliana band and then about Calo, the man who controlled the band
and who may also have controlled Chichiarelli. As we have seen, Judge
Imposimato was not prepared to discuss the delicate subject of the possible

--- Sayfa 269 ---
involvement of the Magliana underworld gang in Moro’s kidnap and other
informed people tend to become nervous when questioned about the
subject.
The link between Pecorelli’s death and the Moro case, so insistently
made in Chichiarelli’s messages, emerged in 1980 during the hearings of
the Moro Commission. Appropriately enough, it was Sereno Freato who
raised the issue. His testimony to the commission may well explain why
Chichiarelli added his name to the document on Pecorelli’s assassination
when he sent it to the Messaggero after the Brink’s raid. In the face of
hostile questioning from a neo-fascist deputy about his involvement in
financial malpractice, Freato blurted out: ‘It wasn’t us who killed Pecorelli.
It wasn’t us who handled relations with Libya, Iran and Saudi Arabia.’
Clearly Freato had a culprit in mind, both for the murder of Pecorelli and
for the political scandals prompted by illegal kickbacks on Italian oil
imports. It has been reported that he went further in his allegations: ‘Find
the people behind the Pecorelli murder and you will find those behind that
of Aldo Moro.’40 This last statement is nowhere to be found in the
commission’s transcript of the hearing but it could well have been said, as
the official account of Freato’s heated exchanges with his interrogators is
patently incomplete. Freato subsequently received death threats while he
was in prison awaiting trial for his role in a massive tax fraud involving the
evasion of government duty on petrol. His claims lend further weight to
Chichiarelli’s messages.
The comments on the Brink’s affair of Giuseppe De Gori, a Calabrian
lawyer who represented the interests of the Christian Democrat Party at the
various Moro trials, are also illuminating. ‘Chichiarelli wrote the Lake
Duchessa communique for the Israeli secret service, Mossad,’ he told the
author. ‘In return they let him carry out the Brink’s robbery and then
murdered him.’ Considering the institutional importance of De Gori’s role,
this is an extremely serious allegation. He was fully aware of its gravity and
highlighted the consequences of the false communique: ‘After that
communique Moro could no longer be saved.’ He explained that Mossad
had been prompted to play this key role in Moro’s elimination from the
political scene because of the Christian Democrat leader’s avowedly pro-
Arab foreign policy.41

--- Sayfa 270 ---
Otherwise, De Gori is confident that there are no mysteries left to be
cleared up in the Moro affair. Ί have studied all the documents and I am
convinced that the truth established at the trials coincides with the historical
truth, or 99 per cent of it,’ he told Panorama (19 June 1988) in an
interview. ‘Behind the Red Brigades there were only the Red Brigades.’
This view chimes exactly with the one expressed with such tenacity, and
flying in the face of the evidence, by Mario Moretti. De Gori reacted
strongly when I suggested that the United States had, in its opposition to
Moro’s policy towards the communists, as strong a reason as Israel for
wanting him out of the way. ‘Get the notion that the Americans were
involved out of your head,’ he said and dubbed as ‘nonsense’ the idea of
Calo having a role in the kidnap. It is hardly surprising that such ideas
should cause alarm in a legal representative of the party that has been the
United States’ most dependable political ally in Italy for more than forty
years.
Technical experts called in the course of the Moro investigation to
compare the IBM revolving head left in a bag by Chichiarelli with the
documents found with it reported that they had been unable to find any
typewriter capable of fitting that particular part. If the part would not fit
IBM models available in Italy, one can only assume that it might have
worked on typewriters domestically available within the United States.
Perhaps Chichiarelli was intending to point a finger at the country of origin
of IBM when he dropped that particular ‘golf-ball’ into his bag of
messages? He is not the only person to suggest that America was in some
way involved in the Moro kidnap. The claim has been made on a number of
occasions and under circumstances that justify giving it the most serious
consideration.
Notes
1   Maurizio De Luca and Mimmo Scarano, Il Mandarino è
Marcio , Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1985, pp. 264-5.
2   Sandro Acciari and Mario Scialoja, L’Espresso , 8 April 1984.
3   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, L’Operazione Moro ,
Franco Angeli, Milan, 1984, p. 259.
4   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 June 1988.
5   Ibid.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
6   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, p. 297.
7   Giuseppe Ferrara, Il Caso Moro , Tullio Pironti, Naples, 1987,
pp. 358-65.
8   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 193.
9   Giorgio Galli, Storia del Partito Armato , Rizzoli, Milan, 1986,
p. 304.
10   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 192.
11   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 June 1988.
12   Sandra Bonsanti and Silvana Mazzocchi, La Repubblica , 10
June 1988.
13   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 195.
14   Sandro Acciari and Mario Scialoja, L’Espresso , 8 April 1984.
15   G.I. Francesco Monastero, Sentenza-ordinanza contro
Germano La Chioma ed altri, Rome, 12 July 1986, p. 5.
16   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 June 1988.
17   Maresciallo Antonio Solinas to Rome magistrates, 22
November 1984.
18   Maresciallo Alessandro Giombetti to Rome magistrates, 22
November 1984.
19   Osvaldo Lai to Rome magistrates, 30 May 1985.
20   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 15,
Rome, 1987, p. 561.
21   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 17,
Rome, 1987, p. 322.
22   Ibid., p. 797.
23   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 22,
Rome, 1984, pp.298-300.
24   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 24.
25   Ibid., p. 175.
26   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., pp. 92-4.
27   Ibid., p. 76.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
28   Quoted in Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p.
80.
29   Sergio Flamigni, op. cit., p. 268.
30   Ibid., pp. 267-8.
31   ANSA dispatch, 18.59, 6 October 1987.
32   Renato Caprile, La Repubblica , 14 March 1989.
33    ha Stampa , 12 March 1988.
34   Chiara Zossolo to Rome magistrates, 26 January 1985.
35   Luciano Dal Bello to Rome magistrates, 24 May 1985.
36   Giuseppe Ferrara, op. cit., p. 368.
37   Ferdinando Imposimato to the author, 22 October 1987.
38   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 June 1988.
39   Benito Cazora to G.I. Ferdinando Imposimato and P.M.
Domenico Sica, Rome, 8 October 1982.
40   Maria Antonietta Calabro, Il Sabato, Rome, 29 November-5
December 1980.
41   Giuseppe De Gori to the author, 25 July 1988.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
[14]
THE MORO DOCUMENTS
One of the greatest mysteries in the whole Moro affair is what the
imprisoned Christian Democrat leader told his Red Brigades captors during
the course of his ‘people’s trial’ and what subsequently became of that
information. It was in the Red Brigades’ interests to extort from their
prisoner as many damaging revelations about himself and his political party
as they could. As someone who had been five times Prime Minister, Moro
was certainly privy to the sensitive secrets of both the Christian Democrats
and the Italian state. From their very first communique, the Red Brigades
promised that the results of Moro’s trial would be made public. ‘Everything
regarding the political line followed by our Organization and its military
activities has always been dealt with publicly; this will also be the case in
everything concerning the trial of aldo moro,’ the communiqué stated.1 But
the Red Brigades were not to live up to their promise. In their second
communiqué they explained that his interrogation was aimed at ‘clarifying
the imperialist and anti-proletarian policies promoted by the Christian
Democrat Party; identifying the international structures and national
affiliates of the imperialist counter-revolution;. . . determining the personal
responsibilities of Aldo Moro for which he will be judged according to the
canons of proletarian justice.’ 2 In communiqué no. 3 they made great play
of their policy of openness, saying that the information provided by Moro
would be made public as soon as it had been checked. They also reported
that Moro had asked to send a secret letter to Interior Minister Cossiga,
observing in parentheses that ‘secret manoeuvres are normal for the
Christian Democrat Mafia’.
The Red Brigades said that the request had been granted ‘but since
nothing must be hidden from the people, and this is our custom, we are
making it public’.3 Later they announced, in communique no. 6, that they
had changed their minds, and that information from the trial would only be
published in their own clandestine newspapers ‘because the regime’s press
is entirely at the service of the class enemy’. They told the public that Moro
had supplied information about corruption and state-sponsored murder, but
paradoxically declared: ‘There are no secrets regarding the Christian
Democrat Party’ and ‘There are no sensational revelations to be made.’4 In

--- Sayfa 274 ---
reality, the BR leadership changed its mind yet again and Moro’s
revelations were not divulged even to the terrorist organization’s own
supporters. Responsibility for this decision has been attributed to Mario
Moretti.5
It was an extraordinary choice, for which there are a number of
possible explanations. One is that Moro’s interrogation showed up the
naivety of the Red Brigades’ own political analysis and the organization
decided to suppress it in order to avoid embarrassment. The terrorists’
obsession with the implausible notion of the ‘Imperialist State of the
Multinationals’ (SIM), an international capitalist conspiracy that made
puppets of leading politicians throughout the Western world, was one plank
of their ideology that may not have stood the test of a lengthy conversation
with Moro. Another explanation, offered by Mario Moretti in an interview
with Giorgio Bocca (L’Espresso , 2 December 1984), was that Moro’s
revelations were of no real political significance. ‘Do you think we would
have organized an operation of that type, in which we risked our entire
organization, just to discover the scandals of the Christian Democrats?
Those didn’t need to be discovered. The whole of Italy knows them. They
are so-to-speak routine, normal.’ If this was genuinely the reason, it
represents a serious underestimation of the destabilizing effect of the
repeated political and financial scandals that have rocked successive
governments and contributed so much to popular disenchantment with the
Christian Democrat Party. There is, however, a more sinister explanation,
which casts doubt on the genuineness of the Red Brigades and of the
political objectives they were ostensibly pursuing.
Moro himself made it clear that he was in a position to make damaging
revelations in his letter to Cossiga. He pointed out that he was under the
total control of his captors and undergoing a ‘people’s trial’ whilst ‘having
all the knowledge and sensibilities that derive from long experience, with
the risk that I may be asked or forced to speak in a manner that could be
unpleasant and dangerous in certain circumstances’.6 Obviously, it was
Moro’s intention in writing, and that of the Red Brigades in allowing him to
send the letter, to pressure the government into negotiating for his release.
The effort would have been futile, though, if there were no substance to the
threat.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
The mystery surrounding Moro’s revelations centres on the fate of a
number of crucial documents. One is the typewritten transcript of a
handwritten document in which Moro elaborated on the verbal answers he
had given during the course of his interrogation. As we have seen, the Red
Brigades decided not to release this but an incomplete copy of it was found
by carabinieri commanded by General Dalla Chiesa in a Milan terrorist
base in Via Montenevoso on ι October 1978. The document consists of fifty
typewritten pages in which Moro passes trenchant judgement on his
political colleagues and makes some illuminating comments on the strategy
of tension. It is obviously incomplete as some pages contain large blank
spaces and the discourse makes abrupt thematic leaps but it was clear from
the first that it genuinely represented Moro’s thoughts and utterances. There
has been much controversy over what happened to the taped recording of
Moro’s voice and to the missing parts of the typescript.
The other documents, the disappearance of which has given rise to
suspicion, were in two briefcases snatched from Moro’s car during the Via
Fani ambush. Moro’s widow has given considerable emphasis to this
matter, pointing out to the parliamentary inquiry the ease with which the
terrorists had identified the two cases containing important documents,
while leaving behind another three that Moro had with him. Asked about
the bags by a member of the commission, she replied: ‘This is another of
the problems which, if solved, would lead one to the truth. They must have
known which ones they were and where they were in the car, because there
was a great constellation of bags . . .’7 She told the commission that she
believed that one bag in particular was likely to contain confidential
documents. ‘He came up and down with this bag; he took it with him in the
car and when he came home he would have it. He wouldn’t even entrust it
to the police bodyguard who kindly offered to carry it.’8
Moro himself attached particular importance to the cases as he made a
point of inquiring what had happened to them in a letter from prison to one
of his assistants. ‘Have the bags from the car been recovered? Have they
been sequestered as evidence and can you arrange their release?’9 It sounds
almost as though Moro was hoping to recover some of his documents in
order to use them as bargaining counters in his own negotiations with the
Red Brigades. Clearly he was unaware that the terrorists already had the
cases in their possession. This is probably why his kidnappers decided not
to deliver the letter, which was later found with the Moro typescript in Via

--- Sayfa 276 ---
Montenevoso. Delivering the letter would have been tantamount to letting
the authorities know that Moro was being kept in the dark about the fate of
his documents and could have raised suspicions about what had really
become of them and the way in which the whole kidnap was being run.
Aside from the documents with him in the car, Moro may have been
tempted to offer the Red Brigades other sensitive papers in his possession in
exchange for his life. This hypothesis was outlined by Pecorelli (OP, 18
April 1978), who pointed out that many politicians had established their
own personal archives, held in secret locations in Italy or abroad. Often
they contain documents that are compromising for their political opponents.
But equally often those documents concern the vital interests of the state. It
is not difficult to imagine that in the event of a kidnap this delicate material
might become the subject of very private negotiations between the victim
and his captors.’ In a later issue, (23 May 1978), Pecorelli suggested that
this had actually happened, and that compromising documents belonging to
Moro had been handed over to the BR by his collaborators. ‘In any case,
even without them, the Red Brigades now possess documents that could
make members of the Italian establishment tremble and reduce them, from
Andreotti down, to the obedient slaves of anyone who decided to make use
of them [the papers].’ The magazine suggested that the documents were
finding their way into the possession of the PCI, a somewhat implausible
hypothesis. It also claimed that following the kidnap, NATO had decided to
change its operational plans for the entire European theatre.
Moro’s assistant Corrado Guerzoni confirmed to the Rome assize court
that one of Moro’s briefcases contained sensitive documents regarding the
Lockheed affair. At the time, investigators were attempting to establish
which Italian politicians had received kickbacks from the US aircraft
manufacturer to secure their support for the purchase of Hercules military
transport planes. Attention was focused in particular on identifying the
politician, known by the Lockheed codename ‘Antelope Cobbler’, who had
pocketed a substantial bribe. Moro himself had come under suspicion. His
secretary, Freato, hotly rejected suggestions that Moro was Antelope
Cobbler when questioned by the parliamentary inquiry. In the same breath,
he denied that Moro had been behind the murder of Pecorelli, showing that
the two issues were linked in his mind.10 According to Guerzoni, Moro had
documents in his briefcase which he could use to rebut the allegations
linking him to the Lockheed scandal. He said he had urged Moro to publish

--- Sayfa 277 ---
them: ‘Let us say how things really are. The documents say that this
information stems from the office of the [US] Secretary of State. Let us
reveal that it is a politically motivated thing.’ And he added his own
interpretation: ‘Besides, it’s obvious that [Moro] was following a particular
policy and that those who opposed that policy had an interest in showing
him in a certain light.’11
On the morning of Moro’s kidnap (i6 March 1978) La Repubblica
newspaper published an article identifying him as Antelope Cobbler. The
paper reported the testimony of a former Italian diplomat, Luca Dainelli, to
the magistrate investigating the Lockheed affair. Dainelli’s information
originated with the US State Department and had been relayed to him via
sources close to the American embassy in Rome and by a former CIA
operative, Howard Stone. From the American point of view, the timing may
have been somewhat unfortunate: the public emergence of their efforts to
discredit and undermine Moro coincided with the very day of his kidnap.
Moro touched on the friction between himself and Kissinger in his
written reply to his Red Brigades interrogators. He explained that one of the
causes of the rift had been the Italian refusal to allow the Americans to use
airbases in Italy for their resupply of Israel during the Six Day War, ‘above
all because of a lack of advance notification and adequate explanation of
the reasons’.12 The Italians, Moro said, were not prepared to accept that the
war constituted a crisis for NATO. He went on to describe Kissinger’s
‘animosity for the Italian side and for my person’ based on the mistaken
notion that Moro was seeking ‘an indiscriminate accord with the PCI’. In
this context, Moro referred to ‘unpleasant episodes’ as American views on
the subject were made plain to him. He may perhaps have been thinking of
the threats he had received during his visit to the United States. These
observations, expressed in the elliptical style typical of Moro and obviously
based on direct personal experience, are ample testimony to the genuineness
of the Via Montenevoso document. Some twelve years later an
extraordinary new development would confirm the authenticity of the text.
Moro also spoke implicitly of American involvement in the strategy of
tension. He said the strategy was aimed at returning Italy to ‘normality’
after the disruption of 1968. ‘One can assume that countries variously
associated with our politics and therefore with an interest in our taking a
certain direction were in some way involved through their intelligence

--- Sayfa 278 ---
services,’ he said.13 Of the indiscriminate right-wing bombings, he
commented: ‘One can neither state there was foreign involvement nor
exclude it, in my opinion there was.’ He added: ‘It’s my conviction, even
though I have no proof, that the interest and the intervention were more
foreign than national.’14 This did not mean that he acquitted his own
political colleagues of all responsibility. ‘The Christian Democrat Party of
that time . . . did not distance itself from an attitude of complicity and
acquiescence enough to place the party above all suspicion.’ Of the Piazza
Fontana bombing, he noted that the judicial inquiries had not yet fully
clarified ‘the pre-eminent role of SID and the more minor one of the police.
But there is no doubt that they were implicated in it.’15
Moro delivered a number of unflattering judgements on his political
colleagues, reserving particular venom for then Prime Minister Andreotti.
After acquitting a series of Christian Democrat leaders of involvement in
the strategy of tension, he concluded: ‘Andreotti has always been in power,
his origins are somewhat to the right . . . Now he is following a hard line in
relation to the Red Brigades, with the intention of sacrificing without
scruple the person who was patron and organizer of the present government
accords.’16 He described the Prime Minister as ‘a cold, inscrutable
manipulator, without doubts, without hesitations, without ever a moment of
human pity. This is Andreotti, whose orders all the others have obediently
followed.’17 He ended a series of vitriolic pen-pictures of Christian
Democrat politicians by highlighting his incompatibility with the party and
announcing his resignation from it, with the comment: Ί have an immense
pleasure in having lost you and I hope that everyone loses you with the
same joy. With or without you, the Christian Democrat Party will not go
far.’18 All this should have been grist to the Red Brigades’ mill. It is
therefore quite extraordinary that they chose to keep it to themselves.
Several P2 members have offered an illuminating commentary on this
strange episode. As usual, one of the best informed and quickest off the
mark was Mino Pecorelli. Writing in OP on 24 October 1978, Pecorelli
warned: ‘Via Gradoli should have taught us that the Red Brigades scatter
poisoned bait amidst the cyclostyled documents in their bases.’ He reported
that Dalla Chiesa had found ‘a bomb without a safety catch’ waiting for him
in the Via Montenevoso flat. Among the items Pecorelli listed as being
present in the apartment were the transcript of Moro’s interrogation and
‘several sound tapes with original recordings of Moro’s voice ’ (in italics in

--- Sayfa 279 ---
the original). The latter claim has surfaced on a number of occasions
subsequently. Pecorelli’s opinion about the importance of Moro’s
revelations was quite categoric: ‘If the detonator is the interrogation
transcript, the bomb consists of the scandals and the revelations.’ The Red
Brigades, he commented, had handed the magistrates ‘a time-bomb that
would undermine the already crumbling structures of the Republic’.
Changing metaphors, he described Moro as taking on the role of public
prosecutor on behalf of the Red Brigades in an anomalous trial of the
Christian Democrat Party. A week later Pecorelli was expounding exactly
the opposite view (OP 31 October 1978). He now claimed that the transcript
contained nothing that was not already known to even the lowliest
parliamentary doorman. ‘Are Moro’s personal judgements on Andreotti
sensational, or his revelations about the “state bombings” or the battles
between ministers for the control of the secret services? It’s stuff we’ve
been reading and writing for years in all the weekly magazines. . .’ It is
interesting that this latter view, adopted presumably on secret service
instructions, coincides exactly with the argument put forward by Moretti for
withholding the document from publication. Even while playing down the
content of the document, Pecorelli did not omit to draw attention to its
incompleteness. He quoted a newspaper article (La Repubblica , 8 October
1978) referring to a seventy-page document, while the one distributed to the
press by the Interior Ministry, Pecorelli said, was only forty-nine pages
long.
The most interesting commentary on the affair comes from the horse’s
mouth, from Licio Gelli himself. It is contained in a two-page document
drawn up by Florentine journalist Marcello Coppetti, which provides a
telegraphic account of a meeting between Gelli, Coppetti and Major
Umberto Nobili of the Air Force Intelligence Service. Gelli denied that any
such meeting had taken place when I questioned him about it.19 Ί knew
Coppetti very well, because he often came to visit me but he never came to
see me with this Nobili,’ Gelli said. According to Nobili, this was his first
meeting with the P2boss and he intended to gather intelligence on him
while ostensibly seeking his assistance on professional matters. The
document appears as a monologue by Gelli and summarizes a conversation
that took place over two hours in Gelli’s Tuscan villa on ι December 1978.
It therefore came two months after the discovery of the Via Montenevoso
base and after much press speculation over what may or may not have been

--- Sayfa 280 ---
found in the Red Brigades hideout. The part relevant to the Moro affair is
preceded, curiously enough, by a comment on the Lockheed scandal. ‘After
the Lockheed sentence two things will happen: we’ll understand why Leone
has been [politically] eliminated and why he hasn’t been sent for trial by the
high court of justice if he is guilty. We will know who the antelope is.’20
Giovanni Leone, who was State President from 1971 to 1978, was in fact
one of the candidates for the role of Antelope Cobbler. According to one
theory, Antelope Cobbler was a garbled version of Antelope Gobbler, a
cryptic reference to Leone, the lion.
Coppetti’s note continued: ‘The Moro case is not over. Dalla Chiesa
had infiltrated a very young carabiniere into the BR. The latter knew that
the BR holding Moro also had compromising material from Moro. Dalla
Chiesa went to Andreotti and told him that the material could be recovered
if he gave him carte blanche . As Andreotti feared Moro’s documents (the
two missing cases?) he appointed Dalla Chiesa. The latter recovered what
was necessary. So the Moro transcript is incomplete. Even the one the
magistrates have. Because it is a state secret.’ Gelli’s account contains a
number of undisputable historical facts: Dalla Chiesa was appointed anti-
terrorism coordinator by Andreotti in August, he commanded the Via
Montenevoso operation in October, the Moro transcript is incomplete and
Moro’s briefcases have still not been officially recovered. Like Moro and
Leone, Andreotti had also been implicated in the Lockheed bribery scandal.
On 5 September 1976, L’Espresso magazine had published three documents
that appeared to indicate that Lockheed had paid or had intended to pay
Andreotti two substantial commissions, one of $28,000 and the other of
$15,000, for mediation efforts on behalf of the company at a time when it
was attempting to sell military aircraft to the Italian Navy and, later, to
Turkey. An Italian parliamentary inquiry subsequently decided that the
letters were forgeries.
Coppetti had underlined various sentences, including the reference to
the antelope, and written a number one beside them in the margin.
At the bottom of the page he had written another one and a
handwritten note: ‘The material had been taken by the BR. It was recovered
by the infiltrator (the carabinierel) or the carabiniere is an excuse? In this
case, Moro was an affair of state and Gelli knows it:’ The note ends
abruptly with a colon. In it Coppetti appears to be offering the reader a

--- Sayfa 281 ---
choice of two interpretations of the Moro affair. If the sensitive documents
were recovered by the infiltrator then the official account of the Moro
kidnap can still stand. If, however, the documents were recovered but not by
the infiltrator, then the carabiniere story is an invention to distract attention
from the truth: that Moro was not kidnapped by the Red Brigades at all but
by agents of the state acting under the guise of Red Brigades. ‘In this case,
Moro was an affair of state and Gelli knows it.’
While denying that this meeting ever took place, Gelli was not averse
to dropping some gentle hints about his knowledge of the affair. Asked
about the fate of Moro’s briefcases, he replied: ‘It’s still a mystery. They
have caught the guilty people, they have been sentenced, they have had the
first, the second, the third and even the fourth trial and they haven’t
recovered the documents. So do we really want to find the documents? Do
we want to find the interrogation of Moro? It’s obvious that either they
haven’t succeeded in recovering this material or they aren’t interested in
recovering it. But I believe that one day, I don’t know whether it will be
tomorrow or in fifty years’ time, this material will come out.’ Gelli also
mentioned the existence of a film of Moro, an item mentioned by other
informed sources, as we shall see. ‘The Red Brigades, who were in the
habit of filming everything, will have filmed him even when they killed
him, I believe . . . I don’t think he was expecting his death, at least that is
how it has been explained [to me].’ This account is supported by the text of
Moro’s written answers, where at one point he thanks his captors for their
generosity in sparing his life.21 But in case his comments gave the
impression that he was excessively well informed, Gelli went on to say that
his knowledge of the affair was based entirely on a reading of the
newspapers. ‘We were like the devil and holy water, because I have always
been against these extremisms, these acts of violence. . . I have had no
knowledge of Red or Black Brigades, because if there was anyone who was
combating them it was me. I never had even a distant connection with
either.’22
Coppetti and Nobili were questioned by the Moro Commission in
1982. Both confirmed the authenticity of the document but otherwise
Coppetti put in a supremely slippery performance. The transcript of his
interrogation covers 107 pages but sheds almost no light on the genesis and
significance of his document and he was equally unforthcoming when I
interviewed him in person. Nobili, who refused to discuss the episode with

--- Sayfa 282 ---
me, was more communicative before the commission but the grave
implications of what he had to say led to his being cut short after a mere
thirty-nine pages. He began by expressing his suspicions about P2
involvement in the Lockheed affair. He described how Gelli spoke of the
carabiniere force as though he owned it and how he claimed to have been
responsible for the appointment of General Enrico Mino as head of the
paramilitary police force. He also told how he called on Gelli at the
Excelsior Hotel in Rome to drop off his curriculum vitae only to be
informed that Gelli was closeted with Arnaldo Forlani. It was Forlani who
was forced to resign as Prime Minister in 1981 following the discovery of
the P2 membership lists. He was elected to the powerful post of Christian
Democrat Party secretary in 1989. Nobili described Coppetti as a trait
d’union between Gelli and sectors of the armed forces and said that the
journalist had shown distinct signs of fear during their joint researches into
Gelli’s activities. Commenting on the traumatic effects of the Moro kidnap,
Nobili suggested that Gelli and the Red Brigades shared a common interest
in destabilizing the country: ‘It is for this reason that Gelli and the Red
Brigades are probably closely related; but that’s only my opinion.’23
Nobili also commented on the surprising freedom with which Gelli
chatted about highly sensitive matters. Gelli’s garrulousness has also been
remarked upon by P2 police chief Federico Umberto D’Amato, who
described his meetings with Gelli in a report to the Interior Minister
explaining the presence of his name on the P2 membership lists. Like so
many others, D’Amato was merely gathering information on the P2 boss.
‘The contact, even though limited to a few casual meetings, enabled me to
gain a better knowledge of the subject thanks in part to Gelli’s exceptional
loquacity.’24 These observations may cast light on a rather cryptic passage
in the Moro transcript. After running through a series of political and
financial scandals, several involving Sindona, with which Andreotti’s name
had been associated in the press, Moro commented: ‘You, Mr Andreotti,
have a man not of the second level but of the first level with you; a
loquacious person, but a man who understands and who knows how to act.
Perhaps if you had listened to him, you would have avoided making so
many mistakes in your life.’25 Gelli would certainly be a candidate for this
role. He was undoubtedly a great talker, he enjoyed a close association with
both Andreotti and Sindona and was suspected of involvement in many of
the scandals which Moro had enumerated. The strange wording when Moro

--- Sayfa 283 ---
spoke of a man ‘not of the second but of the first level’ (non di secondo ma
di primo piano) suggests a possible hint at the P2 lodge. It is not
inconceivable that the Christian Democrat Party president should have tried
to send coded messages to the outside world and it is possible that he may
even have come to suspect a Pi role in his kidnap.
A number of Red Brigades members have denounced the
disappearance of documents from the Via Montenevoso base. Il
Messaggero (6 June 1982) has reported on the testimony to the Rome assize
court of a terrorist, Anna Brioschi, which appears to confirm part of the
Coppetti document’s allegations. ‘From the evidence sequestrated in Via
Montenevoso a cardboard folder containing photocopies of everything that
Moro wrote has allegedly disappeared. Brioschi intended to give this
disappearance a political significance. She made a connection between the
name of General Dalla Chiesa and that of then Prime Minister Andreotti.
What Brioschi implied was this: someone made these papers disappear
because some of Moro’s statements were objectionable to Andreotti. A
grave charge, if it is proved.’
The Coppetti document’s allegations about a carabiniere infiltrated
into the ranks of the Red Brigades is also corroborated by other evidence,
although the controversy is far from being resolved. It is worth bearing in
mind that infiltration was one of General Dalla Chiesa’s most effective
techniques and one can safely assume that he had continued to employ it
from the time of his successful handling of the Brother Girotto operation in
1974 onwards. One of Dalla Chiesa’s collaborators told Panorama
magazine (28 April 1980) that at the time of the interview the carabinieri
had a dozen infiltrators within left-wing terrorist organizations, three of
them in prison. He may have simply been attempting to spread suspicion
and dissension among the terrorists but the ploy could not have been
successful if his claims were not plausible. Asked which of Dalla Chiesa’s
major operations were made possible by the work of spies, the unnamed
officer replied: ‘All of them.’
This makes the Coppetti account all the more believable and also lends
weight to some remarkable claims made by journalist Massimo Caprara in
an article in the left-wing magazine Pagina (25 February 1982). Caprara,
who had been secretary to Communist Party leader Palmiro Togliatti and as
a journalist obtained a number of important interviews with Andreotti on

--- Sayfa 284 ---
the role of the secret services in the strategy of tension, identified Dalla
Chiesa’s infiltrator in the Red Brigades as Patrizio Peci. Peci was arrested in
Turin on 19 February 1980, and became, at least officially, the first
‘repentant’ terrorist of the Red Brigades, collaborating with the authorities
in exchange for a light sentence. Not long after his arrest, however, there
was speculation in the press that he had been kept under surveillance for
many months and that he may even have agreed to collaborate before his
capture. La Repubblica (15 April 1980) quoted Red Brigades defence
lawyer Sergio Spazzali: Ί don’t know his name but I have a strong suspicion
that whoever has talked talked a long time ago, before his arrest. And that
for a long time he continued his political and military work within the BR
and that he therefore may have been involved in some kind of provocation.’
Caprara claimed that Peci had been arrested by Dalla Chiesa’s men not
once but twice and that the first time he had been released in order to act as
a carabiniere informant. He also identified him with Maurizio Altobelli, the
occupant of the Via Montalcini apartment thought to have been Moro’s
prison in Rome. A number of the local residents similarly identified Peci
with Altobelli, but it has never been officially confirmed. According to
Caprara, it is precisely because of this identification that the authorities
were forced to deny that either of the two Rome bases frequented by Peci
could have been Moro’s prison. ‘Dalla Chiesa has Peci’s confession, he has
worked out the consequences, there can be no mistake. One of the greatest
secrets of the Republic has to be preserved. It was neither of them. The
prison was elsewhere.’
Two months after Peci’s arrest, as Caprara points out, newspapers were
suggesting that he had participated in the Via Fani ambush. The Corriere
della Sera (12 April 1980) attributed to Peci the words: Ί participated at Via
Fani but did not shoot.’ Four days later, La Repubblica (16 April 1980)
reported: ‘Via Fani. Someone who has read the seventy pages says: Peci
says: “I was there and Moretti too, who directed operations on the ground.”
‘ Later, it would emerge that Peci’s account was somewhat different. The
text of his statements to the magistrates was leaked to the Messaggero ,
perhaps to put an end to this kind of dangerous speculation. Reassuringly,
the public read (4
May 1980), Peci had not been to Rome since 1976 and his account of
the Via Fani operation, which is the cornerstone of the official

--- Sayfa 285 ---
reconstruction, was drawn from that of other Red Brigades members. The
extreme left newspaper Lotta Continua (29 November 1980) commented
scornfully on the decision of the Rome magistrates to remove Peci’s name
from the Via Fani indictment under the headline: ‘Peci wasn’t there. And if
he was he was sleeping.’
Peci told the Moro Commission that his account of the Via Fani
operation derived from snippets of information given him by Raffaele
Fiore, the leader of the Turin column of the Red Brigades. But his own
description of the events is so detailed and vivid as to call this seriously into
question: ‘When they started firing, Moro immediately threw himself down
between the seats . . . his newspapers even fell on his head. Then he was
taken away. He was probably in a state of shock because he didn’t know
whether or not he was wounded. They asked him: “Are you hurt?” and he
answered “Yes.” But in fact he wasn’t wounded, he was really in shock.’ It
is hard to believe that this graphic account of the ambush could have come
from Fiore, who, according to Peci, didn’t tell him much as he, Peci, was
anyway only interested in how the operation had gone in military terms.26
Caprara’s account reinforces suspicions about the circumstances
surrounding the discovery of the Via Montalcini base. He describes the
building being visited by police, who even had a plan showing the interior
of the base with the extra dividing wall put up by the Red Brigades.
Nevertheless, the terrorists living there were allowed to depart unhindered.
He draws attention to the change found in Moro’s pockets, ‘enough to pay
for a taxi from the outer suburbs, from Ostiense, Magliana, the Cassia or
slightly further out’. The money could have been a ploy to make Moro
believe he was about to be released, as Gelli has suggested he did, but
Caprara offers an alternative explanation. ‘The Moro family has continued
to emphasize this worrying detail, which leads to an equally alarming
conclusion. Was Moro freed by one group and murdered by another?’ This
is a thesis we shall have reason to examine again. But more relevant to
Coppetti/Gelli’s claims is Caprara’s categoric assertion that the Rome
column of the Red Brigades contained ‘two infiltrators, one of each sex,’ at
the time that Dalla Chiesa was given responsibility for the war on terrorism.
Following on from this, he wrote: ‘The bags that Aldo Moro was forced to
abandon in the bloody street of Via Fani were delivered to Palazzo Chigi
[the Prime Minister’s office] by Dalla Chiesa. What did they contain?’

--- Sayfa 286 ---
Dalla Chiesa was himself questioned about these matters by the Moro
Commission, though most of its members appear to have been overcome by
embarrassment at having to raise so unsavoury a subject. He went to
considerable pains to refute the kind of allegations put forward in the
Coppetti document and in Caprara’s article but without, it must be said,
being entirely convincing. The Via Montenevoso operation, Dalla Chiesa
told the commission, began with the identification of Lauro Azzolini, a BR
member, after he forgot a bag containing a pistol on a tram in Florence in
July 1978. It was surveillance of Azzolini, not Peci, that led to the
discovery of the Via Montenevoso base. As for documents being purloined
from the base, this was out of the question. A Milan magistrate went to Via
Montenevoso as soon as the apartment was discovered, he was there all day
and nothing could have been smuggled past him. The general concluded his
account: ‘These are stories that have been denied by the people concerned,
by [the magistrate Ferdinando] Pomarici . . . Andreotti issued a denial for
his part, the Interior Ministry issued a denial. I don’t see why, years later,
people should be believed who are somewhat less credible, I would hope,
than I am.’ The commission’s president hastened to reassure him: ‘The
commission, when it asked you for clarification, did not want to give
credence to . . .’27
A little later on, however, Dalla Chiesa was himself giving credence to
the kind of suspicion he had just been rejecting, and emphasizing the
significance of Moro’s missing briefcases. He was asked by Leonardo
Sciascia whether he remained satisfied that Moretti was the real brains
behind the Red Brigades. Ά doubt has come into my mind just recently,’ the
general replied. After a parenthetical couple of paragraphs discussing
Moretti, he returned to his doubt. Ί ask myself now-because I have been out
of the thick of things for a while and I can play the role of the observer with
a bit of experience behind him-where are the briefcases, where are the
originals (because we only found reproductions), the only copy found of the
Moro document was not an original . . .’ Sciascia: ‘Do you think they may
be in some terrorist base?’ Dalla Chiesa: Ί think there is someone who may
have taken possession of all of this.’ Sciascia: Ί am glad this doubt has
occurred to you.’ Dalla Chiesa: ‘We also have to think of the foreign trips
these people made. Moretti came and went.’28 It is significant that this entire
exchange originated with a question about the identity of the real head of
the Red Brigades. It is extraordinary that Dalla Chiesa should put such a

--- Sayfa 287 ---
sinister construction on the disappearance of Moro’s documents and on
Moretti’s travels when a moment before he had been hotly contesting
similar conspiracy theories. It may be that he too wanted to issue a message
of warning.
It is also significant that Peci’s terrorist career should have taken place
under the patronage of Mario Moretti. Friends from his home town of San
Benedetto del Tronto expressed surprise at Peci’s rapid progress in the Red
Brigades organization. ‘Someone like Peci could be a corporal at most. It
makes one think that one can get on in the Red Brigades Italian-style, just
through friendship, loyalty and coming from the same home town as the
leaders,’ one of them told Panorama magazine (28 April 1980). There is
insufficient evidence to say for sure whether Peci had been an infiltrator
even before his arrest. The gravity of the situation if he had been an
infiltrator and also participated in the Moro kidnap needs no underlining.
Equally, if that had been the case, neither Peci nor his manipulators could
ever admit it. The authorities would certainly not welcome a re-evaluation
of his role, given that so much of the official account of the Moro kidnap
rests on his testimony. The fact remains, and it emerges clearly from Dalla
Chiesa’s testimony to the commission, that Peci was responsible for some
eighty-five arrests within the Red Brigades organization. It is hard to
understand how he could have achieved this in a tightly compartmentalized
and security-conscious organization unless he had been actively involved in
intelligence-gathering while he was a member.
Dalla Chiesa’s role in the battle against terrorism is by no means
simple. His methods were undoubtedly ruthless and effective and ultimately
led to the virtual elimination of left-wing terrorism from Italy. Very little
detail has emerged as to who his agents were and how they were used. A
curious glimpse of the general at work is offered by the text of a
conversation between Dalla Chiesa and an imprisoned terrorist, Michele
Galati, who was proving less co-operative than the general had hoped. Ί
don’t want to arrive at the level of blackmail, at the level of saying, I’ll
throw the name of Galati into the storm and see how he gets on. I won’t
ever do that, but at a certain point. . .’ Dalla Chiesa told his recalcitrant
informant. And later he suggested that the Red Brigades were perhaps being
used by foreign organizations. ‘For example, there can be times when
people want to destabilize a government or a country and that’s decided at
an economic and financial level and you can be used.’ ‘No,’ replied

--- Sayfa 288 ---
Galati.29 It is unclear whether Dalla Chiesa was merely trying to shake the
terrorist’s faith in his own organization or expressing a genuine belief. It is
interesting that he should be holding this type of discussion with Galati, one
of the better-informed witnesses on the activities of the Hyperion language
school.
Dalla Chiesa had applied to join P2 in 1976 although he had never
completed the formalities to become a member. He told Milan magistrates
in 1981 that he had agreed to put his name forward after coming under
intense pressure to do so and at a time when his career was in the doldrums.
He also claimed, as did many other military officers, that he considered
joining the lodge in order to gather intelligence about Gelli. Curiously, his
would-be recruiter told him not to worry about any religious qualms that he
might have as a practising Catholic since ‘many cardinals and other prelates
were also freemasons’. He described a single meeting with Gelli in Rome in
1979, during which he discussed his hopes of being appointed head of the
Milan Division of the carabinieri , a clear acknowledgement of Gelli’s
influence in the sphere of military appointments.30
Dalla Chiesa’s testimony to the Moro Commission was in February
1982. Four months later he was appointed anti-Mafia prefect of Palermo
and on 3 September, after 100 days in the Sicilian capital, he and his young
wife were shot dead by Mafia gunmen as they drove home in the evening.
Dalla Chiesa was well aware of the dangers of his new job and had
requested a number of specific powers from the government before
agreeing to accept. The government’s promises had not been kept. Writing
in his private diary, he drew a connection between the sensitive secrets
about the war against terrorism of which he was custodian and the dangers
of his new assignment. Ί, who know more than anyone about all the affairs
of the recent past, find myself called to a difficult and, why not, dangerous
task.’31
The head of the P2 lodge has suggested, in typical allusive style, that
there may be more to the murder of General Dalla Chiesa than immediately
meets the eye. In his memoirs, Gelli describes the shooting of the general
and his wife and comments: ‘The massacre was carried out by the Mafia.
But it was not only the Mafia. Others were responsible for the assassination
of the man who had undertaken to restore Sicily to order and democracy.’32
He was still more explicit in an earlier, unpublished version of the book,

--- Sayfa 289 ---
referring to the general’s death ‘in an ambush, the sinister background to
which suggests grave responsibilities at the very highest level’.33 But he had
no intention of clarifying what he meant when I asked him about it in
person, merely observing: Ί think that to send a general down south, having
promised him the necessary powers and then not to have delivered them, is
like sending a general to the front, promising him munitions and then not
sending them or sending the wrong ones. He was an inconvenient general
because he was very able, an honest man and a leader of men.’34 Gelli’s
published remarks seem to hint at something more sinister than this rather
bland analysis of murder by neglect. One day we will know whether it was
a Mafia crime or a political crime,’35 he commented, surprisingly explicitly,
in his book.
The connection between Dalla Chiesa’s knowledge and his death was
made in one of Mino Pecorelli’s most remarkable pieces of writing.
Incredibly, it was published four years before his assassination. What
appears to be an uncanny prediction of Dalla Chiesa’s murder is contained
in the anonymous ‘Letter to the editor’ published in OP on 17 October
1978. In it, as we have seen, the writer claimed that Interior Minister
Cossiga knew the location of Moro’s prison ‘because a carabiniere general
had been to apprise him of it in the utmost secrecy’. Cossiga, according to
the letter, had sought instructions from the P2 lodge and the decision had
been taken to do nothing. The letter ended with a cryptic and uncannily
accurate prediction: ‘One can only ask oneself, dear Editor, who will be the
Anzà of the situation: in other words, which carabiniere general will be
found to have committed suicide with the classic pistol shot that does
everything itself . . .’ The death in 1977 of General Antonino Anzà,
officially registered as suicide, gave rise to considerable scepticism. He was
found shot to death in his home. His pistol was neither in his hand nor next
to his body but resting on his desk. It had been fired twice, once into the
wall as a ‘test shot’, according to the investigators. Speculation in the press
suggested that he might have been murdered because of his knowledge of
corruption in military procurement contracts and the use he intended to
make of it. At the time of his death, Anzà was a candidate for the job of
commander of the carabinieri .36 But the really remarkable part of
Pecorelli’s ‘letter’ is where he identifies the future victim. ‘Unfortunately
the carabiniere general’s name is known: amen.’ According to those skilled
at deciphering Pecorelli’s messages, this was a reference, by analogy, to

--- Sayfa 290 ---
Dalla Chiesa. Where do people say amen, the interpretation runs, if not in
church? The Italian for church is chiesa.
It is worth bearing in mind that this letter was published within a
matter of weeks of the Via Montenevoso operation and the concomitant
discovery and alleged disappearance of various of Moro’s documents.
Pecorelli’s articles had consistently challenged official accounts of the
Moro kidnap and he had repeatedly alluded to the sensational nature of
Moro’s revelations to the Red Brigades, before making a sudden volte-face
on the subject. A handwritten note found in the OP office after his death
refers to several of the elements mentioned in the Coppetti document. ‘The
secret papers in Dalla Chiesa’s hands . . . Grave things are going on in the
world of the Brigades.’ On the same page he also mentioned Dalla Chiesa’s
appointment as anti-terrorism chief, ‘signed only on 31 August’.37
The disappearance of documents also crops up in connection with
Dalla Chiesa’s death. His son Nando is convinced that something was taken
from his father’s Palermo residence immediately after his death. ‘The key to
the safe was missing and his servant, a former carabiniere faithful to my
father, was absolutely terrified,’ he told the author. ‘They could have killed
my father alone but they killed his wife as well, to ensure there was no one
in the house. When my uncle arrived at 2 a.m. they [the authorities]
wouldn’t let him in.’38 The key to the safe was found a week later, in a
drawer that had previously been searched. The top half of the safe turned
out to be empty and an empty green box was found on the third shelf. It is
somewhat unusual to keep empty boxes in a safe. One of Dalla Chiesa’s
maids told a Palermo court that she overheard the general tell his wife: ‘If
anything should happen to me you know where to go to find what I have
put down in black on white.’39
As anti-terrorism chief, Dalla Chiesa enjoyed a close and harmonious
relationship with Andreotti but the privileged relationship that had lasted
over many years broke down not long before the general accepted his
appointment in Palermo. According to his son Nando, Dalla Chiesa had
come to the conclusion that Andreotti was ‘too compromised’ as a
politician. ‘Once in particular he said that [Andreotti] was “treacherous”, an
expression that took on a typically military significance in my father’s
speech.’40 An indication of the potential for friction between the two former
allies emerges from the entry in Dalla Chiesa’s private diary for 6 April,

--- Sayfa 291 ---
after his nomination as anti-Mafia prefect. ‘Then yesterday, Andreotti asked
me to call and naturally, given his electoral strength in Sicily, he showed
himself indirectly concerned by the problem. I was very clear and I gave
him to understand that I will have no regard for that part of the electorate
which supports his grand electors.5 In effect Dalla Chiesa seems to have
been putting Andreotti on notice that their previous collaboration was no
reason for the general to hold back from pursuing those of Andreotti’s
Sicilian supporters whom he considered to be most entangled with the
Mafia. The entry continued: Ί am convinced that a lack of knowledge of the
phenomenon. . . has led him and continues to lead him to errors of
judgement and of fact. The fact of his telling me that in connection with the
Sindona affair a certain Inzerillo, who died in America, arrived in Italy in a
coffin and with a $10 note in his mouth, illustrates the point: the folklore
still dominates and the messages are not understood.’ Putting money in the
mouth of a corpse is the Mafia’s way of indicating that the person, who has
normally been murdered, had broken its code of silence. ‘My father made a
brief mention of that meeting to the family: “I went to see Andreotti and
when I told him everything I know about his people in Sicily he went white
in the face,”’ Nando Dalla Chiesa has written. ‘This reference and the notes
in his diary together constitute, in my opinion, an absolutely central passage
in the last months of my father’s life.’41
Andreotti was questioned about this incident in 1987, when the
Palermo assize court visited Rome to hear the testimony of a number of
ministers on the government’s failure to honour its pledges and to give
Dalla Chiesa adequate powers to take on the Mafia. Andreotti told the court
that he probably had met Dalla Chiesa on 6 April, but that it had been at the
general’s request and not his. He said he did not mention the Inzerillo
episode as he knew nothing about it until reading newspaper accounts of
Dalla Chiesa’s diary entry. ‘Perhaps [Dalla Chiesa] saw several people that
day and got a bit confused in his summarizing, that’s the only explanation I
can give,’ Andreotti said. Nando Dalla Chiesa’s lawyer, Giuseppe Galasso,
asked the prosecutor to charge the minister with lying under oath because
the implication of his statement was ‘that General Dalla Chiesa had lied to
himself’. The prosecutor eventually decided that Andreotti had not lied, and
that even if he had, it had no bearing on the trial. Andreotti took the
opportunity to issue his own allusive message at the Rome hearing. Asked
why General Dalla Chiesa should have told his son that Salvo Lima, a

--- Sayfa 292 ---
Sicilian ally of Andreotti’s, was one of the politicians most deeply
embroiled with the Mafia, the minister replied: Ί don’t know. Out of respect
for General Dalla Chiesa and because it cannot be the case . . . for example
I never talk about what General Dalla Chiesa told me about some members
of his family.’ The reference was clearly to Nando Dalla Chiesa’s youthful
involvement in extreme left politics but Andreotti refused to elaborate on it,
saying he preferred not to talk about the subject. The court president
accepted his preference, rejecting Galasso’s insistent demands that
Andreotti explain himself, and ruling that the matter was irrelevant to the
case.
On 9 October 1990, a builder redecorating the Red Brigades apartment
in Via Montenevoso removed a plaster panel under a window in one of the
rooms and discovered a secret cache of arms and documents. The hideaway
contained 60 million Lire, the ransom from a 1977 Red Brigades kidnap,
weapons including a Soviet-made Tokarev submachine-gun wrapped in a
newspaper dated 9 September 1978, and 416 photocopied pages in the
handwriting of Aldo Moro, much of it identical to the typescript found in
the flat by the carabinieri twelve years earlier. The find caused widespread
consternation and suspicion. The flat had been empty since the carabinier’
s 1978 raid, sealed up for eleven years by the court authorities. It seemed
incredible that Dalla Chiesa’s men should have missed such a relatively
obvious hiding place. The magistrate in charge of the search had assured
doubters in 1988 that the flat had been ‘taken apart, wall by wall, brick by
brick’. (L’Espresso , 7 August 1988). After the find, a former carabiniere
told newspapers he remembered visiting the flat a couple of days after its
discovery in 1978 and seeing that the panel had been removed and was
propped against the wall (L’Europeo , 2 November 1990). Leading
politicians voiced the suspicion that some secret service faction or other had
planted the documents in recent times. Socialist Party leader Bettino Craxi
said he thought ‘a little hand’ must have put them there, widely interpreted
as a reference to the Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti. Andreotti replied that
it might have been ‘a large hand’ that did the deed, seen as a reference to
the robustly built Craxi. The entire episode gave a vivid insight into the
climate of intense suspicion that surrounds the Moro case. Rome
magistrates investigating the affair came to the conclusion that the panel
had almost certainly been left intact and undisturbed since the flat’s
discovery in 1978.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
The discovery of Moro’s handwritten replies to his captors confirmed
once and for all the authenticity of the previously known typescript and
raised again the issue of why the Red Brigades had decided not to make it
public. The handwritten documents are longer than the typescript, though in
some cases they too are incomplete.
What is not clear, however, is who was responsible for eliminating
sensitive parts of the manuscript from the typewritten version, whether the
Red Brigades practised self-censorship or whether the material was
removed by the secret services or carabinieri when it was first discovered
by General Dalla Chiesa. The allegation that the security services were
responsible for the disappearance of some of the documents was repeated in
an anonymous letter to Senator Flamigni in 1988 signed ‘Union of
carabinieri junior officers’. The letter said a carabiniere officer had carried
off some of the most sensitive documents before the magistrate could
examine them and added: ‘The evening of that 1 October [Public
Prosecutor] Vitalone came up from Rome by plane and took away material .
. .’ (Avvenimenti , 24 October 1990). The implication is that those
documents too went missing, rather than ending up in court files.
Some of the additions are of considerable note and should have
supplied ideal ammunition for the Red Brigades’ political campaign. In one
document, for example, Moro talks of the CIA’s financing of the Christian
Democrat Party. This subject is in fact briefly alluded to in the 1978
typescript but the reference is so truncated as to be virtually meaningless. In
the manuscript, however, Moro discusses the subject at length. He
confirmed that CIA funds had flowed into the DC for a number of years.
‘Frankly it must be said that this is not a good way, a dignified way of
harmonizing our policies. Because when this happens it should happen out
of authentic conviction and free of all conditioning. But here you have a
brutal “do ut des” [tit for tat].’ Elsewhere, Moro refers to Andreotti’s close
relations ‘with his colleagues in the CIA’ and to the fact that he had directed
the secret services both as Defence Minister and as Prime Minister ‘for
longer than anyone else’. This in reply to a question about Christian
Democrat responsibility for the strategy of tension. These comments, too,
are nowhere to be found in the Red Brigades’ typescript. Another
significant addition to the typescript appears to contain a cautiously worded
reference to the Gladio organization. Moro said that when he was Foreign
Minister ‘no particular emphasis had been attached to anti-guerrilla

--- Sayfa 294 ---
activities that NATO could, under certain circumstances, deploy’. He
referred to training for guerrilla activities ‘to be carried out against
occupying enemy forces or counter-guerrilla activities to be undertaken
against enemy forces operating as such on our territory’. (L’Unità , special
supplement, undated). Given that it was Moro who had imposed state
secrecy to prevent magistrates from understanding the true nature of the
Parallel SID it is quite possible that he may have further elaborated on this
theme in order to try and persuade the Red Brigades to spare his life in
return for his revealing important NATO secrets. Again it is extraordinary
that the Red Brigades found nothing in his answers that might further their
cause.
Imprisoned Red Brigades leader Alberto Franceschini was also
amazed at his companions’ decision not to publish the Moro transcript after
reading the text in La Repubblica newspaper at the end of 1978. ‘Even
though it was incomplete it seemed very important to me,’ he told the same
paper recently (La Repubblica , 14 December 1990). ‘Lauro Azzolini and
Franco Bonisoli [who ran the Moro kidnap along with Moretti] were with
me in Asinara prison. I asked them straight out why they had told us that
that stuff wasn’t important and why it hadn’t been published. They were
unable to answer.’
Whatever became of Moro’s missing documents, they have continued
to cast a shadow over Italian politics. One has the sinister impression that
the secrets of the Moro case have become bargaining chips in furtive
negotiations between Italian political leaders and the Red Brigades. The
kind of deal that seems to be taking shape would involve BR leaders
maintaining the veil of secrecy over the Moro mysteries and endorsing
official accounts of the affair in return for some form of amnesty, as
predicted by OP, which would bring Italy’s terrorist season to an official
close. Other politicians who were not directly involved in the affair at the
time have an interest in the secrets because they could provide them with
material with which to blackmail or damage their rivals.
One of the politicians spearheading the drive for an amnesty is former
Christian Democrat Party president Flaminio Piccoli, whose northern
constituency of Trento contains the university which played a crucial role in
the gestation of the Red Brigades organization. ‘Men like Curcio and
Moretti are in a position to reveal all the secrets, to cast a ray of light over

--- Sayfa 295 ---
our history,’ Piccoli told the Corriere della Sera on 25 April 1987. ‘Why
was Moro kidnapped on the very day that the government of national unity
was being presented to Parliament? Who really took the decision to kill him
and why?’ As Piccoli explained, his statements were based on contacts in
prison between BR leaders and emissaries of his party. Ί have never met
either Curcio or Moretti. But there are friends of ours who have had the
proper permits to see them, to talk to them, to pursue a discussion.’ On 10
May he outlined to the Catholic magazine Famiglia Cristiana what he
considered to be the gaps in the available information about the Moro affair.
‘It’s not true that we know everything about the Moro kidnap. Many
important facts are not known and, above all, we don’t have the film from
the closed circuit television which recorded every moment of the kidnap
victim’s day. This material is in the hands of not more than two or three
people who will make it public, one presumes, when they consider it to be
most politically convenient for themselves.’
Piccoli’s references to meetings in prison, to the television film and its
possible possessors, give the impression that he had detailed firsthand
knowledge of the subject he was discussing. But when he was interrogated
by the Rome assize court it turned out that his statements were merely the
fruit of personal deductions based on close reading of the newspapers. A
lawyer representing the families of Moro’s bodyguard summarized Piccoli’s
account to the court: ‘In short, the journalists had misunderstood or added
to his interviews.’ The lawyer commented: ‘But that is not at all the tenor of
the interviews; what today have become deductions were previously the
certain knowledge of the Christian Democrat deputy.’42
A possible channel of communication between Piccoli and the
terrorists was Remigio Cavedon, deputy editor of the party newspaper Il
Popolo , who held numerous meetings with Moretti in prison in 1987.
Cavedon spoke about his meetings with the BR leader in an interview
published by Corriere della Sera on 28 April 1987. He denied that he was
one of the emissaries mentioned by Piccoli in his interview three days
earlier, but Cavedon’s statements seem implicitly to contradict this. ‘As was
my duty, I reported what I learned to the leaders of my party. They were
very important things about the Moro case. We will reveal them at the
appropriate moment.’ It is hard to imagine what these revelations could be
if, as so many in authority still maintain, almost everything about the Moro
case is already known. Lest anyone fail to grasp what Cavedon was saying,

--- Sayfa 296 ---
he reiterated it: ‘They were problems of enormous political significance and
I certainly couldn’t keep them to myself. But I can’t talk about them now
either.’ Subsequently Cavedon attempted to backtrack on the interview,
claiming that he had been misreported. The journalist who interviewed him,
however, was adamant that this was not the case. Cavedon had telephoned
him asking to make a statement and had been perfectly well aware that the
conversation was being recorded.43 Given that Italian politicians are not
noted for their naivety, one can only assume that Cavedon was using the
front page of the Corriere della Sera to broadcast a message. The gist of the
message, it would appear, was that he and his political friends had come
into possession of important information about the Moro affair. Clearly they
did not intend to share their secret with either the public or the judicial
authorities, but it was important that their political rivals should know that
they knew.
A similar but even more blatantly Mafia-like message was published
in the pages of 11 Borghese , a magazine akin to OP and edited by Mario
Tedeschi, a former neo-fascist senator and member of P2. The magazine
claimed (17 February 1985) that vidéocassettes of Aldo Moro’s
interrogation by the Red Brigades had been found in a trunk at the time of
the arrest of terrorist leader Giovanni Senzani. Il Borghese helpfully offered
its readers a number of conjectures as to the possible fate of the recordings.
‘Presumably the secret services had the first complete viewing and perhaps
they made a number of copies. For whom?’ The magazine put forward three
hypotheses.’1. The secret services decide to keep the video recording in
their own archives, without informing the government. A copy is given to
representatives of an allied secret service [the CIA?]. 2. The secret services
hand over a copy of the film to an important personality who shows it to a
few close friends from his own power group. And then hides it. 3. The
secret services inform the Prime Minister’s office of the discovery and the
video is covered by state secrecy.’ The ‘hypotheses’ are put forward in a
truculent and self-confident style reminiscent of OP. Like OP, Il Borghese
enjoyed excellent secret service contacts. It is curious to note how closely
its allegations correspond to those made by Piccoli two years later about the
existence of a closed circuit television film of Moro.
The magazine went on to speculate about the reasons for such secrecy
surrounding the discovery. It suggested that Moro’s replies to his captors
might reveal ‘truths and states of mind hitherto unknown, which could force

--- Sayfa 297 ---
a reappraisal of the tragic case’. The questions, it said, might show ‘the
main theme of the interrogation, probably focused on a political objective
quite separate from that of the guerrillas who carried out the kidnap
operation’. It also pointed out that the transcripts of Moro’s statements
found in various Red Brigades bases were incomplete, reiterating the claim
made in the Coppetti document. The article concluded by commenting on
the ‘understandable’ silence with which the major political parties had
reacted to questions in Parliament on the subject by a member of the neo-
fascist MSI Party. ‘The fact is that those fifty-five days of the Moro kidnap
still weigh heavily and everyone has, at the very least, sins of omission to
atone for.’ The piece appears to be based on a detailed knowledge of the
facts and is distinctly menacing in tone.
The custom of publicly disseminating threatening political messages
through the media is by no means rare in Italian politics and can sometimes
give the impression that political dialectic has become a cat’s cradle of
criss-crossing blackmail notices. Political commentator Giovanni Ferrara
published a damning analysis of the role of corruption and blackmail in
Italian political life under the title Ί blackmail, therefore I am’ (La
Repubblica , 13 December 1987). ‘The dark side of politics, the world of
bribery, is often where the real game is played out,’ he wrote. ‘But who can
really know it? Only those who are part of it. In this way we have reached
the point where not only does the person who is unable to blackmail count
for little in politics but also the person who cannot be blackmailed: he has
nothing to sell and nothing to buy in the disreputable market of power, he is
honest and therefore outside the game.’ Ferrara is by no means a maverick,
alarming though his view may be.
Even Mario Moretti, who in recent years has steadfastly maintained
that the facts of the Moro case are as clear as the day, once admitted to
communist Senator Sergio Flamigni that ‘some of Moro’s writings were
subsequently made to disappear by the secret services’.44 It is hard to
imagine why they should have bothered to do this if their content was not of
some gravity. On 21 March 1988, Moretti, Curcio and Barbara Balzerani
gave a joint interview to the main state-run television network, RAI 1.
While Curcio and Balzerani were unsure whether or not to participate,
Moretti had made up his mind to give the interview with or without the
other two. Before it was broadcast, the programme was viewed by no doubt
anxious representatives of the Christian Democrat Party, who evidently

--- Sayfa 298 ---
found nothing to object to. In it, a distinctly nervous-looking Moretti
forcefully insisted that there were no mysteries to be solved in the Moro
case. Ί know exactly what happened inside the Red Brigades and this has all
been written, it is all known, there is no secret background to it, there is
nothing that hasn’t been published, there are no interrogation transcripts, no
tapes, there is nothing that is not substantially known. . .’ he told the
interviewer. Ί challenge anyone to find a single episode in which you could
suspect a link between the Red Brigades and anything else.’ This drew a
sharp riposte in an open letter from BR founder Alberto Franceschini. ‘Are
you really sure, Mario, that everything there is to know about the Moro
kidnap has been said and written?’ he wrote. ‘Or in the three years since the
trial has something happened to make you change your mind and confirm
what you yourself used to call the state’s truth?’45
Notes
1   Giorgio Bocca (ed.), Moro: Una Tragedia Italiana, Valentino
Bompiani, Milan, 1978, p. 36.
2   Ibid., p. 39.
3   Ibid., pp. 42-3.
4   Ibid., pp. 120-2.
5   Rocco Tolfa, Il Sabato, Rome, 11-17 June 1988.
6   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
92.
7   Moro Commission, Allegato alia Relazione, No. 5, Vol. 5,
Rome, 1983, p. 15.
8   Ibid., p. 38.
9   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
121.
10   Moro Commission, Allegato alia Relazione, No. 5, Vol. 5,
Rome, 1983, p. 184.
11   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, L’Operazione Moro,
Franco Angeli, Milan, 1984, p. 73.
12   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
168.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
13   Ibid., p. 126.
14   Ibid., p. 160.
15   Ibid., p. 126.
16   Ibid., p. 162.
17   Ibid., p. 153.
18   Ibid., p. 154.
19   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
20   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part
3, Rome, 1985, pp. 545-é.
21   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
154.
22   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989. P2 Commission,
Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 3, Tome 4, Part 3, Rome, 1985* p. 590·
23   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 22,
Rome, 1987, p. 439·
24   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
154.
25   Quoted in Giuseppe Ferrara, Il Caso Moro, Tullio Pironti,
Naples, 1987, pp. 386-7.
27   Moro Commission, Allegata alla Relazione, No. 5, Vol. 5,
Rome, 1983, p. 228.
28   Ibid., p. 233.
29    Panorama , 17 November 1985.
30   General Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa to G.I. Giuliano Turone,
Milan, 12 May 1981.
31   Giuseppe Zupo and Vincenzo Marini, op. cit., p. 231.
32   Licio Gelli, La Verità , Demetra, Lugano, 1989, p. 261.
33   Licio Gelli, unpublished version of La Verità , p. 18.
34   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
35   Licio Gelli, op. cit., (1989), p. 267.
36    La Repubblica , 24 May 1978.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
37   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 17,
Rome, 1987, p. 313.
38   Nando Dalla Chiesa to the author, 1988.
39   Franco Coppola, La Repubblica , 1 August 1986.
40   Nando Dalla Chiesa, Delitto Imperfetto , Mondadori, Milan,
1984, p. 35.
41   Ibid., p. 34.
42   Franco Scottoni, La Repubblica , 9 October 1987.
43   Paolo Graldi to the author, 1987.
44   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, p. 173.
45   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 8 May 1988.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
[15]
MR BROWN’S STORY
The notion that the CIA was involved in the Moro kidnap has been put
forward persistently and in some detail by a strange Scotsman named
Martin Woodrow Brown. Brown has been officially dismissed as a crank
and it does appear that he was somewhat unbalanced, at least in the last
years of his life. Nevertheless, his claims deserve serious consideration
because they are surprisingly precise and because there is other evidence
that corroborates them. Most persuasive of all, though, is the reaction of
people who met Brown when questioned about him. This ranged from
outright alarm, through lies and evasiveness, to curiosity and an open
assumption that the questioner must be working for his country’s
intelligence services. Brown was born in Brookfield near Glasgow on 20
May 1919. He served in the British Army in Italy during and immediately
after the war, where he acted as a cryptographer and also had dealings with
Italian prisoners of war. In the 1950s and 1960s he worked as a civil
engineer in New York and in Canada and returned to Britain in 1968. His
work in North America appears to have been fairly lucrative, as he was able
to buy himself an Aston Martin car in the early 1960s. On his return to
Europe he began to work as an antique dealer, travelling extensively in
Germany, Spain and Italy. For the last few years until his death from a heart
attack in Pisa on 12 June 1986, he lived as a tramp, despite the fact that he
owned a house in Scotland and sizeable shareholdings.1 It appears he may
have spent some time in a mental asylum in Spain.2
Brown began disseminating his views not long after Moro’s death,
writing to, among others, Christian Democrat Senator Giuseppe
Giovanniello. The latter was a personal friend of Moro’s, hailing from the
southern port of Bari, the Christian Democrat leader’s home town. The
Moro trial documents include an envelope addressed to Giovanniello by
Brown and postmarked 4 August 1978. Curiously, the letter it contained is
missing. Its drift can be surmised from the contents of another letter, sent
from Spain and dated 2 April 1979. It is written in capital letters and rather
stilted, telegraphic English:
Senator CIA plot-Signor Aldo Moro.

--- Sayfa 302 ---
With reference to the plot CIA USA against Signor Aldo Moro. I have
proof of this. Please advise if you wish confirmation with Xerox copies.
Research period June 1977 to date with in Rome Oct. 1978. Regarding this
case contacted Prof. Semerari, criminology, Rome University. Please
confirm receipt by return. Its name noted on linked pages assassination list
in a published book.
The letter was signed by Brown. Rather than immediately throwing it
away as the work of a nutcase, Giovanniello sent it on to Examining
Magistrate Achille Gallucci with a covering note expressing the hope that
‘it does not take up too much of your precious time and that it may be at
least a grain of contribution towards the truth’.
A month earlier Brown had sent an even stranger and more complex
letter to the headquarters of the finance police in Rome.
Dear Sir,
I apologize for my poor written Italian. I am writing to you in
connection with the murder of Aldo Moro. In the course of a year’s research
carried out in a British library, in a book whose subject and title is The
Gang That Couldn’t Shoot Straight , published by J. Breslim, Bantam
Books. . . I found a list of anarchist assassinations, partially concealed by
resorting to a system suggested by me in Manhattan in 1956-58, at the time
of the book’s publication. Others provided the ideas for the book, adding
the list of the assassinations, which included the name of Aldo Moro. The
use of the encoding anagrams provides the names, forty of which, I repeat, I
have discovered, including that of a certain Jacques Chaime, president of
the Crédit Lyonnais who was killed in May 1976 in Paris, Blvd des Italiens.
Write to me if you would like to know more details about the code
used.
The list of murders also includes racing drivers, among whom Mario
Andretti is cited. In all, six of the drivers named have already died in car or
plane crashes.
Brown concluded by saying that he had been put in touch with the
press officer of the Italian embassy in London by the Italian naval attache.
Once again, the letter bears all the hallmarks of being the work of a
crank. It does, however, appear to have been treated with some seriousness
by the Italian authorities. A report on the letter, probably drawn up by

--- Sayfa 303 ---
SISMI, and marked ‘Most Confidential’ (Riservatissimo ), is included in the
Moro trial documents. According to those who participated in the trial, it is
most unusual for documents relating to any of the numerous cranks’ letters
regarding the Moro case to be marked in this way. The report noted that
Brown had put forward the name of Enrico Triaca as Moro’s murderer.
Triaca was the owner of a Red Brigades printing press who had been
arrested on 17 May 1978, and the author of the report speculated that
newspaper accounts of the event may have prompted Brown’s identification
of him, given that his letter was written some three weeks after the arrest.
The report observes that the identification was made in a note written at the
foot of a photocopy from Brown’s book, but the photocopy itself is missing
from the trial documents. The report states that in a letter dated 8 August
1978, ‘the collateral British agency’ informed the Italians that there was no
reference to a list of murders or to Aldo Moro in the book cited by Brown.
It identified an M.W. Brown living in Scotland and offered to contact him if
required. The Italians decided to take up the offer but ‘after repeated
reminders’ they were told in the following January that their British
colleagues had been unable to trace Brown and that ‘he was anyway
mentally unbalanced so any information received from him would be
unreliable’.
The remarkable thing about this report is that it shows that the
investigation was handled by the Italian secret services rather than the
police or magistrates, that they reacted very quickly and that they
repeatedly requested their British counterparts to question Brown about his
letter. What’s more, the report’s conclusion that Brown was unbalanced
seems to clash with its ‘Most Confidential’ heading. It is extremely unlikely
that Brown was claiming that the name of Moro’s murderer had been
published in a book, in coded form, several decades before his kidnap and
long before he embarked on the policy of compromise with the PCI that led
to his death. What is rather more plausible is that Brown could identify his
killers using a published book and a code system he himself devised. As we
have seen, he was actually in New York at the time he claimed to be and he
had been a cryptographer during the war.
There are other elements of corroborating evidence that justify taking
Brown’s claims seriously. For a start, there is a curious echo of Brown’s
reference to the murder of the president of the Credit Lyonnais in the
evidence to Rome magistrates of ‘repentant’ right-wing terrorist Walter

--- Sayfa 304 ---
Sordi. Ί remember that one evening, travelling on the Turin-Rome train
with Pasquale Belsito and Stefano Procopio, who were also members of
NAR [Armed Revolutionary Cells], I heard references for the first time to
the Pecorelli murder as being a matter connected with our world,’ Sordi told
the magistrates. ‘In particular, Belsito said that Valerio Fioravanti was not
the clean person we all believed him to be, but someone involved in
complex and sinister manoeuvres, including the Pecorelli murder. Belsito
added that Fioravanti was in contact with Gelli, whom he had met in
France. Valerio Fioravanti had also murdered a number of bankers in
France. Belsito was very vague about this but he said he was certain of
Giusva [a nickname] Fioravanti’s participation in the Pecorelli murder.’
Angelo Izzo, as we have already seen, offered magistrates a similar account.
It is unlikely that Fioravanti was involved in the Jacques Chaine (the
banker’s name is actually spelt with an ‘n’; Brown seems to have had some
difficulty with his spelling, mistakenly giving Triaca’s name as Triaco and
author Jimmy Breslin as Breslim) murder as the banker was actually shot
by a young French anarchist, Jean Bilski, who committed suicide
immediately afterwards, and Fioravanti would only have been in his mid-
teens at the time. Brown was obviously aware of the circumstances of
Chaine’s murder, probably from newspaper reports, as he cited Bilski’s
name and the fact that he had used a 9 mm pistol, at the foot of the
photocopied page where he named Triaca as the murderer of Aldo Moro.
What is interesting is that Belsito should have spoken of the murder of
French bankers in connection with Gelli and his links with right-wing
terrorists.
An even stranger coincidence relates to Brown’s reference to the
accidental death of famous racing drivers. Given that the driver he
mentioned, Andretti, was not dead, one can only assume that their names
were a coded reference to other people who had actually died. Among a
series of documents confiscated from Marcello Coppetti in
1981 was a single page containing a handwritten list of seven racing
driver’s names. Coppetti had entrusted copies of the documents for safe
keeping to a lawyer and to his brother, who kept them for him in a bank
security box. One of the documents, relating to the journalist’s research on
Gelli, contains the statement: ‘I am giving several copies of this note to
people in my confidence, in a sealed envelope to be opened in the event of
something happening to me or my dying of other than natural causes.’3 It is

--- Sayfa 305 ---
hard to understand why Coppetti should have kept a list of racing drivers
alongside other documents which he clearly considered to be highly
sensitive. The names listed are: Villeneuve, Sheckter, Jarier (which appears
to have been crossed out), Andretti (mentioned by Brown), Reutemann,
Lauda and Piquet.4 All the drivers were alive when the document was
handed over to the judicial authorities by Coppetti. The only one to die
subsequently was Gilles Villeneuve, killed in a racing accident in 1982.
More curious still, a document detailing Gelli’s personal financial affairs
was confiscated from the P2 boss when he was arrested in Switzerland in
1982. A payment of 31,000 in an unspecified currency (pesos or dollars?)
was listed against the entry ‘Risar cimento incidente Piquet’ (Compensation
Piquet accident). When I asked him about this, Gelli at first looked
absolutely blank. After a while he suddenly appeared to understand the
question but pronounced the name Piquet like the word ‘cricket’ rather than
in the French manner: ostensibly the reason why he had initially failed to
understand my question. He said Piquet was the name of his Uruguayan
chauffeur, who had had a car accident in Montevideo, and the entry was to
remind him of his insurance claim. ‘It was just a note to remind me of all
the questions I had to deal with. Piquet is still alive and well.’ If this is the
case, it is somewhat surprising that Gelli should have added the handwritten
note about the ‘incidente Piquet ’ at the foot of a typewritten document
mainly devoted to substantial financial operations carried out in conjunction
with Banco Ambrosiano President Roberto Calvi. The matter was clearly
open to misinterpretation, as Gelli quickly commented: ‘That’s another
thing where, who knows what you may have thought?’5 Indeed, one might
have been tempted to think that the racing drivers’ names had been used as
a coded reference to a linked series of political assassinations, about which
both Brown and Coppetti had information.
Along with the list of racing drivers and much documentation on Gelli,
Coppetti also kept several documents relating to the Moro affair, in addition
to the notes of his conversation with Gelli and Nobili about Moro’s missing
papers. In one of these he refers to contacts between Gelli and Army
Commander-in-Chief General Giuseppe Aloia that took place in the mid-
1960s. ‘This is a period worth focusing on because the infiltration of
someone into SIFAR begins, which will lead to the rapid decline of the
Italian secret service, with consequences which will affect SID then SISMI
and SISDE, with the result that when the Moro operation comes to fruition

--- Sayfa 306 ---
the service no longer exists.’6 Coppetti expanded on this idea in another
document entitled, appropriately enough, ‘CIA-NATO’. The document is in
two parts. The first part reads: ‘Directive: when the NATO survival plan
goes into operation (either for total war or “non-orthodox war” or “war of
ideological aggression”) the plan is for all the secret services of NATO
countries, although remaining independent, to give a co-ordinating role for
so-called “camouflaged operations” to the CIA. The latter obviously throws
the country that is undergoing the ideological attack into confusion.’ The
second part of the document describes a plan known by Coppetti as A-2,
which outlines how an agreement between the United States and the Soviet
Union stipulates that whatever happens in Poland, the same must occur in
Italy. ‘See what happens in Poland and Italy in 1976 and why A-2 takes
more initiative in Italy and it ends up with SID being blinded and Moro
eliminated.’7 Whether or not one accepts Coppetti’s thesis of some sort of
reciprocal agreement between the CIA and the KGB, it is interesting to note
that he places the elimination of Moro fairly and squarely within the context
of NATO security arrangements. Moro’s policy of a historic compromise
with the communists may well have been construed as ‘ideological
aggression’ by NATO security chiefs.
There are other elements that lend support to some of Brown’s claims.
In his letter to Giovanniello, he said that he had contacted Professor Aldo
Semerari, a criminologist at Rome University, about the Moro affair. This
was confirmed by Semerari in an interview with Paese Sera (21 June 1981).
Semerari told the newspaper that he had received a letter from Brown,
addressed to the director of the Rome University Criminology Department,
shortly after Moro’s death. In it, the writer stated that ‘on the basis of an
interpretation of passages from an already published book he had succeeded
in predicting a series of crimes, including the murders of Kennedy, an
actress and Moro, and for the future, that of the racer Andretti (who’s
fortunately still alive), as well as other people whom I don’t remember. The
letter appeared to be clearly the work of a psychopath.’ Despite holding this
opinion of the letter, Semerari decided to send it on to General Giuseppe
Ferrara, a friend of his at carabiniere headquarters, and was thanked for it a
couple of days later by the general. Ά little while later, someone calling
himself Brown came to my private office, saying that he was the author of
the letter. He was a middle-aged man, neglectful of his clothes and personal
cleanliness and incapable of speaking Italian.’ Semerari passed him on to

--- Sayfa 307 ---
his colleague Professor Franco Ferracuti, who he knew had an interest in
the Moro case as he had been one of Cossiga’s panel of advisers during the
kidnap. Since then, Semerari said, he had had no more contact with Brown.
Evidently keen to distance himself from the affair, he added: ‘It is in these
terms and only in these terms that my name can be linked to the Moro
case.’
As someone claiming that the CIA was behind Moro’s kidnap, Brown
could not have stumbled upon a more unsuitable audience. Both Semerari
and Ferracuti were members of P2 and had close links to the Italian secret
services. Ferracuti also worked for the CIA and had done so since before
the Moro kidnapping. ‘Ferracuti often boasted of his contacts with the
American secret services for whom he is continuously travelling to the
United States,’ Semerari’s widow told Bologna magistrates in 1985.8
Semerari, who had been a communist in his youth but became an extreme
right-winger in later life, was one of Italy’s most influential criminologists.
His work brought him into contact with Mafia bosses and terrorists and he
was a regular frequenter of the social gatherings of the extreme right. This
enabled him to act as a bridge between the P2 lodge and its occasional allies
in the worlds of terrorism and organized crime. He was able to provide
prisoners with favours of information and assistance with their legal
problems as well as certifying some of them as insane so that they could be
transferred from prison to a less rigorous life in a mental institution.
Semerari was arrested in connection with the Bologna station bombing and
sent ripples of unease through the secret services by threatening to write a
memorandum on the affair while he was in prison in the autumn of 1980.9
He was released shortly afterwards but was terrified that people would
assume this was because he had talked and named those responsible for the
bombing.10 Ferracuti has also been suspected of having inside knowledge
about the Bologna bombing. Semerari’s brother told magistrates in 1984: Ί
think it is important to report the following: when my brother was arrested,
Ferracuti assumed an aggressive attitude towards my sister-in-law, whom he
even went so far as to threaten with reprisals: he told her that if Aldo had
been arrested “because of Bologna”, he [Ferracuti] had nothing to do with it
and he did not intend to be implicated in such events and if he was
implicated in them, he would know how to react.’11
Semerari took his secrets, on Bologna and many other matters, with
him to the grave. He was kidnapped by the Camorra on 27 March 1982 and

--- Sayfa 308 ---
his decapitated body was found in the boot of a car near Naples on 1 April.
His head was found separately, in a plastic bag resting on the back seat of
the car. That same day his secretary committed suicide in Rome, ensuring
that his secrets remained such. It has not been established whether Semerari
was murdered because he had offended a powerful Camorra boss or
because the secret services were worried about his reliability over the
Bologna case. It is not always easy to distinguish between the Camorra and
the secret services in some of the murkier chapters of recent Italian history.
Semerari may not have been as sceptical of Brown as he would have had
people think. Among the Scotsman’s belongings discovered after his death
was a letter of introduction from Semerari addressed to a police officer. His
true opinion about Brown’s claims also went with him to the grave.
Despite Semerari’s assertion that he had referred Brown to Ferracuti,
the latter insisted he had never actually met the Scotsman, when I spoke to
him in 1989.12 ‘Semerari said Brown was unbalanced but said I should meet
him. If I recall correctly, he was unavailable to meet me,’ Ferracuti told me.
But he was given a copy of Brown’s letter from Spain, which he passed on
for analysis to colleagues in SISDE. Ferracuti is a tall, balding,
distinguished-looking man and speaks fluent English. He was a professor of
criminological medicine and forensic psychiatry at Rome University when
he was invited to join the team of five experts advising Interior Minister
Cossiga on the Moro kidnap. Ferracuti gave advice on Moro’s mental state
on the basis of his letters from captivity and attempted to glean information
on the Red Brigades’ intentions by analysing their communiqués. Ί believed
at the time and I still do, that Moro was suffering from the Stockholm
Syndrome,’ he said. The consequence of this conclusion that Moro was
emotionally in thrall to his captors was inevitably to reduce the statesman’s
prestige and diminish the significance of his letters. This is significant,
given that there was fierce debate over the genuineness of his letters, in
which Moro appeared to be giving perfectly lucid advice on how best to
resolve the kidnap. Mino Pecorelli had taken exactly the opposite view:
‘The truth is hard to say, very hard for the Christian Democrats to accept:
Moro wrote what he has written in the full possession of his mental
faculties. The words, the forms of expression, the logical connections, all
bear his unique imprint.’ (OP, 18 April 1978.)
Following the Moro affair, Ferracuti became a consultant to the
domestic secret service, SISDE, and in 1980 he joined P2. He told me that

--- Sayfa 309 ---
he joined the lodge for protection because of the dangers involved in his
secret service work and claimed, somewhat implausibly, that he was
unaware of the negative publicity about P2 which had been gathering pace
in the media at that time. He added the revealing comment: ‘If I had not
been invited to join P2 it would have been an insult. When you reach a
certain level in the secret services you are invited to join, invited is an
understatement.’ Again, this confirms the nature of the lodge as a club for
the top ranks of the security services.
Despite his membership of P2 and his work for the CIA, Ferracuti
retains a sophisticated view of Italian politics. ‘I’m not a communist or of
his own and had immediately passed on the letter to Judge Gallucci. He was
not prepared to discuss the matter any further. This alarmed reaction was
also registered by Paese Sera in the article reporting Semerari’s account of
his dealings with Brown (21 June 1981). ‘He [Giovanniello] cut short a
phone conversation with a journalist with the words: “I can’t say any more.
I don’t want to. . .”’ the paper reported. It is understandable that Brown’s
allegations should be regarded as somewhat sensitive but incomprehensible
that they should provoke fear, unless there were some truth in them. One
possible reason for Giovanniello’s anxiety can be gathered from an
interview he gave to La Repubblica newspaper on 14 September 1978, and
which he subsequently disowned. The interview contains grave and detailed
allegations which echo the claims made by both Brown and journalist
Massimo Caprara. At the time of the interview, Giovanniello would almost
certainly have received Brown’s first (now missing) letter, sent from Madrid
on 4 August. Unless a lot of people’s imaginations were working overtime,
one can only assume that the claims made by normally sober senators and
journalists were based on what they considered to be reliable information.
Giovanniello began by saying that the proposal, put forward by La
Stampa newspaper, that the captive Moro should be elected State President
was ‘the culmination of a series of contacts, the choice taken when certain
things were understood’. Interviewer: ‘That Moro was the victim of an
international plot?’ ‘There’s no doubt about that. I am not interested in
pointing out which foreign power was likely to benefit from Moro’s
disappearance. I only say that Moro being State President, with all that that
implied, would certainly not have impressed the few desperadoes who took
possession of the [Christian Democrat] president in the last stage in order to
eliminate him. The message went much further than that.’ Giovanniello said

--- Sayfa 310 ---
he realized that it would be very difficult to get Moro back alive ‘when we
understood the level of the people behind the kidnap’. He and his friends,
he said, did everything possible. ‘In particular, when we learned that Moro
was about to be handed over to common criminals for the terrible final act,
we did the most unheard of things to try and get to him before the others,
but without success.’
The senator’s account tallies with Caprara’s claim that Moro had been
released by one group only to be murdered by another. His reference to the
foreign power with most to gain from Moro’s removal seems to be a
discreet reference to the United States, echoing Brown’s claim. The claim
that the kidnapped statesman had been handed over to common criminals
might also explain how underworld figures like Toni Chichiarelli could
have come into possession of inside information about the kidnap.
Giovanniello’s account finds faint echoes in Pecorelli’s article ‘Shame on
you, you clowns’ (OP, 16 January 1979), where he referred to negotiations
with the Red Brigades and to ‘someone breaking the pact’. According to
Pecorelli, Moro was to have been released, ‘the “carabinieri ” (?) were to
have checked that Moro was alive and let the red car go. Then someone
raised the stakes to an unacceptable figure because they wanted the anti-
communist Moro dead anyway. . .’ Giovanniello’s description of secret
negotiations and a race to get to Moro first plausibly ties in with this
version. It is, in any case, far too detailed and specific to be easily explained
away. Giovanniello concluded the interview with a reference to the false BR
communique no.7. When he and his friends heard news of it they rushed to
the nearest carabiniere station and contacted the force’s commander-in-
chief, General Mario De Sena. ‘As we know, it was all a hoax, but why did
De Sena immediately reply that it was all over for Moro? How could he be
so sure?’ Given the tenor of the rest of the interview, this last question
seems to be prompted by more than an idle curiosity.
Another document, almost certainly from Brown, adds further detail to
the catalogue of conspiracy allegations. A police report dated 16 May 1979
explains: the previous day, copies of a typewritten document were found in
two telephone booths in Florence following anonymous phone calls to the
local newpaper and to the ANSA news agency. The opening is in the
familiar Brown style:

--- Sayfa 311 ---
Please forgive my Italian, furthermore, I don’t know how to type.
Don’t ask me either why a stranger should write such things only now;
whether they are true or false. It’s up to you to judge. This is not a
confession but simply a true account of the facts. The man who really
organized the Via Fani massacre and the kidnap of Aldo Moro is an Italo-
American and a close friend of Ronald Stark (whom the police have been
protecting so much). His name is David, born 18.3.1954 in San Diego,
California, blue eyes, 1.77 metres tall, chestnut hair, average build, he
sometimes wears a moustache, former marine in Vietnam with the rank of
captain, then entered the Green Beret special forces. Most recently he was a
military counsellor with Central Intelligence Defence in West Germany.
David is the only one of the top directors who personally organized the Via
Fani massacre and the kidnap of Aldo Moro together with his other
companions who are already known to the police. David, however, did not
participate in the elimination of Aldo Moro. Most recently he has been
living in Rome, but he generally lives in Milan (he frequents the USIS
library in Via Bigli 1/A).
The document was found about a fortnight before Brown wrote to
Giovanniello from Madrid. One wonders whether his first letter, posted on
4 August 1978, which has gone missing from the Moro trial documents,
was equally specific. An attempt to discuss these allegations with Judge
Domenico Sica in 1988 elicited the reply that the magistrate had important
things to do and that anyway almost everything about the Moro case was
already known.
The mention of Ronald Stark in the context of the Moro kidnap is
interesting. Stark was the American arrested in Bologna for drug trafficking
in February 1975. It was he who had been in contact with Enrico Paghera,
the man who falsely claimed responsibility for the Lake Duchessa
communique on behalf of Azione Rivoluzionaria. While they were both in
prison, Stark had given Paghera instructions on how to reach a guerrilla
training camp at Baalbeck in Lebanon and, according to Paghera, the
American had set him up as an Interior Ministry informant. Stark was a
balding, overweight man in his middle thirties with a drooping Mexican-
style moustache who dabbled in drug dealing and revolutionary politics to
such an extent that it is impossible to be sure whether his main aim was
self-enrichment or intelligence-gathering on behalf of the US government.
His involvement with drugs began in the late 1960s as a member of a hippy

--- Sayfa 312 ---
drug-dealing association known as the Brotherhood of Eternal Love. This
transformed his personal finances, enabling him to set up a drug laboratory
in Belgium in 1971 with an investment of $300,ooo.13 His involvement with
intelligence work began even earlier, with a stint of secret work for the
Defense Department between i960 and 1962.14 It is worth remembering that
some of the earliest research into hallucinogenic drugs was carried out by
the CIA, prompted by a desire to find a response to the brain-washing of
captured US troops during the Korean War and by an interest in the mind-
control potential of drugs such as LSD. The work was carried out as part of
an operation codenamed MK-ULTRA, authorized by Allen Dulles in 1953,
and designed to investigate covert means of modifying human behaviour.
More recently, the international drug market has offered plentiful supplies
of untraceable funds and information, both of which have a powerful
attraction for the world’s security services.
Stark’s arrest in Italy was prompted by a mysterious phone call to the
police and he seems to have been quite happy to go to prison, where his
time was gainfully employed in winning the confidence of captured Red
Brigades leaders, given that he turned down the opportunity of bail in
August 1978.15 One of his ploys to convince them of his bona fides was to
emphasize his links with the left-wing Palestinian faction led by George
Habbash, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. It was this group
that had been training and arming Toni Negri’s Autonomía Operaia
organization. He was well equipped for this role as he had travelled
frequently to Lebanon, doubtless convenient for his arms and drug deals,
and one of his many identities was that of Ali Khoury, a stateless
Palestinian. According to Paghera, Stark spoke of forming an international
terrorist organization free of Marxist-Leninist ideology,16 an ideal vehicle
for acts of controlled political provocation.
When the time came that he was ready to leave prison, Stark had no
difficulty in persuading the authorities that he had been working for
American intelligence all along. Examining Magistrate Giorgio Floridia
ordered his release on 11 April 1979, saying that a number of circumstances
justified the hypothesis ‘that Stark, a member of the American secret
services from i960 onwards, entered the Middle East drug world probably
in order to infiltrate armed organizations operating in that area and to gain
contacts and information about European terrorist groups’. Floridia based
this judgement on Stark’s close links with the US consul in Rome, Philip

--- Sayfa 313 ---
Taylor, with officials from the Florence consulate and with Charles Adams,
an economic counsellor at the US embassy in London. The magistrate cited
the US authorities’ failure to seek Stark’s extradition, despite the fact he
was wanted in the United States on charges of drug dealing and tax evasion.
He also referred to ‘periodic payments to him from Fort Lee, known to be
the site of a CIA office’.17
While in prison, Stark cultivated the friendship of BR leaders Renato
Curcio and Pietro Bertolazzi. As well as offering to put them in contact with
the PFLP, he provided them with a cryptographic system for coded radio
communications. Having gained their confidence he was then able to pass
on information to officers from the carabinieri and from the Interior
Ministry’s anti-terrorism unit, who came to visit him in prison. In 1976 he
told the Pisa public prosecutor about a Red Brigades plan to assassinate the
Genoa magistrate Francesco Coco, four months before the murder actually
took place. He also told the prosecutor about the existence of a plan to
kidnap Andreotti, but he was not believed on either score.18 Stark told a
Bologna prosecutor that he had provided certain people with names and
addresses which would make possible the arrest of the real Red Brigades
leadership. He said the recipients should have no difficulty in making the
information available as it did not concern their own country, again a hint
that he was working for US intelligence. He also told the magistrate that he
was surprised that information he had provided to a carabiniere officer had
not led to any arrests.
The American provided a somewhat anomalous account of the
structure of the Red Brigades organization during a meeting with officials
from the Interior Ministry’s anti-terrorism unit in July 1977. Their report
says Stark described the terrorist organization as being divided into three
levels. The lowest level was that of the factories, the second was the
‘operational group’, with more than 300 members, and the most secret level
was that of the ‘Military and Industrial Information Centre’, whose
members operated mainly in Rome and about whom ‘everything is known’.
The officers drew a small sketch to illustrate Stark’s description. When I
showed it to BR founder Alberto Franceschini in 1988 he said he knew
nothing of such a structure. One can only assume that by 1977 the Red
Brigades were no longer divided into columns (by city) and fronts (by
activity), under the control of the Strategic Directorate, but that the
organization had a secret structure, unknown even to one of its founder

--- Sayfa 314 ---
members. Alternatively, if Stark was neither lying nor mistaken, he may
have wanted to convey some kind of message to his interlocutors by
challenging official accounts of the Red Brigades organization. His
challenge went further, claiming that Curcio was not the real head of the
organization but made to appear so in order to mislead the police.19 His
account is somehow reminiscent of magistrate Guido Calogero’s
conclusions, which question whether the known Red Brigades members
were the ones that really counted and highlighted the manipulative role of
the Hyperion language school in Paris. The suggestion that Stark was about
to make revelations along these lines would certainly have given a jolt to
the custodians of these secrets.
Stark’s activities offer other surprises. As well as cultivating
imprisoned left-wing terrorists, he appears to have been in contact with
leading exponents of the right. Documents confiscated at the time of his
arrest show that he had been in touch with Salvo Lima, Andreotti’s political
ally allegedly linked to the Mafia, and with Prince Gianfranco Alliata di
Montereale, linked to freemasonry and the Mafia and implicated in the
Borghese coup attempt. There was also evidence of contact with Graziano
Verzotto, an associate of Sindona’s and president of the Sicilian state
mining corporation, Ente Minerario Siciliano, who fled to Lebanon in 1975
after being caught up in a financial scandal. He was equally at home with
the rightists as he was when masquerading as a left-wing sympathizer. A
confiscated letter to Wendy Hansen, American vice-consul in Florence,
expressed the view that circumstances were not yet ripe for a military coup
in Italy.20 Most interesting of all, though, was evidence that he had been in
touch with Vito Miceli, former director of Italian military intelligence. A
complex and never fully resolved tale involving Miceli leads back, by a
roundabout route, to the Moro affair.21
One of Stark’s co-defendants at the drug trial was an architect from
Rome, Count Roberto Fiorenzi, known to his friends as Bubi. Fiorenzi had
come under suspicion of involvement in the Italicus train bombing after it
was discovered that he was staying at the Hotel Locarno in Rome at the
same time as other suspects in the bombing were meeting there.22
According to another of the drug defendants, a car thief named Franco
Buda, Stark had told him that Fiorenzi had given shelter in his house in
Siracusa, Sicily, to at least one of the men involved in the 1973 Fiumicino
airport massacre at the request of a senior officer in the Italian armed forces.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
From Buda’s account the examining magistrate in Rome deduced that the
officer in question could have been Miceli, but the matter was never fully
clarified.23 On 17 December 1973, seven Arab gunmen attacked a Pan
American Boeing 707 at Rome airport. They threw incendiary bombs into
the aircraft, causing the death of thirty-two people, before five of them
escaped to Kuwait aboard a hijacked Lufthansa jet. According to Lotta
Continua (24 October 1978), the other two were allowed to escape to
Rome, where they were taken into the protective custody of the Italian
secret services, before being smuggled out of the country. These two could
well have been concealed in Fiorenzi’s Sicilian house, as Buda had claimed.
La Repubblica (13 June 1976) also voiced the suspicion that the airport
attack could have been planned ‘with the agreement of important sectors of
SID’. The paper cited the account of an eyewitness who claimed to have
seen the seven gunmen being escorted through airport security checks by
policemen three hours before the attack. The suggestion was that right-wing
police and secret service agents assisted the hijackers as part of their
contribution to the strategy of tension. The attack sparked off energetic
efforts on the part of the Italian secret services to persuade Palestinian
terrorist groups to refrain from further attacks on Italian territory. One of the
methods adopted was the supply of large amounts of humanitarian aid to
Palestinian refugees. The man chiefly responsible for Italy’s placatory
policy towards the PLO was Aldo Moro and the go-between he chose for
political contacts with the PLO leadership was Colonel Stefano Giovannone
of military intelligence.
Just over a month before the Fiumicino attack, the Italian government
had made one of its most generous gestures in its continuing attempt to
shield the country from Middle Eastern terrorism. Five Arab terrorists had
been arrested a couple of months earlier as they prepared to shoot down an
El Al airliner with a ground-to-air missile from the balcony of a house in
Ostia, a coastal town directly under the flight path of planes landing and
taking off at Fiumicino.24 Rome judges granted them provisional liberty and
on 11 November they were flown to freedom on board an Italian military
aircraft. Twelve days later, the plane that had ferried the terrorists to
freedom blew up in the sky near Venice. The crash is widely regarded as
having been the result of sabotage carried out by the Israeli secret service as
a reprisal for Italy’s weak-kneed approach to Palestinian terrorism.25

--- Sayfa 316 ---
Curiously enough, Moro referred to both these incidents in a letter
from captivity to Flaminio Piccoli in which he argued the case for a flexible
attitude towards negotiations with the BR. Moro would certainly have
known of the secret service involvement in both episodes and it is not
inconceivable that he may again have been trying to send some kind of a
message to his friends in the outside world. He began by saying that
negotiations were a regular occurrence. ‘And you who knew everything will
certainly be informed about it. . . you can call [Erminio] Pennacchini who
knows all about it (in more detail than I do) and is a sensitive and reliable
person. Then there’s Miceli and if he’s in Italy ( and from all points of view
it would be good to have him come) Colonel [Stefano] Giovannoni, whom
Cossiga admires. So, not just once but several times, detained and convicted
Palestinians were freed by various mechanisms, in order to avoid serious
reprisals.’
It is ironic that Moro’s mention of these incidents should introduce us
to the world of Miceli, Fiorenzi and Stark, and this could well have been his
intention. It is strange that the letter misspells Giovannone’s name as the
secret service officer had at one time been Moro’s personal bodyguard. For
many years he represented the Italian secret service in Beirut and his name
immediately conjures associations with Lebanese terrorism and with
corruption scandals linked to Italian oil purchases, precisely the
associations made by Sereno Freato when he linked the Pecorelli murder to
that of Moro. But, most significantly of all, as Judge Mastelloni’s
investigation has shown, Giovannone’s name takes us to the heart of the
secret agreement between the CIA and the PLO and the concomitant arms
supplies from the PLO to the Red Brigades. It is possible that Moro, who
had long experience as Foreign Minister and a close personal relationship
with Giovannone, may have been hinting in his letter at this murky
international background to his kidnapping. Mino Pecorelli suggested as
much in an article dated 17 October 1978. ‘Just as the Corriere proclaims
the baselessness of the hypothesis of an international plot, in Lisbon Craxi
maintains the exact opposite, leaving aside the fact that it is no accident that
Moro himself in his letter called to his aid Colonel Giovannone, on station
at Beirut.’ The OP article was titled ‘The Red Thread’ and was devoted
mainly to emphasizing the Eastern Bloc connections of the Red Brigades,
but Pecorelli may have had Giovannone’s CIA contacts more in mind when

--- Sayfa 317 ---
he referred to Moro’s appeal for the SISMI officer’s assistance and linked
this to speculation about an international plot behind the kidnapping.
It is not in the least unlikely that Ronald Stark, with his contacts in
Lebanon and with the Red Brigades, straddled the same arms route that
Giovannone had so skilfully mediated and protected. What links Stark most
closely to the Moro case, though, is clearly Brown’s document, in which the
Scotsman refers to Stark’s close friend by the name of David. At first sight,
the claims are unconvincing. Brown stated that David, who was born in
1954, was a captain in the Marines in Vietnam only a decade later. Either
the date of birth was wrong or the Marine captain was someone else. What
is true, though, is that Stark had a close friend called David. Witnesses have
spoken of seeing Stark with an American named David in Lebanon. They
described him as blond, aged twenty-three to twenty-four, and having a
passport in the name of Emilio Messaggio. This could well be Brown’s
Italo-American, as it would not have been easy for David to assume the
identity of an Italian unless he either had Italian blood or spoke the
language perfectly. David also appears to have used the identity of David
Mears, born in Bradford, UK, on 8 November 1952.26 An Englishman
named John Mears, born on 23 September 1949, was authorized to have
access to Stark’s security deposit at the Union de Banques Suisses in
Lugano in 1975. The man in question may also have used the name David
Linker. Stark’s Parisian lawyer, John Crawford, who was also on the board
of directors of his Belgian drug laboratory, told two US Inland Revenue
Service agents in 1972 that a number of things had led him to become
suspicious about the nature of the Le Clocheton laboratory. One of them
was the character of the laboratory director, David Linker, which seemed
inappropriate for someone supposedly running a research laboratory.
Crawford described Linker as being more a ‘man of action’ than a research
scientist.27 There is no evidence that this lead on the Moro case has ever
been seriously investigated and Prosecutor Domenico Sica was unwilling
even to discuss it. For all the strangeness and inaccuracies in Brown’s
claims, it is difficult to imagine that he could have known about the
existence of Stark’s friend David without being privy to first-hand
information. It is interesting to note that he described David as working for
‘Central Intelligence Defence’ in West Germany. It sounds rather as though
he meant to indicate the Defence Intelligence Agency, the organization

--- Sayfa 318 ---
implicated in Italian terrorism by the documents found on Gelli’s daughter
and probably the agency for which Stark was working.
Among the many aliases used by Stark was the name Maurizio
Borghetti. This sounds almost like a jocular reference to Mario Moretti,
who himself used the alias Mario Borghi and sometimes the name
Maurizio. Given Stark’s access to inside information about the Red
Brigades, his choice could well be more than a mere coincidence.28 Stark
was released from prison in April 1979 and ordered to report to the
carabinieri twice a week. Within a matter of days he had left the country. A
telex to the Interior Ministry from the Bologna police chief indicated the
probable route he had taken. Ά reliable confidential source has reported that
Ronald Stark, according to what he himself said at the beginning of the
month, was in a position to leave the country secretly with the assistance of
American personnel. The localities indicated for his probable departure are
Pisa or Vicenza.’29 Both are the sites of US air bases. Stark’s charmed life
continued after his departure from Italy. Drug-dealing charges against him
in Holland were dropped in 1983 and he was merely expelled from the
country, and the FBI found they were unable to gather sufficient evidence to
prosecute him in connection with his drug trafficking with the Brotherhood
of Eternal Love. This made him virtually the only member of the
Brotherhood to escape imprisonment. When a Bologna prosecutor sought
Stark’s extradition from the United States to face the charges against him in
Italy he received a copy of Stark’s death certificate, dated 8 May 1984, from
the US authorities; a document he viewed with some scepticism but which
effectively places Stark beyond the reach of Italian justice.
Returning to Mr Brown: the eccentric Scotsman collapsed and died of
a heart attack in Pisa on 13 June 1986. In his bags, found at the left luggage
office at Pisa station, police discovered a mass of documents concerning
terrorism and organized crime, many of them simply newspaper cuttings.
There were documents indicating that Brown had been arrested in 1963 as a
suspect in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. A cutting from a
Belgian journal reported that Brown had been staying in the same hotel in
Dallas as the gunman Lee Harvey Oswald. Other documents gave the
impression that he had been suspected of belonging to an anti-communist
organization linked to the Mafia and financed by a New Orleans
millionaire.30 Over the years it has been alleged that right-wing CIA men,
anti-Castro Cubans and members of the Mafia conspired together to

--- Sayfa 319 ---
assassinate Kennedy. New Orleans millionaire Clay Shaw was at one time
investigated as a suspect in the murder. These elements seem to square
remarkably well with the contents of Brown’s documents. Furthermore,
Brown claimed to know the identity of the men behind the Kennedy
assassination and claimed that the same group had been responsible for
Moro’s murder. His papers also claimed that there was a common
denominator to the Red Brigades, right-wing terrorism and the Mafia, a
concept we have already discussed and which is by no means implausible.
Following his death and newspaper reports on the unusual contents of
his cases, complete with much speculation as to whether or not he worked
for British intelligence, the authorities embarked on a course of mendacity
and evasiveness which only goes to bolster the view that Brown was in
possession of information that was both accurate and grave in its
implications. When I interviewed Mattia La Rana, the head of the political
office of the Pisa police in 1987, he told me that he had at first considered
Brown’s documents to be of considerable importance but had been forced to
modify this view when he found that Brown’s assertions contrasted with the
judicially verified facts. When I asked him on what subject Brown had got
it wrong he answered, ‘The Moro case,’ implying, like Sica, that everything
on the subject was already known. When I showed him the anonymous
leaflet Brown had left in Florence, the officer said he would have taken the
matter more seriously if he had been aware of the connection at the time.
He did not, however, propose doing anything further on the matter. La Rana
confirmed to me that one of the documents in Brown’s bags was a letter of
introduction for Brown addressed to an Italian police officer and signed by
the criminologist Aldo Semerari. This had been reported in the press at the
time of Brown’s death but the existence of the letter had been officially
denied by the police a few days later.
La Rana told me that he had returned the bags and their contents to
Brown’s nephew, also Martin, when he visited Pisa for his uncle’s funeral.
In fact, Mr Brown Junior had already told me that he had made a selection
from his uncle’s papers, most of which had no meaning for him as a non-
Italian speaker, and then passed on the rest to the British consulate in
Florence. The consulate held on to two of Brown’s bags for three or four
months before deciding to throw them away. The consulate staff showed
admirable self-restraint: despite holding newspaper cuttings describing the

--- Sayfa 320 ---
sensational contents of the cases, nobody, according to Consul Ivor
Rawlinson, thought to examine them.
Presumably, copies of the documents have ended up in the archives of
both the British and Italian intelligence services, the Italian set being, one
imagines, somewhat more complete. A SISMI report obtained through
parliamentary channels in 1988 only compounds the misgivings. Side-
stepping my request for access to Mr Brown’s papers, the secret service sent
me a one-and-a-half-page report into the circumstances of his demise.
According to the report, Brown had been found in possession of ‘numerous
newspaper cuttings concerning terrorism and organized crime’. An initial
examination led the Pisa police to the perceptive conclusion that Brown
‘might be a collector of cuttings or a student of terrorism and crime’. Other
statements in the report are somewhat more illuminating. ‘This office learnt
from the corresponding British service, immediately contacted on the
subject, that Brown was well known for his manias about “intelligence”. In
fact, in 1982, he drew attention to himself in Holland through his statements
about a supposed threat of an attack on a Concorde airliner. On that
occasion it was discovered that his information was based on an
interpretation of a novel described by Brown as being “encoded”.’
What is interesting is that Brown’s documents appeared to be
sufficiently important to justify the Italian secret service ‘immediately’
contacting its British equivalent. But there is no mention of the fact that
they had already contacted their British counterparts in 1978 in connection
with one of Brown’s letters about the Moro case, receiving substantially the
same reply, that Brown was a nut. Even more interesting is the fact that
there is no mention whatsoever of the Moro case, a subject which obsessed
Brown and which, according to La Rana, his documents discussed. The
secret service report concluded by pointing out that the British police had
supplied information through Interpol indicating that Brown had made
numerous false statements ‘about murders, drug trafficking, the poisoning
of elephants, as well as the fact that he knew the true identity of the
murderer of President John F. Kennedy. Although he has no criminal record
in England, Brown has been registered as being mentally unstable.’ The fact
that SISMI preferred not to discuss Brown’s alarming claims about the
Moro case is not, of course, proof that the claims are true and that the secret
service was intent on a cover-up. An open and frank discussion, or even a

--- Sayfa 321 ---
mention of them, might on the other hand have provided convincing
evidence that there was no substance to the Scotsman’s allegations.
Another reason for giving Brown’s claims serious attention is the
quality of his informants. Besides his contact with Semerari, Brown appears
to have met the Camorra boss Raffaele Cutolo on a number of occasions. It
was Cutolo who acted as a mediator to obtain the release of kidnapped
Neapolitan politician Ciro Cirillo from the Red Brigades and who has
dropped menacing hints about the existence of a ‘Calabrian connection’ in
the Moro kidnap, as we have seen. Cutolo told a Naples magistrate in 1986
that during a pause in one of his trials he had been approached by a man
aged between forty-five and fifty (a good ten years younger than Brown
would have been at the time) who said he was ‘aware of matters concerning
the Cirillo kidnap and the Moro kidnap’.31 He said the man claimed to have
been in contact with his own lieutenant, Vincenzo Casillo, both during and
after the Cirillo kidnap. Casillo, who was a wanted man at the time, played
an active role in negotiations for Cirillo’s release. ‘He added that he had
met Casillo just a few days before his death [Casillo was blown up in his
car in Rome in 1984], about which he was also informed.’ Cutolo said the
man gave his name as Martin Brown and that they had met subsequently on
several occasions. ‘In June of this year, I read in the papers that a certain
Martin Brown had died of a heart attack in the street in Pisa (the same city
and the same illness as in the death of Luigi Bosso).’ Bosso was a criminal
who had joined the Red Brigades while in prison and had also played a part
in the complex negotiations for Cirillo’s release. Cutolo’s suggestion
appears to be that there was something suspicious about both deaths. In
reality, there is no evidence that Brown died of anything but natural causes.
However, Cutolo’s hint that Brown may have been a victim of foul play
could be an indication of the sensitivity of the matters that he had discussed
with him and a reminder that the Camorra boss was privy to some of
Brown’s secrets. There can be little doubt that Cutolo intended his
references to Brown to be seen in a threatening light, since he prefaced
them with complaints about his treatment in prison and remarked: Ί realize
once again that I am being subjected to this special treatment in order to
prevent me from speaking about delicate and compromising matters.’ The
Scotsman’s allegations certainly merit some kind of an answer and a first
step in the right direction would be to make available his papers.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
Not long after Moro’s murder, another baffling and alarming account
of his ordeal came to light. It too challenged the official versions of the
affair and saw the involvement of a number of personalities whose names
crop up in other ‘alternative’ accounts. Once again, it has never been fully
fathomed. The episode began while Moro was still alive. Ernesto Viglione,
an Italian journalist working for Radio Montecarlo, told senior Christian
Democrat Party figures that he had been contacted by the Red Brigades and
offered the opportunity to interview the captive Moro. The interview never
materialized, but after Moro’s death Viglione’s contacts, claiming they felt
betrayed by the decision to kill the statesman, offered the authorities the
opportunity to arrest the Red Brigades leadership with their help. This too
failed to materialize and eventually it was discovered that Viglione’s Red
Brigades contact was a simple-minded man named Pasquale Frezza, who
had a history of mental illness. Both were found guilty of concocting their
story in order to prise money out of Christian Democrat politicians, though
Viglione was acquitted of this on appeal.
What is of interest in this bizarre affair is the account of the kidnap that
Viglione relayed to the authorities, the character of the people involved and
their reactions as the story unfolded. It is hard to believe that Viglione, and
through him some of Italy’s most senior political and military figures, could
have been taken in by a mediocre person like Frezza. Viglione was by no
means naïve. He had been a parliamentary reporter before working for
Radio Montecarlo and had also written for the P2-influenced magazine 11
Settimanale. In 1976 he succeeded in interviewing the fugitive Stefano
Delle Chiaie in Madrid for the magazine (26 May 1976). Another of his
scoops, clearly laid on by the secret services, was entitled ‘The strategy of
tension has its headquarters in Prague’ (9 June 1976) and claimed that the
KGB used the Cuban and Czech secret services as proxies in the
manipulation of European terrorism. This is hardly the kind of man one
would expect to mistake a mental patient for a member of the Red Brigades.
Among the normally perceptive people who appear to have taken Viglione’s
claims seriously were carabiniere generals Ferrara and Dalla Chiesa, the
Defence and Interior Ministers and Christian Democrat leaders Flaminio
Piccoli, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro and Amintore Fanfani.32
Still more remarkable was the content of Viglione’s tale. One of his
principal contacts was Moro’s friend, Senator Vittorio Cervone, who was a
leading campaigner for the establishment of a parliamentary inquiry into the

--- Sayfa 323 ---
Moro affair. The journalist played Cervone a recorded message from his
Red Brigades contact: Ί am a member of the Red Brigades, I was at Via
Fani but did not shoot; Moro should not have been treated as he was, he
should not have died; we in the first group of the Red Brigades did not
shoot, others fired because they were afraid of being recognized by Moro’s
escort. . . the whole operation was led by two Members of Parliament and a
figure linked to the Vatican.’33 Subsequently Viglione testified that,
according to his contact, Moro’s murder had not been carried out by the
Red Brigades but by people working for men of power. He added that
members of the carabinieri and the police were among those who did the
shooting at Via Fani.34 This last claim would go some way to explain the
suspicion, voiced by the Moro family’s lawyer during the trial, that the head
of Moro’s bodyguard had not immediately responded to his attackers
because at least one of them was someone he recognized. Among other
elements to emerge were Viglione’s claim to have been offered access to
Red Brigades documents and to the text of Moro’s interrogation, and
indications that Toni Negri, whom Viglione referred to as the leader of the
Red Brigades group opposed to Moro’s murder, may have been in some
way involved in the affair. Furthermore, it emerges that at one time Viglione
referred to the person who later turned out to be Frezza as Francesco, a
Calabrian, whom he believed to be Giustino De Vuono.35 Viglione spent a
considerable amount of time during the relevant period in Calabria, where
he may well have been following up the Calabrian lead knowingly referred
to by Raffaele Cutolo. He also claimed to be in possession of a number of
sensitive documents which he had stored in a Swiss bank.
All this gives the impression that the street-wise Viglione, a friend of
Mino Pecorelli’s, may well have had a genuine channel of communication
with the Red Brigades. It is simply not credible that he and all the others
involved could have been duped by Frezza or that he could himself have
dreamed the whole thing up; if so, what was his motive? The amounts of
money he was given for his research efforts were in any case modest. Some
light may be cast on this by Frezza’s own account. He claimed that Viglione
asked him to play the role of a terrorist in a meeting with Senator Cervone
because the people he was in touch with did not want to come out into the
open. Frezza agreed and learnt by heart the story he was to tell Cervone and
which Viglione had written down for him.36 What seems likely is that
Viglione did have a genuine contact with people involved in the Moro

--- Sayfa 324 ---
affair, possibly with Giustino De Vuono, but that when the full gravity of it
emerged it was decided to put an end to the matter by passing it all off as
the invention of a lunatic. Alternatively, the whole affair may have been
concocted in order to convey a message to particular politicians, making it
clear that Viglione and his friends had inside information on the affair,
regardless of whether or not all the ingredients of his own account were
true. At his trial, five leading Christian Democrat politicians testified on
Viglione’s behalf, as did three influential members of the P2 lodge.37
Franco Ferracuti was the expert called in to do a psychiatric analysis of
Frezza for the Rome assize court. ‘He was a mythomaniac but I said he was
telling the truth on that occasion,’ he told me. ‘The court didn’t believe me,
which didn’t surprise me.’ Even more significant than Ferracuti’s analysis
of Frezza is his response to the ingredients of Viglione’s tale, Ί have heard
that story from people in SISDE.’ Both parts of the story? About the
carabinieri participating in the Via Fani ambush as well as the two
Christian Democrat politicians and the man from the Vatican having
organized the operation? ‘Yes, there was something about people from the
Vatican being involved.’ It is indeed extraordinary that what at first sight
would appear to be ludicrous rumours should have been discussed by
members of the domestic secret service without immediately being rejected
as such. Again, one gets the impression that the truth may be a far cry from
the official versions of the kidnap.
A number of other statements may cast further light on what was at
issue in the Viglione episode. In an article for L’Espresso (25 February
1979), journalist Gianluigi Melega, who had first broken the story in the
magazine, asked a series of detailed questions that were all clearly based on
the results of his own research. ‘Is Viglione aware of links between
common criminals, who are fascist sympathizers and specialize in kidnaps,
and political terrorism?’ he asked, reviving the suspicions about underworld
involvement in the affair. Cervone’s own utterances are also illuminating. In
a book published shortly after the Moro affair, he wrote: ‘Freeing one’s own
party from suspicion is a duty. And don’t say that there are no suspicions,
that it’s pure fantasy, that people are not saying whatever they like in public
and in private about this or that Christian Democrat leader, that they are not
talking about the possibility of saving Moro, of his prison being known, of a
team ready to go into action, of a veto and countermanding order.’38 Some
of the questions he proposed for the parliamentary commission to consider,

--- Sayfa 325 ---
but which were subsequently dropped from its brief, were based, at least in
part, on his involvement in the Viglione affair. ‘Whether ex-members of the
disbanded Italian secret services had a role in the affair and what that role
was; whether it is true that the Red Brigades, when they wanted to use a
secret code, adopted an old military cipher that could only be known by
members of the secret services; whether it is true that there are recordings,
made at the time, of statements by Red Brigades members; what is their
content and how reliable are they. . .?’39
The suggestion that the authorities had identified Moro’s prison, made
by Pecorelli in October 1978 and repeated by Cervone, was also advanced
by a small Milanese news agency, ANIPE, similar in style to Pecorelli’s OP.
‘It would appear that the carabinieri had found Moro’s prison. Furthermore
it seems that they had discovered the food store where the BR members
bought their supplies. It was a place selling roast meats in the centre of
Rome near Piazza Nicosia. According to our confidential sources, the
carabinieri intended to intervene in a military operation to free the prisoner.
The proposal was not accepted by the government,’ the agency claimed (4
November 1978). The article was picked up by Panorama (24 May 1987),
which interviewed the ANIPE editor nine years after the event. ‘There was
no reaction and silence is always a response worth reflecting on,’ Livio
Ricci told the magazine.
What is remarkable about all these strange claims is that they come
from a fairly wide pool of people, many of them in contact with one another
and some undoubtedly in contact with the secret services and therefore in a
position to be well informed. They are surprisingly consistent, with certain
themes recurring over and over again. It is possible of course that false
information was passed from one person to another within the pool or that
they were all part of a determined conspiracy to muddy the waters of the
Moro affair. This is unlikely, though, as there is objective evidence to back
many of their assertions. Finally, a number of people who unquestionably
did not belong to this pool have come to share their suspicions. Some of
them are former members of the Red Brigades.
Notes
1   Martin Brown (Brown’s nephew) to the author, 1987.
2   Umberto Cecchi, La Nazione , 14 June 1986.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
3   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 18,
Rome, 1987, p. 454·
4   Ibid., p. 522.
5   Licio Gelli to the author, 27 June 1989.
6   P2 Commission, Allegati alla Relazione, Vol. 7, Tome 18,
Rome, 1987, pp. 502-3.
7   Ibid., pp. 911-12.
8   Elda Colasanti Semerari to Bologna magistrates, 19 January
1985.
9   Pietro Calderoni, Servizi Segreti , Tullio Pironti, Naples, 1986,
p. 191.
10   Franco Coppola, La Repubblica , 21 May 1985.
11   Carlo Semerari to P.M. Libero Mancuso, Bologna, 30
December 1984.
12   Franco Ferracuti to the author, 22 June 1989.
13   Letter from US embassy to Rome police, 16 December 1975.
14   G.I. Giorgio Floridia, Ordinanza di scarcerazione di Ronald
Stark, Bologna, 11 April 1979.
15   Ibid.
16   Marcella Andreoli, L’Europeo , 17 January 1983.
17   Giorgio Floridia, op. cit.
18   Maurizio De Luca and Mimmo Scarano, Π Mandarino è
Marcio, Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1985, p. 118.
19   Ibid., p. 117.
20   Ibid., p. 121.
21   Giovanni Cerruti, La Repubblica , 20 October 1978.
22   Report of the Moro Commission, Rome, 1983, p. 144.
23   Ibid., p. 144.
24   Giuseppe De Lutiis, Storia dei Servizi Segreti in Italia ,
Editori Riuniti, Rome, 1984, p. 172.
25    Corriere della Sera , 29 November 1988.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
26   Maurizio De Luca and Mimmo Scarano, op. cit., pp. 119-20.
27   1RS Report on The Brotherhood of Eternal Love, Los
Angeles, 12 December 1973, p. 9.
28   Maurizio De Luca and Mimmo Scarano, op. cit., p. 117.
29   Ibid., p. 123.
30   Umberto Cecchi, La Nazione , 15 June 1986.
31   Raffaele Cutolo to G.I. Carlo Alemi, Bellizzi Irpino prison, 19
December 1986.
32   Gianni Flamini, 11 Partito del Golpe , Vol. 4, Tome, 2,
Bovolenta, Ferrara, !985> pp. 569-70·
33   Gianluigi Melega, L’Espresso , 11 February 1979.
34   Ernesto Viglione to G.I. Ferdinando Imposimato, Rome, 6
February 1979.
35   Ernesto Viglione to G.I. Francesco Amato, Rome, 30 March
1979.
36   Pasquale Frezza and Ernesto Viglione to G.I. Francesco
Amato, Rome, 9 March 1979.
37   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, p. 267.
38   Vittorio Cervone, Ho Fatto di Tutto per Salvare Moro ,
Marietti Editori, Turin, 1979, p. 66.
39   Maurizio De Luca and Mimmo Scarano, op. cit., p. 254.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
[16]
MORE VALUED THAN MORO?
IT is futile to speculate on whether or not Moro might have been saved
if the government had been prepared to meet some of the terrorists’
demands. Despite the existence of secret contacts between some of Moro’s
friends and his captors, the bulk of the government seems to have remained
firmly opposed to negotiations. It was their firm attitude that drove Moro to
write his desperate appeals from prison, reminding his erstwhile colleagues
of previous occasions when a more flexible approach had been preferred. In
April 1989, Licio Gelli gave a television interview in which he suggested
that Moro might well have been saved, that those who sought his release
came close to achieving their aim but were ultimately thwarted because a
part of the government did not want Moro freed. Gelli’s claim, delivered
with an insinuating smile, seems to echo the allegations made by Pecorelli,
Giovanniello and others. It also coincides with the testimony of Eleonora
Moro, who claimed in court that action was taken to block mediation efforts
by the International Red Cross and by Pope Paul VI. She said she had
spoken personally to the pontiff, who was a long-standing friend of her
husband’s. ‘He told me he would do everything possible and I know he
tried, but he found a lot of opposition.’ Red Cross efforts, she said, were
similarly thwarted. ‘It seemed in the beginning that something could be
achieved, but all of a sudden. . . I don’t know who intervened to block the
negotiations. Somebody told the Red Cross that Italy did not appreciate its
efforts.’1 Moro himself had his own suspicions as to who might be behind
the government’s policy of rigour. ‘Is there perhaps an American and
German recommendation behind the decision to stand firm against me?’ he
asked in one of his letters from prison.2 Moro’s intuition was subsequently
confirmed by the admission of Cossiga’s American adviser Steve Pieczenik,
at least in regard to his own role.
Whatever vacillations and secret talks there may have been, the
impression that emerges at the end of the day is of a government
determined to resist the Red Brigades’ blackmail and strongly supported in
this policy by the PCI. The only government party to break ranks on the
issue was the Socialist Party. This is why the government’s more flexible
attitude to subsequent terrorist kidnaps seems all the more grave and

--- Sayfa 329 ---
inexplicable. A government that was prepared to sacrifice the life of one of
Italy’s most influential political figures was ready to negotiate with the Red
Brigades for the release of other relatively minor figures. In one case the
circumstances of the negotiations and the deal finally reached were of such
a disreputable nature that those who participated have been forced to deny
the evidence and the episode has gone to swell the armoury of Italy’s legion
of political blackmailers.
The first kidnap to put the government’s policy of firmness to the test
came in Rome on 12 December 1980, with the seizure of Giovanni D’Urso,
a magistrate working on prison administration at the Justice Ministry. The
Red Brigades campaign concentrated on improving the lot of the
organization’s imprisoned members. Just before Christmas the government
announced its intention to close the tough maximum security prison on the
island of Asinara, off the north coast of Sardinia. This had been one of the
Red Brigades’ demands and government insistence that the decision had
been taken even before D’Urso’s kidnap did little to salvage appearances.
On 15 January 1981, D’Urso was released and there was a widespread
perception that the authorities had bargained for his freedom.3
It was during the D’Urso kidnap that the role of Red Brigades leader
Giovanni Senzani first came to light. Senzani, an academic criminologist
and one of the few Red Brigades members with a genuine intellect to be
identified, was challenging Moretti for control of the terrorist organization.
While Moretti saw the Red Brigades as a warrior élite blazing a trail for the
rest of the population to follow, Senzani’s views were closer to those of
Negri and Autonomía Operaia, believing there was room for all the
disenchanted, including common criminals, in the ranks of the revolution. It
was Senzani who ran the D’Urso kidnap, currying favour with the
imprisoned BR leadership by involving them in decisions and setting an
improvement in prison conditions as his principal objective. Conveniently
for him, Moretti was arrested in Milan on 4 April 1981, leaving the road
open for him to dominate the last stage in the Red Brigades’ history as a
serious challenge to the state. Under Senzani the image of a once idealistic
organization would become seriously tarnished: utterly merciless and
dabbling in a sinister dalliance with organized crime and the secret services.
Extraordinarily, the man running the D’Urso kidnap chose to deliver the
text of a Red Brigades interview and of D’Urso’s interrogation to two
journalists from L’Espresso in person. The journalists were aware of his

--- Sayfa 330 ---
identity and one of them ultimately revealed it to the police. Senzani’s
decision to run this unnecessary risk reveals either an astonishing faith in
his own immunity or incredible stupidity.4
Suspicions about Senzani’s true role abound. Born in 1940, he was a
squat, thick-set man with dark hair and usually sported a beard or
moustache. He has been identified as ‘Blasco’, depicted in a comic strip
published by the extreme left magazine Metropoli in May 1979 as the man
who brought the order for Moro’s execution to the Rome column of the Red
Brigades. His criminology studies led him to travel extensively and appear
to have given him almost unrestricted access to Italian prisons. In 1971 he
was working at a cultural centre in Torre del Greco near Naples, heartland
of the Camorra faction controlled by Raffaele Cutolo. In 1974 he won a
research grant to study at the University of Berkeley in California, where he
remained until 1975. Interestingly enough, these were the years that the
predominant colour of Italian terrorism was changing from black to red, as
General Miceli had so accurately predicted. In 1979 he was suspected of
membership of the BR ‘Tuscan Revolutionary Committee’ and arrested by
Florence magistrates but released for lack of evidence. He is suspected of
having selected three magistrates working on prison reform for
assassination. Girolamo Minervini, Gerolamo Tartaglione and Alfredo
Paolella were all murdered by left-wing terrorists. Tartaglione and Paolella
were shot dead in 1978, the first by the Red Brigades and the latter by
Prima Linea. Minervini was killed by the BR in 1980. They were all
committed reformists and they had all attended a conference of
criminologists in Lisbon where Senzani had also been present.5
But the real cloud overshadowing Senzani’s career is that of his
ambiguous relationship with the secret services. Numerous witnesses have
alluded to this, among them Arrigo Molinari, deputy Genoa police chief in
the late 1970s. It was Molinari whose testimony about the links between
Licio Gelli and the US embassy in Rome was reported by L’Espresso and
then, as we have seen, commented on by the embassy in a somewhat lame
cable to the State Department. Molinari claimed he had joined the P2 lodge
in 1978 in order to gather intelligence on the Red Brigades. ‘Through P2 we
hoped to discover BR cells. We knew that Senzani was recruiting among
students and professors under the guise of helping prisoners’ families.’6
Molinari said he had been able to identify three Red Brigades members,
including Senzani, with the assistance of William Rosati, a leading P2

--- Sayfa 331 ---
member from the Genoa area.7 Given P2’s association with the right, it is
surprising that a senior police officer should consider it worth joining the
lodge in order to glean information about the Red Brigades and curious that
one of the terrorists he was able to track down through the lodge should
turn out to be Senzani. According to Molinari, Senzani was ‘definitely in
contact with representatives of SISMI’8 and had enjoyed the protection of
the authorities, who suppressed police reports on his suspect activities,
during his early years as a terrorist.
This allegation has also been made by former BR member Roberto
Buzzati, who has described a meeting between Senzani and a secret service
agent outside Ancona railway station on 8 June 1981. Based on Buzzati’s
description of the man’s appearance, it has been suggested that he could
have been General Pietro Musumeci, a member of P2 and of SISMI.9
Senzani told Buzzati that the man was ‘a KGB agent who was also involved
with our secret services.’ Buzzati considered it strange that Senzani should
be in contact with a KGB agent. ‘In our documents we always defined the
Eastern countries as social-imperialists. But at that time we had
manipulative relationships even with the Camorra and the ‘ndrangheta ,
following the principle that one could make a pact with the devil if that
would further the revolution.’10
What adds weight to these allegations is the fact that Senzani let his
apartment in Via della Vite in central Rome to Luciano Bellucci, an external
collaborator of SISMI. Bellucci and Senzani had done their military service
together in 1967 and had remained in contact subsequently, Bellucci
occupying Senzani’s Rome apartment while the latter was living near
Naples and then in the United States.11 After Moretti’s arrest, Senzani
inherited the BR leader’s Parisian contacts: with the Hyperion language
school and with Paul Baudet, a collaborator of the French Interior Ministry
who posed as a left-wing subversive, further compounding the suspicions
about Senzani’s role.
Senzani’s relationship with the security services is by no means
straightforward. It was, after all, Senzani who organized the kidnap and
cold-blooded execution of Roberto Peci, the brother of ‘repentant’ terrorist
Patrizio. Roberto Peci was kidnapped on 10 June 1981, in his home town of
San Benedetto del Tronto, and shot dead in a ruined farmhouse outside
Rome some fifty-three days later. He was put up against a wall beneath a

--- Sayfa 332 ---
placard reading ‘Death to traitors’ and the Red Brigades actually recorded
his execution on film. This ferocity was justified by the group as a means of
discouraging other captured terrorists from following Patrizio Peci’s
example and collaborating with the authorities and by their claim that
Roberto Peci had himself betrayed the names of a number of terrorists from
his area to the police. Some have even suggested that Senzani’s ruthlessness
may have been prompted by a conviction that Patrizio Peci’s betrayal went
beyond that of merely collaborating with the police after his arrest, and they
have seen this episode as indirect proof that Patrizio had been an infiltrator
in the terrorists’ ranks from an early stage, perhaps the infiltrator referred to
by Caprara and Gelli. If this were true, it would be hard to see Senzani as an
agent of those same security services that had allegedly manipulated Peci. It
is by no means easy to discern the loyalties of a man like Senzani,
embroiled as he was in a game of mutual blackmail and manipulation with
the secret services.
Where Senzani’s role reaches its moral nadir is in his direction of the
kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo, a Christian Democrat local politician from
Naples. Cirillo, a regional councillor, was a representative of Christian
Democrat power at local level, based on clientelism and corruption. He
represented, in short, the soft underbelly of the great white Christian
Democrat whale, to borrow an image often used by Italian journalists to
describe the party. It is therefore extraordinary that Christian Democrat
leaders, who stood firm against Red Brigades demands when one of the
party’s most influential politicians was kidnapped only four years earlier,
should have been prepared to negotiate for the release of so modest a figure
as Cirillo. What makes the contrast all the more striking is that it appears
that they were prepared to do a deal of indefensible cynicism in exchange
for Cirillo’s life. Cirillo was seized by the Red Brigades on 27 April 1981.
His bodyguard and driver were shot dead and his secretary wounded as he
was snatched from the garage beneath his home. He was released after
eighty-nine days in captivity, on 24 July, following the payment of a ransom
of 1.45 billion Lire (£850,000) to the BR and of 2 billion Lire (more than £1
million) to the Camorra as a reward for its mediation efforts.12 The money
was raised by the Cirillo family and by party supporters on the
understanding that those who contributed would be in line for compensation
when the government awarded contracts for reconstruction work resulting
from the 1980 earthquake in the Naples region.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
Negotiations for Cirillo’s release were handled by the secret services,
with help from local politicians and members of the Camorra. Businessman
and secret service collaborator Francesco Pazienza also played a leading
role, regularly accompanying the negotiating team that trooped off to visit
Camorra boss Raffaele Cutolo in his prison cell at Ascoli Piceno. Cutolo
was considered to be an ideal mediator, given the pervasive power of the
Camorra in the Naples area and the organization’s desire to bring the police
emergency to an end so that it could get back to its normal illicit activities.
Under the protective mantle of the secret services, the motley assortment of
negotiators had no difficulty in gaining unrestricted access to the lax prison
where Cutolo was being held. SISMI officers General Pietro Musumeci and
Colonel Giuseppe Belmonte were also prominent in the affair. A Justice
Ministry report refers to links between the secret services, the Camorra and
P2 initiating at this time and continuing subsequently.13 As we have seen,
there is every reason to believe that such links had been forged much
earlier, perhaps at the time of the Moro kidnap. Among those to call on
Cutolo was his right-hand man Vincenzo Casillo, himself a fugitive from
justice, and who Cutolo has claimed had been working for the secret
services since 1978.
Grave though it was that representatives of the state should agree to
large cash payments to the Red Brigades and the Camorra, there were other
even more sinister aspects to the deal. According to one of Cirillo’s BR
guards, the Camorra offered the Red Brigades, on behalf of interested
Neapolitan politicians, not only money but ‘a list of names and addresses of
Neapolitan magistrates. We also learnt that the Camorra had offered to carry
out attacks on magistrates selected for them by the Red Brigades.’14 The
claim is supported by a document written by Senzani and later found in a
BR base in Rome. It too refers to a cash offer for Cirillo’s freedom.
‘Naturally it’s Cutolo who makes the offers, adding the possibility of the
future liberation of one of our companions, an arms consignment and a
number of operations to eliminate local cops. The tone with which the
offers are made is not provocatory but of the following tenor: he (Cirillo) is
certainly a pig. He deserves to die. But for our general interests and
specifically for our building interests, we would prefer it if a solution could
be reached that was beneficial to everyone.’15 The document was described
by Judge Imposimato as being ‘of indisputable value as evidence’. Its
implications were also accepted by a parliamentary committee which

--- Sayfa 334 ---
investigated the role of the secret services in the Cirillo affair. The
committee’s report described how the operation to secure Cirillo’s release
ended up with ‘the payment of a large ransom to a terrorist group which
would have used it to continue its attack on the state, with the offer by the
Camorra to the Red Brigades to carry out a number of operations to
eliminate magistrates and policemen and with other rewards to the Camorra
mediators’.16 One of those who participated in the negotiations,
businessman and Pazienza associate Alvaro Giardili, has illustrated the
value of Camorra assistance. He told magistrates that Cutolo’s followers
had threatened the Red Brigades that they would kill a hundred people, both
members of the terrorist organization and their relatives, if the BR killed
Cirillo. Given the military strength of the Camorra, this was not a threat to
be taken lightly.17
The utter cynicism of the whole operation is highlighted by evidence
from Cutolo himself. He told magistrates that he had relayed a message
from the Red Brigades to the negotiators that they would consider releasing
another of the hostages they were holding at the time, Giuseppe Taliercio,
the director of a chemical plant near Venice, in exchange for the publication
of certain documents in a German newspaper. The negotiators replied that ‘
“they couldn’t give a damn” about Taliercio’s life but they just wanted me
to deliver Cirillo as soon as possible’.18 Taliercio was subsequently
murdered by his captors. On the very day of Cirillo’s release, a common
criminal named Luigi Bosso, who had joined the Red Brigades in prison
and had participated in the negotiations for Cirillo’s freedom, was released
from jail for lack of evidence. Journalist Paolo Guzzanti commented bitterly
on the whole affair: ‘So Cutolo had the power to release people from prison.
If one thinks of the rigour with which an exchange of prisoners or
concessions of any kind were refused at the time of the Moro kidnap, one
feels like weeping. The facts of the story constitute a diabolical puzzle, a
punch in the stomach to all civilized consciences.’19
It is therefore not surprising that those politicians who have been
named as participating in the negotiations have been keen to distance
themselves from the affair as far as possible. ‘If the official policy of the
[Christian Democrat] party was one of firmness, in reality there were
people who operated to obtain Cirillo’s freedom through the mediation of
Cutolo and negotiations with the Red Brigades,’ observed Examining
Magistrate Carlo Alemi.20 One of the names to crop up most frequently is

--- Sayfa 335 ---
that of Flaminio Piccoli. Alemi wrote: ‘Piccoli, for example, has always
maintained that he never went beyond seeking information that might lead
to the identification of the prison, but a signed card from him ends up in the
hands of Cutolo in prison and the explanations of the former Christian
Democrat party secretary are by no means convincing.’21 Piccoli’s
explanation for his dealings with Pazienza, in particular, seem somewhat
lame. He told the magistrate that he had discussed the kidnap with
Pazienza, who had said he might be able to pick up some useful information
from his contacts in Naples, but that Pazienza had never mentioned Cutolo
or the Camorra. ‘Given the reputation that Pazienza had at the time, I had
no reason to imagine that he might be in contact with such people,’ he
said.22 This seems excessively naïve. Pazienza was unlikely to be able to
identify Cirillo’s prison by seeking information exclusively from
respectable, law-abiding citizens. The parliamentary committee was
altogether more realistic. Ά kidnap in Naples of someone of the importance
of Councillor Cirillo not only could not have been carried out but could not
even have been conceived without contacts with the Camorra. . .’23 It is hard
to believe that Piccoli was incapable of reaching this elementary judgement.
In 1985, Piccoli’s account of the affair received confirmation from a
surprising quarter: one of Cirillo’s kidnappers wrote to Piccoli from prison
to say that the ransom paid had been the result of ‘a direct and exclusive
contact between the Red Brigades and Cirillo’s family’. There had been ‘no
approach and no compromise made by the Christian Democrat Party’. As
journalist Sandra Bonsanti has pointed out, this providential missive
coincided with Piccoli’s launch of a campaign for a reconciliation between
the state and the scions of terrorism.24
Another Christian Democrat leader to be named in connection with the
negotiations is Antonio Gava, a powerful Neapolitan politician who was
Interior Minister in 1989. According to Cutolo, his henchman Casillo told
him that he had accompanied Gava on a visit to Ascoli prison but that they
had been unable to enter because there were too many journalists about.25
Gava, on the other hand, insists that he knew nothing of the negotiations
because of his position in the government and his ‘conviction that the
institutions could not and should not give in to the blackmail of the Red
Brigades’.26 But according to the testimony of Alvaro Giardili, he and
Pazienza had met Gava to discuss the Cirillo case and had also made it clear
that they were interested in winning government contracts for earthquake

--- Sayfa 336 ---
reconstruction. ‘Gava went aside with Pazienza to discuss the Cirillo
question. . . Pazienza told me that he had asked him to collaborate in saving
Cirillo’s life,’ Giardili told the magistrates. Again Gava firmly denied this: Ί
never went aside with Pazienza, I never spoke to Pazienza about the Cirillo
kidnap. It was news to me that Pazienza had been involved over Cirillo.’27
One has a choice between the word of a minister and that of a number of
convicted criminals. The evidence seems to support the criminals.
When he was released, Cirillo was picked up by a traffic police patrol
car, which was ordered to bring him in to police headquarters. The car had
driven only a short distance when it was stopped by three other police cars
whose occupants immediately purloined the kidnap victim and drove him to
his home. There he was visited by Gava and other political colleagues,
while magistrates who came to interrogate him were not allowed access to
him.28
Following Cirillo’s safe release, the secret services cancelled all record
of their involvement in the affair. SISMI officers told the parliamentary
committee that this was because the secret services do not keep a record of
their unsuccessful operations. They were not believed and, in any case, it is
absurd to claim that the Cirillo operation was not a success.29 Documents
proving the involvement of senior Christian Democrat politicians in
negotiations with the Camorra and the Red Brigades were found by police
in Cutolo’s home. These later disappeared and the head of the Naples police
and another senior officer were accused of suppressing them. More
alarming still was the fate that befell the head of the Naples Flying Squad,
Antonio Ammaturo. He had been investigating the background to the
Cirillo case, without informing his boss, the police chief. His sister testified
that Ammaturo was demoralized and worried because of the results of his
delicate investigation, while one of his close colleagues told magistrates
that Ammaturo had told him that Gava and other Christian Democrat
leaders had been involved in the efforts to secure Cirillo’s release. Ί have
finished, it’s very grave, Naples will tremble. I have sent everything to the
[Interior] Ministry: be careful as I have sent you a copy of the report in the
post,’ Ammaturo told his brother. The report sent to the Interior Ministry
has never been traced, nor did his brother ever receive his copy of it.30 The
head of the Flying Squad was murdered by the Red Brigades on 15 July
1982. The implications are particularly sinister when one remembers the

--- Sayfa 337 ---
Camorra’s offer to assassinate Red Brigades targets as part of the deal to
secure Cirillo’s release.
The sensitivity of the whole affair was emphasized in a candid
comment from the American consul in Naples to the State Department in
July 1982. ‘We will continue alert to any evidence that may emerge to link
the Red Brigade [sic] with organized crime. Should such a connection
emerge the GOI [government of Italy] may finally be forced to the drastic
measures required to bring the mafiosi of Naples under some control. On
the other hand, the reportedly wide political connections of the organized
criminal element of Naples could, in the event of a proven Red
Brigade/Camorra link, create some devastating repercussions in the
government of this country.’31 The implication is clear, not only that the
failure to control crime in Naples resulted from a lack of political will, but
that the BR/organized crime connection was a potentially explosive issue
for the government, because sectors of the government were themselves
linked to organized crime. This goes some way to explaining the reticence
and mendacity of some of the Christian Democrat politicians questioned
about the affair. It may also explain why a Naples assize court in 1989
reached the astonishing conclusion that there had been no secret
negotiations between the secret services, Camorra and BR. The only person
guilty of serious wrong-doing, the court found, was Raffaele Cutolo, who
had tried to extort favours out of the state.32 Significant sectors of the Italian
press described the court proceedings as a farce.
If the Christian Democrat leadership comes out of the Cirillo affair
with little honour, so do the Red Brigades. We have already mentioned the
striking contrast between the fate of Moro and that of the mediocre Cirillo.
While from the revolutionary’s point of view it may be all very well to
extort large amounts of money from the Christian Democrat Party,
negotiating with the secret services and the Camorra is altogether another
matter. Even if it was Senzani’s intention to do the manipulating, the
chances were that he would end up being the puppet of forces far more
powerful than himself. Nor is it reassuring to note the blithe fashion in
which he explained away the myriad suspicions that surround the Cirillo
case. On the Cirillo affair I must make it clear that the plots that are
constantly emerging are of no concern to me and of no concern to
revolutionaries or to the Red Brigades,’ he told journalists during a pause in
a trial in Florence in 1985. ‘The forces of the revolution have never sought

--- Sayfa 338 ---
or wanted mediators. These conspiracies are not our problem.’33 This denial
of the amply documented facts can only increase the doubts about Senzani’s
role.
Cutolo too has made his own contribution to the climate of suspicion.
He told magistrates that he had come to the conclusion that ‘the Cirillo
kidnap was only apparently the work of the Red Brigades, who were just
pawns manoeuvred by forces that were greater than them. It was all part of
a political strategy devised by sectors of the Christian Democrat Party, of
the Italian secret services and, behind them all, of the CIA.’34 The Camorra
boss claimed he had been told this, in particular, by one of the SISMI
negotiators. One might be tempted to dismiss this view as fantasy or wilful
disinformation, but considering the many twists in the Cirillo tale, that
would be rash. Cutolo had been strategically placed at the point where the
secret services, terrorism and organized crime met and mingled. If all these
forces had been manipulated as part of a complex political game, the
Camorra boss was likely to know it. And the knowledge would become a
useful bargaining chip in his own political game.
Another Red Brigades kidnap that contrasts starkly with the Moro
affair is that of General James Lee Dozier, snatched from his home in
Verona on 17 December 1981 by a group of terrorists disguised as
plumbers. The abduction of the highest-ranking American officer in
NATO’s southern Europe command prompted the largest manhunt in Italian
history, larger even than the search for Moro. This time, of course, the
Americans were prepared to help. US Ambassador Maxwell Rabb actually
had to spend much of his time turning down offers of assistance from
Washington, which wanted to flood Italy with military experts and FBI
agents.35 A stark contrast indeed with the CIA’s blank refusal to lift a finger
for Aldo Moro. The efforts were successful and on 28 January 1982 Italian
police stormed an apartment in Padua and released the hostage unharmed.
Dozier had been kept in a small tent inside the apartment with rock music
blasting into his ears from headphones so as to isolate him completely from
his surroundings. His release spelled the beginning of the end for the Red
Brigades as a rapid succession of arrests wound up the remnants of what
had been one of Europe’s most fearsome terrorist organizations.
There are a number of conflicting accounts as to how Dozier’s prison
was identified and the contradictions between them have never been fully

--- Sayfa 339 ---
resolved. According to the official version, the success was achieved by
good, dogged police work, the breakthrough coming after the arrest of one
of the terrorists who acted as a driver during the kidnap. His name had been
provided, according to this account, by the brother of arrested BR member
Michele Galati.36 But Galati himself, as we have seen, had already been
collaborating with General Dalla Chiesa and it is not impossible that he was
the original source of the information leading to the discovery of the prison.
Galati has claimed, during interrogation by an Italian magistrate, that he
actually warned Dalla Chiesa in October 1981 of the existence of a plan to
kidnap a senior US officer based in the Veneto region. In January 1982 he
complained to Dalla Chiesa that insufficient weight had been given to his
warning. ‘The general replied that he had warned the appropriate authorities
of the danger,’ Galati said.37 If this is true it seems extraordinary that more
effective measures were not taken to protect Dozier.
There are other possible explanations, however, of how the
investigators may have succeeded in tracking down Dozier’s prison.
Numerous BR members had been arrested in the period leading up to
Dozier’s release; ten terrorists, including Senzani, had been captured on 8
January. The circumstances of Senzani’s arrest have themselves given rise
to doubts and suspicion. The left-wing newspaper II Manifesto (12 January
1982) speculated that the BR leader may have decided to give himself up to
the police: two of his associates had been arrested in Rome a week earlier
but despite the fact that they knew the addresses Senzani was using, the ex-
professor of criminology remained in Rome. Alternatively, the paper
suggested, he may have been betrayed to the police by a foreign secret
service, possibly Mossad. This ties in with the comment of Amos
Perlmutter, editor of the US magazine Strategic Studies , that Italy owed
Israel a considerable debt of gratitude for its help in the eradication of
Italian terrorism. Perlmutter claimed that Mossad had played a crucial role
in the rescue of General Dozier.38
What is certain is that during the Dozier kidnap Senzani tried to make
contact with the terrorist cell holding the general, with a view to taking over
control of the operation himself. It is therefore quite possible that it was his
arrest that constituted the crucial break through in identifying Dozier’s
prison. Perhaps to distract attention from this possibility, a number of
colourful alternative accounts, probably containing a considerable element
of truth, have been leaked to the press by the security services in the US and

--- Sayfa 340 ---
Italy. Most notable of these was the story published by Time magazine on
28 February 1983, claiming that Dozier had been located with the
assistance of the Mafia, enlisted for the purpose by SISMI and the CIA,
with the help of contacts in the American Mafia. The story is highly
plausible, given the history of collaboration between the secret services and
the underworld in connection with terrorism and the recent precedent of the
Cirillo affair. It is likely that Pazienza had a part in the leaking of the story
and interesting to note that one of the US Mafia middlemen was Alphonse
Bove, named only as The Fat Man by Time . Bove, like Pazienza, had also
played a role in the negotiations for Cirillo’s release the previous year.
Shortly after publication of the Time article, Pecorelli’s successor as editor
of OP, Paolo Patrizi, boasted to me that his news-sheet had actually scooped
Time on the story. He showed me a detailed OP reconstruction of the Italian
secret service role in the whole operation, naming secret service officers
and describing the content of their phone calls. When I returned to the OP
offices some years later to try and retrieve a copy of the article, the crucial
issue of the news-sheet was missing; a fact that occasioned no surprise on
the part of the OP staff. Clearly the original article had been deemed
excessively indiscreet and had simply been removed from the archives. It
seems rather unlikely that the secret services would have leaked a
potentially embarrassing story to the press-the use of the Mafia to locate
Dozier’s prison-unless they were afraid that an even more embarrassing
truth might come out.
The Dozier kidnap is one of the few episodes where there seems to be
convincing evidence of contact between the Red Brigades and Eastern Bloc
secret services. The organizer of the Dozier operation, Antonio Savasta, has
spoken of an approach from the Bulgarian secret services with an offer of
weapons and money in return for an opportunity to question Dozier. The
offer was relayed by Luigi Scricciolo, an official of the socialist-controlled
UIL trade union, via his cousin Loris Scricciolo, a member of the Rome
Red Brigades column. A meeting between the latter and a Bulgarian agent
was to have taken place at a Rome cinema but for some reason the
Bulgarian failed to appear. Savasta was unable to give any details of
subsequent contacts with the Bulgarians as he was arrested at the same time
as Dozier was freed. The Moro Commission described this affair as a first
alarming exception to the Red Brigades’ policy of total independence from
foreign organizations, although, according to Savasta, the Red Brigades had

--- Sayfa 341 ---
decided to accept the Bulgarian offer of assistance while offering nothing in
return.39
Even this episode may be somewhat more complex than at first
appeared. Gelli’s address book, confiscated from his office at Castiglion
Fibocchi, contains the name of another Loris Scricciolo, a socialist Member
of Parliament and a second cousin of the Red Brigades terrorist of the same
name. Also listed was Piero Scricciolo, a businessman living in Arezzo and
Luigi Scricciolo’s uncle. Both had been members of P2. Moreover, Luigi
Scricciolo, the trade unionist who put the Red Brigades in touch with the
Bulgarian secret services, was in regular contact with the American
embassy in Rome, calling on officials there almost every week.40 It would
therefore appear that the Scricciolo family could provide a potential bridge
between P2 and the CIA on the one hand and the Red Brigades on the other.
Official investigations have produced no evidence of this, but it is quite
possible that the authorities preferred not to find it.
Dozier’s rescue marked a crucial turning point in the war against the
Red Brigades. Many terrorists were already in prison at the time of the
general’s kidnap as a result of information provided by an increasing
number of ‘repentant’ terrorists following the example of Patrizio Peci and
collaborating with the police in exchange for reduced sentences. After
Dozier the process accelerated, with recalcitrant terrorists being encouraged
to talk by police torture. Dozier’s jailers, one of whom was holding a pistol
to the general’s head when the police burst into their Padua apartment, have
given detailed and convincing accounts of the violence to which they were
subjected following their arrest. Policemen involved in the rescue operation
were convicted of using torture on them at a trial in July 1982 but were later
acquitted on appeal.41 The demise of the Red Brigades has been summed up
by political commentator Giorgio Galli: ‘The armed party was defeated
when, having been infiltrated via the underworld, it compromised the
prestige of the establishment in the eyes of their American ally by
kidnapping an officer of the US Army. Having arisen from the left it had
been allowed to operate in order to discredit the left.’42
Notes
1   UPI, Rome, 19.05, 19 July 1982.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
2   Moro Commission, Relazioni di Minoranza, Rome, 1983, p.
96.
3   Giorgio Galli, Storia del Partito Armato , Rizzoli, Milan, 1986,
pp. 237-9.
4   Antonio Padalino, Panorama , 26 January 1981.
5   Ibid.
6    Panorama , 13 August 1984.
7   Arrigo Molinari to G.I. Ernesto Cudillo, Rome, 9 November
1981.
8    La Repubblica , 29 August 1986.
9   Sergio Flamigni, La Tela del Ragno , Edizioni Associate,
Rome, 1988, p. 179.
10   Silvana Mazzocchi, La Repubblica , 4 September 1986.
11    L’Espresso, 29 January 1984.
12   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 March 1989.
13   Quoted in Report on the Cirillo Kidnap by the Parliamentary
Committee on the Secret Services, Rome, 1984, p. 18.
14   Sandro Acciari and Pietro Calderoni, L’Espresso , 19
February 1984.
15   Ibid.
16   Report on the Cirillo Kidnap by the Parliamentary Committee
on the Secret Services, Rome, 1984, pp. 16-17.
17    L’Espresso , 29 January 1984.
18   Pietro Calderoni, L’Espresso, 13 December 1987.
19   Quoted in Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 260.
20   Giuseppe D’Avanzo, La Repubblica, 29 July 1988.
21   Ibid.
22   Sandro Acciari and Pietro Calderoni, L’Espresso, 30 July
1984.
23   Report on the Cirillo Kidnap by the Parliamentary Committee
on the Secret Services, Rome, 1984, p. 9.

--- Sayfa 343 ---
24   Sandra Bonsanti, La Repubblica, 13 September 1988.
25   Pietro Calderoni, L’Espresso, 13 December 1987.
26   Marcella Andreoli, Panorama , 12 March 1989.
27   Sandra Bonsanti, La Repubblica, 11 September 1988.
28   Antonio Padellaro, Corriere della Sera, 8 September 1988.
29   Report on the Cirillo Kidnap by the Parliamentary Committee
on the Secret Services, Rome, 1984, pp. 19-20.
30   Sandra Bonsanti, La Repubblica, 13 September 1988.
31   Telegram No. 001641 from US Consul Naples to Secretary of
State, Washington, July 1982.
32   Ermanno Corsi, La Repubblica, 26 October 1989.
33    Il Mattino, 1 November 1985.
34   Pietro Calderoni, L’Espresso, 13 December 1987.
35    Time , 28 February 1983.
36   Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 283.
37   Michele Galati to P.M. Carlo Nordio, Venice, 4 February
1982.
38   Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 281.
39   Report of the Moro Commission, Rome, 1983.
40    L’Espresso , 13 March 1983.
41   Giorgio Galli, op. cit., p. 288.
42   Giorgio Galli, ‘Per una Storia del Partito Armato’, Special
Report, Panorama , 12 November 1984, p. 159.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
[17]
TIME FOR GLASNOST IN THE WEST
IT seems appropriate that the kidnap of an American general should
mark the first comprehensive defeat for the Red Brigades and the moment
when their organization ceased to constitute a serious threat to Italian
society. By 1982 political circumstances no longer required their presence
on the scene. The Communist Party had proved itself in the hour of crisis to
be a democratically reliable force. Even better, it had embarked on a
process of slow but inexorable electoral decline. The insecurity caused by
terrorism and the particularly damaging consequences of left-wing
terrorism had deprived the party of the chance to form a genuinely
alternative government in 1976, when power was almost in its grasp. And
left-wing terrorists had robbed the party of its opportunity to share power
through consensus with the Christian Democrats when the Red Brigades
kidnapped and murdered Aldo Moro in 1978. By the time of the Dozier
kidnap, the PCI was no longer a threat to the centre parties and the Red
Brigades could safely be reduced to a marginal, maverick force, capable of
the occasional sporadic political assassination but without even the illusion
of a long-term, realizable political goal.
Italian public opinion is still far from ready to accept this kind of
political analysis and will probably always remain deeply divided on the
subject of the country’s terrorist years. But a number of leading members of
the Red Brigades have begun to discuss these theories and are now
convinced that their struggle was exploited by conservative forces to block
political change in Italy. Foremost among them is BR founder Alberto
Franceschini, who formally dissociated himself from the armed struggle in
February 1987 and is now engaged in cultural work during day-release from
prison. One thing that has always struck me is the length of time that the
Red Brigades lasted,’ he told me. ‘We were the only revolutionary
organization in an advanced capitalist country that has lasted over the years.
I used to think that this meant that Italy was a country ripe for revolution.’
Franceschini no longer harbours such illusions and is convinced that the
police could have wound up the organization in 1972 after Pisetta’s
revelations and again in 1976. Ί had the impression that the carabinieri
could have arrested us whenever they wanted to but they never went the

--- Sayfa 345 ---
whole way.’ The purpose of this official leniency is now clear: Our
activities were destabilizing; those who used us did so in order to achieve a
stabilizing effect, so that there should be no change in Italy, to maintain the
exclusion from power of the Communist Party and of the left. We were
acting to bring about change and those who used us did so to prevent
change. It’s a paradox, absurd, incredible.’
Franceschini is convinced there are a number of obscure holes in the
history of the Red Brigades, the most mysterious of all being the Moro
kidnap.’ It’s difficult to say who was responsible for it. The answer will
probably never come out. The question is whether there is a desire to
discover the truth among Italian politicians, who tend to prefer compromise
to the truth. More will come out, but we will probably never get right to the
bottom of it; perhaps in fifty years’ time when our [the Red Brigades’]
history no longer has any bearing on Italian politics. For the moment the
affair is too sensitive.’ For many years Franceschini refused to contemplate
such notions and his words amount to an admission of the most
comprehensive defeat possible of the cause for which he fought over four
years and which has already cost him more than fifteen years in prison. If
one of the most influential members of the early Red Brigades and a man of
considerable integrity can bring himself to voice these suspicions, it is hard
to see how the bland official reconstructions of the Moro affair can survive
intact.
Franceschini is distrustful of erstwhile companions who participated in
the Moro operation and have never spoken out about it or have actually
contributed to the official version. During the course of conversations in
jail, Prospero Gallinari (who has remained silent) and Antonio Savasta
(who collaborated with the authorities) both privately led Franceschini to
understand that the BR base in Rome’s Via Laurentina had been Moro’s
prison. ‘When Savasta told the magistrates it was Via Laurentina that was
immediately confirmed by the Interior Ministry,’ Franceschini said. He
added that he had never asked Gallinari about the base and was
embarrassed when he was told, in breach of Red Brigades ‘need to know’
rules of confidentiality. Franceschini had the impression he was being
provided with information that could one day enable him to corroborate the
Red Brigades’ account of its affairs, an account he did not believe.1 It has
now been established that Moro’s prison was not in Via Laurentina.

--- Sayfa 346 ---
Another person who does not believe the official accounts of the Moro
affair is Moro’s daughter, Maria Fida, a Christian Democrat senator. ‘The
lack of clarity on the Moro affair and the guilty consciences that exist about
it create a permanent stumbling block in Italian politics,’ she said. ‘Those
who are in a position to clarify what happened either do not want to or are
not free to do so. I have no desire for it to be clarified because I know that’s
not possible.’ She is angry that not enough was done to save her father.
‘Absolutely nothing was done. There were no negotiations; various
attempts to negotiate were nipped in the bud.’ She believes that anyone
trying to understand the Moro case should start from 1964 (the year of
General De Lorenzo’s attempted coup). ‘The Red Brigades are a sector of
Italian political life that is not representative of the forty years during which
my father was active in politics. For as long as I can remember papa was
always surrounded by threats, against him and against us. My father tried to
ensure that political conflicts found their expression in Parliament. It is
ironic that he should then himself be killed by this blind violence.’ She
summed up her attitude to the official reconstruction of her father’s kidnap
and murder: Ί would tend to be among those who doubt it. I believe there is
a fear of what we, the family, might say to be the truth, even if it turned out
not to be.’2
These doubts about the Red Brigades’ handling of the Moro kidnap are
angrily rejected by many of the imprisoned members of the organization,
particularly those who have refused to recant and continue to believe in the
justice of their revolutionary struggle. Almost all have now come to
recognize that there is precious little prospect of victory. Among these are
Prospero Gallinari and Francesco Piccioni whom I spoke to in the
defendants’ cage during a pause in the 1989 trial of the Red Brigades for
armed insurrection against the state. They were ultimately acquitted, as the
court decided that their organization had never been remotely capable of
overthrowing the state. Many observers saw the verdict as a way of keeping
the door open for an amnesty or the selective reduction of sentences for
imprisoned terrorists who renounced the armed struggle. Gallinari is a thin,
grey-haired man. He was wearing silver-rimmed glasses and appeared
remarkably courteous and mild-mannered for someone who was once one
of the most feared members of his terrorist organization. He is also the man
who is officially thought to have killed Moro, though he will not comment

--- Sayfa 347 ---
on this, and there is reason to doubt it. Piccioni, in contrast, is a bluff,
heavily built and seemingly jovial character.
Gallinari dismissed suggestions that the Red Brigades might have been
manipulated by Italian or foreign secret services during the Moro kidnap.
‘That’s absolutely false. Moro was kidnapped by the Red Brigades, a
communist organization that has always worked independently. There are
no dark pages in the Moro kidnap or in all the history of the Red Brigades,’
he said. Ί don’t accept the argument that our activities moved the political
centre of gravity in the country to the right.’ He also rejected the suspicions
about the role of the Hyperion language school and the suggestion that it
had been run by the CIA. ‘It was a logistical and survival centre for our
people. There are masses of rumours about us that have simply been
invented.’ Gallinari had no qualms about the decision to kill Moro, while
expressing respect for the way in which Moro conducted himself during his
imprisonment. ‘Moro was tried and condemned for everything he had done.
Today he is portrayed as the greatest democrat in the country, but two years
before his kidnap he was the politician whom the people most hated. He
was not the greatest thief in the land but he ran the country in a particular
way. The historic compromise was a trap for the Communist Party.’
This view of the historic compromise as a trap was reiterated by
Piccioni. ‘The PCI found itself supporting the government’s political
programme, which involved sacrifices on the part of the people, and which
was eroding the social basis of the party’s consensus.’ Piccioni was
unrepentant about his choice of the armed struggle: ‘Our only error was not
to win.’ Nor would he accept that there had never been any prospect of a
revolution in Italy. ‘The international situation was very different in the
1970s. There wasn’t the stability there is now. There was a crisis of
American imperialism, so one couldn’t rule out the possibility of Italy
leaving the US sphere of influence,’ he said.
‘Popular protest even caused de Gaulle to totter,’ added Gallinari. Like
Gallinari, Piccioni firmly rejected the notion that the BR had colluded with
either organized crime or the secret services during the Moro kidnap, when
I asked him about the role of underworld forger Toni Chichiarelli in the
affair. ‘These people were working for the state. They couldn’t have had
any contact with the BR. All these rumours were created in order to reduce

--- Sayfa 348 ---
the history of the Red Brigades to something suspect. In practice, it is the
only clean bit of history this country has.’3
Piccioni may be somewhat overstating his case. Nevertheless, if the
unpalatable truth that emerges from this investigation is to believed, an
explanation must be found for why so many former BR members, many
apparently in good faith, reject the idea of secret service interference in the
activities of their organization. One possibility is that they are lying, to
cover up for their own responsibilities or because they fear for their lives.
Another is that they genuinely believe their own denials but know only a
small part of the overall reality. Yet another possible explanation is offered
by Alberto Franceschini, who spoke of his own difficulties in coming to
terms with the idea that the revolutionary struggle may have been exploited
by conservative forces. ‘If I had realized this while I was still in prison [full
time] I would have committed suicide. This is why Curcio [whose personal
integrity is widely accepted and who is still a full-time prisoner] refuses to
entertain such ideas,’ he told me.
Franceschini is deeply suspicious of the role of the Hyperion language
school and of its forerunner, the Superclan, in the story of left-wing
terrorism. He is critical of Mario Moretti for having maintained contacts
with the Hyperion without informing the imprisoned members of the Red
Brigades leadership. ‘He knew of the difficulties we had had with the
people from the Hyperion. He should have told us. At this point I believe
that he was always in touch with them. Moretti never told us he had been a
member of Superclan. He always said he couldn’t stand the Superclan
people. If it should emerge that he had been in contact with Superclan that
would be extremely grave.’ This is precisely the claim that has been made
by a number of repentant terrorists and there is little reason to doubt their
word. Hyperion member Corrado Simioni has aroused particular suspicion
among those who have begun to question the whole history of red terrorism.
‘He had a bad reputation, many people warned one to beware of him,’
Franceschini said. ‘He told us about his work for USIS in Munich, perhaps
in order to cover himself. And there was another rumour going around in
the far left that he had been in contact with [right-wing bomber Giovanni]
Ventura in the late 1960s.’ Professor Robert Kupperman, a terrorism expert
from the Georgetown University Centre for Strategic and International
Studies (CSIS), registered a similar reaction on hearing a potted biography

--- Sayfa 349 ---
of Simioni. ‘He sounds like an agent for the Agency, but I don’t know,’ he
told the author.4 Kupperman was, after all, merely stating the self-evident.
Franceschini also has doubts about the role of Prospero Gallinari,
though he retains considerable respect and affection for him. ‘Gallinari was
in Superclan and he may have been another infiltrator in the Red Brigades
on their behalf. He is a typical Stalinist: he would be capable of killing his
own mother if they told him to do it. But I am convinced that Prospero is a
comrade. He still probably believes that the Superclan people were real
revolutionaries.’ Franceschini has greater difficulty in judging Moretti’s
role but ultimately comes down to the view that the two of them may have
been manipulated by other smarter operators and ended up by unwittingly
serving reactionary interests. ‘He [Prospero] and Mario are not agents. They
are convinced BR members.’ But he has few doubts about the manipulative
role played by the Superclan/Hyperion group. ‘They were just the people to
do it. Superclan’s plan was to direct all the groups of the far left. One of
their people who collaborated with the magistrates said they had a couple of
people infiltrated into the Red Brigades and a couple in Parliament. Their
plan resembles that of P2, creating an informal [political] party within the
left. They played the role of the so-called “third level” of the Mafia. They
were the Cupola [the governing body of the Mafia].’
Franceschini endorsed Judge Calogero’s theory of a secret
intelligentsia, identifiable at least in part with the Hyperion group, pulling
the strings of Italian terrorism. ‘Effectively, Calogero was right. He’s a
judge whose career has been destroyed because of it.’5 Calogero’s view also
receives authoritative confirmation from General Carlo Alberto Dalla
Chiesa. A declassified State Department cable from 1981 reports on a pre-
broadcast viewing of a television interview with the general. ‘Dalla Chiesa
suggested that Toni Negri, the jailed intellectual whose guilt or innocence of
terrorist activity has been heatedly debated, was part of the brains of the
Red Brigades, whereas BR founding father Renato Curcio fell into the
category of executioner [soldier].’6 The precise relationship between Negri
and the Red Brigades has never been fully clarified and most BR members
claim their organization rebuffed Negri’s attempts to take it over. Dalla
Chiesa’s revelation that he considered Negri to be ‘part of the brains of the
Red Brigades’ is a powerful endorsement of Calogero’s interpretation,
which does not necessarily require Negri to be the overt or even generally
accepted leader of the BR.

--- Sayfa 350 ---
More sensitive still is the suggestion made by Robert Kupperman of
CSIS that Negri may have been a US intelligence asset all along. ‘[CIA
director of counter-espionage James] Angleton made the allegation-not to
me, so it’s only hearsay-that Negri was an FBI plant.’ This is astonishing
corroboration from within the American intelligence community of the
view put forward by Mino Pecorelli in his OP article on Negri. Kupperman
also referred to tension between the CIA and the Italian secret services
during the 1970s. ‘The FBI guy [at the Rome embassy] ended up being the
conduit for a lot of stuff that should have been handled by the CIA,’7 he
said. Officially, the FBI does not operate outside the United States except in
exceptional circumstances and at the invitation of foreign governments. In
practice, it is quite possible that the FBI was actively involved in
penetrating European terrorist organizations and running operations about
which the Rome CIA station might well have had qualms. It is likely, in any
case, that Negri would have come to the Bureau’s attention during the
course of his numerous visits to the United States, where he frequented
members of the US Workers’ Autonomy movement and the left-wing
magazine Zero Work . The latter organizations would undoubtedly have
attracted the attention of the FBI.
It is worth remembering, in this context, one of the comments made in
the recommendations of the Pike Committee Report. ‘The committee
hearings on the FBI documented the problem of informants turned agents
provocateurs . Informants are necessary; the use of provocateurs is totally
contrary to principles of decency and honesty. One of these agents
provocateurs was William Lemmer, who worked in Florida as an informant
for the Bureau. Lemmer infiltrated the Vietnam Veterans Against the War
and became one of the most active members of the chapter. As such, he
allegedly suggested violent means of expressing VVAW disagreement with
the country’s Vietnam war policy. This kind of activity, directed by the
Nation’s foremost law enforcement agency, is plainly and starkly wrong.’8
If the FBI could be involved with agents provocateurs at home, it is
not hard to imagine it doing the same thing abroad. There would have been
considerable advantages in running the most secret covert operations
through an organization not normally thought to operate overseas.
According to police official Federico D’Amato, ‘The CIA distrusted Gelli
but he had a connection with the FBI.’9 D’Amato’s assertion, if true, would
be highly significant, particularly in the light of Angleton’s allegation about

--- Sayfa 351 ---
Negri and Kupperman’s suggestion that the FBI had taken on work in Italy
that should normally have been handled by the CIA. D’Amato was certainly
in a good position to know, having himself collaborated with the CIA over
many years and with his name featuring on the P2 membership list. In
reality, Gelli himself seems to be reconciled to being thought of as an agent
of the CIA. In October 1990 he went to the small town of Riolo Terme to
collect sixth prize in the local poetry competition. A journalist at the
ceremony asked him if he belonged to the CIA. ‘No,’ he replied, ‘but if I
keep hearing it said, I will end up believing it myself.’ (Corriere della Sera
, 22 October 1990.)
According to the State Department cable, General Dalla Chiesa’s
television interview contained further enlightening comments. ‘Asked about
foreign terrorist influence, Dalla Chiesa said he could not answer beyond
saying that as long as there exist powerful, opposed superpowers, it would
be absurd to think that the respective secret services are not seeking theatres
in which economic and military strategies could be carried out. . . On the
terrorist campaign itself, the general hinted at “political responsibilities”,
noting “as a soldier, I can say that one rule has not been applied: that of
exploiting one’s success.” ‘ A year and a half later, Dalla Chiesa would be
dead. It is not unreasonable to assume that his inside knowledge about
which superpower’s secret services had been most active in Italy and which
Italian politicians had prevented him from exploiting his successes against
the terrorists may have had something to do with his murder.
If overall responsibility for the strategy of tension rests with the United
States, a great burden of guilt must be born by the Italians, without whose
willing participation the country’s terrorist ordeal would never have come
about. It was, after all, a young generation of Italians which took to political
violence like ducks to water. For a significant minority, the hundreds who
took up arms and the thousands who supported them, a pistol became an
everyday fashion accessory and the destruction of human life almost a
trivial occurrence. Though Italy has a long tradition of political violence,
the period that became known as ‘the years of lead’ saw a quite
unprecedented, as well as unnecessary, slaughter. A decade later, the levels
of political violence prevailing in the 1970s and the motivations behind it
seem incomprehensible, light years away.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
Equally guilty were the Italian politicians who managed and exploited
the strategy of tension, descendants of the men who built the Roman empire
proving themselves willing vassals in the making of a new colonial Italy, a
troubled outpost of the US empire. Some of those politicians are now
proposing to bring the country’s terrorist season to an official close by
finding a political solution to the problem of the ‘political prisoners’. The
idea of an amnesty, or much reduced sentences, for imprisoned terrorists is
being put forward. Many of those who support the proposal are motivated
by genuinely humanitarian considerations and Italy’s penal system is, as a
result of their efforts, in some respects surprisingly compassionate and
civilized. But the inevitable consequence of the amnesty scheme is to
remove any incentive for imprisoned terrorists, of right or left, to offer
information to the authorities in exchange for a lighter sentence. The
message to the prisoners is clear: wait quietly for your release. As a result,
the many gaps in the history of terrorism are unlikely to be filled. It is worth
remembering, in this context, Pecorelli’s remarkable prediction that a great
amnesty would arrive ‘when national pacification has been completed’. Its
effect would be to ‘cleanse all and consign all to oblivion’, thus rewarding
the Red Brigades who had provided cover for the ‘people whom they
believe to be their occasional allies’ and who had carried out the Moro
kidnap.
The Italian Communist Party must bear some responsibility too for the
political violence of which it was itself the principal victim. Many of the
Red Brigades began their political life in the party’s youth wing, and some
party members, who never embarked on terrorism themselves, clung to
their revolutionary aspirations long after they had become an historical
anachronism. With a few notable exceptions, party leaders have been
remarkably diffident in their denunciation of P2 and other related scandals.
The impression is inescapable that some of the material that might cause
embarrassment for government parties has become the subject of secret
negotiations rather than of open political dialectic. If the PCI has become
caught up in a web of reciprocal blackmail, it is possible that it is paying the
price for the secret activities of its own revolutionary wing and of
incautious contacts between some of its own leaders and Italian secret
service bosses, possibly even of contacts with Gelli himself.
But the lion’s share of the blame must go to those members of the
Italian secret services who deliberately fostered terrorist violence, firstly by

--- Sayfa 353 ---
covering up for the right-wing bombers in the early 1970s and then by
allowing the left-wing terrorists to have their head in the second half of the
decade. The political exploitation of Italian terrorism was not the result of a
seamless conspiracy. The conspirators were often divided by fierce factional
rivalries and there were many in the police and secret services who opposed
the strategy of tension and did their best to thwart it. Far fewer fragments of
the story would have emerged if this had not been the case. But there can be
little doubt that a conspiracy did exist and continued to function for more
than a decade, that its ultimate purpose was to keep the Communist Party
from power and that its ultimate guarantor was in Washington.
The manipulation of left-wing terrorism is a complex and controversial
issue. Whether one takes the extreme view expressed by Gianfranco
Sanguinetti that ‘the BR are the state, that is to say one of its many armed
appendages’,10 or the view that the far left was manipulated at arm’s length
into unwittingly serving the interests of the right, there can be little doubt
that the activities of the left-wing terrorists ultimately played into the hands
of the conservative conspirators. The truth probably lies somewhere in the
middle. It is likely that the secret services had very few infiltrators within
the ranks of the Red Brigades and may have exercised only a partial control
over them. But the results were still excellent. From a secret service point of
view, the exploitation of genuinely autonomous terrorists constituted the
most sophisticated kind of covert operation and offered the added advantage
of plausible deniability. At the same time, it seems likely that the secret
services were able to exercise a more direct control at crucial moments in
the Red Brigades’ history. One has only to remember the attempts to
infiltrate the left and provoke it to violence in the early 1970s, carried out in
a somewhat crude fashion by secret service-controlled rightists, to realize
that it is highly unlikely that the terrorism of the late 1970s and early 1980s
could have remained entirely immune from secret service influence. This
suspicion is reinforced by the sinister role of the Hyperion intellectuals,
who exercised considerable sway thoughout the far left and in particular
over the youth protest movements that gave rise to the Red Brigades.
Despite the traumatic results of the P2 Commission’s investigation,
when the Italian political establishment effectively put itself on trial, the P2
power network has never been completely dismantled. One of the reasons
was that the political establishment was simultaneously defendant, judge
and jury, and so had a natural interest in minimizing the sentence. The

--- Sayfa 354 ---
international implications of the conspiracy were also too disturbing to be
fully aired in public. It is illuminating that Tina Anselmi, who as president
of the commission genuinely sought to penetrate the secrets of the lodge,
refused to discuss the subject when asked several times for an interview in
1989. Licio Gelli, in contrast, was happily receiving the world’s press at his
luxury Tuscan villa and lecturing them on the unjust political persecution he
had suffered. It was certainly not the P2 boss who gave the impression of
being cowed or vanquished. After all, the government of the day was one
that he had long advocated: based on an alliance between the Christian
Democrats under Giulio Andreotti and Bettino Craxi’s Socialists.
It is ironic that the United States, a profoundly democratic country and
itself frequently the victim of international terrorism, should have played
such an ignoble role in recent Italian history. There can be little doubt that
much of the responsibility for what happened as a result of the strategy of
tension rests with the United States. The strategy was aimed at keeping the
Communist Party out of power in Italy. For the Italian secret services to
have persevered with it for so long, it must have had the endorsement of
NATO and of NATO’s most powerful member in particular. Since the end
of the Second World War the United States has exercised great and only
gradually diminishing influence over the Italian secret services; it is
unthinkable that those secret services could have been involved in major
abuses and in collusion with terrorism for more than a decade without the
approval of the NATO security establishment. It might be claimed that the
intervention of the secret services averted a possible civil war and prevented
even greater bloodshed but the argument is unconvincing. It fails to take
account of the fact that under Enrico Berlinguer the bulk of the PCI was
firmly committed to Western-style democracy. And it is hard to see how a
strategy that cost the lives of many of the best and most honest servants of
the Italian state, and included indiscriminate bombings against the public
and the murder of Aldo Moro, could ever find justification.
The involvement of the United States in the strategy of tension is well
illustrated by the close American ties of the P2 lodge. ‘P2 was the bonding
mechanism of the extreme right’ and ‘the social network of the security
services’, according to Professor Kupperman. ‘Someone [from the US
intelligence community] would have been assigned to Gelli, to cultivate
him as an intelligence asset. I don’t know who.’ Membership of P2 was
clearly a touchstone of Atlantic loyalty. As CIA collaborator Professor

--- Sayfa 355 ---
Ferracuti has explained, it was almost automatic for members of the secret
services to be invited to join the lodge when they reached a certain stage in
their careers. Kupperman, who worked as a consultant to the Italian secret
services on a number of occasions in the early 1980s, found that many
Italian officers used their membership as a guarantee of their reliability. Ί
met many military and intelligence officers who openly told me, a complete
stranger to them, that they were members of P2. They would say: “You can
trust me, I am a member of P2.”’ Kupperman’s candour contrasts with the
discomfort and reticence displayed by former CIA director William Colby
when I questioned him about the US connections of P2 members Michele
Sindona and Licio Gelli. He appeared not to have even heard of Gelli,
despite the fact that the P2 boss has undoubtedly been a US intelligence
asset since the end of the war and despite the fact that Colby had served
with the CIA in Italy in the 1950s and then been director of the Agency in
the 1970s. The FBI must have been extremely jealous of their asset if they
concealed his very existence from the CIA, as Colby’s apparent ignorance
would imply. The State Department also appeared to be uncomfortable
about addressing US-P2 relations, turning down a request for an interview
about this and other issues with the lame excuse that there was no one on
the Italian desk who had been there long enough to answer my questions. It
was almost as though the US government kept no records and was unable to
give an account of its activities stretching back more than five or ten years.
The reality, it would appear, is that it can give no convincing explanation
for the close relationship that once existed between the US government and
its intelligence agencies and extremely unsavoury individuals such as
Sindona and Gelli.
It is clear that the United States did not just operate in Italy through
proxies such as the Italian secret services and the P2 lodge but was also
directly involved in highly sensitive covert operations. Negri’s involvement
with US intelligence, the Hyperion language school and the secret CIA-
PLO deal to provide the Red Brigades with weapons are but a few
examples. Most sensitive of all is the role of US intelligence in the kidnap
and murder of Aldo Moro. Unquestionably, the United States was opposed
to his policy of accommodation with the PCI and had an interest in his
removal. Unquestionably, the CIA refused to help in the search for his
prison. Even Colby expressed surprise at this, while remaining sceptical of
its veracity. ‘If an allied country had its Prime Minister kidnapped we

--- Sayfa 356 ---
would do everything we could to help. Perhaps we didn’t have anything
useful to offer. I find it hard to believe that we refused to help.’11 Whether
US intelligence agencies were directly involved in some way in Moro’s
kidnap, as Martin Brown claimed, remains, for the moment, an open
question.
The exact role of the different US intelligence agencies in Italy is also
by no means clear. Certainly, the CIA was not the only agency to be
actively involved in Italian affairs. The dispute between the CIA and
Ambassador Martin over the latter’s funding of General Miceli reveals that
the Agency sometimes took a doveish line towards Italy in contrast to the
hawks elsewhere in the government. According to some, the State
Department secret service, the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, often
adopted a more ruthless approach than the CIA. As we have seen, the FBI
was allegedly in contact with both Negri and Gelli, and Gelli’s sending of
an Army Field Manual into Italy was presumably intended to imply that the
Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA) had played some role in the
destabilizing of the country. It also suggested that the US may have adopted
a South-east Asian approach to Italian communism. What may, or may not,
have been appropriate for combating communism in Vietnam was certainly
inappropriate in Italy. The threat of the PCI to the democratic order in Italy
has consistently been overstated, while the party’s progressive distancing of
itself from its revolutionary roots passed virtually unremarked. The
question inevitably arises whether US and Italian intelligence officials may
have deliberately over-emphasized the communist threat in order to give
themselves greater power and greater leeway for their own manoeuvres.
Italian political parties of the centre and right had a similar interest in
stressing the communist menace when appealing to the US for financial
assistance. Perhaps the best indication of the damage caused to the PCI by
terrorism and the party’s commitment to the democratic order can be seen
in its expenditure on anti-terrorism propaganda, which outstripped that of
any other party. In the two decades from 1969 to 1988 the PCI spent 20
billion Lire (more than £10 million) on the propaganda war on terrorism,
compared to only 15 billion spent by the DC.12
Another former member of the Red Brigades to harbour doubts about
the manipulation of Italian terrorism is Massimo Gidoni, a wealthy
psychiatrist from Ancona, who participated in the kidnap of Roberto Peci
and took Mario Moretti on his 1979 gun-running mission to Lebanon on his

--- Sayfa 357 ---
yacht Papago. Significantly, this was one of the mysterious PLO arms
consignments, the bizarre background to which we have already examined.
In Cyprus the two met a man who Moretti said was a representative of a
Palestinian group but who struck Gidoni as being surprisingly pale-skinned
for an Arab. It was this man who provided them with the co-ordinates for
their rendezvous off the Lebanese coast. As skipper, Gidoni found that the
whole journey went surprisingly smoothly: too smoothly, he would later
come to think.
Gidoni voiced his suspicions about Moretti, whom he had previously
considered to be ‘a good comrade and a friend’, in an interview from prison
with Panorama magazine (17 July 1988). ‘People are now talking about a
two-tier Red Brigades organization and I can’t understand his behaviour,
this refusal to clarify his position, even if only internally. I can understand
the logic of refusing to deal with institutions and that’s why I can’t
understand him when he agrees to go on television and continues to give
explanations that are . . . not completely believable for anyone.’ Gidoni
described his reaction to the murder of Roberto Peci and the sense that
something irreparable had happened in his own life as a result. He then
added a comment that indicates that he too harboured suspicions about the
true role of Peci’s brother Patrizio: ‘Immediately afterwards I thought that if
that was the way it had turned out something important must have
happened, that perhaps something serious to do with Patrizio Peci had been
discovered.’ The implication is that the Red Brigades may have become
convinced that Patrizio had been an infiltrator all along: thus their ferocity
towards his brother. Like Franceschini, Gidoni said he had joined the armed
struggle in order to change the world but subsequently found that he was
achieving exactly the opposite effect. Ί have often put this question to the
older comrades: “If you know the truth then tell me, so at least I’ll know
which window to go to to collect my pension: whether it will be marked
Red Brigades or Italian or foreign secret services.”’ ‘It’s obviously a joke,’
commented the interviewer, ‘but full of bitterness.’ The truth may be bitter
for ex-members of the Red Brigades but it is still more so for their wholly
innocent victims.
Following the discovery of Moro’s handwritten documents behind a
panel in the Red Brigades base of Via Montenevoso in October 1990, Rome
magistrates opened an investigation into the possible existence of contacts
between the BR and Italian or foreign secret services. One of the

--- Sayfa 358 ---
magistrates, Franco Ionta, had specifically ruled out such a hypothesis in a
report he had concluded not long before. He has been assigned an escort of
ten bodyguards in view of the highly sensitive nature of his inquiry.
The recent revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe have altered the
political geography of the globe and may have removed the last vestiges of
the Cold War. As a result, the Cold War requirement that the PCI be
permanently excluded from power in Italy should also fall. The PCI itself
has decided to reflect its true social democratic identity by dropping the
word communist from its name altogether. In October 1990 it was renamed
the Democratic Party of the Left (Partito Democrático di Sinistra). PDS
does not have much of a ring to it, however, and most people continue to
refer to the party as the PCI (‘pee-chee’). It is understandable that at a time
when the superpowers were engaged in planet-wide competition and
conflict, the role of the PCI, with 30 per cent of the electorate behind it and
in a country as apparently unstable and socially divided as 1970s Italy,
should have caused acute anxiety. But it was a major error to assume that
the threat from Italian communism bore any resemblance whatever to that
from Korean or Vietnamese or Soviet communism. Italian communism was
a much more moderate and homespun affair.
It is clear that in the course of pursuing the conflict in Italy, the United
States resorted to a number of tactics that it could never publicly justify,
that negated the fundamental principles of Western democracy and involved
the abandonment of the moral high ground in its ideological battle with the
Soviet Union. There is no suggestion that this course was lightly or
unthinkingly embarked upon, but it was the result of serious errors of
judgement, both in exaggerating the perceived threat and in failing to select
an appropriate response. Probably the United States’ gravest blunder was
the decision to ally itself with the unpresentable Sindonas and Gellis of the
Italian scene, who will continue to cause the US government
embarrassment long after they have all gone to their graves. As the Iron
Curtain is rung down across Europe, it is perhaps time to examine the beam
in our own eye and to practise a little glasnost in the West.
Notes
1   Alberto Franceschini to the author, 28 July 1988.
2   Maria Fida Moro to the author, 2 August 1988.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
3   Prospero Gallinari and Francesco Piccioni to the author, 15
June 1989.
4   Prof. Robert Kupperman to the author, 7 December 1989.
5   Alberto Franceschini to the author, 3 October 1989.
6   Cable from US embassy, Rome, to Secretary of State,
Washington, No. 5888454, Recent Developments Concerning Italian
Terrorism, February 1981.
7   Prof. Robert Kupperman to the author, 7 December 1989.
8   Recommendations of the Final Report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence, Washington, 11 February 1976, p. 12.
9   Federico D’Amato to the author, 8 October 1989.
10   Gianfranco Sanguinetti, Del Terrorismo e dello Stato , Milan,
1980, p. XV.
11   William Colby to the author, 4 December 1989.
12   Corriere della Sera , 5 April 1988.

--- Sayfa 360 ---
POSTSCRIPT
Since completing the book, the disconcerting series of acquittals in
right-wing bombing trials has continued virtually uninterrupted. On 5
March 1991 the Court of Cassation quashed a Florence appeal court’s guilty
verdict on Pippo Calo and his associates for the Christmas 1984 train
bombing. The court ruled there was insufficient evidence to convict Calo
and ordered a new appeal court hearing. Some three weeks later, on 28
March, a Florence assize court sentenced MSI deputy Massimo
Abbatangelo to life imprisonment for his alleged involvement in the
bombing. The neofascist parliamentarian was accused of supplying part of
the explosive used in the bombing to coconspirators in the Neapolitan
Camorra. The chances of the verdict being confirmed on appeal are slim,
however. Abbatangelo’s alleged accomplices in the Camorra have already
been definitively acquitted.
On 4 April a Bologna appeal court quashed the life sentences on two
neofascists, Mario Tuti and Luciano Franci, for the 1974 Italicus bombing.
These verdicts appear to follow the now established pattern of terrorist
bombings going unpunished and call into question the fascist label that has
been attached to them. President Cossiga recently went so far as to
apologize to a representative of the MSI for having publicly attributed the
Bologna station bombing to the far right. The verdicts show up the true
gravity of the judicial sabotage carried out over the years by the secret
services and set the seal on the almost comprehensive failure of the
judiciary to clarify the mysteries of Italy’s terrorist past.
Investigations into Gladio do, however, appear to be making
considerable progress. The crucial role of the United States in the genesis
and running of the stay-behind network is becoming ever more plain.
Magistrates have established that weapons for the gladiators were stored at
the US military base of Camp Derby near Livorno and that numerous
Italian right-wingers received military training at the base. It is also
increasingly apparent that the true purpose of the organization was not to
oppose an invasion of Italy by Eastern Bloc troops but to counter the
internal threat of the PCI. The testimony of Peteano bomber Vincenzo
Vinciguerra continues to be particularly illuminating. In an interview with
L’Espresso magazine (4 April 1991) he emphasizes the anti-communist
purpose of Gladio. Ί can say this from my own personal knowledge, given

--- Sayfa 361 ---
that members of this organization have carried out bombings and incited
others to do so,’ Vinciguerra told the magazine. He reeled off a list of
twenty names of right-wingers who do not appear on the official Gladio
membership list but who, he maintains, worked for the NATO organization.
Vinciguerra described the gladiators as being inspired by ‘a visceral anti-
communism and an opportunism that meant they would stop at nothing.’
The CIA has refused to permit the publication of the text of the original
agreement setting up Gladio; an indication that its contents would still be
viewed today as an unacceptable infringement of Italian sovereignty.
Rome magistrates are investigating the claim by Camorra boss
Raffaele Cutolo that he was able to secure the release from the Red
Brigades of Aldo Moro but that his offer to do so was turned down by
political associates of the Christian Democrat leader. In a letter to the
author, Cutolo said he learnt of the possibility of freeing Moro through a
contact in the Magliana band. His willingness to discuss these matters was
greatly reduced by the murder, in December 1990, of his twenty-eight-year-
old son Roberto.

--- Sayfa 362 ---
GLOSSARY
Autonomía Operaia, Workers’ Autonomy, extremist left-wing
organization
Avanguardia Nazionale (AN), National Vanguard, right-wing
terrorist organization
Azione Rivoluzionarie, Revolutionary Action, minor left-wing
terrorist organization
BR, Red Brigades, left-wing terrorist organization
CIA, Central Intelligence Agency (US)
CPM, Collettivo Politico Metropolitano, Metropolitan Political
Collective, left-wing political organization
DC, Christian Democrat Party
DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency (US)
FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation (US)
GAP, Gruppi di Azione Partigiana, Partisan Action Groups, left-
wing terrorist organization
MAR, Movimento di Azione Rivoluzionaria, Revolutionary Action
Movement, right-wing terrorist group
NAR, Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari, Armed Revolutionary Cells,
right-wing terrorist group
NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Office of Special Affairs (Ufficio Affari Riservati), political police
department of the Interior Ministry
Ordine Nero, Black Order, right-wing terrorist organization
Ordine Nuovo (ON), New Order, right-wing terrorist organization
OSS, Office of Strategic Services, forerunner of the CIA
OVRA,
Opera
Vigilanza
Repressione
Antifascismo,
The
Organization for Vigilance and Repression of Anti-fascism, fascist secret
police
Pace e Libertà, Peace and Freedom, right-wing association
PCI, Italian Communist Party

--- Sayfa 363 ---
PLO, Palestine Liberation Organization
Potere Operaio, Workers’ Power, extremist left-wing organization
Prima Linea, Front Line, left-wing terrorist organization
PSI, Italian Socialist Party
SID, Servizio Informazioni Difesa, Defence Information Service
SIFAR, Servizio Informazioni Forze Armate, Armed Forces
Information Service
SISDE, Servizio per le Informazioni e la Sicurezza Democrática,
Democratic Information and Security Service
SISMI, Servizio per le Informazioni e la Sicurezza Militare, Military
Information and Security Service
Superclan, left-wing terrorist group
USIS, United States Information Service

--- Sayfa 364 ---
Table of Contents
PUPPETMASTERS
All Rights Reserved © 1991, 2002 by Phillip Willan
Contents
INTRODUCTION
[1] IN DEFENCE OF DEMOCRACY
Notes
[2] THE ORIGINS OF TERROR
Notes
[3] THE MASONIC CONSPIRACY
Notes
[4] GELLI AND AMERICA
Notes
[5] MINO PECORELLI
Notes
[6] THE COUP SEASON
Notes
[7] COVERING UP FOR THE BOMBERS
Notes
[8] OPERATION GLADIO
Notes
[9] STILL COVERING UP
Notes
[10] MANIPULATING THE LEFT
Notes
[11] THE MORO KIDNAP
Notes
[12] THE PECORELLI VERSION
Notes

--- Sayfa 365 ---
[13] THE MAGLIANA MESSAGES
Notes
[14] THE MORO DOCUMENTS
Notes
[15] MR BROWN’S STORY
Notes
[16] MORE VALUED THAN MORO?
Notes
[17] TIME FOR GLASNOST IN THE WEST
Notes
POSTSCRIPT
GLOSSARY