--- Sayfa 1 ---
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
ABOUT ISLAM
VOL. 2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
QUESTIONS & ANSWERS
about ISLAM
VOL. 2
Translated by Muhammed Çetin
New Jersey
2005

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Copyright © 2005 by The Light, Inc. & Iþýk Yayýnlarý
08 07 06 05      1 2 3 4
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording
or by any information storage and retrieval system without permission in writing
from the Publisher.
Published by The Light, Inc.
26 Worlds Fair Dr. Suite C
Somerset, New Jersey, 08873, USA
www.thelightpublishing.com
http://en.fgulen.com
Translated from Turkish by Muhammed Çetin
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gülen, Fethullah.
[Asrin getirdiði tereddütler. English]
Questions and answers about Islam / M. Fethullah Gülen.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p.      ) and index.
ISBN 1-932099-25-5 (v. 2 : alk. paper)
1. Islam--Theology--Miscellanea.  2. Islam--Doctrines--Miscellanea.     I. Title.
BP166.G8513 2005
297.2--dc22
2005022436
Printed by
Çaðlayan A.Þ. Izmir, Turkey
September 2005

--- Sayfa 5 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
About the Author......................................................................................vii
Preface .....................................................................................................xiii
Chapter 1
WISDOM IN THE MESSAGE OF THE QUR’AN
1.1.
It appears that the time of the coming of rain and
the sex of the baby in the mother’s womb can be known
in advance. Are these then no longer to be counted
among the “five mysteries” mentioned in the Qur’an? ....................3
1.2.
Do the appointed times of death (ajal) of people who die en
masse in natural disasters come to all of them at the same time?.......9
1.3.
Although Azrail is one, how does he capture the
souls of many people who die at the same instant? ........................15
1.4.
What is the wisdom in fasting?......................................................21
1.5.
Why does the Qur’an mention a person such as
Abu Lahab who was an inveterate enemy of Islam?.......................25
Chapter 2
ETHICS AND SPIRITUALITY
2.1.
What is ulfa (familiarity)? And what are its negative effects? .........35
2.2.
What is “unity of being” (wahdat al-wujud)? Does it
conform in any way to the teachings of Islam?”.............................41
2.3.
How can we avoid sins, and how can we show
sincere repentance? ........................................................................53
Chapter 3
VIRTUES AND HARDSHIPS IN THE SERVICE OF ISLAM
3.1.
How can moderation be defined? .................................................59
3.2.
How should people avoid sins, distractions, and temptations?.......63

--- Sayfa 6 ---
3.3.
How should believers invite others to faith? ..................................75
3.4.
How should we deal with mockery or ridicule, especially
of the young trying to practice their religion by their peers?..........95
3.5.
As God already gives His blessings and peace to Prophet
Muhammad, what is the wisdom in our invoking God’s
blessings and peace upon him? Does he need our invocations?......99
Chapter 4
SCIENTIFIC ISSUES
4.1.
Is it right when people link HIV to “the Beast of the Earth”
(Dabbat al-ard), one of the signs of the Last Day?.......................103
4.2.
What do you say about sperm banks and artificial insemination?.....113
4.3.
What is the reason for the persistence of Darwinism in the
general culture of the masses, though many of Darwin’s
hypotheses have been challenged and even disproved?.................117
4.4.
What should be our attitude against ideas like positivism and
rationalism which are accepted as the sources of information
in the West? To what degree do they reflect the truth?.................125
Chapter 5
PERSPECTIVES
5.1.
What are the reasons for the fact that Islam spread over such
vast territories in such a short time in the past? What are the
reasons for the Muslims’ defeat and failure at the present time?...131
5.2.
What is the Islamic perspective on anticipation for the
Messiah and the Mahdi? ..............................................................143
5.3.
How are those who are hostile to dialogue activities today
relevant to “Kharijites, Karmatis, Anarchists”?.............................157
5.4.
How would you describe the moral transformation of the
Prophet’s Companions after the advent of Islam? ........................163
Notes......................................................................................................167
Index ......................................................................................................173
Table of Contents
vi

--- Sayfa 7 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
B
orn in Erzurum, in eastern Turkey, in 1938, M.
Fethullah Gülen is one of the world’s most prominent
and influential Islamic intellectuals.* He was trained in
the religious sciences by several celebrated Muslim scholars and
spiritual masters. Gülen also studied the principles and theories
of modern social and physical sciences. Based on his exception-
al skills in learning and focused self-study, he soon surpassed his
peers. In 1959, after attaining excellent examination results, he
was awarded a state preacher’s license (in Edirne), and was pro-
moted to a post in Izmir, Turkey’s third largest province, in
1966. It was here that Gülen started to crystallize his theme and
expand his audience base. In his sermons and speeches he
emphasized the pressing social issues of the times: his particular
aim was to urge the younger generation to harmonize intellec-
tual enlightenment with wise spirituality and a caring, humane
activism.
Gülen did not restrict himself to teaching in the inner cities.
He traveled around the provinces in Anatolia and lectured not
only in mosques, but also at town meetings and corner coffee
houses. This enabled him to reach a more representative cross-
section of the population and to attract the attention of the aca-
demic community, especially the student body. The subject mat-
ter of his speeches, whether formal or informal, was not restrict-
ed explicitly to religious questions; he also talked about educa-
tion, science, Darwinism, about the economy and social justice.
It was the depth and quality of his speeches on such a wide
range of topics that most impressed the academic community,
and won their attention and respect.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Gülen retired from formal teaching duties in 1981, having
inspired a whole generation of young students. His efforts, dat-
ing from the 1960s, especially in educational reform, have made
him one of the best-known and respected figures in Turkey.
From 1988 to 1991, he gave a series of sermons as preacher
emeritus in some of the most famous mosques in major popu-
lation centers, while continuing to deliver his message in the
form of popular conferences, not only in Turkey, but also in
Western Europe.
MAIN IDEAS
In his speeches and writings Gülen envisions a twenty-first cen-
tury in which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual dynamic
that will revitalize long-dormant moral values; an age of toler-
ance, understanding, and international cooperation that will
ultimately lead, through intercultural dialogue and a sharing of
values, to a single, inclusive civilization. In the field of educa-
tion, he has spearheaded the establishment of many charitable
organizations to work for the welfare of the community, both
within and without Turkey. He has inspired the use of mass
media, notably television, to inform the public, of matters of
pressing concern to them, individually and collectively.
Gülen believes the road to justice for all is dependent on the
provision of an adequate and appropriate universal education.
Only then will there be sufficient understanding and tolerance
to secure respect for the rights of others. To this end, he has,
over the years, encouraged the social elite and community lead-
ers, powerful industrialists as well as small businessmen, to sup-
port quality education. With donations from these sources, edu-
cational trusts have been able to establish many schools, both in
Turkey and abroad.
Gülen has stated that in the modern world the only way to
get others to accept your ideas is by persuasion. He describes
those who resort to force as being intellectually bankrupt; peo-
ple will always demand freedom of choice in the way they run
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
viii

--- Sayfa 9 ---
their affairs and in their expression of their spiritual and reli-
gious values. Democracy, Gülen argues, in spite of its many
shortcomings, is now the only viable political system, and peo-
ple should strive to modernize and consolidate democratic insti-
tutions in order to build a society where individual rights and
freedoms are respected and protected, where equal opportunity
for all is more than a dream.
INTERFAITH AND INTERCULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Since his retirement, Gülen has concentrated his efforts on
establishing a dialogue among the factions representing differ-
ent ideologies, cultures, religions and nations. In 1999, his
paper “The Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue” was presented to
the Parliament of World’s Religions in Cape Town, December
1-8. He maintains that “dialogue is a must” and that people,
regardless of nation or political borders, have far more in com-
mon than they realize.
Given all of this, Gülen considers it both worthwhile and
necessary for a sincere dialogue to be established in order to
increase mutual understanding. To this end, he has helped to
establish the Journalists and Writers Foundation (1994), whose
activities to promote dialogue and tolerance among all strata of
the society have been warmly welcomed by people from almost
all walks of life. Again to this end, Gülen visits and receives lead-
ing figures, not only from among the Turkish population, but
from all over the world. Pope John Paul II at the Vatican, the
late John O’Connor, Archbishop of New York, Leon Levy, for-
mer president of The Anti-Defamation League are among many
leading representatives of world religions with whom Gülen has
met to discuss dialogue and take initiatives in this respect. In
Turkey, the Vatican’s Ambassador to Turkey, the Patriarch of the
Turkish Orthodox Church, the Patriarch of the Turkish Armenian
community, the Chief Rabbi of the Turkish Jewish community
and many other leading figures in Turkey have frequently met
About the Author
ix

--- Sayfa 10 ---
with him, portraying an example of how sincere dialogue can be
established between people of faith.
In his meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican (1998),
Gülen presented a proposal to take firm steps to stop the conflict
in the Middle East via collaborative work on this soil, a place
where all three religions originated. In his proposal, he also
underlined the fact that science and religion are in fact two dif-
ferent aspects that emanate from the same truth: “Humankind
from time to time has denied religion in the name of science and
denied science in the name of religion, arguing that the two pres-
ent conflicting views. All knowledge belongs to God and religion
is from God. How then can the two be in conflict? To this end,
our joint efforts directed at inter-religious dialogue can do much
to improve understanding and tolerance among people.”
Gülen released a press declaration renouncing the September
11th terrorist attacks on the USA, which he regarded as a great
blow to world peace that unfairly tarnished the credit of believ-
ers: “. . . terror can never be used in the name of Islam or for the
sake of any Islamic ends. A terrorist cannot be a Muslim and a
Muslim cannot be a terrorist. A Muslim can only be the repre-
sentative and symbol of peace, welfare, and prosperity.”
Gülen’s efforts for worldwide peace have been echoed at con-
ferences and symposiums. “The Peaceful Heroes Symposium”
(April 11-13, 2003) at the University of Texas, Austin, produced
a list of peacemakers over 5,000 years of human history. Gülen
was mentioned among contemporary heroes of peace, in a list
which includes names such as Jesus, Buddha, Mohandas Gandhi,
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa.
In March 2004, the Spirituality Foundation of Kyrgyzstan
awarded Gülen with its “Intersociety Adaptation and Contribution
to Peace Prize” for his contribution to international peace through
his thoughts and activities in education.
Gülen contributes to a number of journals and magazines.
He writes the editorial page for several magazines. He writes
the lead article for The Fountain, Yeni Ümit, Sýzýntý, and Yaðmur,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
x

--- Sayfa 11 ---
leading popular and spiritual thought magazines in Turkey. He
has written more than forty books, hundreds of articles, and
recorded thousands of audio and videocassettes. He has deliv-
ered innumerable speeches on many social and religious issues.
Some of his books—many of which have been best-sellers in
Turkey—have been made available in English translations, such
as, The Messenger of God: Muhammad: An Analysis of the Prophet’s
Life, Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, Questions
and Answers about Faith, Pearls of Wisdom, The Essentials of the
Islamic Faith, Towards the Lost Paradise, Key Concepts in the Practice
of Sufism. A number have also been translated into German,
Russian, Albanian, Japanese, Indonesian, and Spanish.
The educational trusts inspired by Gülen have established
countless non-profit voluntary organizations—foundations and
associations—in Turkey and abroad which support many schol-
arships.
Though a well-known public figure, Gülen has always shied
away from involvement in formal politics. Gülen’s admirers
include leading journalists, academics, TV personalities, politi-
cians, and Turkish and foreign state authorities. They see in him
a true innovator and unique social reformer who practices what
he preaches. They see him as a peace activist, an intellectual, a
religious scholar, a mentor, author and poet, a great thinker and
spiritual guide who has devoted his life to seeking the solutions
for society’s ills and spiritual needs. They see the movement he
helped to nurture as a movement dedicated to education, but an
education of the heart and soul as well as of the mind, aimed at
reviving and invigorating the whole being to achieve compe-
tence and providing goods and services useful to others.
About the Author
xi
* Although official records have listed his date of birth as 1941, the actual date is 1938.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
PREFACE
T
he primary duty of those thinkers that have a clear con-
science is to give comprehensive and satisfactory
answers to questions that have been raised merely to
confuse people’s minds; they rack their brains, mining for ideas
with the pickax of thought. In a way, this is their raison d’etre.
A community without such figures of deep reflection is indeed
a poor one. A society whose members have turned their backs
on such people can be considered one that has failed to compre-
hend the purpose of their own existence.
The questions “how” and “why” have existed since the begin-
ning of the world. These are the questions through which the
world is given its meaning. This is what we mean when we say
“this world is the realm of wisdom.” That is, God executes His
commands or acts in this world behind the veil of causality.
Though God is the Creator and the Ultimate Agent, everything
happens according to or within the framework of certain causes.
As a matter of fact, inquiring into the relation between cause and
effect is wisdom in and of itself. If there were not for the thought-
provoking questions (those that are free from evil intentions) how
would we be able to talk about wisdom and the All-Wise One?
However, trying to answer every question we face is an
unnecessary challenge. When the archangel Gabriel asked the
Prophet about when the end of the world would occur, he
replied: “The one asked does not know more than the one ask-
ing.” This answer presents an example of wisdom for us.
To sixty out of every hundred questions asked to him,
Imam Abu Yusuf replied “I don’t know.” Surprised by this,
those inquiring retorted, saying: “You are paid to answer our
questions, but for the most part you answer ‘I don’t know.’

--- Sayfa 14 ---
How can you explain this?” The great Imam gave them the fol-
lowing meaningful reply: “You are paying me for the things I
know, and if you had paid for what I don’t know, the whole
world would not have sufficed.”
There is also a proper manner in asking such questions.
Those asked out of genuine wonder and in an acceptable man-
ner are of utmost importance, in our view. Likewise, the
answers to be given to them are very difficult, but critical.
Lazy brains cannot ask good questions. We cannot talk
about action of thought as far as dampened minds are con-
cerned. Another hadith concerning Gabriel teaches us how to
ask. Once, Gabriel appeared in human form and kindly asked
the Prophet for permission to approach him. He asked permis-
sion three times, and the fourth time he kneeled, putting his
hands on his knees, and asked again. He then proceeded to ask
critical questions like “What is iman? What is Islam? What is
ihsan?” Gabriel knew the answers to these questions, but his
purpose of disguising himself and posing these questions was to
help others attain this information.
A question is asked for a certain purpose. Asking a question
for the sake of displaying one’s own knowledge or asking mere-
ly to test the other person is worthless. If a question is asked for
the purpose of learning or in order to let others find out the
information (as in the example of Gabriel above the questioner
may already know the answer), it can be considered a question
that has been posed in the correct manner. Questions of this
kind are like seeds of wisdom. Gabriel’s questions are very good
examples. He later went on to affirm the answers that he
received; this signifies his acceptance of the answers as being
correct. In any other case it would not be proper for the person
asking a question to affirm the answer. Moreover, Gabriel was
there to teach the religion and he instantly affirmed that what
the Prophet had said was in full compliance with the Revelation.
Such an affirmation is proper only in such a context.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
xiv

--- Sayfa 15 ---
A good question, i.e. one that is acceptable in terms of man-
ner and intention, inspires the answerer and provides food for
thought. Asking is a skill, and answering satisfactorily is a
virtue. It is with this in mind that the book you are about to
read has been put together.
The first volume addressed to more essential questions con-
cerning Islamic faith; e.g. God and the nature of His existence;
can Islam solve every problem? did Prophet Muhammad write
the Qur’an? Prophethood; Satan, etc. Although the questions
included in this second volume have been selected on the
assumption that the reader is already informed of the content of
the first volume, an independent reading is still possible for each
question-answer is a separate entity and the book does not
develop one question upon another.
This book is a translation and like all translations this repre-
sents our best attempt to convey the writer’s message fairly and
clearly. One major problem with the translation of a Turkish text
is that it has only one pronoun for the third person and it is not
gender-specific as in he or she in English. For reasons of brevi-
ty and style, we have settled on the use of “man” in some places,
“humanity” or “humankind” in others, where some editors
might have preferred “men and women” or a “human being,” “a
person” or another such expression. The use of the word “man”
does not indicate that women are excluded from the author’s
exhortations, both men and women are addressed.
Muhammed Çetin
Preface
xv

--- Sayfa 17 ---
CHAPTER 1
Wisdom in the Message
of the Qur’an

--- Sayfa 19 ---
1.1.
It appears that the time of the coming of rain and the sex
of the baby in the mother’s womb can be known in
advance. Are these then no longer to be counted among
the “five mysteries” mentioned in the Qur’an?
T
he question concerns the mystery of “time” and “knowl-
edge” which governs all five things mentioned in the
verse:
The knowledge of the Hour is with God. It is He Who sends
down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs. And no
one knows what it is that he will earn tomorrow and no one
knows in what land he is to die. God is all-knowing, All-Aware.
(Luqman 31:34)
Let us look at each of the five briefly in the order given.
God alone knows when and how the Hour, the Resurrection
will happen. As the Qur’an states this as a fact and principle, it
is improper for a Muslim to offer an opinion on the matter
without saying “God knows.” We affirm the truth of this from
the well-known hadith1 that tells when the archangel Gabriel
came and asked the Prophet to explain iman, Islam, and ihsan.
Gabriel confirmed the answers he got by saying “sadaqta” (he
has spoken truth). Gabriel’s last question was: “When will the
Resurrection take place?” The Prophet answered, “The one
asked does not know more than the one asking.” Thereafter, he
mentioned certain of the signs and portents of events that

--- Sayfa 20 ---
would occur close to the time of the Resurrection. Such was the
courtesy of the Prophet when asked about one of the “five mys-
teries.” Both the Prophet and Gabriel in fact had some certain
knowledge of it, but only God knows when it will happen.
As for how the Resurrection may take place, in terms of like-
ly physical causes, we may surmise many, any of which might
suffice to bring it about: such as, a comet striking the earth, or
the sun, according to the laws of thermodynamics, extinguishing
or exploding, or people may unintentionally initiate some sort of
chain reactions beyond their control, and so on and so forth. But,
again, only God knows the when and how.
The second “mystery” mentioned in the verse is that it is
God who sends down the rain. This is one of the two points
raised in the question. People claim to know when it will rain by
meteorological analysis, and therefore argue that there is no
longer any point in counting rain as one of the mysteries. No
doubt some people who put forward such claims have it in mind
to generate unease and doubts about the perfection of the Book
and the faith. Muslims must nevertheless deal sensitively with
such questions, even if they conceal a blasphemous intent.
I begin by asking how much of what people claim to know
though modern science and technology is truly related to the
unseen or what is beyond our perception. In fact, their guesswork
about rainfall, done after all the conditions for it and the signs of
it have already begun to be experienced in the visible world, has
nothing to do with knowing the Unseen (ghayb) at all.
Let me explain this by a simple example. Turn off the ventila-
tion of a room full of people, and introduce some carbon dioxide
into the air in the room, measure the oxygen and carbon dioxide
levels. Then make a forecast about how many minutes later the peo-
ple in the room will feel some kind of headache. What if our fore-
cast turns out to be accurate? Will we have known the Unseen? No.
The Unseen is defined precisely as that which God assigns only
Himself to know. Guessing whether (or roughly where) it will rain
tomorrow is not knowing the Unseen. Knowing in all details where,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
4

--- Sayfa 21 ---
when and how much rain will fall, let’s say, in one, five or ten years’
time—that would be knowing the Unseen. Let alone in one or five
years’ time, can people forecast even how much rain will fall the
next day? Moreover, we sometimes see that what the meteorolo-
gists forecast does not turn out to be accurate; sometimes, even the
opposite of what was forecast takes place. That tells us that they do
not know for certain, but only make calculated guesses.
Besides, it does not need so many gadgets and apparatuses
to know whether the rain, whose symptoms have already
become apparent in the visible world (‘alam al-shahada), will fall
or not. There are many common folks who make accurate guess-
es on the basis of personal experiences acquired over years of
observation, and what they say is not less accurate than what the
meteorologists say. Let me tell you one of my memories, since it
is related to the subject.
Some American scientists came to do research in a village.
They saw a shepherd hastily herding his goats back into the fold
instead of heading out to the pasture which was in the opposite
direction. The scientists were surprised and felt the need to ask
why. The shepherd told them it would rain soon and went on
with his business. The scientists checked their instruments and
saw no chance of a rain. However, it began to rain after a while.
The scientists also took refuge in the fold and asked the shep-
herd how he knew that it would rain. He said, “I have observed
over years and learned that the goats lower their tails between
their legs before the rain comes.” Upon this, some of the scien-
tists despised their expensive gadgets for not being better than
a goat’s tail! Similarly, Bediüzzaman Said Nursi used to say that
due to his rheumatics he felt the rain forty-eight hours in
advance. And even some of my fellow-villagers were making
correct guesses about whether it would rain or snow by observ-
ing the atmospheric symptoms.
Therefore, in the light of hygrometry, hydrostatics, dynamics,
meteorology, climatology and other sciences, by observing atmos-
pheric phenomena—the clouds, their density, humidity, change in
the air pressure, currents, winds, frontal systems, etc.—and then,
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
5

--- Sayfa 22 ---
using highly sophisticated instruments such as radars, computers
and satellites, making forecasts, people are only observing signs
and symptoms which are already there and even then only mak-
ing guesses about the likelihood of rain. Some people seek to
present this guesswork as if it were knowing the Unseen, know-
ing the exact time or amount of the rainfall, and by so doing they
pretend to refute the verses of the Qur’an. Their doing so is noth-
ing but a sign of ignorance and impertinence.
I will mention one of the miraculous sayings of the Prophet,
which is scientifically accepted today. He said: “No year is more
rainy than another.”2 We understand from this hadith that the
same amount of rain falls on the world each and every year.
However, it is unknown to us where and how much it will rain.
That is of the Unseen and cannot be known.
The third thing mentioned in the verse is the second point
asked about in the question. It is God Who knows what is in the
wombs. Some people say that doctors can know what is in the
wombs, boy or girl, by ultrasound and other medical proce-
dures. It would be better if they reflected on the fact that to
know something whose signs and symptoms have already
begun to be experienced in the visible world, has nothing to do
with knowing the Unseen at all.
People also claim to be able to predict the sex of an unborn
embryo because they can find out the set of sex chromosomes,
XX or XY, in the fertilizing sperm. Again, being able to tell the
sex chromosomes of a sperm, whether in or out of the womb,
has nothing to do with knowing the Unseen. In one of his
enlightening sayings, the Prophet said: “If male dominates, it
becomes a boy, or if female dominates, it becomes a girl.”3 (This
hadith has nothing to do with being dominant in male-female
relationships, as wrongly understood by some interpreters in the
past.) The fact is that if the sperm with male set of chromosomes
(XY) first arrives, manages to penetrate the membrane of the
ovum and fertilize it, then it becomes a boy; but if the female set
first arrives and does so, then it becomes a girl. Having some cer-
tain knowledge about the cause and determining agents of a
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
6

--- Sayfa 23 ---
future event, does not justify any claim to knowing the future in
advance; to advance such a claim is sheer self-delusion.
The Qur’an says it is God Who “knows what is in the
wombs”; it uses the word ma here. It does not say it is God Who
knows whether it is a boy or a girl in the womb. The “what”
relates not merely to the sex of the unborn, but also to the ques-
tion of whether it will be born at all, and if so, how long it will
remain in the womb, whether it will be born alive, what its nat-
ural endowments and character will be, its merits or foibles, what
sort of a new individual it will be, prosperous believer or
wretched evil-doer, what role it will play in life, a blessing or a
curse to its parents and society, and the whole entail and outcome
of its existence in this world and the Hereafter. To know all these
is unique and peculiar to God. So what is truly of the Unseen is
here indicated by the inclusive word ma, and it is not just a mat-
ter of gender. What the Qur’an refers to is comprehensive, gen-
eral, and universal. Only knowledge of this level could be right-
ly called knowledge of the Unseen. Claiming the same for any-
thing that humans can and do know is sheer delusion and folly.
To make the point clearer, consider this simple analogy:
Standing on one side of a garden fence, you see an apple
tree. The root and trunk of it are on your side, but its branches
and leaves are bending over onto the other side, so you are
unable to see them. When it is the season to give fruit, you say
that the branches on the other side are full of apples now. When
people check, they see that it really is so. Does this mean that
you knew the Unseen? Or are you just reporting an ordinary
event that everyone can normally know? Certainly the latter.
This is exactly the same as knowing the sex of the unborn baby
in the womb. It is not knowing the Unseen, but merely giving
information about a tree whose roots are in the visible world
and whose branches are bending into the Unseen. To attempt to
invalidate the Qur’anic verse on the basis of such a slight and
false claim to knowledge of the Unseen is absolute foolishness.
The fourth point in the verse is “no one knows what he will
earn tomorrow.” “Earn” here means not only “earn one’s liveli-
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
7

--- Sayfa 24 ---
hood” in a physical and financial sense, but also to reap the con-
sequences (good or ill) of one’s conduct generally. Nobody
knows what tomorrow may bring forth. All physical and spiri-
tual enlightenment and solace are within this earning. What a
scientist adds to his knowledge and experience is also an earn-
ing, and God alone knows when and how much it will be.
Sometimes you read several volumes of book, but you do not
gain a line’s worth of knowledge; on the other hand, sometimes
a single line may yield to you whole books’ worth of knowledge
and flood your sources of inspiration.
However, even if we take the reference in only the financial
sense, it is not possible to know even how much people on fixed
wages will earn tomorrow. For an unexpected gift, or unexpect-
ed expenditure, some accident or natural disaster, may dramati-
cally alter the day’s earnings. I see no point in giving more
examples on this argument and say as the Qur’an says, “no one
knows what it is that he will earn tomorrow.”
The fifth point is “no one knows in what land he is to die.”
God alone knows where, when and how one will die. The
moment at which Azrail, the archangel of eeath, or his helpers
will pronounce “It’s time” is unknown to us. As no one raises any
objection to this, I leave it there.
The five mysteries summed up in the verse are governed by
God’s Knowledge and Law. We know some things in ordinary life,
but this amounts to nothing compared to Divine Knowledge. Our
knowledge is made up from superficial acquaintance with certain
things, signs and symptoms of which are given from the Unseen
to the visible realm. We cannot answer with any precision ques-
tions as to when, how or where. This is particularly and acutely
clear in the case of rainfall, and human life and death. These remain
great mysteries, and full knowledge is with God only.
Verily, God [alone] is All-Knowing, All-Aware.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
8

--- Sayfa 25 ---
1.2.
Do the appointed times of death (ajal) of people who die
en masse in natural disasters come to all of them at the
same time?
. . . And He knows all that is on land and in the sea; and not a
leaf falls but He knows it; and neither is there a grain in the
earth’s deep darkness, nor anything living or dead, but is
recorded in His clear Decree. (An’am 6:59)
D
eath is understood as the cessation and conclusion of
physical existence. The appointed time of death, is the
end of the lifetime of each being that lived its own life
within the conditions and limits given to it uniquely. Each and
every being that came into existence has a beginning, a destined
life, and a destined end.
In the flow of time and existence, the difference between a
beginning and an end is almost impossible to tell. Every thing
that is can be likened to a drop of water which, absorbed by the
earth, becomes invisible. Or it may be likened to a stream which
flows down to a sea and becomes extinct when it mixes with it.
This is the destiny of all beings. They all come into life and pass
away according to this destiny.
All beginnings imply their ends; all comings-in are the first
point of all goings-out. He that has no beginning has no end,
and that One is God, Who is Eternal. It is God Who governs all
beings that come into existence within time and He it is Who
decrees each individual destiny. He in Himself is free of all

--- Sayfa 26 ---
increasing and diminishing, of all compounding and decom-
pounding, and of birth and death. He is the One Who creates
and administers all times, past, present and future. Nothing is
that is not under His sovereignty, disposal and power.
Therefore, it is not correct to attribute any occurrences to nature
alone, without making reference to God, as if to imply that such
occurrences are merely natural, that they just happen without
Divine Decree. Things are allowed the right to exist only by an
Eternal Will and All-Mighty Decree, together with the assign-
ment to each of a particular task or service. All creatures, ani-
mate or inanimate, come into existence only to serve as mirrors
which display the might, power, knowledge and beauty of the
One Creator; then, after the appointed time, they are dismissed
from the service and give way to newcomers.
All births and deaths work within this framework in order
to take their part in this display and to be tested by means there-
of. Coming into existence out of nothing indicates the existence
of an Unseen Being, and completion of the service and, after a
time, dismissal from it, indicate the eternity and the immortali-
ty of that Eternal Being Who is not constrained by past or
future. Our seeing, hearing and knowing lead the mind to the
One Who sees, hears and know all our actions. Our completion
of service and thereafter departing this world likewise lead the
mind to the Unseen One Who, in contrast, neither enters the
creation as we do, nor departs it never to return as we do: He
who created death and life, that He may try which of you is best in
deed (Mulk 67:2).
It is of the utmost importance to understand the secret of
coming into and being tested in this world and, therefore, to be
ready to depart from it at any time.
Let us now return to the question—do the appointed times
of death of people who died en masse in natural disasters come
to all of them at the same time?
Yes, for those who died so, their appointed time of deaths did
come at the same moment. There is no impediment to such an
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
10

--- Sayfa 27 ---
event. The Supreme Being Who possesses and governs the whole
creation, Who holds everything under His sovereignty, and Who
created everything from the smallest atoms to the largest celestial
systems, each with its own destiny, can also destroy each or any
number or all of them in an instant. It does not make any differ-
ence whether the existent things or beings are in different places,
or are of different classes, or have different properties—nor, in
respect of His Will, is their number of any significance.
It is possible to say many things to give some notion of the
power of the Creator, in order to enable some grasp of what
“All-Mighty” means, but it is very difficult to give an exact idea
or analogy for it.
Every creature needs energy which in its visible form is
light. Every creature depends in some way on the sun to exist
and does so in harmony with every other and with the best
result. The plant forms achieve their colorful diversity and
splendor with the sunlight, and flourish and sink back with sun-
rise and sunset. Similarly, they all thrive in the spring, bloom in
the summer, and fade away in the autumn, enjoying the same
destiny harmoniously. Everything comes into existence and its
existence is sustained within an all-encompassing, omniscient
and omnipotent Will and Plan. Nothing can exist outside of this
Divine Decree: . . . And He knows all that is on land and in the
sea; and not a leaf falls but He knows it; and neither is there a grain
in the earth’s deep darkness, nor anything living or dead, but is
recorded in His clear Decree (An’am 6:59).
If the coming to life, maturing, bearing fruit and dying of
the seeds and grains of plant-forms are events so solemnly
recorded and stored, can humankind, the most perfect being, be
left to live and die, as it were, unattended, unnoticed? The
Creator and Owner of all earthly and heavenly realms, Whose
hearing and seeing of one thing does not prevent His hearing
and seeing of every other thing, will surely attach importance to
the deeds and manners of humankind, who is the core of the
universe and created in the best stature. The Supreme Being will
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
11

--- Sayfa 28 ---
surely bestow upon humankind, the index of the whole universe,
the blessings He bestowed upon the whole creation. He will
undoubtedly receive humanity into His Presence and so honor
him with a special invitation and unique favor.
This invitation may summon people individually or en
masse, sometimes in bed, sometimes on a battlefield, and some-
times by means of an accident or disaster. The summons may
come at the same moment and in the same way to all people liv-
ing in one particular place or to different people living in differ-
ent places and in different ways. Concerning the All-Mighty’s
dealing with His servants, conditions of time or place or num-
bers have no relevance. For One Who creates and sends people
into this world, Who sustains and cherishes all, Who keeps peo-
ple in this world as long as He wills and releases them after the
completion of their services, it is an easy matter whether He
takes souls singly or en masse. The latter is no more odd or dif-
ficult to understand than that a single word from an army com-
mander can, at a moment pre-arranged by the commander, dis-
miss a single soldier or the whole army from active service.
Moreover, there is not only one angel commissioned to take
the souls of people but many. With the authority, permission and
will of their Creator, many angels can meet people and carry out
their duties following the Divine Records given to them. In
doing so, they approach people, and appear and act to them, in
different ways and manners. If particular accidents or disasters
are carefully looked at, it will easily be seen that there is indeed a
preordination in events, that there is one and only one appointed
time of death, at the same instant, for all those who perished in
the particular event. One can find many examples of this report-
ed in the media each day and in books. For example, in earth-
quakes which turned whole towns upside down, in which adults
were unable to save themselves with every sort of means avail-
able, babies were dug out of the rubble after many days without
any mark or injury; again, when many passengers well able to
swim drowned after their vehicles skidded into rivers, babies
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
12

--- Sayfa 29 ---
were found alive, floating on the water; in the same way, there
are well-known reports of children found safe and sound thrown
meters away from where the plane in which they were traveling
crashed and exploded. We could give many such examples; the
point is that each and every such incident, every such death or
survival, does not just happen. All events take place in accordance
with the Eternal Will and All-Mighty Decree of the All-Seeing,
All-Hearing and All-Encompassing Creator.
Every being that enters existence, whether alone or en masse
with others, and then lives until the time for its death appointed
in the Record, is commissioned to comprehend the secrets of its
primordial nature (fitra), to explore the unseen beauties beyond
nature, to become a mirror and interpreter to the Creator of the
whole. And it may be dismissed from this service, as it entered
into it, either singly or en masse. Such fore-knowing and register-
ing of life, and putting an end to it, is very easy for the Creator.
Moreover, God reveals that around each human being there are
many angels whose commission is to take souls—in addition to
the many other angels with different commissions.
One may ask: Why do some innocent people die in disas-
ters along with others who may have deserved such a fate? Such
a question arises from false reasoning and an error in belief. If
life were only the life in this world, if this world were the first
and the last resort of life, that question might be considered a
quite sensible and reasonable one. But if this world is a prepar-
ing ground and ante-chamber, and the world to come is the fruit
and harvest of this one, and a place of rest and felicity, free of
toil and hardship, then the question is an aimless one. Given the
reality of the life to come, it is not unnatural that good and bad,
or righteous and sinner, die together at the same instant in this
world. On the contrary, it is quite reasonable and logical for it
to be so. For each individual will be resurrected and give an
account for what each did, and be chastised or rewarded accord-
ing to intentions and deeds.
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
13

--- Sayfa 30 ---
In sum, death and its time mark the end of life and service
in this world. That period of life and its end conform to a pre-
ordained plan which, taking human free will into account, is
written and stored in the Record. And the Record comes into
force whenever its time is due, according to the will and com-
mand of the All-Hearing and All-Seeing. There is no difference
of principle between whether death comes to a person separate-
ly or en masse with others.
I suppose that, as in many religious questions, the lack of
understanding of the true, limitless knowledge, power and will
of the Creator is one of the major reasons for error and doubt.
Another reason is a mistaken evaluation of things and events. If,
in the face of things and events, one does not eliminate from
one’s thoughts the mistaken notion of “coincidence” or “nature,”
if one does not devote oneself to contemplation and religious life
and distance oneself from worldly concerns, the inner life will be
full of unsound and weak belief and become a battleground for
satanic misgivings and anxiety.
While the hearts of people are impoverished and unable to
sustain themselves, constant exposure to doubts and misgivings
of this nature is profoundly damaging to their spiritual being. In
the face of such a situation, one should marvel that the young pre-
serve their faith at all, rather than that they are deviated from it.
It may be claimed that we give too much attention to such
issues which may seem, to some people, of little immediate sig-
nificance in this time. But we cannot agree: any issue related to
faith is always of the highest importance and worthy of the most
serious effort of reflection and study.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
14

--- Sayfa 31 ---
1.3.
Although Azrail is one, how does he capture the souls of
many people who die at the same instant?
By the angels who tear out (the souls of the wicked). By those
who gently draw out (the souls of the blessed). And by those
who glide along (on errands of mercy). (Nazi’at 79:1-3)
W
ith this question, we again face a subject which, if we
tackle it by making human analogies, will mislead
us. It is a mistake to liken an angel to a human being,
just as it is a mistake to seek the mind in the brain, or the emo-
tions in the heart, or the soul in the body, or—in the language
of philosophy—to seek the noumenal in the phenomenal. It
would be improper to attempt this question without first point-
ing out that mistake in thinking and terminology which (prob-
ably) is what gives rise to it and other questions like it.
Angels are, as regards their creation and essence, the realm
they exist in, and their responsibilities and duties, creatures wholly
different from all others. Any argument or judgment made with-
out taking full account of that difference is bound to go wrong.
The nature of angels should therefore be approached through con-
sideration of their different creation and essence, their different
realm of existence, and their different responsibilities and duties.
Malak (angel) in Arabic relates to malk which has the mean-
ing power, or to mal’ak which has the meaning messenger. The
shared point of reference is to one most powerful or to the pow-

--- Sayfa 32 ---
er itself or to one who, as messenger, holds and carries that pow-
er: thus, an angel comes to mean one who, as messenger, holds
and carries the divine commands. Such an elevated rank belongs
to all angels as such. For the angel commissioned to convey the
Divine Message to humankind, it is necessary to have the most
elevated rank and the most superior attributes of all. Angels are
commissioned to oversee all kinds of events—from supervising
birth, life, and death to carrying the Throne (arsh) and observing
the Divine Actions in wonder, admiration and praise. All so-
called natural laws, from attraction and repulsion between mass-
es to the principles that regulate electrons spinning around the
nucleus, and the putting into effect of these laws, and all changes
and transformations, compositions and decompositions, exist
under the administration of angels, who are the medium of the
messengership and power. Angels are so related to things and
events that neither a drop of rain nor a clap of thunder can ever
be conceived without them. The laws operating in the universe
(shari’at al-fitriyya) are the manifestation of the limitless power
of the Creator, the All-Mighty, the Absolute Sovereign, on angels
according to their skills and capacities. Similarly, all legislative
(tashri’i) commands to humankind from the attributes of kalam
are conveyed by angels. Since humanity is the focus of all great
and majestic manifestations of the Creator, the Divine inspiration
and revelation that come to humanity to guide and regulate his
actions are nothing other than the manifestations of God to
angels. In this respect, it is ignorance and an error in thinking to
liken to human beings, the angelic beings who are a medium or
a means between God and His servants, who are charged with
supervising or administering all things from atoms to nebulae in
dependence on the power of the All-Mighty. It is likewise a mis-
judgment and an error to consider restrictions by which human
existence is bound as applicable also to angels. If the angels had
a physical form like that of humankind and were subject to decay
and decomposition, if they too were aged and eroded by time,
we might use the same criteria for both. However, there is a
world of difference which makes such a comparison impossible.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
16

--- Sayfa 33 ---
As regards their creation and nature, the angels are different
from humankind. The powers and responsibilities of angels are
not bounded by space and time. The purity, light (nur) and
splendor in their essence make them more powerful, influential,
quick and active. They can be in touch with many souls, be seen
by many eyes, and manifest their oneness in plural forms, at any
instant of time or space, even though they are one. In a hadith
narrated by ‘Aisha, Prophet Muhammad said: “The angels were
created out of light (nur).”4 That is why, they are given and thus
manifest all the attributes of light.
Luminous things, like the sun, though single, are reflected
by and so seen in each transparent object; they can reach and be
seen by each and every eye. Similarly, the angels, who are creat-
ed out of light, can meet and be reflected in many souls; and
they can deal with thousands of them at an instant. The angels,
whose essence is latif (fine, subtle), are very different from what
has material form and is therefore heavy and dense. The angels
can take different shapes and forms; also, they can be seen in dif-
ferent shapes and forms at the same instant. Tamassul, the souls’
or angels’ assuming visible forms, has long been known among
religious people, and there are many examples of it. It is even
now not uncommon to hear claims (something, alas, of a pas-
time among the so-called “idle rich”) of some individual’s “spir-
it” or “double” being in a place separate and distant from where
the body is and able to produce material effects. Whatever the
truth of such reports and claims, they indicate that all fine
beings like souls, in comparison to physical beings, are more
capable, quick and active. Angels are far more capable, quick
and active than souls, which is another indication that angels
operate beyond the bounds of physical nature.
As we said, tamassul of souls and angels is a phenomenon
that has long been known and reported. The Prophets in the
first place and then the saints have recounted their experiences,
and many ordinary people around them witnessed such inci-
dents. The coming and appearance of the archangel Gabriel, in
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
17

--- Sayfa 34 ---
different guises and personalities, according to the reasons and
missions he was given, such as being a messenger while convey-
ing the Revelations and being a warrior during battles, are good
examples of tamassul: Gabriel appeared in the form of Dihya5;
as another angel, whose name we do not know, fought till
evening in front of the Prophet as Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr6; many
angels took part in the battle of Badr in the guise of Zubayr ibn
Awwam to boost the morale of the Muslims.7
There are many incidents which indicate that some saints
are in touch with the heroes of the Unseen, among them former
saints and Companions of the Prophet. Also, their appearance
to ordinary people in dreams and trance-like states supports the
argument. A number of godly men and women have testified
that, in their dreams, particular noble souls always keep in touch
with them, and give them guidance. To be sure, there will be
people who refer all such experiences to the “subconscious” and
so make the whole subject incomprehensible. Alas for their
ignorance and arrogance!
To sum up what we have said so far: just as all beings are
seen reflected in a mirror, so angels are seen in everything that
can be a mirror to them, but with this difference that angels are
not merely a picture or image, as a reflection in a mirror is, but
are as themselves, with all their powers and faculties. Like a beam
of light, angels can reach and be in various places at the same
time and carry out their duties, the distance of the place or the
number of people concerned are of no relevance and can present
no hindrance. The sun is single but is reflected, seen, and its
effects are felt, everywhere on every object according to the
object’s qualities. Similarly, the angels, being created of light, can
be seen, breathe life into human beings or recapture their souls
or carry out any other of their duties everywhere at any time.
In reality it is, of course, God who gives and takes life. Azrail
is only a medium and means, commissioned to superintend the
giving of life and recapturing of souls and to praise the All-Mighty
in His Divine Actions. As God is everywhere at every instant and
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
18

--- Sayfa 35 ---
performs innumerable actions beyond the power of our imagina-
tions to conceive, it is not difficult to accept that He can create,
give and take innumerable lives all in a single instant. Such omnis-
cience and omnipotence can undoubtedly see, administer and
govern the deeds, and give and take the lives, of as many people
as there may be particles in the whole universe, at the same
instant, though some unfortunate atheists may refuse to believe.
Whether God or Azrail captures the souls, each soul whose
time of death has come turns to God at its last moment and then
is taken. We can make this more comprehensible by an analogy.
Let us suppose that there are thousands of radio-like receivers
operating on the same frequency. If any transmitter sends signals
on that frequency, they will be heard on all the receivers. In the
same way, all beings live in dependence for everything on the All-
Mighty, All-Generous Creator, and when they ask for anything
from Him, they do so through their poverty, that is, through
their needs, their helpless impotence. And when they reach the
last minute of their life and turn to God by, as it were, switching
on to their life-ending frequency, they begin to perceive the sig-
nals of death. If a weak, powerless human being can make con-
tact with systems hundreds of miles away simply by pressing a
button, why cannot the All-Mighty Creator, who is free from all
our weakness, impotence and deficiencies, make contact with
souls, each of which is, in a sense, a living machine? Why cannot
He make them all start or stop functioning in an instant?
Summary
1. It is God who gives and takes life. Azrail is only an agent
who is commissioned to oversee and administer and praise the
work of God.
2. While carrying out his task, Azrail acts only with the per-
mission and approval of God.
3. As a great number of angels administer tasks in the uni-
verse as representatives of the Divine Authority, Power and Will,
there are many angels that can help Azrail with his work. They
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
19

--- Sayfa 36 ---
are even grouped into classes according to their tasks. Some of
them take the lives of people without causing them any distress
or hurt—they carry out their task peacefully. After souls have
been recaptured, other angels at once take the souls before the
Divine Presence, and so on. The Qur’an refers to all of them: By
the angels who tear out (the souls of the wicked). By those who gently
draw out (the souls of the blessed). And by those who glide along (on
errands of mercy) (Nazi’at 79:1-3).
Thus there are different angels dispatched according to the
level of the people they will deal with. They are all under the
supervision of Azrail, and God commissions them according to
whether the individuals concerned were good or wicked.
In conclusion, we can say that the understanding which
gives rise to such questions begins in an error of thinking in that
it mistakenly likens angels to human beings. We have pointed out
that angels are quite different from beings with physical form;
not only in their essence and creation but also in their tasks, ser-
vanthood and responsibilities, angels are quite different from
other creatures. Angels can assume different forms (tamassul), be
in many places, and do many things, as human beings’ souls can.
What is popularly read about in our day in connection with spir-
it-mediums, necromancy, and other such efforts to communicate
with the Unseen, are in their way evidence of metaphysical ele-
ments operating in the physical universe. Angels, as beings far
superior to these elements, can function and carry out their mis-
sions in a way far superior to all other beings. And certainly, at
the time of death, when people share the same “frequency” with
the angels, an angel can deal with thousands of people at the
same instant. Finally, we must remember that the angel for death
is not alone; rather, there are innumerable angels appointed for
taking souls, and when we consider that there is an angel for each
individual death, no further point remains to raise the kind of
doubts expressed in the question.
God knows best.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
20

--- Sayfa 37 ---
1.4.
What is the wisdom in fasting?
T
he hawk’s swooping contributes to the sparrow’s
alertness and agility. Although rain, electricity, or fire
sometimes harms people, no one curses them. Fasting
may be difficult, but it provides the body with energy, activity,
and resistance. A child’s immune system usually gains strength
through illness. Gymnastics are not easy, but they are almost
essential to bodily health and strength. People’s spirits are
refined through worship and meditation as well as through ill-
ness, suffering, and hardship. These allow them to acquire
Paradise, for God gives a large reward for a little sacrifice.
Hardships and sufferings promote people to higher spiritual
degrees, and will be returned manifold in the other world. This
is why all Messengers experienced the most grievous hardships
and sufferings.
Hardship, suffering, and calamity cause believers’ sins to be
forgiven, warn them away from sins and the seductions of Satan
and the carnal self, help them appreciate God’s blessings, and
open the way to gratitude. Also, they urge the rich and healthy
to be concerned about the ill and the poor and to help them.
Those who have never suffered cannot understand the condition
of those who are hungry, sick, or stricken with a calamity. In
addition, these afflictions may help establish closer relations
between different social sectors.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
The role of intention in fasting
Intention has a prominent place in our actions, for God’s
Messenger told us that our actions are judged according to our
intentions. Intention is the spirit of our actions, for without it
there is no reward. If you remain hungry and thirsty from day-
break to sunset without intending to fast, God does not consid-
er it a fast. If you fast without intending to obtain God’s good
pleasure, you receive no reward. So whatever one intends, one
gets the reward thereof. Those who have a firm belief in God,
the other pillars of faith, and the intention to believe in them
will be rewarded with eternal felicity in Paradise. But those who
are determined not to believe, who have removed the inborn
tendency to believe from their hearts, will be victims of their
eternal determination and deserve eternal punishment. As for
those with deeply ingrained unbelief and who have lost the
capacity to believe, we read in the Qur’an: As for the unbelievers,
it is the same whether you warn them or warn them not. They will
not believe. God has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing,
and on their eyes there is a covering (Baqara 2:6-7).
Favoring the Heart as Opposed to the Flesh
Human life is a composite of two distinct powers: the spirit and
the flesh. Although they sometimes act in harmony, conflict is
more usual—conflict in which one defeats the other. If bodily
lusts are indulged, the spirit grows more powerless as it becomes
more obedient to those lusts. If one can control the desires of the
flesh, place the heart (the seat of spiritual intellect) over reason,
and oppose bodily lusts, he or she acquires eternity.
Compared with previous centuries, people may well be
wealthier and enjoy more convenience and comfort. However,
they are trapped in greed, infatuation, addiction, need, and fanta-
sy much more than ever before. The more they gratify their animal
appetites, the more crazed they become to gratify those appetites;
the more they drink, the thirstier they get; the more they eat, the
hungrier they get. They enter into evil speculations to feed their
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
22

--- Sayfa 39 ---
greed to earn still more, and sell their spirits to Satan for the most
banal advantages. And so they break with true human values a lit-
tle more each day.
To sacrifice one’s enjoyment of worldly pleasures has the
same significance for human progress as roots have for a tree’s
growth. Just as a tree grows sound and strong in direct relation
to its roots’ soundness and strength, people grow to perfection
whose striving to free themselves from selfishness so that they
can live for others.
Spiritual practices during Ramadan
Muhasaba (Self-Criticism or Self-Interrogation)
Self-criticism may be described as seeking and discovering one’s
inner and spiritual depth, and exerting the necessary spiritual and
intellectual effort to acquire true human values and to develop
the sentiments that encourage and nourish them. This is how
one distinguishes between good and bad, beneficial and harmful,
and how one maintains an upright heart. Furthermore, it enables
a believer to evaluate the present and prepare for the future.
Again, self-criticism enables a believer to make amends for past
mistakes and be absolved in the sight of God, for it provides a
constant realization of self-renewal in one’s inner world. Such a
condition enables one to achieve a steady relationship with God,
for this relationship depends on a believer’s ability to live a spir-
itual life and remain aware of what takes place in his or her inner
world. Success results in the preservation of one’s celestial nature
as a true human being, as well as the continual regeneration of
one’s inner senses and feelings.
Tafakkur (Reflection)
Reflection is a vital step in becoming aware of what is going on
around us and of drawing conclusions from it. It is a golden key
to open the door of experience, a seedbed where the trees of truth
are planted, and the opening of the pupil of the heart’s eye. Due
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
23

--- Sayfa 40 ---
to this, the greatest representative of humanity, the foremost in
reflection and all other virtues states: “No act of worship is as
meritorious as reflection. So reflect on God’s bounties and the
works of His Power, but do not try to reflect on His Essence, for
you will never be able to do that.”8 By these words, in addition
to pointing out the merit of reflection, the glory of humankind
determines the limits of reflection and reminds us of our limits.
Shukr (Thankfulness)
True thankfulness in one’s heart is manifested through the con-
viction and acknowledgment that all bounties are from God,
and then ordering one’s life accordingly. One can thank God
verbally and through one’s daily life only if personally con-
vinced, and if one willingly acknowledges that his or her exis-
tence, life, body, physical appearance, and all abilities and
accomplishments are from God, as are all of the bounties
obtained and consumed. This is stated in: Do you not see that God
has made serviceable unto you whatsoever is in the skies and whatso-
ever is in the earth, and has loaded you with His bounties seen or
unseen? (Luqman 31:20), and: He gives you of all that you ask
Him; and if you reckon the bounties of God, you can never count
them (Ibrahim 14:34).
Of course, one should try to increase in all virtues during
Ramadan, as this is the best time of year to do so.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
24

--- Sayfa 41 ---
1.5.
Why does the Qur’an mention a person such as Abu
Lahab who was an inveterate enemy of Islam? What is
the wisdom in doing so? How does it befit the dignity and
purport of the Divine Book?
A
bu Lahab was one of the uncles of Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him. His real name was
‘Abd al-Uzza. He was popularly called Abu Lahab (lit-
erally, “the father of flame”) on account of his ruddy complex-
ion and hot, fiery temper. He was one of the most inveterate
enemies of early Islam. His hostility came from his inborn arro-
gance, pride in his great wealth and children, and a dislike of the
messages the Prophet conveyed. Abu Lahab’s wife, Umm Jamil,
was equally vehement in her spite and cruelty against the Prophet
and his followers. Her hatred was so intense that, in order to
cause the Prophet bodily injury, she would often make up bun-
dles of thorns with ropes of twisted palm fiber and, under the
cover of darkness, strew them around his house and on the paths
he was expected to take. Also, she used her considerable wealth
and great eloquence in persistently slandering the Prophet and
his message.
At that early time of Islam, the Prophet called the people to
come together and listen to his preaching and warning. When
they had assembled, he asked them, “If I were to inform you
that enemy warriors are about to fall upon you from behind that
hill, would you believe me?” They answered, “Yes, we would.”

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Thereupon he said, “Behold, then, I am here to warn you of the
coming of the Last Hour.” At that, Abu Lahab flared up and
cursed the Prophet, saying, “Did you summon us here just for
this? May you perish!” Shortly after that incident the chapter
Masad (111th chapter, also called Tabbat) was revealed, which
derives its name from its last word, masad (the twisted strands).
It is the sixth in the order of revelation and relates to the bitter
hostility always shown to the Prophet’s message by Abu Lahab.
Perish the hands of the father of flame! Perish he! No profit to
him from all his wealth, and all his gains! Burnt soon will he be
in a fire of blazing flame. His wife shall carry the (kindling)
wood as fuel; A twisted rope of palm-leaf fiber round her neck.
(Masad 111)
Abu Lahab and his wife used their will and wealth in the
wrong way. Though they lived very close to the Prophet, they
never tried to understand his message. While the Prophet and
the Muslims were marching toward the Ka‘ba, they scattered
thorns and set up fires to prevent their progress. They spent
their life in unrelenting rage and hatred, cruel plots and perse-
cutions; their punishment was to be the same kind as what they
had relentlessly inflicted on Muslims.
Abu Lahab was unable to take part in the Battle of Badr. He
was sitting in a large tent near the Ka‘ba when the news of the
battle was brought to him. When he was told how “men in white
with turbans on piebald horses between heaven and earth” had
helped the Muslims and fought against the unbelievers, he was
greatly shaken. Umm al-Fadl, ‘Abbas’ wife, and Abu Rafi’,
‘Abbas’ slave, were among those who listened to the same news
in the corner of the tent. They were both Muslims who had kept
their Islam secret from all but a few. But Abu Rafi’ could not
contain himself for joy at the news of the Prophet’s victory. On
hearing of “the turbaned men in white, between heaven and
earth,” he exclaimed, “By God, those were the angels!” An
impulse of maddening rage seized Abu Lahab who struck Abu
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
26

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Rafi’ in the face, bore him to the ground, knelt over him and
struck him repeatedly. Then Umm al-Fadl took up a wooden
pole used to reinforce the tent posts, and brought it down with
all her strength on Abu Lahab’s head, heavily wounding him.
“Will you treat him as of no account, now that his master is away
and cannot protect him?” she cried. Since she was his sister-in-
law, Abu Lahab did not say anything to her and went home
directly. His wound did not heal, but putrefied. As a result of this
blow or for other reasons, he was infected with a disease called
adasa (malignant measles, black measles), at that time considered
to be more deadly than plague. His wealth, his position, or his
children were of no avail. Even his own wife and the children, of
whom he had always boasted, abandoned him. His whole body
was covered with festering pustules. After writhing in pain for a
week, he died with no one to attend his deathbed. No one came
to remove his dead body from the house until, eventually, his
embarrassed relatives hired some Bedouins from the desert, and
had them take the rotten corpse out, throw it to a pit and heap
some stones on it.
Not only did Abu Lahab not benefit from the Prophet, in
spite of his kinship with him, he became his most inveterate
enemy. Therefore, a terrible end and punishment in both this
world and the next were his due. His hands, the instruments of
his action, perished, and he perished himself. His words, power
and influence proved futile.
Umm Jamil came from the noble and wealthy family of Banu
Umayyad. She never held back from any of the cruel and unre-
lenting persecutions inflicted upon the Prophet and the Muslims;
rather, she took a deep, even malicious, pleasure in them. She col-
lected and carried thorns, scrub and pieces of wood to scatter and
make fire on the ways the Prophet was likely to take. “Carrying
fire wood” may also be a metaphor for “carrying tales” between
people to embroil them, another of her vices. Though excessively
fond of ostentatious luxury and of using servants, her rage against
the Prophet and Islam was such that she disregarded her pride in
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
27

--- Sayfa 44 ---
her high rank and stooped to work that, in those days, was done
by only slaves and servants. Instead of necklaces and jewelry, she
took delight in putting the rope of twisted palm fiber around her
neck with which she carried thorns and wood on her back to use
against the Prophet. Her punishment in the Hereafter would be
of the same kind as what she relentlessly inflicted on Muslims in
this world. The Qur’an implies as such.
Abu Lahab was a particularly determined, stubborn person.
Abu Jahl, who knew this side of Abu Lahab’s character, would
say, “Never enrage him. If he should join the other side [i.e. the
Muslims], no one will ever be able to turn him back.”
Unfortunately, Abu Lahab used this strength of determination
in enmity against the Prophet. He and his wife both revered the
idols at the Ka‘ba. They never gave a thought to the Prophet’s
teaching, even though he was a near relative, one raised in their
immediate neighborhood and known to everyone (including
themselves) for steadiness of character, impeccable honesty, and
trustworthiness. While they had not the least idea that their kins-
man and neighbor was chosen by God as His Last Messenger to
humankind, they certainly knew no wrong of him, nor had they
suffered any harm at his hands. Nevertheless, they determined,
in the most resolute and spiteful way, to do him injury and harm
to the extent of their influence and power.
Abu Jahl, a close ally and associate of Abu Lahab, organized
the three-year economic and social boycott against the Muslims
in Makka. The boycott forbade any trade or any contract of
marriage between the Muslims and idolaters. Some of the eld-
erly and the very young among the Muslims died as a result of
the hardships, physical and mental, imposed upon them. Alas,
their sufferings did not stir the least bit of sadness or compas-
sion in Abu Lahab.
The Prophet’s wife, Khadija (umm al-mu’minun—mother of
believers), died at that time. In the same year, later known as the
“year of sadness,” died another uncle of the Prophet, Abu Talib,
beloved by him, and who was the Muslims’ most significant and
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
28

--- Sayfa 45 ---
reliable protector. But for the authority and influence of Abu
Talib, the idolaters in Makka would not have hesitated to kill the
Messenger outright. However, though he protected the Muslims
as kinsfolk, as best he could, Abu Talib himself did not embrace
Islam. He was one of those whom the Prophet particularly
desired should believe. When Abu Talib was on his deathbed, the
Messenger again invited him to belief, but idolaters like Abu Jahl
and Abu Lahab surrounded him so as to prevent his embracing
Islam. The Prophet was deeply grieved that Abu Talib had passed
away in unbelief.
On the day of the conquest of Makka, Abu Bakr, the clos-
est Companion of the Prophet, took his aged father who had
then accepted Islam to God’s Messenger. As he did so, Abu Bakr
sobbed bitterly. Later, he explained:
O Messenger of God, I desired very much that my father should
believe, and now he has believed. But I desired the belief of Abu
Talib even more than that because you desired it. That is why I
am weeping.
Whereas Abu Talib did everything he could to protect the
Prophet, Abu Talib’s brother, Abu Lahab encouraged and took
part in all sorts of cruelties against the Prophet and the Muslims.
When the Prophet went from clan to clan inviting the people
to the principle that all human beings are equal before God and
will be judged by Him on their merits alone, one man, with red
beard and complexion would follow him like a shadow and seek to
undermine the impression he made on audiences. Whereas people
from the farthest clans and tribes came to affirm some form of kin-
ship or other with the Prophet, Abu Lahab considered getting far
away from him as almost a duty, an obligation. It is of one so will-
fully blind that he refused even the light of the sun rising around
him, that the Qur’an declared, Perish the hands of Abu Lahab!
There are several verses in the Qur’an that allude directly or
indirectly to people who did whatever they could to abuse and
persecute the Prophet, to run down his doctrine, and to injure
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
29

--- Sayfa 46 ---
those who believed in him. One of these inveterate enemies was
Walid ibn Mughira, father of Khalid soon to become Islam’s first
great military commander. Walid was pondering ways to slander
the Prophet and to undermine the wonderful influence that the
Qur’anic verses had on their listeners. He hesitated over which
accusation to use, whether “poet” or “magician” or “soothsayer.”
Eventually he determined in favor of saying “magic” of the Qur’an
and “magician” of the Prophet. To this incident, the Qur’an refers
in the verse:
. . . And Woe to him! How he determined! . . . (Muddathir
74:19)
Other unbelievers are reproached and threatened in other
verses. That being so, there is no reason why Abu Lahab should
have been excepted. Indeed, if Abu Lahab had not been reproached
whereas Walid ibn Mughira had been, some people are bound to
have wondered if Abu Lahab was spared just because of his
familial relationship to the Prophet. But the Qur’an did not give
any grounds for such a notion; it included Abu Lahab in the
same category as all the idolatrous unbelievers.
The chapter naming Abu Lahab was revealed in Makka, well
before the battle of Badr. The Qur’an said that Abu Lahab and his
wife would die as unbelievers, and so it happened just a week after
Badr. Before the fighting at Badr, the Prophet walked around the
battlefield and pointed to particular locations, saying, “Abu Jahl
will be killed here, Utba here, Shayba here, Walid here,”9 and so
on. After the battle the Companions found the corpses where it
had been predicted they would be. This served to boost the morale
of the believers at a time when they were few and their enemies
too many. In a similar way the prediction and the fact of Abu
Lahab’s death served to increase the believers’ morale and became
a caution, a stern forewarning, to all.
Sometimes an understanding or self-knowledge gained through
a slight misfortune or calamity can lead to a spiritual attainment
such that (if the veil of the Unseen is lifted and one sees what he
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
30

--- Sayfa 47 ---
has gained) one would ask for the misfortune and calamity to
recur, because in comparison to what is gained ultimately, the mis-
fortune or calamity amount to very little. On the other hand,
there are people whose humanity is so destroyed, who have
doomed themselves to losing it perpetually, that they cannot gain
anything from misfortunes. Whether the Qur’an does or does not
use dire, threatening language about them will not affect in the
slightest degree the course or consequences of their actions, or
their ends. Those people determined and prepared their own irre-
versible end. The Qur’an’s specific mentioning of Abu Lahab and
his wife strike some readers as inappropriate to the dignity of a
Divine scripture. But, over the centuries the verses have encour-
aged millions of people to reflect upon their intentions and
actions, to seek to avoid falling into the condition of Abu Lahab
and his wife, to encourage each other on the path of right actions.
Thus, there is much wisdom in the naming such in these verses;
psychologically and pedagogically it has proved to be useful and
necessary for the benefit of the believers.
At the same time the chapter produced doubts and misgivings
on the part of the unbelievers. By turning their fixed, secure unbe-
lief into doubts and misgivings, it made coming to Islam easier for
them. The affirmation of faith, too long imprisoned in their con-
sciousness, was able to penetrate into their hearts and minds.
Many people forsook their once resolute unbelief and became
Muslim, and started to guide, instruct and enlighten others.
In short, specifically mentioning a couple who were notori-
ous for their determined enduring hatred of Islam, expounding
the Divine wrath that persistent hatred incurs and specifically
indicating the outcome for that couple, is not an example of a
failure of substance or style. On the contrary, it is evidence of
and another example of the profundity and marvelous variety of
the Qur’an’s methods and meanings. It is like throwing a small
stone into an ocean and producing an endless sequence of waves
all over that ocean. That sequence of waves has been continual-
ly causing the hearts of millions of people to be moved. The
Wisdom in the Message of the Qur’an
31

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Qur’an was revealed in such a lofty style that by informing of an
individual’s death in unbelief in a way that balances attraction
and repulsion, the chapter became a means for millions of peo-
ple to attain guidance. Its meaning is much wider than its refer-
ence in the first instance to two specific individuals. This befits
and conforms to the eloquence, clarity and the purport of the
Qur’an, which is the very wisdom and appropriateness.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
32

--- Sayfa 49 ---
CHAPTER 2
Ethics and Spirituality

--- Sayfa 51 ---
2.1.
What is ulfa (familiarity)? And what are its negative effects?
T
he word ulfa means familiar intercourse, familiarity,
friendship. But what is meant in the question has a far
broader and more comprehensive meaning than the
bare translation of the word conveys.
Humanity’s relationship to things and events, the meanings
and conclusions drawn by them from such relationship, the
actions and reactions that are aroused by these conclusions with-
in their conscience, and the changes in their actions and atti-
tudes as a result of all these, are a chain of matters that keep their
souls alert, active, sensitive and vigorous.
The admiration humanity feel for the splendor and attrac-
tion of the creation, the curiosity and wonder they feel about
the precise operation and order of the universe, the gains they
make from the things they discover, the urge to acquire more
and more, and the intellectual capacity and the organized way of
their thinking, lead them to be mentally and spiritually sensitive,
alert, active for and preoccupied with all events.
By contrast, if they do not perceive the exciting beauties and
varieties of things and events around them, but go on living
unaware of the harmonious combinations working in the uni-
verse, inattentive and indifferent to everything around them; if
they do not seek for the cause and effect and wisdom behind all
things and events; and also, if they do not discover their inner

--- Sayfa 52 ---
world and soul—this shows insensitivity, negligence and igno-
rance, and spiritual enervation. Neither the mysterious book of
the universe nor the opening out before their gaze of its signs,
leaf by leaf, teaches him anything. And how many signs in the
heavens and the earth do they pass by? Yet they turn (their faces)
away from them! (Yusuf 12:105). In spite of exposure to falls and
rises, to such convincing illustrations in nature and history, how
few people really benefit from them!
For those who are aware of what is going on around them,
their curiosity and wonder at the creation are like setting forth
on an endless sea, in each stage of which they acquire the gold-
en keys to the mysterious palaces of the universe. As they
advance with pure heart, elevated feelings, composed mind and
soul ready to receive inspirations, and as they feed their soul
with what they gather from the whole creation, their intellectu-
al world turns to a garden of Paradise and yields its fruits.
Those who do not acquire such an understanding cannot
take themselves out of the circle of familiarity and keep com-
plaining about the monotony of things and events. According
to such people, everything is chaos, dark and meaningless. . . .
Even if they see all the signs, they will not believe in them. . . (A’raf
7:146). Their minds are chained, their souls yoked, and their
hearts are sealed, so they understand not (there are many verses in
the Qur’an ending this way). Such people cannot be expected to
do any good or produce anything useful. It is impossible to
hope for something from them in this mood.
There is another sort of familiarity which happens after one
has fully known and realized something or supposed that one
has, though, in reality, one has not. This is what the question was
getting at. After having known, believed, acquired or experi-
enced a little, the changing conditions and the renewed beauties
should result in new dimensions and greater profundity. To lose
one’s interest, alertness and sensitivity and to no longer draw les-
sons or conclusions, is a kind of fall or deviation, of decay and
death, in one’s feelings.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
36

--- Sayfa 53 ---
If those who have fallen into such a situation do not waken
immediately and run (or are not led to run) to appreciate again the
delicacy, subtlety of thought and wisdom in things; if they do not
open their ears, listen to, and understand, the Divine Messages, they
are destined to become barren and perish. Therefore, the Creator of
the universe has sent many and various people and given lessons and
warnings by them. By these sincere, reliable, eloquent, and infallible
guides, the Almighty reiterates His Eternal Messages and thus
brings clarity to the minds, strength to the hearts, and peace to the
souls. Moreover, He always awakens consciences against that to
which they may get habituated, and urges people to review all the
tableaux He presents to their understanding.
God reiterates many times the creation of humanity, the dis-
persal of humankind over the farthest corners of the world, their
union and happiness with their mates, the grandeur and magnif-
icence in the creation of the world and heavens, the variations in
languages and colors, the alternations of day and night, and the
blessings, fertility and prosperity that come with climatic activi-
ties such as thunderstorms, lightning and rain, in most powerful
and varied words. God never leaves any room for “becoming
habituated” for over-familiarity—at least, not for those of His
servants who know, reflect, reason, and understand.
Among His signs is this, that He created you from dust and
then— Behold, you are men scattered (far and wide)! And
among His signs is this that He created for you mates from
among yourselves, that you may dwell in tranquility with them,
and He has placed love and mercy between your (hearts): In that
are signs for those who reflect. And among his signs is the cre-
ation of the heavens and the earth, and the variations in your lan-
guages and your colors. In that are signs for those who know.
And among His signs is the sleep that you take by night and by
day, and the quest that you (make for livelihood) out of His
bounty. In that are signs for those who hearken. And among His
signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear and of
hope, and He sends down rain from the sky and with it gives
Ethics and Spirituality
37

--- Sayfa 54 ---
life to the earth after it is dead. In that are signs for those who
are wise. (Rum 30:20-4)
Like the above, many Qur’anic verses draw our attention to
the extraordinary wonders and miracles that a great number of
human beings pass by each day without taking lessons from
them. Our situation may be likened to that of a fish that lives in
the water but does not know what water is nor how valuable it
is for itself.
Another form of ulfa, over-familiarity is that staleness in
one’s thinking and mentality that affects one’s actions and wor-
ship. This is the death of one’s love (‘ishq), ecstasy (wajd), and
enthusiasm. One who falls into such a state loses the love and
excitement for worship, the sense of responsibility, the aversion
to sins, and the liking for repentance and lamenting sins. From
then on, it is almost impossible to turn that person into his for-
mer good state. It requires very pure and sincere persons to
remind and help that person to look to himself, so that he can
evaluate his situation and heed the warnings and the people who
give those warnings.
Each and every voice and breath that comes to humankind
to establish a new spirit has always conveyed the same message:
To become habituated, dull, stale, to grow old and become
corpse-like is inevitable for some people at some time, but it is
never impossible to reform, as long as they are respectful to
those who must use a sharp instrument to cure their sickness:
Has not the time arrived for the believers that their hearts in all
humility should engage in the remembrance of God and of the
Truth which has been revealed, and that they should not become
like those to whom was given the Book aforetime, but long ages
passed over them and their hearts grew hard? For many among
them are rebellious and transgressors. (Hadid 57:16)
In sum, ulfa, staleness and over-familiarity, is a great disas-
ter which afflicts human beings, and has in fact afflicted many.
The afflicted person is unaware of the happenings around him,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
38

--- Sayfa 55 ---
blind to the beauties in the great book of the universe, and deaf
to the tongues which speak of the truth. That is why he is shal-
low and inadequate in his faith, without any love and ecstasy in
his worship, and unbalanced, unjust and erring in his social rela-
tions. His rescue from such a situation depends on a powerful
hand stretched out to help him and make him see and hear
again. For this reason, such a person should be made to reflect
and meditate on death and the Hereafter, to visit many charity
and service institutions, to take part in some social and religious
service, to study and review the glorious pages of the history of
Islam and thus look up to the heroes of Islam, to meet with sin-
cere, well-versed, people full of Islamic love, ecstasy, and zeal. In
this way, the opportunities and conditions should be prepared to
reform and renew that person. There are many more points to
make on this subject, but we have had time only to review some
of them in the hope, and with the prayer, that God, the All-
Mighty, in Whose hands are the keys to all hearts, may remove
ulfa from ours.
Ethics and Spirituality
39

--- Sayfa 57 ---
2.2.
What is “unity of being” (wahdat al-wujud)? Does it con-
form in any way to the teachings of Islam?”
W
ahdat al-wujud (literally, oneness or unity of being)
is a teaching mostly spoken of in connection with
mystics and Sufis. Although the phrase refers to a
subjective state or direct, inward experience attained by Sufis, it
has also been understood and discussed as a philosophical con-
cept and, as such, interpreted in different ways. Some have even
considered it practically indistinguishable from wahdat al-
mawjud (the oneness or unity of existents), a philosophy known
in the West by the name monism.
As with much else, wahdat al-wujud has reached us with
excesses and extremes in the use and understanding of it. In
some cases because of lack of suitable words to express the expe-
rience to which it alludes; in others because of inadequacies in
the manner in which the phrase has been applied to the ordi-
nary, visible reality of this world; in yet others because it inclines
to a line of thought very like another philosophical doctrine,
namely pantheism—the phrase wahdat al-wujud which, strictly
speaking, can only be referred to God Himself, has been con-
ceived and interpreted in diverse ways and led to a variety of
unsound speculations and controversies.
Those who uphold the teaching of wahdat al-wujud distin-
guish three modes of tawhid (oneness):
1. Tawhid al-af’al (oneness or unity of the Agent): Meaning
that, of every act, the sole and only, the absolute, Agent is God.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
It follows from this view that there is no need to look for any
cause for whatever exists or happens in the universe; everything
everywhere is directly the work of God. (Since we dealt with the
issue of kasb (the performance or doing of acts) and khalq (the
createdness of acts), matters pertaining to kalam (theology), in
the questions related to destiny, we shall not repeat that discus-
sion here.) Those who argue for tawhid al-af’al cite the follow-
ing verses to support their view:
But God has created you and what you do. (Saffat 37:96) . . .
All is from God . . . (Nisa 4:78)
2. Tawhid al-sifat (oneness or unity of the Subject): Meaning
that of all predicates the sole and only Subject is God. According
to this view, all volition, all forces and powers, all knowledge
and faculties, belong to God only; they are an intelligible expres-
sion, or a work, or a realized state of Him.
3. Tawhid al-dhat (also, tawhid al-wujud) (oneness or uni-
ty of Essence or of Being): Meaning that in essence all existence
is One; and everything visible or knowable around us, other
than Him, is a manifestation and disclosure of Him in certain
states.
There is much to say and dispute about here, from the modes
of tawhid to the subtle nuances between manifestation and disclo-
sure. However, since the question asked here concerns only the
third mode of tawhid, we will only dwell upon the tawhid al-dhat
(oneness or unity of Essence or Being).
Given that such a view of tawhid, as noted above, is the
result of an inward state or direct, inward experience (dhawq),
many scholars do not consider the subject amenable to rational
discussion.
In fact, when existents and events are not referred ultimate-
ly to God and His Names, it is impossible to explain them ful-
ly. That is acknowledged by all people of sound learning who
reflect seriously and pursue their reflections fully. There is con-
siderable similarity between the understanding of tawhid of
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
42

--- Sayfa 59 ---
those who use rational methods of inquiry, and those who fol-
low the disciplines of Sufism. Sa‘d al-Din Taftazani, in his Sharh
al-Maqasid (Explanation of Purposes), distinguishes two groups
among those who argue wahdat al-wujud, of whom one he
assesses to be within the bounds of the ahl al-Sunna, i.e. ortho-
dox: there is no dispute about or with this group.
According to Taftazani, the two groups are the sufiyya and
mutasawwifa. The former hold to the plurality in wujud as is in
mawjud, in essential being as in existence. However, when the
Sufi reaches God, he is immersed in the ocean of ‘irfan (percep-
tion, direct knowing); he experiences fana’, the perishing or loss
of the self in God and of his attributes in God’s attributes. As a
result of this mystical experience, he believes that nothing exists
other than God; he regards himself as the focus (mikhraq) of all
manifestation (tajalli) of the Divine Attributes: this is the state
the Sufis call fana’ fi l-tawhid or perishing into the Oneness.
Unable at this point to understand the reality of the situation,
the Sufis may exclaim in ecstatic utterances a condition of in-
dwelling (hulul) in God or of “union” (ittihad) with God.
According to some Sufis, such an understanding of tawhid is
the result of that stage or degree of union with God (maqam al-
jam). But this is firstly a matter of ‘irfan, and then a matter of
experience or tasting (dhawq). In this degree, attributing real exis-
tence to things could not but be contradictory to the Sufis’ visions
(mushahadat). That is why, to acknowledge asbab (causes) in that
state would be, in a sense, to acknowledge an associate with God
(i.e. to do shirk). On the other hand, to deny the asbab without
really attaining such a degree of consciousness, without really
experiencing it fully, is hypocrisy and a merely theoretical asser-
tion. Therefore, one who denies union (jam’) is considered ‘irfan-
less (unknowing, unperceiving) and one who denies the differ-
ence between God and humankind (farq) which the Sufi over-
comes in the experience of jam’ is considered far away from the
secrets of servanthood to God. The mature person is one who
Ethics and Spirituality
43

--- Sayfa 60 ---
comfortably accepts both farq and jam’, each in its necessary
place.
The second group comprise those who argue an absolute
wahdat al-wujud. For them Being is One, which is nothing oth-
er than God. The multiplicity of the visible is only imaginary or
illusory.
While wahdat al-wujud is for the sufiyya a matter of affective
state (hal) or direct experience (dhawq), the mutasawwifa seem to
hold to it as an established conviction and philosophy. In fact,
not a few theologians have shared that conviction. Some of
them, such as Jalal al-Din Dawwani, have defended it vigorous-
ly. However, the general consensus of ahl al-Sunna scholars is
that the (separate) reality of things in the world is thabit (secure-
ly established).
Sheikhulislam M. Sabri in his Mawqif al-’aql (The Station of
Reason) indicates that the concept of wujud al-haqq (unity or
oneness of reality) is behind that of wahdat al-wujud. But, as is
known and accepted by scholars and theologians, wujud is an
addition to mahiyya (quiddity); this is so both in that which is
wujub (necessary) and that which is mumkin (possible). However,
Imam al-Ash’ari held the opposite, namely that wujud is the same
as mahiyya both in wujub and mumkin. While the Philosophers
agree with al-Ash’ari in regard to wujub, they side with theolo-
gians in regard to mumkin. Since the schools of al-Ash’ari and the
Philosophers consider wujud to be ultimately from God Himself
and from His Being (Wujud), they accord a derivative, relative
wujud to everything and see all existence as ultimately from One,
God Himself.
In fact, whether the Being of God or His Attributes are the
same as or other than God in Himself is a matter which has long
been discussed. Some people, including very great scholars of
Islam, consider wujud al-Bari’ (oneness or unity of the Author)
as the same as the Divine Being in Himself. To conclude from
this that these people affirm the teaching of wahdat al-wujud
and even of wahdat al-mawjud (monism) may lead one to claim
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
44

--- Sayfa 61 ---
that they are in error (dalala)—but that is a charge of such
moment that we should not wish to bear the responsibility of it.
Jalal al-Din Dawwani, in his Risalat al-Dawwani, remarked
that the being of the Real (al-Haqq) is the same as His Essence
(Dhat) and that there is no real being or existent other than Dhat
al-Haqq; and that since wujud is wujud (since “being” is precisely
that which “is”), it cannot but be the being of the Real, wujud al-
Haqq. That entails that the being of all existents is not real but
itibari (derivative, relative). Dawwani goes a step further and
observes that it is impossible to consider the creation as compris-
ing existents that are independently, fully existent (mustaqil) both
in their being (wujud) and in their outward manifestness:
“Regarding wujud, it is impossible to attribute [independent] exis-
tence to ‘alam (the universe); it is impossible for anything to exist
in itself. Regarding outward manifestness, it is impossible to attrib-
ute an independent existence to mumkinat, because a thing can
only be manifest relatively to the Real Being, to the Wujud who is
al-Haqq (the Real). No actual existent (mustaqil haqiqa) has its real
being except in relation to Real Being, its being depends upon His
Being—on that dependence it can be said to exist. Therefore, we
should not consider entities that we know to be conjectural
(wahm) and imaginary (khayal) as actually existent (mawjud).”
Ibn al-’Arabi goes still further and insists that what is visi-
ble in the universe is a manifestation and reflection, it is never a
mawjud (existent), not even derivatively. God constantly and
continually manifests Himself and the universe is constantly and
continually renewed. These manifestations succeed one other
and the universe constantly and continually goes back and forth
between existence and non-existence because of these consecu-
tive manifestations. These manifestations succeed one another
so rapidly that no interval or gap is perceived in the continuous
hierarchy of beings.
Mawlana Jalal al-Din al-Rumi shares the same views and
expresses them in a colorful way: “O Soul of our souls! Who are
we that dare to attribute existence to themselves? (in comparison
Ethics and Spirituality
45

--- Sayfa 62 ---
to You, what or who are we that dare to make such a claim.) We
are a large number of nothing. Our existences are nothing, either.
As to You, You are the Wujud al-Mutlaq, who exhibits all the fani’
(the transient, perishable entities) on a mirror in which everything
is going to appear. Each of us is a lion, but one that is not real—
one such as might be embroidered on a flag is moved by the
blowing wind. Its movements are seen in the movements of the
flag but the wind that moves them is not seen—may that Unseen
never withhold His blessings from us! Our existence is bestowed
by You and we are Your creation only. You made non-existence
taste the flavor of existence, and made it in eternity Your enrap-
tured (lover).” Such a view which holds everything to be the man-
ifestation of al-Haqq cannot attribute being to anything. While
Rumi considers that the universe does have being, that it exists,
it does so figuratively (majazi) and because of its being a mani-
festation of al-Haqq.
Yet there is a multiplicity and variety in the visible world.
Some Sufis, as we have just noted, consider this multiplicity and
variety as manifestation of al-Haqq and explain it as dependent
upon the skills (istidat) of the mirrors; and they hold that such
a view is not contrary or harmful to the unity of Divine Being.
Junayd al-Baghdadi conveys the same view in his well-known
remark: “The water takes on the color of the cup.” True or Real
Being is One. Just as the Light is One, for all that it illumines—
all creatures are reflections and ripple-waves of this Light. Just as
rain droplets, which appear in different forms, as water, ice and
vapor, are different states of one substance. Similarly, things and
events, which flow by and are differently manifest, are the mani-
festations of the same Reality.
Unlike the early Sufis whose views lead to a sound belief in
tawhid, those of the mutasawwifa group who treat wahdat al-
wujud in a philosophical way have not been able to stay clear of
expressions and utterances which incline to hulul and ittihad. In
fact, when they expand on the subject scientifically and philo-
sophically, they cannot be thought free from such a consequence.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
46

--- Sayfa 63 ---
Indeed, they even seek evidence for their position in verses of
the Qur’an and the hadiths of the Prophet, peace and blessings
be upon him.
The verses are:
It is not you who slew; it was God. When you threw (a hand-
ful of dust), it was not your act, but God’s . . . (Anfal 8:17)
Verily those who plight their fealty to you do no less than
plight their fealty to God . . . (Fath 68:10)
It was We who created man, and We know what dark sugges-
tions his soul makes to him: for We are nearer to him than his
jugular vein. (Qaf 50:17)
The hadiths are:
God the All-Mighty says, “O man! I was ill, but you didn’t
visit me.” Man says, “My Lord! You are the Lord of all the realms,
how can I visit You?” God says, “Do you not know that so-and-
so of my servants got ill, but you did not visit him. If you had
visited him, you would have found Me with him.”1
God the All-Mighty says: “. . . My servant does not draw
near to Me with anything more loved by Me than the religious
duties that I have imposed upon him, and My servant continues
to draw near to Me with supererogatory works so that I shall
love him. When I love him, I am his hearing with which he hears,
his seeing with which he sees, his hand with which he strikes,
his foot with which he walks. . .”2
It would be possible to narrate many more such hadiths and
other Qur’anic verses. However, believing that to do so would
not add to the argument, we keep the discussion short. Also, the
remarks on this subject of the great men of Sufism, of which we
have mentioned only a few so far, are too many to ignore.
However, as dealing with them fully in the scope of this ques-
tion-answer would be impossible and, perhaps, unnecessary, we
have limited our attention to only a few.
Ethics and Spirituality
47

--- Sayfa 64 ---
First of all, characterizing the first two verses quoted above
among the muhkamat (the clear truths) of the Qur’an and thus
closing the door to any contradiction of the Muslim creed, is the
surest way of right interpretation to which many great mufassirs
(interpreters of the Qur’an) have adhered.
It does not make much matter whether the action men-
tioned in the verse is ascribed to God or to His Prophet; either
it is a miracle or an action that is attributed by God to His most
glorious servant to assure his glory; or it expresses his might and
power, confirming his truth.
In fact, in the above verses, what is used to justify an extreme
interpretation of wahdat al-wujud, rather emphasizes and confirms
the (separate) reality of what exists in the world. For, the difference
of unbeliever and believer, of slayer and slain, and muhatab (third
person), are mentioned: it is possible to deduce unity of being only
by means of elaborate and far-fetched interpretations. Especially to
deduce from “. . .We are nearer to Him than his jugular vein,” a
meaning in favor of wahdat al-wujud is impossible.
In the hadiths, what is obvious is separateness and multi-
plicity, not unity, of being. To acknowledge that a servant (‘abd)
is a distant, secondary creature until he acquires nearness (qur-
biya) to God, and then to talk about unity of the two is a rather
crude form of belief in hulul and ittihad (in-dwelling and union)
which even the mutasawwifa do not accept. Moreover, even in
the words of the “people of God,” uttered to affirm Oneness of
Being, a duality is evident:
You are either the sun or the sea; either the Mountain Qaf or Phoenix.
O Being, who is beyond the comprehension of mind!
You are the Eternal and Limitless.
However, since You manifest Yourself in countless chapters (forms), both
those who unite with or liken themselves to You are all enraptured.
Rumi
Without needing further comment and interpretation, it is
obvious that everything there said or aspired to rests on duality
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
48

--- Sayfa 65 ---
and multiplicity. Although other people look for evidence for
wahdat al-wujud in the words of the mutasawwifa, the muta-
sawwifa themselves are always seen to affirm the realm of multi-
plicity by their actions, such as to annihilate their nafs (selfhood,
carnal self). Except for the separateness from God, what is the
meaning of all the hardships and disciplines of those who hold
to the teaching of wahdat al-wujud, of their striving for perfec-
tion, their seeking to be rid of their deficiencies? Moreover, the
profound sincerity in the servanthood to God of those great
people absolutely contradicts the extremist, philosophical
understanding of wahdat al-wujud.
As long as any believer in wahdat al-wujud accepts his own
answerability to God, his servanthood to God, it means that he
is acknowledging the difference of ‘amir (the superior) and ma’mur
(the subordinate). After acknowledging subordination, to insist
literally on unity of wujud is sheer self-contradiction. And, bar a
few unbelievers who reject servanthood, no believer has ever
dared to reject servanthood to God. Therefore, whereas the
understanding of wahdat al-wujud of the sufiyya—which in reali-
ty concerns wahdat al-shuhud (the unity or oneness of witness-
ing)—is a result of the affective state in Sufism, istighraq (absorp-
tion in ecstatic contemplation, beatitude), and of a lack of words
and phrases to express what they feel, the understanding of wah-
dat al-wujud of some of the mutasawwifa derives from the frailty
and insufficiency of rendering in philosophical concepts and
arguments what the Sufi experiences as inward consciousness and
witnessing: moreover, these philosophical concepts and argu-
ments have their origin less in Islam than in a school of thought
developed out of a Western-Christian/Greek philosophy.
The allegation should not be accepted that, under the influ-
ence of Neo-Platonist, some great Muslims sought to introduce a
doctrine of “pantheism” into Islam. The most that could be said
is that those Muslims may have considered it not dangerous tem-
porarily to borrow some terms from the Neo-Platonist since they
could not find the words they needed to express what they expe-
Ethics and Spirituality
49

--- Sayfa 66 ---
rienced in their mushahadat (visions) and perceptions. Otherwise,
there is a world of difference between those two groups of people
in terms of their understanding of the Divine Essence.
A group of people who had found the balance of the world
and the Hereafter as that balance is conveyed by the Qur’an can
never be considered to agree on an understanding of wahdat al-
wujud such as is attributed to the mutasawwifa:
1. A belief in One God who is everything everywhere means
accepting the most unsuitable and irrelevant things to be
“God,” the absurdity of which any sense must reject.
2. The Qur’an adduces evidence from the universe and cre-
ation for the Oneness and Existence of God, which indi-
cates that the reality of the created world is thabit
(securely established).
3. In the Qur’an, many verses reiterate that the universe is
going to be destroyed, after which a new world will be
established. The destruction and extinction of something
is meaningless unless it first exists. To talk about the
destruction of something whose reality is not thabit is
absurd and futile. And the Qur’an is altogether free from
of absurdity or futility.
4. All the Prophets, peace be upon them, teach that all
beings, great or small, were created second, and insis-
tently reiterate the doctrine that the relation between
God and all other existents is only a relation between
the Creator and what He created. In the understanding
of wahdat al-wujud attributed to the mutasawwifa, the
Prophets and the truths given to them by revelation
have to be declared false and denied, which is an abom-
ination to heart and mind.
5. Every piece of evidence adduced to support a simple, lit-
eral understanding of wahdat al-wujud, in fact gives sup-
port to the argument for multiplicity of being.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
50

--- Sayfa 67 ---
6. A great number of verses in the Qur’an affirm that the
obedient will be rewarded and the rebellious will be pun-
ished. From a literal understanding of unity of being, any
judgment of this kind is an impossibility, since it would
be impossible to answer such questions as, “Who is obe-
dient?” “What is a blessing (ni’ma) and where is it?”
“Who is guilty?” “What is punishment?” and so on.
7. If all things are accepted to be of God and events to be
some sort of manifestation of Him, it would be injustice
to criticize idols and the idolatrous. For, as all events are
manifestations of Him, idols and the idolatrous cannot
be reckoned other than Him. On the other hand, it is
obvious that the Qur’an and Sunna, which establish
tawhid, are the greatest enemy of unbelief and idolatry.
8. If wahdat al-wujud is accepted as the mutasawwifa accept
it, it necessitates the idea that matter is qadim (eternal),
which is, by the consensus of the community (bi-l-ijma’)
tantamount to kufr (unbelief) and those who are truly
“people of God” are absolutely far from and free of
committing such a kufr.
There are clear differences between the mutassawwifa under-
standing of wahdat al-wujud and a literal-philosophical under-
standing of the concept which declines into pantheism. There is,
to be sure, an outward similarity between the two. The philo-
sophical understanding holds that God and the universe have
the same being, a position divides into two:
1. God is a Real Being and the universe is nothing but an
assemblage or arrangement or composition of some man-
ifestations (tazahurat) or emanations (sudurat). This is a
view held by Spinoza and his followers.
2. Only the universe is real. God is the majmu’ (sum/whole)
of all existents (mawjuds). This is the view of a naturalist
pantheism sometimes associated with Hegel and his fol-
lowers.
Ethics and Spirituality
51

--- Sayfa 68 ---
In short, the difference is this: As a result of having experi-
enced fana’ (extinction) the mutasawwifa deny the reality of the
universe, the philosophical group ignore the Creator of the uni-
verse and try to put Him aside. While the mutasawwifa under-
standing of wahdat al-wujud implies wahdat al-shuhud (oneness
of witnessing), the others’ understanding of it inclines to wahdat
al-mawjud (monism). The first group, unable to express their
affective state (hal), visions (mushahada) and istighraq (absorp-
tion), resort to mutashabihat (metaphors, allegories) due to lack
of words to express what they experience. The other group the-
orize the concept, and try to make a formal philosophy, a science,
out of it. While the first start with God and then evaluate exis-
tents and events from this respect, the latter start to deal with the
experiencing subject, thus making God dependent on the exis-
tents. While there is direct experience (dhawq) of God with the
first, there is only theory and speculation with the latter. While
the first deny and lose their selves in humility before God, the lat-
ter make the philosophy of their being like wajib al-wujud.
God knows best.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
52

--- Sayfa 69 ---
2.3.
How can we avoid sins, and how can we show sincere
repentance?
I
t is very important for our spiritual and emotional life to
pay special attention to repentance, the greatest shelter
against sins, in the following respects:
Reaction to Sin
One’s reaction to a sin that he or she has committed is closely relat-
ed to one’s moral and spiritual station. There may be an instance
in which, because of a sin, you prostrate yourself before God and
implore Him to forgive you. There may also be a case when such
actions do not satisfy you, when your sorrow lights an internal fire
in your heart. But we can hope that the sorrow disturbing your
heart in the name of repentance may be more acceptable to God.
Repentance is indeed regret and an internal fever. In this
respect, one should regard sins as being in the company of ser-
pents and poisonous centipedes. Only such a firm attitude is
acceptable from a believer, for any contrary one implies doubts
about the outcomes of a sin in the Hereafter. Therefore, it is
essential that every sin be confronted in an alert manner and, if
committed, be succeeded by regret.
Sins Must Be Short-Lived
Since every sin engenders a new sin, whenever a person commits
a sin, he or she must seek purification without delay. After all, no

--- Sayfa 70 ---
one knows when he or she will pass away. Those who are con-
scious of God cannot be at ease until they have cleansed them-
selves from sin. It is detrimental to a person’s spiritual well-being
if he or she allows a sin to survive for even one second. Moreover,
such an attitude implies revering something that God does not
like. Sins do not have the right to live. They must be ephemeral,
because if they are not removed through repentance they become
serpents constantly biting one’s heart. And once the heart gets a
stain, it is easier to get more. The end result is a vicious circle.
Every sin engenders a new sin and at last, Indeed, on their hearts is
the stain of the (ill) that they do (Mutaffifin 83:14) becomes evident
on them.
For this reason, it is very important to remind people of
these realities and alert them to sins. Moreover, if you can do so,
you must reveal the ugly nature of sin to people and make them
renounce their sins.
Apparently, sensitive and alert souls can smell the offensive
odor that sins exude.
Sins Must Be Regarded as Detestable
When repenting, one of the most important things is to view the
particular sin as something detestable and disgusting. If we do not
abstain from sins, believing that they are like being with serpents
and scorpions and therefore deserve our disgust, we will not have
the resolve to struggle against them through repentance. When you
break a priceless crystal vase, for example, you feel sorrow. In the
same way, every sin you commit cracks and dirties your life lantern.
Thus it is necessary to feel regret and sorrow after each sin, at least
to the degree of sorrow felt after breaking a crystal vase. Otherwise,
you are not taking your sins and your repentance seriously.
The Correspondence between Sin and Repentance
One’s repentance for a given sin must match the sin’s degree of
seriousness, for every sin resembles a well filled with pitch. In
other words, it is easy to fall into but very hard to get out of.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
54

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Recognizing Sin
If we belittle the outcomes of a sin, we are committing another
sin equivalent to the first one. For instance, if one considers for-
nication or violation of another’s property rights as sins exag-
gerated by religion and says that “we benefit from them, so why
consider them sins?” he or she is committing an even bigger sin.
Thus, we have to resist sins and condition ourselves in this way:
“O sins, the doors of my heart are locked, so your zeal to get
into my heart is in vain.”
The simile of the great scholar Bediüzzaman Said Nursi is very
expressive: “Run away from a sin as if it is a poisonous serpent or
a centipede.” Note that he likens sin to a serpent and a centipede,
rather than a lion or a tiger. One can take measures before a lion
or a tiger attacks, for they attack bravely, whereas a serpent and a
centipede attacks unexpectedly and maliciously. Backstabbing and
treachery may be considered examples of such sins.
In short, vigilance against sins must be an attribute of a true
believer. We have to keep in mind that vigilance against sins is an
indication of our loyalty and fidelity to our Lord, the Almighty.
To realize the true nature of sins, we can look from the
point of view of holy saying of Prophet Muhammad: “Adhnaba
‘abdi dhanban,”3 which is about a servant of God who sins and
then repents. In this saying, the words used have a very deep
meaning: dhanb (sin) and dhanab (tail) come from the same
root in Arabic. Thus, a believer who says: “O my Lord, I have
committed a sin,” means to say: “O my Lord, I have put on a
tail again. In my present state, You may consider me a fox with
a furry tail, a scorpion stinging others with its tail, or a serpent
whose tail is a long part of its body! And that is me!” In other
words, those who confess their sins in reality confess that they
have scorned and belittled the humanity granted to them by
God and, as a result, have fallen to the level of the animals.
As for the one who sins and is unaware of it, he or she is a
mirror of the verse: They are like cattle, or rather are even more
misguided (7:179) and has fallen to a level below the animals.
Ethics and Spirituality
55

--- Sayfa 73 ---
CHAPTER 3
Virtues and Hardships
in the Service of Islam

--- Sayfa 75 ---
3.1.
How can “moderation” be defined?
M
oderation is the balanced way between extremes, the
middle way between two excesses: ifrat (too much)
and tafrit (too little). It is also to use one’s primordial
nature, capacity, and skills to do good, to do exactly what is pre-
scribed by the Creator, on His way. Man’s faculties of sense and
mind, his emotions, fear, anger and bodily desire, and the like,
are innate in him and play a major role in his life. If these gifts
are well used as they were meant to be used, moderation is
achieved. On the other hand, insufficient or excessive use of
them bring about deviations.
For example: bodily desire is, in general terms, a desire to
obtain whatever is a means to keep people alive and their gen-
eration continuing. Eating, drinking, and such similar acts are
also parts of bodily desire, which sustain physical existence and
health. To abstain altogether from such desire, as some
Christian nuns and monks do to achieve perfection of will, is
tafrit: it is a form of excess, an excess of omission and absti-
nence. On the other hand, to accept no boundaries and to con-
sider everything permissible is ifrat, another form of excess,
arrogant indulgence. The clear way between the extremes of
self-denial and self-indulgence is self-discipline:

--- Sayfa 76 ---
The emotion of anger is also a gift to humankind made for
particular reasons. It too must be applied in correct measure. For
instance, to cause great damage to oneself and others in order to
avenge a trifle, ruthlessly to shed blood, this is ifrat. On the oth-
er hand, to be silent and abstain from anger against gross injus-
tice, against violation of one’s honor, or against the dishonoring
of the sacred things, is tafrit. Moderation lies in the middle path.
It is to raise your voice against injustice, tyranny and oppression,
and to be firm and implacable against them, but to be soft-heart-
ed and compassionate to the weak and innocent, and to be
patient if, for that situation, patience brings about good.
Excessive worry or groundless fear, being afraid of every
thing—possible accidents, thunder-storms, superstitions or any-
thing in the universe—make life unbearable for the one who
suffers them, and this is ifrat. The banks of the Ganges are lined
with examples of people who attribute divinity to many things
and forces in nature which they fear and to which they plead for
help in the form of idols which are as helpless themselves.
However, being totally fearless and having no cares or worries
about anything, on earth or in the heavens, when one is normal-
ly expected to fear and worry, this is tafrit. This is probably a
sort of insanity in which doing harm to oneself and endanger-
ing the lives of those close by is inevitable. Moderation is to take
some precautionary measures to protect one’s life and the lives
of those close to one, and not to attach too much importance to
far-fetched worries and ill-defined probabilities.
The terms ifrat, tafrit and moderation apply also to reason.
Without taking the outcomes of observation and perception
into account, to depend only on reason is ifrat. This is what the
sophists or logicians of ancient times did in their games of wit
or what today’s materialists do in their dialectics. Denial of rea-
son altogether, rejection of all mental phenomena and categories
of mind, relying instead on either a bare, external positivism or
an intuitive, subjective consciousness as the only truth—this is
tafrit. Examples of this are the positivism of Comte and certain
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
60

--- Sayfa 77 ---
sorts of mysticism in Christianity. Moderation in reasoning and
thinking is to compose and then reach new ideas through the eval-
uation of the input of subjective feeling and objective observation.
In this way, one can comprehend what is not within the limits of
either intuition alone or observation alone. Straightforwardness in
the use of mind can only be achieved through the guidance of
Divine Revelation. Otherwise, the mind when it turns away from
the Divine Revelation is nothing but self-willed craft and obstina-
cy mixed with pride.
Moderation, as we have said, is one of the essentials in all the
faculties and senses that we are endowed with. The same is true of
the obligations and duties laid upon us, and in respect of sound
belief. Disbelief in the existence of God and rejection of His
Attributes is atheism. On the other hand, accepting that He has a
material being or form, or attributing to Him a location or human
qualities, is also unbelief. The middle way between these two
extremes is that, when one believes in the existence of God, one
acknowledges that He is One, the Creator, and that He is free from
fault, want and need, and that His Attributes are perfect and Divine.
All the other matters related to faith can be dealt with in
the same way. For instance, believing that humankind has no
will and no power is predestination as compulsion. Believing
that humankind is the doer and creator of all their acts and
handiwork is extreme voluntarism. The middle way is to
acknowledge that humankind has free will as an ordinary con-
dition and that God alone creates everything. Moderation is the
true practice (‘amal), too. If the sensual and carnal life in this
world make us forget or ignore spirituality and the Hereafter,
this is materialism, which is ifrat. Mystical spiritualism which
totally denies sensuous bodily existence is tafrit. The balanced
view between these extremes is to deal with everything in
accordance with the balance between body and soul, between
this world and the Hereafter. This kind of faith is genuine and
it is itself moderation.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
61

--- Sayfa 78 ---
In the light of this argument, we can argue that some world
religions display examples of extremism on both ends. The only
right response for a murder in a religion can be death penalty,
without any chance of forgiveness; whereas another religion
would impose no sanction on the murderer or fail to observe
justice by only prescribing to forgiveness only, and nothing else.
Islam achieves moderation by taking the middle path, establish-
ing the principle of “measure for measure” but with the door
always open to forgiveness. When we look at any aspect of life,
whether it be theoretical or practical, we shall clearly see that
Islam commands, and is, the way of moderation in every case.
Social moderation which is bound to concern every people
constituted as a society is an unattainable ideal unless the mem-
bers of that society have attained a sufficient level of straight-
forwardness in their thinking and practical life and in their eco-
nomic relationships. That straightness of conduct, in turn, can-
not be sustained unless and until a sufficient number of people
in that society understand, desire and practice the virtue of
moderation.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
62

--- Sayfa 79 ---
3.2.
How should people avoid sins, distractions, and
temptations?
T
he question refers to one of the greatest difficulties of
modern life. Even the not-so-young, but of course espe-
cially the young live in a social environment that exag-
gerates the natural pressures of youth to an extreme; ever-pres-
ent temptations and passing desires scatter one’s nobler senti-
ments and higher aspirations. It is difficult indeed in this envi-
ronment to represent the sublime qualities of person and char-
acter that the Messenger of God exemplified and willed his fol-
lowers to emulate; but, to live at such a time and to struggle
against the desires and temptations has its own particular advan-
tages. This is because the reward of all effort is proportionate to
the hardship of the conditions endured.
Is it not the hardship of the struggle he endured which
earned Hamza the titles “the master of the martyrs” and “the
lion of God”? His battle-cry to his men—“The enemies are
many, but we have faith,” and charging the enemy front-line
with self-sacrificing disregard for death—these are the qualities
that raised him to such a high rank.
When Islam was first preached, the women among the idol-
aters used to circumambulate the Ka‘ba naked; adultery, fornica-
tion, usury, profiteering, exploitation, bribery, drinking and
gambling were deeply embedded in the manners of the society.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
And yet, the Companions turned their backs on such practices
and embraced Islam. They were all normal human beings with
feelings and appetites like all others. But their giving up and
leaving aside carnal desires and immoral practices in that envi-
ronment, their preferring a pure and honest way of life, and
their support of the revived, true religion and the Messenger
who preached it—and their doing so, despite all dangers, threats
and persecutions, made them nobler than the rest and greater
than all the greats. By doing so, they gained such merits and
virtues that they have become the light and, like the stars in the
heavens, guide those who come after them.
The kinds of obstacles, disasters and destructions they faced
exist also today. In a spiritual assembly, Bediüzzaman Said Nursi
was named as the man of the age of disasters and destruction.1 If
the Prophet called the people who try to live and serve Islam sin-
cerely in this age, he would definitely name them as the genera-
tion of the age of disasters and destruction. For, if the streets and
market-places, city centers, social and commercial business, indi-
vidual and family life, schools (which nurture the rest) and all
other societal entities and institutions which together make up
collective life and its norms—if these were assessed one by one,
the verdict on each of them would be “bad, spoiled or ruined.”
Wherever you go, you cannot avoid some or other sort of
foulness or sin staining your senses; the atmosphere is invasive,
aggressive. To do or finish a job in the community, you cannot
pass from one side to the other without your soul and heart
being assaulted and your spiritual life shaken. To live Islam is as
hard as walking on a road of fire or going across a river of foul
blood. We are creatures of such a time of disasters and destruc-
tion. The sensuality, carnality, corporeality hidden in the self is
like the tail of a scorpion lifted and ready to strike. Those
appetites and lusts always feed upon and grow in the conditions
prevalent (and systematically encouraged) in this modern socie-
ty. It is possible to be poisoned at any instant by the scorpions
within and around us. We must be aware of the conditions and
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
64

--- Sayfa 81 ---
evaluate them in the light of “the reward is proportionate to the
hardship endured,” and so feel somewhat lightened and encour-
aged by the hope of a recompense whose magnitude will reflect
the hardship and affliction we have overcome. The more suc-
cessful we are in defeating the enemies, the more we will be
rewarded. If the Companions acquired their high rank by over-
coming the hardships and afflictions they faced, then people
today could do and achieve almost as much in a similar way—
which is what we expect from the Divine Mercy. Today, when
the conditions for committing sins are so easy, of course there
must have been some errors and sins of ours that we committed
unintentionally; but it behooves us, and we need, not to leave
the gate of Divine Mercy; rather, we must be persistent there.
Let me tell you one of my childhood memories, which reflects
how I think and feel. When I was a child we had a very faithful
dog which guarded our flocks of sheep. I so admired its loyalty
that I fed it frequently and even sometimes played with it. When
I raised my little hands in prayer, I remembered the significance
of its loyalty to us and put it next to my hopes and prayed to
God: “O my Lord, just as I treated that dog as a friend on
account of its loyalty to us, so forgive me, such a slave of Yours,
who has never left You and the gates of Your Divine Mercy and
who has never prayed and bowed before anyone else but You.”
The same is true for Muslims (who have never left Him and
the gates of His Divine Mercy and who have never prayed and
bowed before anyone else but He). In spite of some slips, mis-
takes and sins, there are such Muslims who serve in the way of
God so sincerely and faithfully that God, the Most Merciful, will
not drive them from the gates of His Mercy. We accept and admit
our faults. Such admissions, confessions, are a part of journeying
through regrets, remorse and repentance. We ask Him again and
again to forgive our wrong-doings out of His Mercy, in accor-
dance with His Grace. And God accepts and answers such prayers
done wholeheartedly, with faith and sincerity.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
65

--- Sayfa 82 ---
What we have said so far was by way of reporting the situ-
ation we are in. Let us now look briefly at some points about
what to do and how to act.
- I -
On slippery, dangerous roads, one walks very carefully, as if
through a mine field or dangerous enemy territory. A comparable
caution and alertness are necessary while one goes out in the
streets and market-places, because it is always possible that the
forbidden things will present themselves to our eyes. One should
avoid looking at and seeing the forbidden by casting down the
eyes or turning the face away. One who shuts his eyes to the for-
bidden does not lose anything materially and spiritually, and he
does not give any harm to anybody. One who works efficiently,
honestly and sincerely and serves in the way of God, can never be
a passive victim of evil and vice. On the other hand, those who
stare at others or let others stare at them do not gain anything
thereby except danger. Hospitals, courts, prisons and the reports
in the dailies are clear testimony of what such persons themselves,
who court danger, and their partners, families, societies and coun-
tries, have lost by doing so. You cannot expect much from those
who paralyzed their hearts and wills by wandering glances.
In one hadith the Prophet said: “A time will come when to
preserve faith will be like holding a red hot cinder in one’s
palms. If you throw it away, you will lose your faith, if you keep
it, you will get burnt.”2
In another hadith he said: “Nazar (glancing at the forbid-
den) is one of the poisonous arrows of Satan.”3 When it hits the
heart or penetrates it through the channel of the eyes, one per-
ishes. And the Prophet expressed the Divine Will in his words
and added that: “If anyone leaves it out of fear of Me, I will give
his heart such an exhilaration of faith that he feels it thorough-
ly in the very depths of his heart.”4
The Prophet expressed his attitude toward the poisonous
arrows of Satan in speech and also demonstrated it in his dealings
with his close relatives. While they were descending from Mount
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
66

--- Sayfa 83 ---
Arafat during the pilgrimage, he let his cousin, Fadl, son of
‘Abbas, ride on his camel. In order to prevent his cousin’s gaze
being caught by the women who were passing by them, the
Prophet with his hand pushed his cousin’s head from one side to
the other.5 Recall that this happened during pilgrimage, when any
intention to look at women for pleasure is impossible, and when,
in the words of ‘Aisha, mother of believers, women used to cover
even their faces, at a time when everyone felt the sublime atmos-
phere of the Archangel Gabriel’s Revelations, the nearness of the
Hereafter, and the miracles, the Age of Happiness. Even as we
seek to control our hearts in the mosques and in the company of
other sincere Muslims, how should we evaluate the Prophet’s
turning his cousin’s face from one side to another during a Hajj
in that epoch? The Prophet did so because he did not want his
cousin to be distracted, to be hit by a poisonous arrow which
might sow the seeds of evil and vice in his heart and mind, even
at a time when Fadl was far from dreaming of such a thing.
The meaning of this event is to cut off evil at its root. It is
like not allowing a box of matches into the forest so as to protect
it from being burnt down; or, even when there is no threat of
war, to maintain the practice of guarding the frontiers and head-
quarters with many sentries; or to stuff all the holes and crevices
so that snakes and scorpions have no dwelling-places in which to
breed. That is, to set barriers before vice and evil so as to prevent
many individuals from being led astray and families broken; to
eliminate all the ways and means leading to rape, adultery, mur-
der, all sorts of immorality, perversions and corruptions; and to
deter all sins by prevention. That is the way defined by God.
The Prophet said to ‘Ali, who became a Muslim at the age
of seven, who grew up within the atmosphere of the Prophet,
was his cousin and was to be the father of the generations that
would come from the Prophet’s lineage: “O ‘Ali, the first glance
is in your favor, but the second is against you.” That is, when
your eye lights on something forbidden, you will not be respon-
sible for that glance because it is unintentional and accidental.
Your will is not in that first look. But, if you do not turn your
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
67

--- Sayfa 84 ---
eyes from it and keep on looking, your carnal self and will are in
it, and you will be questioned and punished for it; because this
is the first ring of a chain that will drag you into deviation, into
the forbidden. So the Prophet would have us close the gates to
the forbidden, to prevent it in advance, before it can happen.
- II -
One should not go out simply when one is bored. Going out
just out of boredom is a weakness and error of attitude. For, one
exposes oneself thereby to more negatives, a sort of “falling out
of the frying pan into the fire.”
Boredom arises from the dissatisfaction of the heart, lack of
closeness and relation to the Prophet and God, being unable to
do the religious duties and prayers properly or adequately, being
free or idle due to not reading and contemplating enough, hav-
ing few good friends and having no duty or responsibility on
one’s shoulders to fulfill or not serving in the way of God as one
is supposed to. In such a person, there are many openings for
Satan to get into. This is like walking again through the trench-
es where one was wounded by Satan, or like drinking sea-water
to quench a thirst aroused by drinking sea-water.
There is another way to look at this situation. God, in virtue
of His name Qabdh, grips man’s heart and puts him into a state
of qabdh (literally, “contraction,” “gripping”); a state of spiritual
desolation, which is a test for man to see his level of determina-
tion and loyalty. That is, the man is tested to see whether he will
turn to God and do prayers and supplications—or turn away. Let
me point out here that prayers, supplications, duties and servic-
es done in such a state are far more rewarding than those done at
bast (literally, “expansion,” “extension”), in a joyful and happy
state, or than those done with ease, amid other Muslims at nor-
mal times of congregation. And later on, as the sun shines after
a short burst of cloudy weather, God, in virtue of His name Basit,
expands the man’s heart and returns him to comfort and eager-
ness. Thus, God gives man the reward proportionately to the
hardship he endures.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
68

--- Sayfa 85 ---
In sum, one should not go out unnecessarily and, when he
does so, he should try to accomplish not a single but a couple of
tasks on one occasion. He should keep away from the places and
districts where sins are committed and where there is no service
in the way of God.
When one goes out, one should give the time and place the
attention that is their due. The Companions of the Prophet, like
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Abu Dhar, often went out to teach the
truths of Islam. Those who go out onto the public streets with
such aims in mind give the streets their due right and thus are
protected from committing sins. When the Prophet forbade his
Companions to sit alongside the roadway, they said they had
some business or good reason for doing so. Then the Prophet
said: “Then give the roadway its due,” that is, clean it of all
stones, thorns or obstacles, receive and respond to the greetings
of passers-by, enjoin the good and forbid the bad and tell them
the truths. Only with this pure intention, one’s sins and wrong-
doings can be replaced and turn to good deeds.
- III -
One should refer to, read, listen to, or have to do with works
that encourage knowledge, awe and fearful reverence (makhafa),
purify the senses and feelings, direct one’s attention to the high-
er purpose of living in this world, and keep one’s thoughts and
feelings under the influence of that purpose while one is going
out to school, or work, or is engaged in service. One should
review one’s purpose before going out, take a deep look at the
self ’s accounts and balance-sheet, do self-supervision, and be
equipped with some spiritual tension so that it may serve as a
cover, or shield, between oneself and vice. In that way one may
be protected by God from Satan and sins.
- IV -
One should not go out, as it were, unattended. One should have
the company of one or more good friends who can always help
guide one’s attention and who are accessible for consultation and
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
69

--- Sayfa 86 ---
who can keep one’s spiritual resources alert through guidance and
counseling. For, often one’s inner control may not suffice to brake
and hold oneself safe against temptations. One’s level of faith may
not be of the strength and quality to feel that one is always under
the watchful supervision of God. One may sometimes suffer such
weak moments that self-control fails, one’s gaze slips to the for-
bidden, and thus one receives a wound in the soul, the seed of bad
ideas may spread in the mind and a sin begin to ferment in the
soul. However, when one has good friends around, each watch-
ing out for the others, conversation can always turn to good
things and one can be more careful about what enters the eyes and
ears. There are moments when one will forget that the watchful
supervision of God is constant; in such moments, the desire and
need not to embarrass and disgrace one’s friends may serve to pre-
vent acts or manners that constitute or lead to wrong-doing. This
may be considered a lack of sincerity, to some extent even a sort
of hypocrisy, a mere pretending to be good; but, whereas hypocrisy
ruins the essence of the positive deeds, like salat (prescribed daily
prayers), it does not ruin the negative deeds, the not-doing of
what is bad. For example, if a man does not commit adultery
while only pretending to be good, still he did not commit that sin,
or if he does not steal something only because people are watch-
ing him, even so he did not steal. When the adultery of the hand
or foot, eye or ear, or mind, or whatever else will draw man’s
imagination toward sin is renounced, even to seem good to oth-
ers, one is considered to be safe from that sin unless and until it
takes control of the soul and one commits the sin, as it were, in
the heart though not daring to do it in fact. Furthermore, there is
some reward in not committing and renouncing the forbidden.
For instance, each closing of the eyes to the forbidden earns man
the reward of a wajib (necessary) act.
- V -
While coming, going or staying somewhere else one should, to
the extent practicable, carry with him the works and materials
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
70

--- Sayfa 87 ---
related to our world of faith and religion. These will serve to pro-
tect him, like guarding angels. These materials, which act as a
shield against sins, will be the means for inward contemplation,
for watchful supervision. A person who is accompanied or sur-
rounded by such materials can commit sins only with difficulty.
- VI -
As soon as one has done something wrong, one should repent
and turn to the Divine forgiveness. Sin is going out of the atmos-
phere of God’s favor, Grace, and denial of His security. In each
sin, there is always a way leading to new sins. One who has com-
mitted a sin already becomes an easier target for Satan, more like-
ly to be targeted again and commit that sin again. As one’s sins
increase, God’s security and protection against them decrease.
The place where a sin is least able to dwell is the believer’s
heart. The wrongs should be transient there, like passing clouds
on a sunny day, and should fade quickly. Sin is foulness, a stain,
rust. As it is expressed in a hadith, when foulness and rust pile up
because not cleaned off immediately, they come in between the
heart and God, cut off the manifestations coming from Him, hin-
der the winds of His Mercy and deprive one of His Grace. Could
there be an easier target for Satan to hit than such a heart?
No matter what the nature of the sin, one should never per-
mit such a negative effect to build up in the heart and soul.
Therefore, turn to God, express remorse, repent, ask for His for-
giveness, take refuge in His infinite Grace and Mercy. One of the
Companions came to the Prophet very upset, and said that he
was utterly perished. He explained that on the way he had looked
at a woman or touched her. He was so remorseful, indeed dev-
astated, on account of his sin that God sent Gabriel with the fol-
lowing verse:
And establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day [fajr,
zuhr, ‘asr] and at the approaches of the night [magrib, isha].
For those things that are good remove those that are evil. That
is a reminder for the mindful. (Hud 11:114)
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
71

--- Sayfa 88 ---
It is by the prayers that we keep away from evil, and God for-
gives the sins and replaces them with good. In particular, waking
up for the tahajjud (a very rewarding supererogatory prayer
observed in the night), which is the light of the intermediate
world, leaving the comfort of bed and sleep during the latter
hours of the night, and turning to God in prayer—is a sure means
of undoing mistakes and cleansing the stain of sins quickly.6
Prayers and supplications in the late hours of the night done
by a heart full of fear and hope will certainly be accepted by
God, provided that they are from the heart with sincerity. To do
the five daily prayers at the appointed times of worship, each of
which signifies the milestones of a day in humanity’s life, are a
means for any wrong-doings and sins committed between two
times of prayer to be forgiven.7 More than that, we should also
try to earn God’s pleasure by supererogatory prayers, especially
the tahajjud.8
A separate but important issue is that one who has commit-
ted a crime that embarrasses him will not want anyone to
become aware of it. However, he is totally aware that God and
His Angels saw and know what he did. Satan lies in wait for just
such an eventuality and will seek to make the sinner say: “I wish
there were none who saw and knew about my sin,” or even “I
wish it were not a sin”—Remember that not accepting as a sin
what God has forbidden leads to unbelief.
Insistence on committing a sin and considering it trivial may
also lead one to unbelief. Some people may be so habituated to
sins they cannot extricate themselves. It can happen that we
unintentionally push such people into far worse situations in an
effort to rescue them. For example, if we say to a weak Muslim,
“Don’t drink. It is forbidden,” he may respond: “A little or a cup-
ful cannot be forbidden,” or “I find the rule too strict.” Likewise,
in response to insistent words calling to salat, a weak individual
may respond with: “I’m not coming.” Such responses belong to
unbelief, so the individual may be led astray.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
72

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Essentially, sin is sin when it is insisted on, considered trivial,
not feared for its harm, not repented, and for which forgiveness is
not asked. Otherwise, if one is not persisting in a sin, knows the
harm and damage of it, tries to shun it, repents the doing of it,
and seeks forgiveness, by the grace of God, as the Qur’an states,
one will be granted forgiveness and mercy. Though the sin be the
size of a mountain, one should not despair, for there is no sin that
God will not forgive, except the sin of shirk (associating partners
with God)—and one who commits that will not turn to God for
forgiveness; he will seek solace (if at all) at the court of some false
or non-existent power.
- VII -
One should not be free or idle, and should take on some duties,
responsibilities and services on him. Satan makes use of idleness
and inactivity, and does not like one’s being enlightened intellec-
tually and spiritually so as to live and serve in the way of God. If
one is empty of responsibility, then Satan preoccupies the mind
and heart with fantasies, sins, and forbidden things. One can
block up all the holes through which Satan leaks into the mind
and heart by energetic activity and tries to prevent serving in the
way of God. One who runs to spread the message of God to oth-
ers without stopping to rest and congratulate himself will feel
energy, vitality, and joy in both body and soul. As is stated in a
hadith, since one enjoins the good and forbids the wrong, he will
feel the blessings and inspirations of the Divine Revelations in
his life, his food and necessities of life will be blessed and abun-
dant, and his home (family) will be one of the abodes of
Paradise. As is further pointed out in the hadith, if such duty and
service in the way of God, is forsaken, this blessings of the
Revelations will be cut off, and those who are deprived of such
blessings will be doomed and perish in darkness and afflictions.
- VIII -
God will help and protect those who dedicate themselves to
God, Islam, the Prophet, the communicating the Truth and the
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
73

--- Sayfa 90 ---
awakening or the enlightenment of people. God Himself makes
a covenant with such people:
O You who believe, if you help [the cause of] God, He will help
you, and plant your feet firmly. (Muhammad 47:7)
So it is obvious that God will not let those people be deviat-
ed, corrupted and caused to perish by any sort of evil or vice, or
Satanic selfhood. The Prophet said that if someone draws near to
God, God will draw near to him tenfold, if someone walks to
God, God will run to him. So if one acts upon Islam, performs
the prayers and obligations, and helps the Cause of God, he will
be rewarded manifold, and God will not let him be distracted,
deceived, or led astray by desires and temptations, his sins will be
replaced by good and righteous deeds, and he will be recom-
pensed with unknown, unforeseen rewards and eternal bliss.
On the one hand, we are in a terrible situation, surrounded
by sins. On the other, we are in a situation that offers advantages
that make up for its terrible side. With this attitude, to some
extent comparable to that of the Companions, we have the oppor-
tunity of getting closer to the Companions. They could feel the
breath of the Revelation on their faces, whereas we live ages apart
from them. Yet, if we are able to take our place behind them with
a Muhammadi spirit, we will, in one respect have assured our sal-
vation by the grace of God.
May God not disappoint us in that hope! Amin.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
74

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Communicating Islam to others
3.3.
How should believers invite others to faith?
T
he aim of sending the Prophets is communicating the
divine message, which is the most important and vital
obligation incumbent on humanity. That is to say, to
enlighten others with knowledge of the true religion and the
duties that accompany it. In the light of this our primary duty
is to review all existing and past methods and approaches, and
to put into practice today those principles which it is possible to
apply, and which lead to the best results. Everyone who is con-
sidered old enough to be responsible for his actions may and
should serve to convey the message of God to everyone, in the
recognized ways, with the courtesies proper to the task.
Whatever their ages and status are, each and every individual is
obliged to tell others what he is supposed to tell, and this con-
stitutes a most vital duty. The purpose of our existence is the
same too. For, God says: I created man and jinn for no other pur-
pose than to worship Me only (Dhariyat 51:56). Such worship or
servanthood to God is like a race, and every person will take part
in it. Some will not cope with the hurdles and be detained, and
some will always win and attain the furthest places in this race,
even to the presence of God.
To know God and devote oneself to Him is the purpose of
one’s nature and the essence of creation. Devotion, servanthood,
to God requires not only listening, understanding, accepting,
abiding by and applying certain rules in one’s life; it also means
seeking the purity in ideas and mind, and striving toward the

--- Sayfa 92 ---
horizon of thinking of only the Creator, whose effort is a heavy,
sublime, and sacred duty.
O you people, worship your Guardian Lord Who created you
and those who came before you that you may become right-
eous, Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens
your canopy; and sent down rain from the heavens; and
brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance; then set not
up rivals unto God when you know the truth. (Baqara 2:21)
Worship your God. For He is the Creator. The Creator of
you and the people who lived before you. The act of creating
and the things created belong to Him alone. It is God Who
brought you into existence, and Who created, in one sense,
before your birth, the elements and particles which would con-
stitute you, and Who created, in another sense, the people who
came before you. It is God Who caused to perish many before
you, like Pharaoh, Nimrod, Shaddad, and such. By His laws of
creation, He turned the Romans, the Greeks, the Byzantines,
the Ottomans and the rest, who strutted and swaggered about
the earth, into ruins. So it is God Who created and caused to
perish all those. Therefore, beware and worship God alone, the
Almighty, the Creator, the Sustainer, and keep always in mind
and before your eyes the example, lesson and warning of the
past and present, so that you may enter into the circle of piety,
consciousness of God.9
It is the Sustainer, the Almighty, who made the earth your
couch, a resting place.10 He created and provided for it in such a
way that everything of need is placed within the reach of your
hand. It is as if the world were a big mansion and the Owner of
this mansion, the Sovereign of all the worlds, was entertaining
His weak and unable guest with a great show of honor, treating
him with marks of respect and distinction. If the slightest failure
occurred in this couch, the guest could do nothing and would
have nowhere to flee to. So everything is maintained according to
the guest’s wants, needs and weaknesses. When this guest lies
down on his back and looks at the canopy over his head, he will
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
76

--- Sayfa 93 ---
see it ornamented with stars and systems for his observation. It is
God Who made this magnificent canopy over His guest’s couch.
He has made the heavens as a canopy well guarded.11 There
is a continual preordained coordination between the heavens
and the earth. The heavens give light and heat, and the earth
responds with buds and flowers; the earth returns the evapora-
tion to the heavens, and the heavens turn it back as rainfall; the
heavens have the thunders, lightning, and the earth gets its share
from their fertile effects; the heavens give rain, and the earth
preserves and presents it as drinking water, the living things live
their lives and die, and the earth is purified and sterilized by the
change of time, seasons, and so on and so forth. So we see that
this guest-house is created; not left to run itself but, on the con-
trary, it is cared for, sustained, and provides for the guests fruits
and blessings of all kinds. Therefore, turn to your Sustainer,
Cherisher, Lord of all the realms, and worship Him.
We are surrounded by such magnificent order, harmony,
splendor, and blessings, operated with great wisdom and power.
It is apparent that light for our eyes, taste for our tongues and
sound for our ears, that is, our physical and spiritual needs, are
all regulated and provided, as sustenance for us. All these come
from God. He is never confused while granting all these diverse
kind of sustenance; and He neither needs others’ help nor lets
them interfere with His work. Therefore, be fair and reasonable;
and do not confuse, do not associate, others in your worship of
God. Avoid and save yourself from the different kinds of the ugli-
ness of shirk (attributing partners to God) whether open or hid-
den, big or small.
All causes are accidental, secondary, none has true substance
or primary reality. Had God not assigned to us recourse to caus-
es, we would not have felt any need to refer to cause and would
have regarded any attempt of that kind as shirk. However, since
this world is the abode of wisdom and everything comes into
this place entangled in causes, we just consider them as mediat-
ing conditions. But the real focus is the Giver, Creator, Who
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
77

--- Sayfa 94 ---
holds all causes under His disposal, therefore we worship Him
alone. While attributing some share to causes, whether in the
face of misfortunes, calamities and sufferings, or of joy, pleasure
or delight, one should always preserve the balance, and avoid
words and acts which give any hint of shirk. And the sensitivity
to be observed on this matter is directly proportional to one’s
closeness to God. When one has tasted the blessing of the
immaterial and spiritual pleasures, one should continue to act
and worship God in a way worthy of such blessings. One should
not let oneself go astray even for an instant by any inclination
that might turn one to any other than God. If such an inclina-
tion occurs to one, one should come to oneself and affirm the
tawhid and proclaim the oneness of God. Such servanthood to
God done in this consciousness is the purpose of life, and every
understanding of service that leads to such a purpose is an obli-
gation, which is the wisdom in sending the prophets to carry
out this obligation. So we, the believers, undertake such a sacred
duty, and serving God in this way is a competition in virtue, and
the people who take part are the most virtuous people of all.
If all the ways which lead to presidency were opened and the
position were offered to someone who attaches importance to
serving God as explained above, and if he had to choose between
one or the other, the presidency or the service of God, he would
certainly prefer the latter. For, he knows that this is the job which
belongs to the Prophets and the truthful. In this way, there are
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Ali and the rest, who were pure,
saintly and enlightened men. On the other side are people of
whom a great majority are oppressors and tyrants; their actions
belong to those who have not been adequately nourished moral-
ly and spiritually, and have to do with dirty politicking, hatred,
intrigue and plots.
We live such a life that neither our coming into nor going
out of it is in our hands. But, it is possible for us to turn our lives
from ones in which we exist and do nothing but wait for the
inevitable end, to ones in which we live and make gradual progress
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
78

--- Sayfa 95 ---
to the level that God is pleased with us. This could be done first
by digesting all the principles of faith into our souls, making
them an integral part of our souls, and filling our consciences
with knowledge of God; and next, aspiring to the consciousness
of ihsan—worshipping as if we were seeing God—by raising our
faith toward the level of perfect sincerity by means of constant
worship, and thus making the pillars of Islam a faculty inherent
in our particular nature; and finally conveying these merits,
virtues and qualities, which we acquired for ourselves in the first
instance, to the community, making them prevalent in all walks
of life and thus enlightening all people and places.
In reflecting how to perform the duty of guidance and
teaching faith, a number of points are worth bearing in mind.
To set the matter out somewhat systematically can be useful in
terms of giving people ideas about how to do it, but it can be
harmful in terms of over-fixing and over-defining what needs to
be natural and flexible. Bearing in mind the need for naturalness
and flexibility, we can look briefly at a number of points.
- I -
One should seek and find ways to win entry into the heart and
soul of the person addressed. There are many humane ways one
may resort to, such as giving gifts or easing the person’s difficul-
ties. In fact these are ways of kindness that are an essential part
of the religion, part of what we are commanded to practice when
approaching people. So, first, the person we address should be in
a state willing to accept our friendship, cordiality and intimacy.
These are important factors if what we say is to be welcomed by
that person. Therefore, every effective way legitimate and per-
missible in Islam should be used to win the person’s heart.
- II -
We should know very well the level of faith, knowledge and cul-
ture of the person being addressed. In this way we may avoid
saying or doing something that could so frighten off that per-
son that he may never again come close to us or Islam. For
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
79

--- Sayfa 96 ---
example, if we open and read any Islamic publication or the
Qur’an to that person, and if our doing so puts him further off
from Islam, then it would be better not to read something, even
the Qur’an, to him. Any material we refer to might indeed be
full of inspirations which should conquer the hearts and souls of
people. However, to offer such material to one who is not yet
ready to welcome it, is indirectly (and unintentionally) to betray
the cause of Islam.
God provides colostrum, a milk-like liquid secreted for a few
days after childbirth that is high in antibody content. Later it
turns to whole milk and even the content of it gradually changes
as the baby grows up. This law of nature is certainly true of spir-
itual education and moral nourishment, too. What God mani-
fests to us in His laws of creation should be investigated, minute-
ly, and we should adjust our acts in accordance with them.
Sometimes, as this adjustment was lacking, what was said with
the intent of guidance caused such a reaction that, even if you
happen to find a suitable moment to tell it again, it is ineffectu-
al. So first of all, we should determine the level of perception,
knowledge and understanding of the person, so that, as Said
Nursi puts it, we do not end up offering grass to the lion and
meat to the horse.12
- III -
Gaining the trust and respect of the person spoken to is essen-
tial. He must trust and become attached to you in such a way
that you and his love for you weigh heavier than that of his oth-
er friends; because your friendship, relationship and love for
that person is different from the others’ and only for the sake of
God, it will definitely show its effects on his heart. When he is
to make a choice, he should be ready to prefer the strenuous
duties the religion lays upon us, to the comfort and pleasures of
the other side. Even the hardship, trouble and dangers he might
experience in the way you are going should be dearer to him
than the pleasures and comfort of his previous life. This can only
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
80

--- Sayfa 97 ---
happen for that person if he knows and trusts and loves you
thoroughly.
Here is a striking and a concrete example from the Age of
Happiness. Utba ibn Walid was one of the richest and the most
inveterate enemies of Islam in Makka. For this reason he was
given a nickname meaning, the most wretched evil-doer of his
tribe. He was the head of much mischief. However, there was a
fortunate person who was brought up in his house and was not
like him at all. This was his son, Hudayfa, who attached himself
to the Prophet loyally and rejected the most attractive things, in
the worldly sense, presented and proposed to him by his father
and family. What he was asked by his family was to abandon the
Prophet and the cause he propagated. However, due to the les-
sons he took from his teacher and guide, Hudayfa’s spiritual
tension was exact, and his faith and conviction were firm, and
he did not give in. What did the Prophet respond to such an
offer made by the chieftains in Makka? “If you put the sun in my
right hand and the moon in my left on condition that I abandon
this course, before He has made it victorious, or I have perished
therein, I would not abandon it.”13 The words the Prophet had
said made such an impression in the hearts and consciences of
the people that not only Hudayfa but also all the Companions
would give the same answer. As a guide and teacher, the Prophet
won the hearts of people in such a way that wherever and when-
ever his name was mentioned the effect and decrees of parents,
brothers, other kith and kin, were of no avail, and only he
remained as the focus of values.
From past to the present nothing much has changed in
respect of the relation between the spiritual guide and the one
guided. Only the time and the people change, the rest remains
the same. Therefore, would-be guides and teachers should apply
the Prophet’s way to win the hearts of people. Otherwise, what
is said will remain in the air (be ineffective) and will not meet
with a friendly welcome. It is a question of reaching, penetrat-
ing and settling in the hearts of people. We must remember that
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
81

--- Sayfa 98 ---
if the Prophet had not made himself so loved by his Companions,
they would not have gone to Badr behind him. For this was the
first battle—all the conditions were completely against them;
moreover, the majority of the enemies were their own sons,
brothers, fathers, uncles or other relatives. However, the believ-
ers got the signal to go forward from the Prophet and believed
that it was better for them to die in his way than to live with the
falsehood of their kith and kin.
Sometimes the Prophet inculcated in the believers the con-
sciousness of preferring God and His Messenger. We see in the
example of Ka‘b ibn Malik who failed to march out with the
army to Tabuk. Ka‘b himself told the story. The Prophet
admonished him: “Didn’t you promise to me in ‘Aqaba that you
would go wherever I go?” He replied: “O Messenger of God!
If I were dealing with a worldly man, I am sure I would escape
his displeasure through seemingly reasonable excuses, for God
has endowed me with the gift of the tongue. But in your case I
am sure that if I appease you with a false statement, God would
be displeased with me. And, on the other hand, I am sure that
if I displease you by confessing the simple truth, then God
would very soon blow away your displeasure. I therefore make
bold to speak the very truth. By God, I had no excuse at all. I
had never been so well as I was at that time.” His speaking the
truth and perseverance in seeking forgiveness of God brought
his salvation.14
The guide should enter the heart of the person he is dealing
with in such a way that he can persuade him to do what he tells
him; but that which he tells the other to do should not, must not,
be for his carnal self. According to the Qur’an, Pharaoh, Nimrod
and Shaddad represent the state of those who require from others
for themselves. By contrast, the Prophets made their demands
only on behalf of God or their community. This is a very subtle
point and those who communicate the divine message and be a
spiritual guide should pay the closest attention to it.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
82

--- Sayfa 99 ---
- IV -
We should have a sound grasp of Islam and Islamic tradition. One
should not speak out whatever comes into his mind or speculate.
The Prophet said that he left to us two resources, which we must
adhere to, and which would allow us to differentiate light from
darkness, right from wrong, namely the Qur’an and Sunna.15
Therefore, when something is presented on behalf of the cause of
Islam, it should be done within the principles of these two
sources, and one should have mastered the issues being addressed.
One should be well-versed, skilled and proficient in Islamic mat-
ters. One should never indulge in dialectics merely to silence the
other by argumentation. What we say should be what we our-
selves in the first place have understood and digested fully, so that
the person we are dealing with can easily take it in and be (spiri-
tually) nourished thereby. Just as in the analogy Bediüzzaman
gave, a spiritual guide should be like a sheep, which takes in,
digests and turns food into milk. So we should feed people with
the most restorative, wholesome food, but should not be like a
bird, which half-eats, then gives its chicks the regurgitated food.16
If we do it the right way, we can appeal to people’s minds and
souls, and, considering the true knowledge and wisdom which
would lead to God, and bring about the best, desired effects.
Naturally this can only be done by reading and studying,
improving one’s level of knowledge and culture. That is why
those who assume the duty of communicating the divine mes-
sage should allocate a certain period in a day only to study. The
person who is unaware of the knowledge and culture of his day
has nothing much to say to the people he is dealing with, or in
other words, the person whose level of knowledge and culture
is shallow cannot long satisfy the minds of the people he is
addressing. Therefore, a guide who is likely to meet people at all
levels of knowledge and education should at least have sufficient
knowledge and the mastery of the issues he is explaining to sat-
isfy the people he is dealing with. It is my belief that anyone
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
83

--- Sayfa 100 ---
who is backward in his cultural epoch can offer but very little to
those who are, or think they are, ahead of him.
I insistently and emphatically repeat that those who regard
communicating the message as the purpose of their lives should
be equipped with learning and knowledge of God. What an
empty person will say is also empty, worse still is when such
people try to cover their lack by vehemence, belligerence, angry
and futile attitudinizing: in reaction to that, those who are lis-
tening will be put off and indeed resent what they otherwise
would accept as reasonable.
- V -
All work should be done with devotion, from the heart and with
sincerity. Seeking the pleasure of God is what should govern the
perspective, and everything should be designed and regulated
accordingly. The method to be followed and the strategies to be
applied should primarily be evaluated and assessed by the pleas-
ure of God. If we have a strong conviction that God will be
pleased with them, we will go ahead, otherwise, we should
absolutely renounce them, and in this way we may hope never to
offer any occasion for people to be misled.
The Prophet defines, limits, struggle in the way of God as
that struggle which is undertaken only to exalt the religion of
God.17 That means that if you are striving on the way in order
to spread the name of God, then it is for God. But to claim that,
while in reality serving one’s carnal self, is doomed to failure: for
such a struggle is without sincerity and obtains no reward, and
where sincerity is damaged, neither the pleasure of God nor any
positive influence on the hearts of others are thinkable.
There lived such people before us that whenever they felt
that they had spoken or acted flawlessly, they straightaway went
into prostration and asked for forgiveness and sincerity from
God. For instance, when ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz saw how well
he had written a state letter, and himself liked its eloquence, he
feared lest pride and conceit should enter his heart, and imme-
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
84

--- Sayfa 101 ---
diately tore up the letter and wrote a new one. Islam was pre-
sented in such an atmosphere of sincerity and consciousness
then. To speak of God and to spread His message in such a style
that the carnal self gained no advantage or comfort from it was
almost considered a principle. They assumed that since their
own carnal self did not like and get a share from such acts, that
there was the pleasure of God in them, and later they turned this
into a principle. In sum, sincerity and action from the heart
must be the whole essence of what is taught or explained; and
if we would avoid reproach and having our efforts thrown back
in our faces in the Hereafter, we must stick to sincerity firmly.
We see in many hadiths that the Prophet emphasized the
significance of sincerity and indicated it as the ultimate objective
or horizon.18
In narrating about the Prophets, the Qur’an pointed out
their sincerity, and presented it as an integral part of prophet-
hood. The Qur’an concisely tells us in the word “mukhlas”
(Maryam 19:51) that the Prophet Moses’ acts and work were
done only to gain the pleasure of God, and in this way it gives
people a lesson in sincerity. The Prophet Abraham, as one whose
understanding and consciousness of sincerity was of the highest
order, did not fall into doubt and despair even when all events
and conditions proved against him, and he even refused the
intercession of the angels, taking refuge in only God, Who is
All-Aware, All-Knowing, All-Seeing, and said, “God is enough
for me.”19 What was more important for him was the pleasure
of God, and he did not put this idea into a secondary place even
when threatened with execution. For this reason he was called
Khalil (friend) of God20; and such a friendship obviously requires
the deepest devotion and sincerity.
One day when the Prophet was addressed as “O Friend of
God,” he immediately reacted with: “No. That is Abraham.”21
Also, one day when he was addressed as “Sayyiduna,” (our mas-
ter) he immediately reacted with: “Sayyiduna is Abraham.”22
Thus it is that only a jeweler appreciates the true value of a jew-
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
85

--- Sayfa 102 ---
el. That is why, sincerity and action from heart, the attributes of
the Prophets, should be inseparable and integral parts of those
who take on the duty of the Prophets. The Qur’an presents us
every Prophet as one who had achieved sincerity or to whom
God commanded it.23 So, I believe that it would be better to
study the Qur’an from this aspect too.
- VI -
Whatever the level the guide has attained, his heart should be
equipped with religious sciences and his mind with civil and
positive sciences. By employing his skills and talents at a level
high above worldly trivialities, a level attained as a result of the
union of both kinds of knowledge, he should become more pro-
found in inward self-supervision, and then, within the potential-
ities granted to him, he should improve in understanding of the
Names of God. All of which is, of course, related to the point
we made above—the acquisition of sincerity and action from
the heart in all their dimensions.
Those who take on the duty of guidance should never indulge
in the vulgar ways of getting others to accept them, of having
the conceit that they influence people, or of boasting of increase
in the number of their followers. Instead, they should make a
self-criticism of their actions to see if they conform to the pleas-
ure of God. Self-criticism, self-inspection, and self-supervision
are essential with regard to spiritual guidance.
What is the reason for what you are doing? That is what
needs to be checked and supervised. If there is anything related to
our nafs (selfhood, carnal self), we must know to stop there and
then. For instance, you are reading and telling something in a
gathering, a very good thing in itself, but as you become attentive
you realize that what you are captivated by is not the content and
meaning of what you are reading but the fact that you are doing
so and how well you are doing it. So, there and then, you must
stop, or at least pass the book to someone else to carry on. Say,
you are preaching from a pulpit, and by the grace of God, you are
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
86

--- Sayfa 103 ---
blessed with such an “expansiveness” that you have only to part
your lips and the words flow from your mouth as if of their own
accord. There and then you should pay attention to Him Who
makes you speak so, and realizing the Giver of such a blessing you
should acknowledge your smallness, your servanthood to Him
and His Lordship. Otherwise, if your nafs is trying to get some
share in His Grace, and you are captivated by that, you must
know to stop speaking immediately and get down from the pul-
pit. For, there is fitna (severe trial) in speaking well, and one
should seek refuge in God from such an end. There have been
such orators in the world who led great masses of people behind
them, but (except the few who were sincere among them) many
of their followers are still giving their accounts bitterly, resentful-
ly, to God of how they were persuaded. Say, we are regularly read-
ing and reciting from the Qur’an as our act of secluded worship,
and, while reading, we become aware of also trying to melodize
and sweeten our voice. Though it is the Qur’an, even such acts of
worship are vulnerable to other aims than the pleasure of God, so
doubts arise in us and give us pause. Then we should say, “O God,
I have begun to read for You, and now I’m stopping, also for
You,” and stop reading. Thus, by this inner self-supervision, we
learn to regulate ourselves in respect of what is coming up from
the depths of our hearts. When it is time, one should know how
to deny the carnal self and how to strive against the carnal self.
Even in this struggle, one should look for the pleasure of God and
act in the ways which will lead to His pleasure.
Such a mood may sometimes manifest in manners that will
appear to some people as abnormal, such as, shaking the head,
being doubled up in pain, or going into prostration and crying,
groaning, there. However, sincerity will, gradually over time,
will become natural, and then one can do, act, take or give up
everything for God with ease of heart. May God grant us sin-
cerity and purity of heart according to our needs, but not our
deserts.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
87

--- Sayfa 104 ---
- VII -
If our work causes some adverse reactions in some particular
conscience, we should, saying “God’s good pleasure (with us) is
above all,” wholeheartedly and cheerfully give way to another to
do the work. Some individuals may react to us for some partic-
ular personal reasons, and whatever we say may bring about an
adverse reaction. If we remained insisting, our efforts would
only serve to make the other refuse, rather than accept. Thus,
while that other person has suffered a loss in not accepting the
truth, we will suffer a greater loss for we prevented its accept-
ance. The solution is simple. It is someone else, not we, who
will speak to that person. It may be that he accepts the truth
from another and so, for being a means to it, however indirect,
we will earn the reward for it—as much as the one who worked
after us. A subtle matter here is to observe that there is a differ-
ence between merely willing that another do the work, and
accepting cheerfully that it be so, liking it to be so. We should
endeavor to be of the latter, for that is sure to displease the car-
nal self, and that takes courage and is an instance of genuine
altruism and generosity in the cause.
The offer of a Companion who expressed his desire for a
position of authority was not welcomed by the Prophet.24 Similarly,
a desire to be the person who speaks at a gathering is not wel-
comed either. The Prophet always gave such duties to those who
were competent, qualified, appropriate and deserving. For this
reason, people should come together, choose the person, pre-
pare the conditions for him to speak, and should never be trou-
bled by being among the listeners.
- VIII -
When we encounter issues or questions we have no knowledge
of, we should readily and comfortably say “I don’t know.” Again,
our best example and guide is the Prophet. With malicious
intent, some Jews came and asked the Prophet about the essence
of the spirit, looking to raise doubts and misgivings about his
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
88

--- Sayfa 105 ---
Prophethood. As the Revelation had not yet come on this mat-
ter, the Prophet gave no answer and kept silent; but, later on, the
matter was revealed: Say: The spirit is my Lord’s command and you
have not been given except a little knowledge (Isra 17:85). The
Prophet’s keeping silent in the first place and answering later on,
after the verse was revealed, became more influential, and when
the Jews got the anticipated answer they were convinced and
silenced. So, even the Prophet of God did not say “I know” to
every question. What a great lesson to us all!
When the Archangel Gabriel, disguised as a traveler and
inquirer, came to the Prophet and asked the time of the Day of
Resurrection, the Prophet answered, “the one who is asked does
not know more than the one who asks.”25 There cannot be a
better example to teach us that we do not have to answer every
question put to us.
On one occasion, when Imam Abu Yusuf was asked one
hundred questions, he responded to sixty out of the hundred
with “I don’t know.” And the people reacted that they were pay-
ing for the position of the Imam, and yet here was the Imam
saying “I don’t know.” Imam Abu Yusuf explained: “You are
paying me for the things I know, and if you had paid for what I
don’t know, the whole world would not have sufficed.” Imam
Abu Yusuf at that time held the position of Chief Qadi. On a
similar occasion, Imam Malik answered only three questions out
of thirty put to him.
These and similar examples show that even the giants of
learning held in the highest honor and esteem for their knowl-
edge, did not answer everything they were asked. What is more,
they said, “I don’t know.” So, we should easily be able to acknowl-
edge that we do not know; but we need not to leave it at that; we
must follow up the matter, and seek learning where we are igno-
rant. It is also possible that there may be a knowledgeable person
whom we know and trust, to whom we can take the questioner
or the question. In this way, we learn ourselves and prepare
opportunities for others to learn also.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
89

--- Sayfa 106 ---
- IX -
The people of guidance should be generous, open-handed and
benevolent. They should be ready, willing and decisive to spend
everything they have in His cause while going on the path of
serving God. To win the hearts of people they should make their
generosity a means, a vehicle. Whenever generosity is men-
tioned, Khadija, the wife of the Prophet, comes to my mind.
She was born before him and passed away before the Prophet.
When she met the future Prophet, she was a noble and prosper-
ous businesswoman, organizing trade caravans to other coun-
tries whereas he did not have anything in terms of worldly
wealth. However, this woman of great insight perceived the
great potential in the future Prophet and proposed to him. She
had a nature suited to becoming the wife of the Prophet. When
Prophethood was given to him, she was the first to acknowledge
him, without any doubt, and put the whole of her wealth at his
disposal, in the way of God. Nothing was left from this wealth
during the boycott imposed upon the Muslims by Quraysh in
Makka. At times the Prophet could not find anything to eat and
was all but fainting with weakness because there had been noth-
ing at home for days. During that time, umm al-mu’minin
(mother of believers) Khadija became ill and as there were no
means to procure treatment, she passed away. In generosity, the
ultimate is to give oneself, to be consumed.
Abu Bakr was one of the richest tradesmen in Makka, but
as one of the good examples of generosity, he used and spent all
his wealth in the way of God, and nothing was left to him and
his family. He used to distract his aged father by putting pebbles
into the money bag, while spending the pieces of gold in the
way of Islam. For this reason, even when he was elected the
Caliph, he was one of the poor and earned his living by milking
other people’s sheep.26
‘Umar and his family subsisted on a few dates, as did the
poorest in Madina. That suggests that he too used up everything
he had in the way of God.27
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
90

--- Sayfa 107 ---
The Companions of the Prophet competed with each other
in acts of generosity and altruism on behalf of Islam. Their sin-
cere generosity won hearts and minds to Islam, and the number
of entrants to the faith grew with the gathering force of an ava-
lanche. In this as in all matters, the Companions took their cue
from the Prophet. One day, one of those on the brink of enter-
ing the faith who had yet to do so, went to his tribe and said:
“O my tribe! Go and surrender to that person, for he is the
Prophet of God. If he had not been a Prophet, he would not
have been so generous, and feared for his sustenance. This per-
son gives immediately whoever wants whatever.”28
Every spiritual teacher young or old, should try to enter and
conquer the hearts of people in this way. If one gains the heart of
a person by spending all he has, he will be considered to have
gained a lot and lost nothing. For the generous will open the gates
of Paradise.29 So, one should open the ways that lead to such gates
in this world so that there are many to accompany one to Paradise
in the other world. Those whom you treated with generosity in
this world will be in a state such that if one day they happen to
face a choice between human-improvised way of life and Qur’an-
enjoined ways, they will choose the Qur’an and the Prophet and
so come to submit, to surrender, themselves, wholly to God.
Those who are first to enter the Paradise will not be schol-
ars or preachers, lecturers or teachers, rather those—whoever
they are, whether big businessmen or small, or ordinary work-
ers, disposing large incomes or small—who spent their wealth
and lives on the path to spread the Truth; generous, open-hand-
ed, benevolent and altruistic Muslims, profoundly attached and
devoted to God alone. For it is they who were able to distin-
guish rightly and accordingly it will be said of them: they gave
to their Lord what is transitory and perishable and received
what is permanent and everlasting.
- X -
Today we witness and experience an awakening of consciousness
in all walks of life such as we have not experienced for almost
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
91

--- Sayfa 108 ---
twenty years. In the past it was really difficult to find so many
believers in the field of higher education as there are today. This
is a sheer blessing of God. However, now, not individuals but
the masses stand as the owners, protectors or patrons of servic-
es to Islam. We experience a time when even some of the most
obstinate people have come to soften their attitudes to Islamic
matters and even begun to consider them as feasible. Therefore,
at such a time, it is incumbent upon us to develop, employ and
evaluate new methods and approaches, provided that we do not
depart from the essence and spirit of the truth. Otherwise, it is
likely, indeed certain, that we will, as others have, fail to realize
the conditions of the time and so lose relevance and effective-
ness. We take refuge in God from falling into such a state. We
must, as we need to do, adapt to the new ways and develop-
ments that the present age presents to us. It should be remem-
bered that the slower we are to adapt, the slower we shall be in
reaching the target.
We may conclude with a point that is general and valid for
all, that those who take on spiritual guidance should know and
realize the conditions and requirements of their epoch, and base
their ways of working on these fundamentals. While others are
returning into space and shuttling between far new horizons, it
is obvious that we will get nowhere by taking people to unso-
phisticated ways, dark places or underground, in order to teach
them something.
- XI -
Understanding group psychology, using appropriate ways to
facilitate the joining and progressing of new people is also
important. With some people there are things you speak of but
cannot make understood for years. Make such people aware of
the development and progress of particular services and institu-
tions, get them to see and meet the others who are working sin-
cerely, whole-heartedly and with great zeal, let them feel the val-
ue and atmosphere of cooperation, solidarity and mutual help in
collective work. Such direct witnessing may prove more influen-
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
92

--- Sayfa 109 ---
tial than mere telling. However, the Islamic services and institu-
tions should be presented without discrimination and prejudice,
without any sense of exclusivity or belonging to a narrow
grouping or party. Such visits and demonstrations can influence
and reinforce the people’s power of determination in such a way
that they may jump the interval of years on one occasion, and
be ready to stand on the same line as yourself, shoulder to shoul-
der. This is true of both individuals and groups.
Thank God that such institutions are now great in numbers,
both to hearten the believers and to dishearten the enemies of
Islam.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
93

--- Sayfa 110 ---
R

--- Sayfa 111 ---
3.4.
How should we deal with mockery or ridicule, especially
of the young trying to practice their religion by their peers?
Forthwith he [Noah] starts constructing the Ark: Every time
that the Chiefs of his people passed by him they threw ridicule
on him. He said: “If you ridicule us now, we (in our turn) can
look down on you with ridicule likewise! But soon will you
know who it is on whom will descend a chastisement that will
cover them with shame—on whom will be unloosed a chastise-
ment lasting.” (Hud 11:38-9)
“Our Lord! bring us out of this: if ever we return (to evil), then
shall we be wrongdoers indeed!” He will say: “Be you driven
into it (with ignominy)! And speak you not to Me! A part of My
servants there was, who used to pray, “Our Lord! we believe;
then do You forgive us, and have mercy upon us: for You are the
Best of those who show mercy!” But you treated them with
ridicule, so much so that (ridicule of) them made you forget My
message while you were laughing at them! I have rewarded them
this day for their patience and constancy. They are indeed the
ones that have achieved bliss . . .” (Mu’minun 23:107-11)
Those in sin used to laugh at those who believed, and whenev-
er they passed by them, used to wink at each other (in mock-
ery); and when they returned to their own people, they would
return jesting. (Mutaffifin 83:29-31)
I
t is clear from the verses above that the Qur’an regards
derision and ridicule of the believers as a habit, a regular
custom, characteristic of unbelievers. A Muslim may nei-

--- Sayfa 112 ---
ther initiate nor return derision and ridicule of the beliefs of oth-
ers: that is explicitly commanded in the Qur’an, where the rea-
son given is that the Muslim must not provoke unbelievers into
one of the greatest sins, namely blasphemy, even if the unbeliev-
ers do not recognize it as such.
Those who ridicule the believers will clearly see what they did;
they will have a clear answer for it in the Hereafter, and will there
curse and denounce themselves. In the brief life of this world, retal-
iation in kind exacerbates the harm and there is no point in that.
As believers, we are enjoined not to retaliate in such situations, and
we are most content with this injunction to restraint.
Believing in God and expressing surrender and servanthood
to Him is the highest glory and honor for us in this world and
the next. If it were permissible, we would take pride in it and
boast of it.
The mockers mock our prayer, but it is our means of ascen-
sion, that makes us closer to our Creator. They mock our wudu’
(ablution); it will make us known to our Prophet beside the
pool of kawthar (heavenly river) through the radiance it brings
to our faces. They mock our manner of dress; it is what the
Prophet commended as the way that increases our reward man-
ifold and us in dignity. None of these are worthy of ridicule;
rather, they are ways that will be acknowledged and prized for
their supreme otherworldly value and reward in the Hereafter.
What is worthy of criticism is the manner of one who spurns
the Creator like, or worse than, an ignorant animal. Likewise
deserving of criticism are the manners of drunks, dipsomaniacs
who shame and disgrace themselves and their society: of usurers,
black-marketeers, monopolists, and profiteers, who defraud and
disgrace the commercial life of the society; of those who profit
from the weaknesses of others by systematically encouraging and
exaggerating those weaknesses, drug-pushers, the dealers in
pornography and the so-called sex “industry.”
Yet those who take up or support shameful practices aspire
to spread them, and resent those who keep themselves aloof,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
96

--- Sayfa 113 ---
safe, from their poison. Out of that resentment, their ridicule is
born, and especially directed at the young. To the young
Muslims so targeted, we say: find strength, assurance and solace
in this description of your character:
Those who witness no falsehood and if they pass by futility,
they pass by it with honorable (avoidance). (Furqan 25:72)
So when young religious Muslims, who are honored by the
Qur’an, find themselves in such a situation, they must withdraw
from it in an honorable, dignified way. If they pass by those put-
ting on impertinent and doubtful attitudes, let them pass noble-
heartedly, kindly and smilingly, and thus demonstrate the strength
and contentment, the sheer sanity and ease, of being a Muslim.
Those who mock display their own smallness of spirit. Let the
young Muslims answer their smallness with largesse: behave to
them with dignified seriousness, retain your natural courtesy of
manner and speech, present the strength of Islam with all its grace
and sweetness. Indeed, offer in your heart that even those mock-
ers may find guidance to the Right Path. For that is most becom-
ing to a Muslim, and will be a proof for yourselves of being on
the Muhammadi way.
Each of us shall be resurrected with what we did. Those who
laugh at Muslims today will be exposed to laughter and ridicule;
those who are ridiculed today will be honored and glorified with
the kindness and favor of God tomorrow, and they will pass over
the bridge of Sirat (the very narrow bridge which leads to
Heaven) like lightning, and reach the Garden of Paradise.
May God make firm the feet of those young Muslims sub-
jected to the assaults of ridicule and scorn in the way of Islam;
may they never be shaken nor made fearful, nor caused to step
back from that way. May God grant them the strength and grace
to see the great journey to its end. Amin.
Virtues and Hardships in the Service of Islam
97

--- Sayfa 115 ---
3.5.
As God already gives His blessings and peace to
Prophet Muhammad, what is the wisdom in our invoking
God’s blessings and peace upon him? Does he need our
invocations?
P
rophet Muhammad is like the core of all the good deeds,
prosperity and divine blessing. He is the unfailing, unerr-
ing guide, the exemplar to be taken as a model by all,
and the one who leads to the Right Path, who establishes the
best methods to serve God and humankind and thus ushers a
new era to enable human beings to live humanely.
He is the means, appointed by God, to take people out of
darkness to the light. Accordingly, he will be given the equal of
the reward earned by the good deeds of his community. In accor-
dance with the principle “one who causes is like the doer,”30 the
same amount of reward for the good and righteous deeds done
by his people will go on being written in his book of reward till
the Day of Judgment.
To the Prophet belongs the Maqam al-Mahmud, the praised
position or rank assigned to him as intercessor in the Day of
Judgment. His book of reward will not be closed from the time
of his death. Rather, abundance of good works and pious deeds
will be added to it, his rank will increase ever higher, the scope of
his intercession will expand further,31 and thus, as God wills, he
will have a right to intercede for greater numbers, masses, of the
people of his community. For this reason, we will look at this
question from two different angles:

--- Sayfa 116 ---
First, by uttering the formula calling God’s benediction on the
Prophet, we renew our oath to the Prophet and the desire to
belong among his community. That is, we say: “We remembered
and thought of you as our Prophet and prayed God to increase
your worth and degree, and we join and relate ourselves to you.”
Since our prayer is made with the intention that God will increase
the degree of esteem of the owner of the Maqam al-Mahmud, his
sphere of intercession will expand and thus many more people will
be able to benefit from his intercession on the Day of Judgment.
Secondly, one’s prayer to God that the Prophet’s rank be
increased is a means to be taken under the protection of the
Prophet and thus one’s hope of intercession is enlarged. That is
why it is we, rather than the Prophet, who are in need of invoking
God’s blessings and peace upon him. By doing so we acknowledge
the Prophet as the Prophet, his greatness and authority, and, at the
same time we acknowledge our smallness, our nothingness, our
need for belonging to his community. Just as a person can regard
the state of which he is a subject or citizen as potent to assist him
in case of need or danger, so do we stand in need, on account of
our incompetence, poverty, and the anxiety of a terrible Day of
Reckoning—even now, in advance, we can feel the oncoming,
shock of that Day— of the refuge and safety of the Prophet, and
we seek that refuge through our invocations, inform him of our
present state and give him a petition to be remembered.
May God honor us with the intercession of His Prophet,
the one who has by God’s leave, the widest right of intercession
on the Day of Reckoning.
Reflect, too, on the good news that God allows to every
Prophet something that he may pass on to his people. When the
other Prophets were granted the right to ask something for their
peoples, they all asked for something in this world. But our Prophet
said: “I left what I would give to my people to the Hereafter, and
that is my intercession.”32
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
100

--- Sayfa 117 ---
CHAPTER 4
Scientific Issues

--- Sayfa 119 ---
4.1.
Is it right when people link HIV to “the Beast of the
Earth” (Dabbat al-ard), one of the signs of the Last Day?
T
he question touches on two matters. One has to do with
what AIDS is; the other has to do with how Muslims as
Muslims make sense of it and of similar phenomena. Let
us take the first matter first.
What is AIDS?
AIDS or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome is a viral infec-
tion which destroys the body’s defenses against disease. Because
its effects are dramatic and nearly always fatal, it has been called
the plague of modern times. It also spreads very quickly—the
number of people infected is reckoned to be doubling every ten
months. Moreover, there is, as yet, no reported cure.
AIDS was first diagnosed in 1981. Once initial investiga-
tions into it—how the infection is transmitted, how it develops
and progresses, and the difficulty of containing, let alone curing,
it—became widely known, the popular reaction was panic.
No such infection had been reported before the eighties.
How did it originate? Among other conspiracy theories, one
was that the virus had “escaped” from improperly controlled
experiments in the United States for biological or chemical war-
fare purposes. There is no proof for this allegation. Nor is there
any proof for the other popular theory that the disease originat-
ed among a particular species of monkey in Africa, “jumped”

--- Sayfa 120 ---
into a human being, and was then carried, through sexual con-
tact, to an American visiting Africa who then took it back with
him to the United States whence it spread further. The reality is
that nobody knows how HIV originated.
There is certain knowledge, however, of how the disease is
transmitted. It is transmitted by direct exchange of bodily flu-
ids; in the United States and Canada HIV is most commonly
transmitted during sex between homosexual men and by sharing
needles while using illicit drugs. Transfusion of infected blood
can also cause the disease, and it can be passed on by infected
pregnant women to their babies.
It is also known with certainty that some people may be
HIV carriers, able to transmit the disease to others without suf-
fering the effects of it themselves. This adds further to the mys-
tery and terror surrounding HIV.
HIV may be epidemic in some parts of the world but, all
praise and thanks to God, the least infected peoples are Muslims,
whether in Muslim countries or others. The noble values and
morality of the Islamic way of life have protected Muslims against
such a disaster, even though they have suffered a long and inten-
sive campaign to renounce that way of life. HIV is a visible fea-
ture of the impurities that flow under (or along with) so much
of the mainstream of the “modern lifestyle”; but, for reasons that
need not been gone into here, I think it better to avoid dwelling
on the useless, on what is vain or absurd or immoral. To be frank,
even talking around an issue like HIV causes me considerable
unease and embarrassment. I therefore touch upon the subject
only so far as it can be approached in a way that benefits the
understanding and well-being of right-minded people.
Now, as to the second matter. How should Muslims as
Muslims make sense of HIV?
How to respond to phenomena like HIV
It is, unfortunately, true that some people have put forward the
view that HIV is the referent of the Qur’anic phrase dabbat al-
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
104

--- Sayfa 121 ---
ard which means, literally, “beast of the earth,” whose appear-
ance will indicate the nearness of the Last Day. We shall look
closely at the content of this view, but there is a general point
here which also needs to be discussed.
To read dabbat al-ard as referring to HIV is a particular
example of a more general failure to be sufficiently careful in
relying upon modern referents for terms used in the Qur’an and
hadith. A specific example is the hasty interpretation by some
people—intending no doubt to affirm the “scientific validity” of
hadith—of the Prophet’s warning: “Flee from leprosy just as
you would from a lion.”1 These people thought the metaphor of
lion very telling because the microbe associated with leprosy
seemed to look like a lion. Closer microscopic inspection proved
this likeness to be incorrect. Now if any Muslim had believed
that what the Prophet said had anything whatever to do with
the form of the leprosy microbe, would that Muslim’s belief not
be vulnerable to the argument that a statement attributed to the
Prophet had been established as false.
To make claims of the sort just illustrated can be harmful.
To do so without knowledge and understanding of the essential
truth of the matter in question is surely wrong. Besides, none of
the findings of scientific research are ever absolute. Neither the
procedures of research, nor the processes of reasoning about the
results of research, are free from error. Indeed, the most widely
accepted position among scientists themselves is that the best to
be hoped for from science is the gradual elimination, one by
one, of past and present errors. Extreme positivist or rationalist
doctrines are now generally rejected. It seems most improper,
therefore, to seek to understand or explain the Qur’an or hadith
on the basis of what is, at best, uncertain and hypothetical, and
quite possibly false. The great volume of articles and books pro-
duced in this vein in recent times will be open to ridicule in the
future. To be sure, there is a reward for sincerity and good inten-
tion; but what if sincerity and good intention result in weaken-
ing faith and practice instead of strengthening them? What if
Scientific Issues
105

--- Sayfa 122 ---
they lead to Muslims being embarrassed and mocked on account
of the naiveté of the arguments put forward on behalf of Islam?
It is our view that people who have approached the subject of
HIV in this way have erred.
It is surely wiser, worthier in intention and result, to tackle
such subjects from a broad, traditionally Islamic perspective.
Arguments that do so, however “old” remain fresh, light and
appealing. The scope and manner of their explanations maintain a
link with the general truths of Islam. Precisely for that reason, they
are able to embrace the realities specific to particular circumstances
and are therefore always relevant and enlightening. By contrast,
arguments that bow to the agenda of modern circumstances are
(when they are not wrong to start with) soon out of date.
The traditional teaching begins from the belief that God is,
and Muhammad is His Messenger. It proceeds to explain how
particular events or entities in the universe, from the smallest to
the largest, affirm that belief. That is wholly different from the
approach that begins with the assertion of the so-called truths of
science, and then hopes, on the basis of such weak, insecure
foundations, to build understanding and knowledge of the Creator
and the teaching of His Messenger.
I do not doubt that the Muslims who try to reconcile cur-
rent knowledge and current events with the Qur’an and hadith
are well-intentioned. In doing this, they mean to affirm the
statements of the Qur’an and hadith. As against certain attitudes
provoked by over-confidence in the natural sciences, in posi-
tivism and rationalism, they aim to demonstrate that Qur’an
and hadith do not contradict but concur with the results of
experimentally verified scientific inquiry. They hope to commu-
nicate something about Islam to those scholars, thinkers and
their students, whose world-view is too narrowly circumscribed
by the norms and procedures of scientific investigation. For the
reasons explained above, their efforts are sure to receive some
criticism in the future. However, to say that their approach is
totally or only harmful would be an ill-considered and hasty
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
106

--- Sayfa 123 ---
judgment. The wisdom of Qur’an and hadith do not need any
external support—their authority, soundness, and rightness
appeal directly and naturally to human intuition and conscience.
That said, we should not over-criticize sincere efforts to present
additional, external evidence that tries to get rid of the dust that
prevents our poor minds from grasping the correspondences or
compatibilities between the absolute truths of Islam and the
insecure “truths” of science; but what we must, and do, reject is
that the truth of Qur’an and hadith should be made to depend
upon verification and confirmation by scientific data which are,
as explained above, incomplete, disconnected from the meaning
and purpose of life as a whole, and vulnerable to change as the
borders of human ignorance change.
Let me now turn to the matter of HIV in relation to dabbat
al-ard.
Dabbat al-ard
The phrase occurs both in the Qur’an and hadith. Dabba con-
notes any entity that creeps, crawls or moves upon the earth on
its legs. God describes in the Qur’an all species of animate
(moving) creatures of the earth as dabba:
God has created every being (creature) from water: of them
there are some that creep on their bellies; some that walk on
two legs; and some that walk on four. God creates what He
wills. For God has power over all things. (Nur 24:45)
From its use in its context, we see that dabba could refer to
any of the creatures known to humankind, from micro-organ-
isms to dinosaurs. Yet, there are some that are not known to us,
and still others that God will create in the future, as He wills.
The HIV virus which leads to AIDS may be among those
micro-organisms which have recently become known.
The term is used again, in other Qur’anic verses, when God
affirms that He provides sustenance for each of the creatures of
the earth. For example:
Scientific Issues
107

--- Sayfa 124 ---
There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance
depends on God . . . . (Hud 11:6)
How many are the creatures that carry not their own suste-
nance. It is God who feeds both them and you . . . (Ankabut
29:60)
But the dabba mentioned in the question occurs in this
verse in the chapter Naml:
And when the word is fulfilled against them (the unjust), We
shall produce from the earth a dabba (beast) to face them. It
will speak to them, because humankind did not believe with
assurance in our signs. (Naml 27:82)
The “when” to which the verse alludes is that time when the
task for which all creatures were created, namely to display the
Names and Attributes of God, is concluded, and the earth is no
longer needed to serve as an arena of exhibition. Such an exhibi-
tion was held because God wills Himself to be known and
affirmed. When God is not known and humanity turns away
from His signs and rejects the Truth, when the believers, gradu-
ally decreasing in number, are finally no more, and the corrupt-
ed world is no longer needed, God will decree both human
beings and the world to be destroyed. In order to fulfill this
decree, God will produce a dabba, which speaks, from the earth.
Whether it speaks by voice or gesture or by some other means,
it will tell that there will no longer be sincere believers in the
signs of God from then on. That is, the appearance of dabba will
signify that the quality of belief and of believers will no longer
improve, but rather decay and weaken and eventually become
extinct. Moreover, the fact that the verses alluding to
Resurrection come just after the verse just quoted indicates that
dabbat al-ard is among the most important and last of the signs
of the end of the world.
Dabbat al-ard is one, probably the last, of the ten signs of
the Last Day.2 Study of the verse in its context, makes it clear
that all Islamic life, movements and values, will come to an end,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
108

--- Sayfa 125 ---
new believers will not succeed those before them, and those
who believe in God will lack conviction and certainty (yaqin).
One explanation is that science and philosophy will have pro-
gressed so far, such enthralling technological inventions and dis-
coveries will have been made—human beings, keen on “creat-
ing” something, will have attempted to manufacture human
beings; they will have produced robots and tried to deliver the
administration of affairs to them—that the world will be filled
with individuals claiming (and believing) that “I created this or
that.” And people who make such a claim can never attain cer-
tainty (yaqin) in their faith and knowledge of God. That is a part
of what could be inferred from the full context of the verse.
Dabbat al-ard occurs in the hadiths of the Prophet with the
same general meaning as in the Qur’an. The hadiths point out
the things dabba will do, such as: “Dabba will emerge, travel all
over the earth and be seen everywhere . . .”
Now as to whether dabbat al-ard has anything to do with
HIV:
Can HIV be associated in any way with dabbat al-ard?
Firstly, while it may be correct to say that HIV is one aspect or
one part of the whole reality of dabbat al-ard, it is not correct to
say that it is dabbat al-ard. For, if HIV is made the only referent
of the phrase, the relevance of the verse is thereby restricted and
would not survive the problem of HIV. Many diseases have visit-
ed humankind in the past, devastated many lives, and later been
cured or forgotten. Abu Dawud narrates a hadith from Umm
Salama: “God did not create an illness but He provided its cure.”3
In other hadiths, we learn that only death and growing old are
incurable.4 That means that there must be a cure for AIDS, as it
were, waiting to be discovered.
Secondly: while there are indeed many cases of AIDS in some
countries, the epidemic is nowhere near of the dimensions
reached by (for example) tuberculosis in the past; nor, in the pres-
ent, does it affect as many people as does cancer. These illnesses
Scientific Issues
109

--- Sayfa 126 ---
might also be referred to as dabbat al-ard. In fact, in view of the
numbers of their victims, it might be more appropriate to do so.
However, we should qualify any such statement by adding explic-
itly that tuberculosis or cancer, likewise, could only be aspects of
the whole reality of dabbat al-ard. Tuberculosis and the plague
were defeated by the medication and treatment granted by God
to humankind, and (almost) erased from the book of dabbat al-
ard. Some cancers in early stages of growth can now be success-
fully treated. May the treatment of HIV also be soon found. The
plague used to be a nightmare for people in the past. In Amwas,
it killed 30,000 people from among the Companions.5 We rarely
hear of such large death-tolls now, except for a very few incidents
in remote parts of the world. That plague, because it caused such
widespread and fatal epidemics, might well have been called dab-
bat al-ard. But it was not. Similarly, at the present time, cancer is
a great killer all over the world. But, by God, improved treat-
ments and a cure will be found. Now, in terms of the death-toll
arising from it, cancer is a likelier candidate for the description of
dabbat al-ard than HIV. But when cures are found for either or
both, do not those who insist upon a narrow interpretation of
either as dabbat al-ard, risk leading people toward a weakening of
their trust in the Qur’an and hadith?
The phenomenon of HIV may well be one aspect of the
whole reality of dabbat al-ard or carry out one part of the work
that dabbat al-ard is to do in the future. Similarly, cancer may be
the same sort of thing and undertake a small part of the work of
dabbat al-ard. On the other hand, dabbat al-ard itself, which is a
great sign and means of declaring to human beings that true faith
is wearing away, something that, as we indicated earlier, may fol-
low from the abuse of science and technology, is a unique entity,
very different from its constituent aspects. It will be a phenome-
non far removed from the familiar and, on account of its sheer
oddity, its being alien (gharaba), difficult to grasp.
As we noted above, the emergence of dabbat al-ard will mark
the end of all Islamic values. However, as stated in the eighth verse
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
110

--- Sayfa 127 ---
of the chapter Saf in the Qur’an: God will most certainly complete His
Light (His favor of Islam). Now, if dabbat al-ard were indeed to
appear on the earth, it would be a fatal blow to our hopes, because
its appearance signals the end of certain belief (yaqin) and knowl-
edge of God. There will be an end of it and decline from then on.
But, as we know that there will be an Islamic revival and awaken-
ing, that once again Islam will gain its due position in the balance
of the world, and that the Muslims world-wide will seek and find
the guidance of their Prophet Muhammad let us have done with
talking about dabbat al-ard! We are not expecting it now. It will
appear very near the Judgment Day, which is a time of terror for
unbelievers. To hold a contrary view is in opposition to belief and
a blow to our hopes.
If speculation may be permitted on such a matter, there are
many entities, real or potential, which could be candidates for
the role of dabbat al-ard. Mechanized imitations of human
beings or advanced robots—something that, for the present,
mainly preoccupies science fiction writers—to which people
have consigned rule over their affairs are a possibility. Now the
Qur’an indicates that there are entities yet to come into exis-
tence whose nature is known only to God and is not knowable
by human beings. That is, these entities will be wholly alien to
how human beings think or feel: lacking any notion of compas-
sion, the robots—should they turn hostile—will not heed
human excuses, pleas, tears—nothing will move them.
Such a possibility gives considerable cause for alarm, even
to the very scholars and scientists managing and developing the
technology to produce such machines—so much so, that they
envisage the possibility that after these advanced robots have
been programmed and launched into space, they may defy their
instructions (malfunction) and start to fight and devastate
everything. If such machines can really exist, they might well be
considered a serious candidate to be dabbat al-ard.
However, these are no more than speculative musings. We
too should be cautious and prudent. Self-operated, self-main-
Scientific Issues
111

--- Sayfa 128 ---
tained and motivated advanced machines, or concocted viruses,
inexplicable epidemics, minuscule, abhorrent creatures yet to
appear, unknown factors in diseases resulting from use of so-
called weapons of mass destruction—any of these might repre-
sent dabbat al-ard, which speaks the death of, first, the human
spirit and, then, of the body.
It seems to me that approaching the subject of dabbat al-ard
in this way may, firstly, preserve respect for the relevant hadiths
and verses of the Qur’an, and secondly, not improperly restrict
their meaning.
To summarize: I certainly hold that those who relate phe-
nomena like HIV to Islamic sources without sufficient reflection
and caution are nevertheless quite sincere in their intentions. But
sincerity is only one aspect of dealing responsibly with such mul-
tifaceted questions; interpreting them in the way they do is
wrong and misleading. Personal sincerity is one thing; being
respectful and loyal to the essential truths of hadith and Qur’an
is quite another.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
112

--- Sayfa 129 ---
4.2.
What do you say about sperm banks and artificial insem-
ination?
S
perm banks are established to facilitate artificial insemi-
nation. It has been used for plants and animals for a long
time to produce higher quality breeds and to improve
and preserve the species. However, its widespread use for humans
is recent.
The seed in the plant kingdom and the sperm in the animal
kingdom are the indexes and data boxes of the new beings. The
seed germinates in the soil and the sperm in the womb. They are
the kernels from which the attributes and characteristics of the
new being develop. They are the elements through which the
procreation and survival of the species are maintained.
While in the plant and animal kingdom artificial insemina-
tion has some significance in terms of the preservation and
improvement of the species, its usage in humans is fixed by cer-
tain legal principles. In addition, it also needs to be dealt with in
terms of the natural laws governing the universe (shari’at al-fitra).
We accept without argument artificial insemination for
plants and animals. However, for human beings, because of
inheritance, marriage, and family relationships, it represents a
very different situation. For those reasons, the manner of fertil-
ization and procreation has been bound by restrictions since the
first human in the world, and it has come to our day as it was,
except for a few periods of history during which it was abused.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
This may have been because of humankind’s unlimited carnal
desire or because of some natural disposition. We strongly hold
that the first union of man and woman was bound by divine
restrictions. Since the beginning of legislation, the protection of
lineage has been one of the five basic principles (usul al-khamsa).
This basic principle tells us that the sperm and the womb must
be restricted and tied to each other by a contract. In other
words, the sperm and womb should be tied and the reality of
male and female, which seem to be separate, become symboli-
cally united. Through this union, the third aspect of the family,
i.e. the child, acquires its legitimate affinity to the family union.
The religion sees this union as marriage. It is the most firm
foundation on which the family can be established.
Any union of sperm and womb without marriage is consid-
ered fornication. It leads to the destruction of the family trio,
widespread immorality, women being debased to the level of
common property, and illegitimacy. For this reason, the Divine
religions all place special emphasis on marriage. They consider
it a necessary condition of being a human. On the other hand,
adultery and fornication are considered to be transgression and
delirium caused by uncontrolled, base human nature.
If fertilization is caused by a sperm of unknown origin, can
it be legitimate? In fact, there is no difference between a child
born through this manner and one born of an illicit relationship.
Since there is no contract in either of these cases, lineage is bro-
ken and the family tree is felled. From this arise several legal
issues which cannot be overcome: e.g. inheritance, marriage and
family relationships. For this reason, artificial insemination is
not a subject which can be dealt with lightly. Apart from this, in
terms of a psycho-sociological approach or of family psycholo-
gy this issue presents many risks. A father who knows that the
child was not born from his own sperm cannot erase the feeling
of strangeness toward the innocent child who he himself is try-
ing to attentively bring up. He will always approach him with a
degree of fearful uncertainty. In this way, it also affects the
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
114

--- Sayfa 131 ---
mother and her way of looking at both the child and the father
and the relationship between them. The child will carry a dou-
ble burden. He may perceive the paternal closeness of his father
as a mere loan. He will feel he is wearing the borrowed shirt of
sonhood. I say “perceived” because it will be heard from some-
where that he is not the real son or he may gather this from the
looks and attitude of his supposed father.
They may ask “if the sperm is taken from the woman’s hus-
band, is artificial insemination then permitted?” To say yes to
such a question without careful consideration may be taken as a
religious-legal responsum (fatwa). This is because the nature of
the question seems to elicit a positive answer, but the bad inten-
tion behind it and the demagogy implied in it leads us to be cau-
tious. Why do they choose such an unnatural way, while there is
a natural and innate way? Would it not be appropriate to sub-
mit to Divine wisdom and act according to the rules of physical
creation? To comply with the natural way is essential. For this
reason, artificial insemination is completely unnatural and insti-
tutions serving it might be considered tacitly the institutions of
fornication.
They may raise another question. They may say: “What you
said may be true when the father is able to fertilize and the moth-
er is able to be fertilized. In this case one certainly takes the natu-
ral way. However, what about when the father is not able to do
so?” Then I will ask the question: “Whose sperm is used in fertil-
ization?” If the father is weak, impotent and the sperm does not
function as it is supposed to then it is obvious that the sperm tak-
en from the father will definitely not fertilize the egg. One will
then take foreign sperm and this will be considered indirect forni-
cation. If the situation is because the mother has a blockage or
inadequacy or sickness of the womb, the specialist should inter-
vene. If such a legal medical intervention makes the womb “a place
of rest firmly fixed” (Mu’minun 23:13), then it becomes incum-
bent to follow the natural way. If the womb is not able to function
as it is supposed to, artificial insemination is meaningless. Taking
Scientific Issues
115

--- Sayfa 132 ---
this subject lightly and saying “taking the sperm from the husband
is permitted,” although technically true, is a defective judgment
because it is open to abuse. Indeed, I do fear that those who raise
such issues do so in order to get a judgment of a sort to open the
doors to abuse. Sperm banks are already in existence and their
doors are wide open to anyone whether they consider artificial
insemination legitimate in Islam or not.
In terms of the laws of nature (shari’at al-fitriya), artificial
insemination has many objections. However, discussing them
opens up a complicated debate and so I will not enter into it. It
is not my field. I should leave it to the specialists, scientists and
doctors; that is the soundest approach.
There is no doubt that such a way is contrary to nature. Every
being is urged to maintain the survival of the species through sex-
ual reproduction. They are given a small reward in the form of
temporary pleasure to serve this end. The Owner of all beings
who imbued such a disposition into beings does not want it to be
changed. Therefore, no one has any right to seek to abolish this
natural phenomenon. Any attempt to do so is an attempt to
change creation and nature, which must be rejected (mardud) as
satanic. It is an approach that considers humans at the level of
plants and animals and destroys the distinction of humanity. For
this reason, each and every person ought to protest against such
thinking. However, people of today are crawling at the ABC of
natural sciences. It will not be easy to save them from the mad-
ness of hastily contrived technologies. Some are no doubt seeking
an artificial conflict on this and similar issues between science and
the creation of humanity “in the best pattern” (Tin 95:4), and
seeking to present science and religion as in opposition to one
another.
We hope that such people who are in a sort of delirium soon
wake up and see the truth, and that all the obstructions in the
way between science and ethics will be overcome.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
116

--- Sayfa 133 ---
4.3.
What is the reason for the persistence of Darwinism in the
general culture of the masses, though many of Darwin’s
hypotheses have been challenged and even disproved?
I
t would be difficult to find another theory which, like
Darwinism, has been battered and defeated so many times,
and yet the corpse of it revived artificially again and again.
Some scientists still defend it to the hilt; others discredit it alto-
gether, asserting that holding to it is sheer delusion. It seems
that, in the academic-scientific world, Darwinism will keep con-
ference agendas busy for some time yet, and thousands more
articles and books will be written on it, and the debates persist.
The collapse of communism as an ideology and as a political
force has made it more obvious than it was before that “East” and
“West” was a geographical, not a cultural divide. It was and is right
to think of the experiment in Russia and its former satellite states
as a variation within Western culture, not an opposition to it. The
strictly Western attitude to religion, derived from Rousseau and
Renan, was to see it as a socially necessary myth, a delusion that
provided a sort of cultural and social cohesion to collective life but
which had no more basis in reality than do dreams. The strictly
Eastern (Communist) attitude, founded upon explicit rejection of
religion and explicit acceptance of materialism, naturally favored
Darwinism (which entails the same rejection) and gave to it more
deliberate and institutional support than in the West. But in the

--- Sayfa 134 ---
broader view, modern Western culture as a whole is closely predi-
cated on the assumptions of Darwinism, and those who, in
Muslim countries, wish to promote Western culture, continue, in
universities and educational institutions generally, to pass off
Darwinism as established scientific truth and, by implication, to
represent religion as unscientific and false. Inevitably, some of this
poison is effective on pliable young minds: many of them begin to
believe (though far fewer continue to believe) that religion is not
conformable to human reason, and that, as an explanation of the
origin of species, Darwinism is still the best that independent
human reason can do.
I will not go into the details of the evolutionary hypothesis,
but within the scope of brief question and answer, I will touch
upon some of the major points.
According to Darwin, life originated on earth from simple,
single-celled organisms giving rise to multi-cellular organisms
through a process of gradual change, along with random muta-
tions, over millions of years. According to more developed forms
of evolutionary theory, the foundation of all living things is
amino acids within water, which later somehow got formed into
single-celled organisms, like the amoeba, and these organisms
interacting with each other and the immediate environment over
uncalculated billions of years, gradually or by sudden jumps
evolved into the great variety of complex multi-cellular animals.
Then the invertebrates gave rise to aquatic vertebrates, i.e., fish,
which evolved into amphibians which gave rise to reptiles; later,
some reptiles evolved into birds, while others evolved into mam-
mals culminating in the evolution of humankind.
The hypothesis is typically argued on the basis of a few
incomplete pieces of fossils, though, so far, the actual fossil
record has failed to endorse that view. To our knowledge, no sci-
entific hypothesis except this one was ever sustained on the basis
of so many, and so important “missing links.” What the scientists
have discovered through observation proves the opposite of the
evolutionary theory true: in spite of having many varieties, bac-
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
118

--- Sayfa 135 ---
teria have not evolved into anything different and higher though
they adapt very quickly; in whatever variety they exist, cock-
roaches and insects have been living as they are for almost 350
million years. Fruit flies have remained fruit flies for millions of
years; arthropoda, sponges, and sea crabs today are exactly as
found in fossils from rock formations formed 500 million years
ago; snakes, lizards, mice, and many other species, have not
evolved into any other different species; nor have horse’s hooves
or human feet evolved into something different. Man is, as we
put it, exactly the same as he was created on the first day.
There are no examples of the transitional organisms that the
theory requires, such as, for example, an animal that has evolved
its front legs partly (but not yet wholly) into wings in readiness
for the transition to bird-like flight. And, unsurprisingly, there is
not even a theoretical explanation, given that such transitions
are supposed to take thousands of generations to complete.
How the partly evolved animal could survive in what kind of
environment—lacking four “good” legs, and still not equipped
with two good legs and a pair of wings.
Many arguments give the erroneous example of the evolu-
tion of the horse from a small dog-like mammal with five toes
to the large modern horse with one toe or hoof. In fact, the evo-
lutionists have no evidence for that claim. Nowhere in the world
have they found a series of fossils to demonstrate such an evo-
lutionary order. It remains entirely hypothetical, suppositional.
They talk about an animal which lived in the past and claim that
it was the ancestor of the modern horse; but they cannot estab-
lish any necessary connection between the modern horse and
that animal: the only need for that connection is the need to
illustrate the theory, which the illustration is supposed to estab-
lish. This is the very opposite of reliable scientific argument and
procedure. We shall say that God created such an animal at that
age which later on became extinct, and it no longer exists now.
Why do we need to connect these two species? Even today hors-
es of different sizes and breeds co-exist in our age.
Scientific Issues
119

--- Sayfa 136 ---
Scientists found bees and honey from millions of years ago.
The bee produced honey and the honeycomb in the same way
as it does today, using the same geometrical measures, 100 mil-
lion years ago. So, for that whole expanse of time neither the
bee’s brain and physiological structure nor the way it produces
honey have changed.
What of the evolution of humankind? It is especially badly
argued and ill-founded. Some scientist discovered some bones,
or even just the tooth of an ape, and posited (that is, guessed)
the rest—the body posture, flesh, skin, hair, features, etc., of the
evolved “human.”
Piltdown Man is a good example to famous scientific hoax-
es related with evolution. The supposed discovery near
Piltdown, England, of an ape-like fossil ancestral to modern
humans, was reported in 1912. The discovery included frag-
ments of what were later proved to be a modern human crani-
um and the jawbone of an ape. For many years the Pildown man
fossil was a subject of anthropological controversy. In 1953, sci-
entific analyses proved the fossil a forgery.
Evolutionists used to mention the coelacanth, a fish abun-
dant 400 million years ago, as a link between the fish and the
land-animals because of its limb-like fins. It was theorized that the
coelacanth lurched onto the land in search of food, staying there
longer and longer until—about 70 million years ago—it disap-
peared from the fossil record. To their surprise, local fishermen
caught several dozen coelacanths off the coast of Madagascar in
1938. The caught fish were exactly like their ancestors, perfectly
adapted to their deep-sea environment and showing no signs of
evolution. The coelacanth has been quietly dropped by many text
books from the list of evidences of evolution, because it became
the symbol of the non-evolution of organisms, rather than of their
evolution.
Evolutionists also claim that the organisms evolve through
random mutations. While new cells are being formed, if the
genetic code, normally identical in all the cells of an organism, is
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
120

--- Sayfa 137 ---
copied differently or mistakenly, mutations occur. Such a change,
which is claimed to bear evolutionary fruit gradually over a long
period, may be caused by a number of external agents, such as
geography and climate, even planetary influences such as changes
in the sun’s or earth’s rotation, or by radiation, chemical pollu-
tion, etc. The argument is that non-lethal mutations which repro-
duce successfully (that is, adaptively to changes in immediate
environment) function like sudden jumps in the progress of evo-
lution and give rise to species variation.
However, recent work in genetics and biochemistry has
shown conclusively that mutations are all but always harmful, even
lethal, the cause of many physiological disorders. In any case, they
could not give rise to a magnitude of change of an order to gener-
ate a new species, to make a dog a horse, or an ape a human. For
such an order of change to occur randomly and then to become
successfully established would require a period of time many times
in excess of the highest estimate for the age of the universe.
For years, much research has been done on pigeons, dogs
and flies. Though some physiological changes do occur within
the same race of animals (there are different breeds of dog and
pigeon, for example), such adaptive evolution within species is
no evidence for evolution of species. All the extensive research
done for years on Drosophila yielded nothing but Drosophila,
and the research proved that Drosophila remains as it is.
Hybrid varieties are obtained by artificially crossing two
species, such as horse and donkey, but the resultant hybrid (mule)
is typically sterile. After long research, scientists have recognized
that it is not possible to progress from one species to another.
There are some insurmountable, impassable, barriers between
species. That conforms to ordinary sense, as well as to the known
facts and to scientific reasoning. How could such a creature as
human, who has an extraordinarily sophisticated brain and is capa-
ble of (in any and every stage of civilization) of linguistic and cul-
tural expression, of religious belief and aspiration—how could such
a creature have evolved from an ape? It is quite extraordinary that
Scientific Issues
121

--- Sayfa 138 ---
even to speculate that it might be so can be given serious consider-
ation, let alone believed and accepted as conforming to reason!
However, that acceptance of evolution is a major pillar of
modern materialism, and of historical materialism in particular,
as Marx and Engels insistently pointed out. It is a sort of blind
faith, a prejudice, a superstition that the materialists cling to
Darwinism of the crudest kind. They insist that absolutely every-
thing be explained by material causes. As for what, by those lim-
ited means, they cannot explain, they dare not admit that they
cannot explain it so. They can never allow that there must be a
supra-natural, metaphysical agency that intervenes to make the
biological world as it is, so wonderfully abundant, prolific,
diverse and, within stable forms, so marvelously adaptive and
versatile in response to local environmental possibilities.
The alternative to evolution is design which necessarily
leads to the concept of a transcendent and unitary power, the
Designer-Creator, God. Therein lies the reason for the continu-
ing tyranny of the Darwinist theory: the fear that to acknowl-
edge the Creator will bring down the edifice of an autonomous
science, an autonomous human reason. An individual scientist
in his or her private capacity may be a believer, a theist, but sci-
ence itself must be unbelieving, atheistic. It is ironic indeed that
to preserve the illusion of independent human reason, the
Darwinists (and materialists generally) will defy or ignore the
facts, deny and belittle logic and reason. It is to the credit of the
scientific community that, in ever greater numbers, individual
scientists have found the courage to question and challenge the
tyranny of Darwinism in the teaching of the life sciences.
That said, it remains unfortunately true that, some young,
pliable minds are vulnerable to the myth of Darwinism simply
because it is the official dogma, the staple of all textbooks on the
subject everywhere. How true and apt is the Turkish proverb—
that a half-wit can throw a pearl into a well with ease, and forty
wise men struggle in vain to get it out again. Nonetheless, there
is solace in the knowledge that a lie, however mightily supported,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
122

--- Sayfa 139 ---
can have but a short life. The truth of the matter is that the ori-
gin of the species, and of the major divisions of species, is not yet
understood. Is it too heavy a burden on humility to say: “We mar-
vel, but we do not know”? And we marvel most at, and under-
stand least of all, the origin of intelligent speech, ideation, abstrac-
tion, symbolization, culture, love of beauty and variety, conscious-
ness, altruism, morality religion, and spiritual aspiration.
To be sure, Darwin was a great and gifted scientist who must
be credited with a mighty contribution to the ordering and clas-
sifying of species, and for his work on adaptation; but it should
be noted that what he did well and incontrovertibly is to observe
accurately and understood intelligently what was there in nature.
Whatever his own intentions, in spite of them, his work, like
every reliable advance in observation and explanation, confirms the
Divine Architect, the All-Mighty Power, Sustainer, Administrator,
Who willed the marvelous organization, reliable, systematic, sub-
tly integrated harmony of the operations of nature, and who com-
bined that order with beauty. Whereas what Darwin found increas-
es our faith in God, it led him astray.
How great, sublime, is the Creator. Order, understanding,
wisdom are by His gift. Likewise, guidance to faith is absolute-
ly in His grasp.
Scientific Issues
123

--- Sayfa 141 ---
4.4.
What should be our attitude against ideas like positivism
and rationalism which are accepted as the sources of
information in the West? To what degree do they reflect
the truth?
M
uch has been said on the issue of information sources.
Some of the people who have commented on this
issue have sometimes been restricted by their knowl-
edge and/or faith, thus they have vocalized different opinions.
According to the Islamic perspective, there are three types
of information sources:
Knowledge obtained through the five senses or relating to
these senses. These include, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
and touching. For example, something that is seen is there, and
something that is felt through touching exists.
According to the trend which accepts only this source of
information, anything beyond the perception of these senses
cannot be a subject of knowledge. This positivist trend has lost
its influence over recent decades; however it was widely popu-
lar at the beginning of the twentieth century.
The second source of information is the mind. When the
“mind” is mentioned, an unbiased decision-making entity, capa-
ble of evaluating matter within its pure form, and competent of
making an objective decision is implied. The importance of a
non-degenerate, unbiased, non-oppressed, functional mind is
undeniable for information. In the modern world, rationalism is

--- Sayfa 142 ---
the representative of this tendency. Since its emergence,
Rationalism has always advocated the “mind” as the only source
of information. However, even rationalism is not sufficient to
achieve true knowledge.
Another source of information is “authentic narration.”
Authentic narration should be understood in two ways. Firstly,
it is knowledge that has been transmitted by a number of differ-
ent people and accepted as true. For example, a narration about
a continent or a country to which one has never been is an
authentic narration. To illustrate further, for a person who has
never visited the continents of Australia or America, any accu-
rate information, or first-hand information, obtained is of this
type. It is possible that we may not have visited or seen these
places, however millions of people live on these continents and
hundreds of thousands of people visit these continents every
year. The information gathered from these people is so power-
ful and trustworthy that anyone who has not seen these places
cannot doubt their existence.
Secondly, authentic narration can also be considered to be
that of “Divine Revelation.” In other words, this would consist of
the Divine Books revealed to the messengers by God Almighty,
where the revelations were brought by the Archangel Gabriel.
In order to discover the wonders of the universe and to
achieve a better and more accurate knowledge with our five
senses and mind, we must make evaluations under the light and
wisdom of Divine revelations. Only when manipulated to work
under these principles will science be able to accomplish its task
of producing the fruit that it should.
Human beings are not capable of seeing or hearing every-
thing that exists, and thus they are not capable of knowing
everything that exists. The mind cannot comprehend everything
that exists. There are so many things that exist but which are not
sensed through our senses or understood by our minds, or even,
if the mind does understand them, can never be sensed or
reached. Hence, the human being can only learn these facts
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
126

--- Sayfa 143 ---
through the teachings of a Divine Being whose knowledge, pow-
er, and will surround everything. We can only learn the things
He knows to the extent that He teaches us in His Divine Books;
in this way we become knowledgeable of those matters.
Otherwise, partial falsification or incorrect interpretations
of the Divine Books is inevitable. Moreover, if only the senses
and experience will be the basis of information, then one will be
forced to say “I do not believe in anything other than what I see,
hear. . .” This is tantamount to rebelling against everything that
the mind puts forward. In fact, if only sensory information is
taken as the basis of knowledge, then people will be forced to
search for compatibility between their deduced knowledge and
the universe that is created by God Almighty. In such a system,
whatever facts agreed with their theorems would be true, any-
thing else would be false. However, as God says in the Qur’an:
We did not take the human beings as witnesses to the creation of the
Heavens and the Earth (Kahf 18:51). When the Divine revela-
tion is not taken into consideration, every explanation is no
more than a theorem or a guess.
Unfortunately, because only the first two types of sources
were accepted, many Divine Revelations were rejected. With the
progress of science, their validity has once again been proved. For
example, the stages of an embryo in the mother’s womb have
been well defined. When Omar Khayyam, who was an extreme
rationalist, was asked about these verses, his response was to com-
ment against the Qur’anic truth by commenting that the verses
were not meant literally. Some other scholars thought that a per-
son can only have faith in the resurrection, as it cannot be under-
stood by the mind; however, Said Nursi has explained it with a
simple analogy. The resurrection is like the spring that follows the
winter. We do not have any actual sensory knowledge that this
will happen, we know from observation and reasoning that the
spring will come. Since some people only trust in the two types
of sources, they had to twist what they read in the Divine Book,
even the fundamentals of faith. For example, through the influ-
Scientific Issues
127

--- Sayfa 144 ---
ence of philosophy, Farabi and Ibn Rushd, even though they were
geniuses of their time, considered the Divine Revelations and the
prophethood as being human-made concepts.
Some thought that philosophers were higher in status than
the Messengers of God. The All-Knowing God was aware of
how the Messengers would perform their duty of conveying the
message; i.e. with an extraordinarily superior performance. This
is why they were given the prophethood in advance; yet philoso-
phers could not see this fine nuance. Moreover, it can be con-
cluded that philosophers are only translating what Aristotle had
earlier said to suit their time.
If the Islamic World is considered as a whole, it can be seen
that not everybody fell into these traps. Zahrawi, Ali Kuþçu,
Jalaladdin Dawwani, Gelenbevi and many others, did not fall into
these traps; they were very religious, and they were very influen-
tial in their times. People like Molla Husrev and Khwarizmi, with
their work in sciences that led their fields of study for many cen-
turies, even in the West, were still able to maintain their faith
without experiencing any conflict and lived for the most part as
religious, pious people.
In conclusion, it would be proper to say that all sources of
information must be handled together if one is to achieve an
end result. Discriminating between these information sources
and taking them discretely will open up pitfalls for humanity.
The same pitfalls will continue to open if the same mistakes are
repeated. Humanity will have to say “True” to those things it
claimed as “False” the day before. However, using the Divine
Revelations as the foundations of knowledge, and surrounding
and framing them with the information attained from the sens-
es and mind is the only path that will lead us in a true direction.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
128

--- Sayfa 145 ---
CHAPTER 5
Perspectives

--- Sayfa 147 ---
5.1.
What are the reasons for the fact that Islam spread over
such vast territories in such a short time in the past?
What are the reasons for the Muslims’ defeat and failure
at the present time?
A
Muslim could be defined as one who believes in God
and the principles of faith decreed by God, who never
deems the opposite of these principles even likely, and
thus submits and surrenders himself to God. That is, a Muslim
is one who wholeheartedly and sincerely performs and repre-
sents all His commands with respect to regulating his individ-
ual, familial and social life. However, during some periods,
Muslims might have been unable to find the opportunity to rep-
resent Islam in all respects. Even so, if people burnt with the
love and yearning to represent Islam and writhed in the longing
to live and act upon it, God willing, they would not be respon-
sible, blamed and reprimanded for collective failures. Any sub-
tle, complex system dismantled and laid aside unused, its use
half-forgotten with the passage of time, can only be re-assem-
bled and made to work again after the greatest application and
effort. How much more so if that system were a way of life
involving the taking on of burdens and responsibilities which, in
the long term productive of ease and contentment, are in the
short term sometimes strenuous and arduous—how difficult to
build up that way of life again, reviving the consent of not one

--- Sayfa 148 ---
or a few persons but of a whole society? And yet, if people are
determined, persevering and sincere in the intention of making
it work again, their sincerity of effort may suffice to excuse
them, even though their effort did not or could not succeed. If
people pursue that goal with a total commitment and yearning,
as a matter of life and death, they would surely not be held
accountable if the goal eludes them. In fact, in order to be
exempted from the responsibility, one should either live Islam
thoroughly or burn with a strong desire to live Islam and to
make it a lived reality. Any acts contrary to this will entail con-
sequences in this world and in the Hereafter. In this world, the
people suffer abasement and degradation as a consequence of
living apart from Islam; they will be condemned to live in all the
domains of life, social, political, commercial, military, under the
power and direction of unbelief, and they will be mightily sur-
passed in the fields of knowledge and technology. Then, in the
Hereafter, they will be questioned and punished severely for all
that failure, that surrender to the powers of unbelief.
For almost a thousand years, Muslims experienced civiliza-
tional rise from one level to another and earned the highest
acclaim. During the period of the Rightly Guided Caliphs that
rise had a sublime, heavenly quality. Those who followed the
Prophet in the first Islamic century were real representatives of
the true Islamic way of life. God’s Messenger says concerning
this period:
Muslim armies will arrive, after me, at the gates of cities, where
they will be asked, “Did anyone among you see the Prophet?”
The answer will be affirmative, and the gates will be opened for
them. Those who succeeded them will also perform jihad and
they will be asked, “Are there any people among you who saw
those who had seen the Prophet?” They will reply, “Yes,” and the
cities will be conquered by them. There will finally come the
third generation, who will be asked, “Did anybody among you
see those who had seen the followers of the Prophet’s
Companions?’ When this question, too, receives an affirmative
answer, conquest will also be bestowed upon them.”1
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
132

--- Sayfa 149 ---
Again, in another narration recorded in Bukhari and
Muslim, God’s Messenger says concerning those three succeed-
ing generations: “The best of you are those who live in my peri-
od, then those who succeed them, and then those who follow
them.”2
Those three generations followed strictly in the Prophet’s
footsteps and, accordingly, were granted great victories.
When we look at our Islamic past, we see that the historical
events confirm the sayings of the Prophet. The period of the
Four Caliphs was thirty years. During the reign of the third,
‘Uthman, the Muslims spread in all directions of the known
world. In one direction, they went up to Lake Aral and in the
opposite direction up to Erzurum in eastern Anatolia. Despite
differences and disagreements at that time, the spirit of jihad
against unbelief was always strong, sustaining the consciousness
of being active and moving forward. During that time the
Muslims conquered the northern Africa in its entirety. ‘Uqba ibn
Nafi‘ was the Muslim commander in that campaign and died at
the age of 50. However, the campaign was successfully conclud-
ed within his life-time and he managed to make himself listened
to and obeyed by all the Berbers. When he reached the Atlantic,
he rode his horse into the sea and there stood and exclaimed: “O
God! If this sea of darkness did not appear before me, I would
convey Your Name, which is the source of light, to overseas lands
as far as the remotest corners of the world.”3 The great Muslims
of that time did not dispose of modern ships or planes that can
travel in almost any weather conditions. At that time, they cam-
paigned on a mount or on foot, and rivers were forded or crossed
upon simple rafts. Despite shortage of means, the Muslims were
able to travel to and conquer vast stretches of territory in differ-
ent parts of the world in a remarkably short span of time.
It is one of the mysteries of destiny that wherever the
Companions of the Prophet went or conquered then, there is to
this day a Muslim people, even in countries far from the “heart-
lands” of the Arabian peninsula—such as Dagestan, Turkmenistan,
Perspectives
133

--- Sayfa 150 ---
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan. These countries still have functioning
mosques and traditional religious academies, raised scholars and
scientists, who were, and are still, regarded as the best in their
fields, from Bukhari to Muslim, from Muslim to Tirmidhi, from
Ibn Sina to al-Farabi, because Islam was lived and acted upon in
those lands. We certainly believe that the splendor and excellence
of an Islamic ethos, spirit and consciousness will be experienced
again in those places, and the Muslims will regain their former sta-
tus in the world.
That the Companions of the Prophet managed to conquer
so many places in such a short time certainly has its own expla-
nations and meaning. First of all, the Companions were wholly
devoted to the cause of Islam. Superficially viewed by their ene-
mies, they must have seemed to them to be out of their minds—
certainly, their accomplishments were such as to stir and freeze
all imagination. For instance, ‘Ali slept in the Prophet’s bed, in
his place, on the night when the Prophet left for Madina and the
enemies surrounded the house intending to assisinate the
Prophet with multiple sword blows. ‘Ali’s doing so means that
he had accepted the likelihood that he would be dismembered
and killed. But the polytheists’ hands remained hanging in the
air, so astounded were they that the person in the bed was not
the Prophet but a young man who accepted such a sacrifice and
thus attributed no value to the rest of his life, at the age of 17.
In another instance, on hearing the continuous howls and voic-
es of livestock and domestic animals, Abu Jahl and other poly-
theists climbed to the roof of the house of Abdullah ibn Jahsh
to learn what was going on in there. They were struck by what
they saw. All the members of the family had deserted the house
to follow the Prophet, taking nothing with them, giving not a
second thought, to their possessions, thinking only of moving to
Madina to be with the Prophet. Upon this Abu Jahl said to
‘Abbas: “How strange! That cousin of yours has caused such a
split (iftiraq) between us that it is impossible either to explain or
to understand.” Home, goods and chattels, wife, children and
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
134

--- Sayfa 151 ---
family, and everything were left, given up, for the sake of God,
His Messenger and the message he brought. How could poly-
theists comprehend such a thing?
While Abu Bakr was migrating from Makka to Madina, he
did not take anyone along with him, but he left his children, wife
and father, whom he loved dearly, back in Makka. ‘Uthman did
not take his wife, Ruqiyya, the beloved daughter of the Prophet,
along with him while migrating. Ruqiyya was the light of the
Prophet’s eyes, and I certainly believe that if it were said that a
life is needed for Ruqiyya, each and every Muslim would run to
sacrifice his own life thousands of times for her. However, that
Ruqiyya was left in Makka and ‘Uthman emigrated to Madina.
Such was the loyalty to the Prophet at that time.
On his return from negotiations with the Prophet ‘Urwa bin
Mas‘ud he said the following to the people in Makka about the
Companions’ commitment to their cause and devotion to the
Messenger of God:
O people, I have been sent as envoy to kings—Caesar, Chosroes,
and the Negus—but I have not seen a king whose men honor
him as the Companions of Muhammad. If he commands any-
thing, they almost outstrip his word in fulfilling it; when he per-
forms his ablution, they well-nigh fight for the water thereof;
when he speaks, their voices are hushed in his presence; nor will
they look him full in the face, but lower their eyes in reverence
for him . . .4
However, the Prophet advised those who stood up for him:
“Do not stand up (for me) as the Persians do (stand up for their
elders).”5 As the Prophet demonstrated and lived modesty and
humility, so he rose ever higher surpassing even the angels. It
was narrated that when the Prophet first saw the Archangel
Gabriel, he was frightened. However, as one of the saints, lovers
of the Prophet, remarked: “If Gabriel had comprehended the
essence of the haqiqat al-Ahmadiyya (the truth of Muhammad),
he would have passed out and never come to himself till the Day
of Reckoning.” The Prophet always rose higher and higher in
Perspectives
135

--- Sayfa 152 ---
respect of his power of relationship, obedience, submission and
servanthood to God. However, every step toward the highest
deepened his humility. He presented himself as an ordinary
man, one among many others, and was deeply disturbed by any
other manner or treatment shown to him.
That period was such that the Companions attached them-
selves deeply to the Prophet and integrated with him thorough-
ly. When the Prophet said: “Your blood is my blood, your life is
my life,” the words confirmed what actually existed as a full har-
mony and accord. When the time came to spread and represent
Islam abroad, when it was necessary to emigrate to different
lands and climates, none of them asked why or what. They sim-
ply went and never thought to return to their old homes. Let
alone thinking of coming back, out of the fear of blemishing the
sincerity of the intention to emigrate for the sake of God only,
they trembled at the thought of dying being buried in their old
hometowns. Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas had fever in Makka, and was
shaking with grief. When the Prophet asked the reason for his
sadness, it was that he was worried that he would die in Makka
after he had emigrated to Madina, and that thus his emigration
would not be complete.
When marching on the Khaybar, the Prophet did not want
to take ‘Ali on the expedition because he had some ailment of the
eyes. However, ‘Ali was not willing to be left behind. He said:
“Would you have me to stay behind with the women and chil-
dren, O Messenger of God?” He did take part in the expedition
and the citadel of Khaybar was conquered though his extraordi-
nary courage.
Once, before leaving Madina for an expedition, the Prophet
appointed Umm Maktum, a blind person, in charge during his
absence. He was exempt from fighting because he was blind; the
other who remained behind were women and children. Years lat-
er, when Umm Maktum learned that the Muslims were going to
fight the Persians. Despite his old age, he joined the marching
soldiers and expressed his wish to take part in the battle ahead.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
136

--- Sayfa 153 ---
Some Muslims, especially Mughira ibn Shu‘ba, wanted him to
stay away from the front, but Umm Maktum found an oppor-
tunity to talk to the commander of the Muslims, Sa‘d ibn Abi
Waqqas and said: “Mughira bin Shu‘ba wanted to prevent me
from fighting in the way of God. If any of you prevents me from
fighting and dying in the way of God today, I will make com-
plaint about you to the Caliph ‘Umar.” What a reason to com-
plain about—being prevented from offering his life in the way
of God! When asked what he could do, he answered: “Yes, I am
blind, but this will not prevent me from holding the flag and
walking straight ahead. So, I would like to hold the banner before
the army.” He really seized the opportunity, did not hide behind
excuses, but took part in the front line, held the banner, walked
forward, and found what he yearned for, martyrdom at the bat-
tle of Qadisiya.
The Companions were that kind of people, who scorned
danger in the way of God, and even courted death for the sake
of their true belief, and to convey it to other lands.
Though Abu Talha had grown very old, weak and feeble,
when he heard that the army was preparing to go to Cyprus, he
called his grandsons and told them that he would like to take
part in the expedition: “I heard from the Prophet that Cyprus
would be conquered6 and I think it is time for it, and I’d like to
take part in it. However, it is not possible for me to sit and ride
on horse-back. Therefore, tie me tightly to the horse lest I fall
off.” His grandsons did not want to yield to their grandfather’s
wish and argued that he was quite old, and so excused and
would not be accountable for being absent from the battle.
However, he replied that he understood the Qur’anic verse urg-
ing people to strive in the way of God as not discriminating
between young and old; he read it in the absolute sense. In the
end, the grandsons were unable to dissuade him and Abu Talha
joined the army in the way that he wished. However, his life did
not suffice to complete the journey as he was so elderly and fee-
ble; but he did, after all, achieve what he longed for in this
Perspectives
137

--- Sayfa 154 ---
world, and perhaps he might have said with his last breath: “All
thanks and praise to God! You bestowed upon me what I
longed for.”
Another Companion, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, who hosted the
Prophet at his home, had already been married with children
when the Prophet first arrived at Madina. Abu Ayyub’s grand-
children helped him mount the horse before he came all the way
to Istanbul (Constantinople) under the command of Yazid.
From the Prophet’s arrival in Madina to the rule of Mu‘awiya
and the command of Yazid, we may count that 40 or 50 years
passed. Abu Ayyub must therefore have been around 75 or 80
years old when he arrived in the vicinity of Istanbul.
Let us pause to ask at this point: What were such
Companions of the Prophet after? There are many verses in the
Qur’an and there are sayings of the Prophet praising their virtues
and attributes. God named them as Ansar (Helpers) and
Muhajirun (Emigrants) and glorified them. They were even fore-
told in the Old and New Testaments (the Torah and the Gospel).
They had listened to the Prophet saying that the victorious armies
of Islam would arrive at the gates of Europe, and that he gave tid-
ings that Constantinople (now Istanbul) would be conquered by
Muslims. Many attempts were made to realize this and be worthy
of the encouragement of these words of the Prophet: “Certainly,
Constantinople will be conquered. Blessed is the commander who
will conquer it, and blessed are his troops.”7
Since that city was itself a symbol of a large dominion, the
Prophet was thus directing his community to carry Islam all over
the world. So the only objective they had was to be among the
troops the Prophet praised and thus gain the pleasure of God.
There was no other motive, ambition or purpose behind the hard-
ships and dangers they endured. Since the Prophet pointed out
the worthiness of the army in the eyes of God, the Companions
were in a sense competing to become members of that army.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
138

--- Sayfa 155 ---
Hoping to be an object of the Prophet’s praise, Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari (Khalid bin Zayd) set forth from Madina to Istanbul
even in old age. The city was besieged for weeks and months,
but the Muslims were not then granted the conquest. Before
that, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari was totally exhausted and waiting for
death. One of the things he mostly kept asking was “Any news
of the conquest?” Eventually, when the commander of the army
realized that he was on the very verge of death, he asked the
noble Companion of God’s Messenger if he had any wish. Abu
Ayyub al-Ansari said: “Take me as far as possible. If it is possi-
ble, take me and bury within the walls of Constantinople. We
came to conquer Constantinople, but I see that I will not be
blessed with such a conquest. On the other hand, I definitely
believe that one day the tidings of the Prophet will come true
and be attained by some [other Muslims]. Therefore, I would
like to be buried over there. Listening to the clashing of their
swords and shields in my grave will please me. Let me hear at
least the voices of those blessed soldiers.” Almost five or six cen-
turies later, Istanbul was conquered by the Ottoman command-
er, whose name was also Muhammad (Mehmed), at the age of
22. Such sweet manifestations of destiny, as to end one period
in history and start a new age, to be blessed with the tidings of
God’s Messenger, to break down an iron door, like the door of
Khaybar, leading to Europe, to represent the Muhammadi spir-
it completely at his time, were the blessings bestowed on Sultan
Mehmed the conqueror. He can be said to have represented the
Muhammadi spirit in his time like a Mahdi; his was among the
voices of the soldiers that Abu Ayyub al-Ansari wished to hear
and welcome to Istanbul.
Those people who sincerely and devoutly commit them-
selves to either irshad and tabligh (guiding and enlightening
others) or to striving by what they own (material and physical
struggle, jihad with their lives and wealth) can conquer the
Perspectives
139

--- Sayfa 156 ---
world and hold their authority in it. As the Prophet of God
expressed it in a hadith, when the fear, of death grasps the souls
of the Muslims, everything gained will start to slip away piece
by piece. We enjoyed great status and weight among the peo-
ples and in the history of the world until two or three centuries
ago. Now we have lost that. There can be only one explanation
for this: namely, that we were victorious when we had the
Islamic spirit, and kept our submission, obedience and servant-
hood to God in a firm and sound condition. During the period
in which we started to slip backward, our souls were captured
and enslaved to fear of death, and other fears, weaknesses, love
for life, ambitions and concerns for our own future.
Those Muslims in the past spread to all parts of the world
and conveyed the Divine Message and established the best and
noblest type of rule. What can this accomplishment be attrib-
uted to other than the fact that they really devoted their physi-
cal, spiritual and material wealth to the way of God?
No matter what nation or ethnic background they were
from, we see in all those heroes raised from the Islamic world
the same spirit. They scorned and ignored the pleasure of living
for themselves but preferred the pleasure of making others live
instead. The only thing they had in mind was to spread the
Religion to which they were bound as believers and followers,
and they regarded that belonging as the highest honor. In the
Seljuk, Ottoman or other states, in rulers like Alparslan,
Kýlýçarslan, Murad Hüdavendigar, Mehmed the Conqueror,
Selim I, Salahaddin Ayyubi, and many others, we see the same
spirit and consciousness.
Alparslan, the Seljuk Sultan, who defeated the Byzantines in
1071 and thus opened the doors of Anatolia and the vast
Byzantine territories to Muslims, delivered a sermon before the
Battle of Malazgirt (Manzikert), one of the great decisive battles
in history, and concluded with this prayer: “O Lord, make the
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
140

--- Sayfa 157 ---
white clothes and robe I put on my shroud today.” Those
Muslims went on the battlefield to become martyrs rather than
victors, and proved that with the shrouds they put on before bat-
tle. In that way they were undoubtedly ready to tackle the ene-
my army, often many times more numerous, without a second
thought. At the end of the day, the Muslims were victorious and
the enemy were defeated and captured, even the Emperor
Romanus Diogenus, and we believe that Sultan Alparslan meant
it sincerely when he said he was not so happy because he had not
reached his goal, which was to become a martyr.
The Ottoman Sultan Murad Hudavendigar prayed
throughout the night: “O Lord, make my army victorious but
me a martyr” before he fought against the Serbs in Kosovo. His
prayer was accepted, he defeated the Serbs, saw his army victo-
rious but while inspecting the wounded soldiers, he was
stabbed to death by a Serb. As he lay on the ground, he was
asked what his last wish was. He said two words “Never dis-
mount.” Then he passed away. The wish he expressed was nev-
er to stop struggling in the way of God and carrying His Divine
Message further.
The magnificent state (and states) established by people of
this quality enjoyed such prestige and authority in the balance
of power in the world that other nations and states looked to
them and adjusted themselves and regulated their affairs accord-
ingly. They exerted such efforts in the way of Truth, and scorned
everything except that, holding God first in all plans and affairs.
They thought and evaluated everything according to the Divine
Will and Pleasure, and became the zealots of the Sublime Cause.
For this reason God protected our borders from all intrusions,
and we led a glorious and dignified life in the past. When we
lost such high attributes and spirit, we were surrounded on all
sides, degraded and eventually captured by our enemies. We
first died in spirit and then in dignity and honor, and then in
physical, material terms.
Perspectives
141

--- Sayfa 158 ---
If we would like to recover and represent Islam beautifully
as they did in the past, we must first recover those factors which
made our ancestors attain their high rank, all of them, not
neglecting a single one among them. For the truth is: . . . man
can have nothing but what he strives for (Najm 53:39).
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
142

--- Sayfa 159 ---
5.2.
What is the Islamic perspective on anticipation for the
Messiah and the Mahdi?
M
essiah is a name or attribute of Jesus, peace be upon
him. Messiah means “blessed” in Hebrew, thus this
name might have been used for him in admiration
for his merits and virtues It is reported that he was given this
name for several reasons: he was protected from all kinds of
sins; his touch healed illnesses by God’s permission; he fre-
quently traveled and made his message heard everywhere.
Mahdi literally means one who has embraced the faith and has
thus been led to the “straight path.” Mahdi also refers to the sav-
ior, who will come at a time when tyranny and injustice domi-
nate all around the world; he will re-establish justice, make
Islam dominant, and he will be a descendent of the Prophet (Ahl
al-Bayt).8
Awaiting a savior at times when basic credo of belief is
ignored, abandoning religious duties has become common, and
proper conduct as enjoined by faith has been forgotten in the
world, dates back very early in history. Jews, Christians, even
many people before them all spent a lifetime with expectations
of a savior, especially when they had to face injustice and suffer.
Throughout the ages of prophetic mission that was represented
by a chain of messengers, it was always a Prophet or a Messiah
for whom the people waited. After the Messenger of God, peo-

--- Sayfa 160 ---
ple no longer await a messenger; rather they are expecting a
reviver or a savior, a guide or a mahdi from the lineage of the
Prophet. This mahdi has been called Mahdi al-Rasul, due to the
perception that the Mahdi will be sent like a messenger by God
and that there are signs of his superiority over the Fuqaha al-
Arbaa (four great jurists of Islam: Imam Azam, Imam Malik,
Imam Shafi‘i, and Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal), saints of all ranks,
and even the Qutb al-Irshad (Master of Teachers, a title given to
very exceptional saints who appear only many centuries after a
previous one).
Islam and anticipation of the Mahdi
In religions like Judaism and Christianity people have always
awaited a Messiah or a Mahdi, who will save the believers from
sufferings and teach the faith to others. Such anticipation consol-
idated the believers’ spiritual power and stimulated the believers’
determination for revival. It can even be argued that the popu-
larity of prophets like Moses and Jesus were, to a certain extent,
a consequence of this kind of anticipation. People who gathered
around each of them said, “He is the powerful will and determi-
nation that the previous messengers gave glad tidings of!”
According to the New Testament (Matthew 3:11) the Prophet
John (the Baptist), said, “I indeed baptize you with water unto
repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier than I; he is
one whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you
with the Holy Spirit and with fire.” Although he was also a
prophet, when he listened to Jesus, the most glowing youth of
Nazareth, who was also his cousin, he saw his enthusiasm and
influence upon people, and he said, “This is the Messiah we have
been awaiting!” John’s glad tidings gave rise to further enthusi-
asm and expectations in the community, and his testimony for
Jesus quickened the process of the apostles’ faith in him, reinforc-
ing their belief.
The Children of Israel have always anticipated a Messiah.
When they noticed certain features of the savior described in
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
144

--- Sayfa 161 ---
their holy book, their anticipation became a fire burning inside,
urging them toward further research. Nevertheless, during the
translations of the scriptures, or as they were handed from gen-
eration to generation, some kind of a mist covered this very
important issue, making it impossible to see what was behind.
Lost in this overwhelming mist, the Children of Israel became
lost in their viewpoint and got mired down in denial, although
the savior for whom they had been waiting was standing in
front of them. They denied the Messiah who embraced every-
one with forgiveness and compassion, saying, “You are not him
(the Messiah).”
After Jesus another savior was awaited. The coming of the
Pride of Humanity, Prophet Muhammad, was anticipated; all
his attributes had been very well defined and sought after. The
glad tidings of this were announced by Jesus and the messengers
who came before him. Bahira, the Christian monk, expressed
this longing for the coming savior when he told the following
to the Messenger, who was partaking in a trade caravan to
Damascus: “You will be the Last Prophet. I hope that I can live
until the day when you will declare your mission, and that I will
be able to serve you by carrying your shoes.” Zayd (Umar’s
uncle, his son Said ibn Zayd was a Companion among the ten
people who were promised Paradise) voiced the same anticipa-
tion when he said on his deathbed, “I know a religion will come
very soon, its shade is above your heads. But I don’t know if I
can survive until that day.”9 However, there were also many oth-
ers who failed to see the pit in front of them, denying him, say-
ing, “You are not him.” There were others who did not accept
his message either because it was against their interests or
because he was not of their lineage; but the glad tidings, known
for so many years, that a savior would come caused the first
Companions to embrace Islam and the Helpers of Madina to
pledge their commitment to the Messenger of God at Aqaba.
Anticipation of a Messiah had a great influence in the formation
of the bond between the Prophet and his Companions, despite
Perspectives
145

--- Sayfa 162 ---
so many provocations and attempts to discourage the followers
by the polytheists. The believers stood firm at the reverse in the
Battle of Uhud and at the Battle of the Trench. In addition to
the Prophet’s personality, appearance, message, persuasion, con-
fidence, devotion, loyalty, and intellect, we cannot deny the role
this anticipation played in the spreading of his message.
The origins of the anticipation for the Mahdi-Messiah in religion
There are almost a hundred Traditions of the Prophet which
point to the return of the Messiah at the end of time and how
this return will take place. At least forty of these Traditions are
authenticated according to the criteria determined in hadith
studies; they are considered to be reliable by experts. Another
twenty of this hundred are listed as being hasan, i.e., although
not as certain as the authentic Traditions, their chain of trans-
mission is considered to be dependable. Twenty to thirty other
Traditions have a weaker reliability for their authenticity. To cite
an example, it is reported in Bukhari, Tirmidhi, and Musnad
that the Messenger of God said, “By God in Whose Hand of
Power my soul is, the descent of Jesus, son of Mary, who was a
just sovereign, among you, is soon. He will destroy the cross,
kill the swine, revoke the capitation tax, and distribute goods in
abundance. Property will be so vast that no one will accept it as
charity.” In another hadith, reported in Muslim and Abu
Dawud, the Prophet said, “When Jesus, son of Mary, descends
the ruler of the Muslims will ask him, “Come and lead the
prayer for us.” Jesus will say, “No, you are rulers to each other;
this is a blessing of God to the Muslim community.’”
There is no verse in the Qur’an that has an overt reference
to this issue. However, some prominent scholars, like Kashmiri
of India, who compiled Traditions related with this issue, selects
four verses that are considered to indicate the descent of the
Messiah toward the end of time.
He shall speak to the people in the cradle and in manhood. And
he shall be of the righteous. (‘Al Imran 3:46)
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
146

--- Sayfa 163 ---
And there is none of the People of the Book but will believe in
him before his death (Nisa 4:159)
And peace on me on the day I was born, and on the day I die,
and on the day I will be raised to life. (Maryam 19:33)
And (Jesus) shall be a Sign (for the coming of) the Hour (of
Judgment). (Zukhruf 43:61)
We can also give two examples from the Traditions about the
Mahdi: “The Mahdi is from us, Ahl al-Bayt. God will give him
victory in one night. The Mahdi is from the children of Fatima.”10
“Even if there will be one day left for the end of this world, God
will send a person from Ahl Al-Bayt to fulfill justice in a world of
tyranny.”11
As a work of His Mercy, God Almighty, at various times of
disunity, has sent a restorer, a reviver, a respected vicegerent, a
saint, a perfect teacher, or other mahdi-like blessed people to us.
Such people have eliminated disunity, restoring and protecting
the faith. Bediüzzaman gives Mahdi al-Abbasi as an example in
the political arena, Abd al-Qadir Jilani, Shaykh Naqshbandi, aqtab
al-arbaa (four great saints: Abd al-Qadir Jilani, Ahmad Badawi,
Ahmad Rufai, Ibrahim Desuki), and twelve imams in the spiri-
tual arena, saying, “As this is the way of God, He will definitely
send a radiant person from Ahl al-Bayt, who will be the greatest
jurist, the greatest reviver, sovereign, mahdi, teacher, and the
greatest saint against a grievous mischief toward the end of
time.” Bediüzzaman also answers questions about the weakness
of the reliability of Mahdi-related Traditions: “Is there anything
that cannot be criticized in some way or another? Some scholars
report with indignity that even Ibn al-Jawziya, a great scholar of
hadith, listed some authentic hadith as fabricated. Every weak or
fabricated hadith does not necessarily mean that it conveys a
wrong message. A weak hadith means that its chain of transmis-
sion does not certify its authenticity; but its message might
reflect the truth.”12
Perspectives
147

--- Sayfa 164 ---
The return of Jesus
Some Islamic scholars consider the descent of Jesus as a person
would be contrary to the divine wisdom of God Almighty. They
rather think that it will take place as a descent of a “collective
spiritual personality.” Some other scholars have interpreted
Qur’anic verses and Traditions in a different way. Bediüzzaman,
on the other hand, while not discarding the possibility of Jesus’
descent as a person, stresses the spiritual personality more, and
interprets this descent as the conformity of the Christian world
to Islam. He also argues that the descent of Jesus as a person
might not be a distant possibility: “The Glorious Sovereign,
Who sends angels from heavens to the Earth at all times, Who
sometimes transforms them into human form as did Gabriel
into Dihya (a Companion of the Prophet), Who make the spir-
itual beings from the realm of spirits come to this world in the
form of a man, or late saints in an imaginary body, would cer-
tainly dress Jesus in a human form who is alive and resides in the
worldly sky, even if he had gone to the farthest end of the after-
life and was really dead, and would send him for such a substan-
tial result.” Bediüzzaman never went further into these details
which exist in certain reports.
Claiming To Be the Mahdi Is Deviation
The Mahdi-Messiah issue is an issue that has not only long been
abused, but also one that has been exploited by unbelievers who
try to slander sincere believers. Some of those who make such
claims are pushed to the fore by certain powers and they are
used against Muslims.
I believe the descent of Messiah as a spiritual personality is
not too distant a future. It may indeed take place that this spirit,
or meaning, may descend, and nobody should oppose this possi-
bility. The coming of the Messiah as a spiritual personality simply
means that a spirit of compassion or a phenomenon of mercy will
come to the foreground, a breeze of clemency will waft over
humanity, and human beings will compromise and agree with
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
148

--- Sayfa 165 ---
each other. The signs of such a phenomenon are already present:
Muslims are sometimes invited to churches to read the Qur’an, it
is now an accepted fact that Prophet Muhammad is a Messenger
of God, and that the Qur’an is a divine revelation. Some people
as well may come to declare themselves as “Muslim-Christians.”
It does not seem improper to me to regard these as an introduc-
tion to the spirit of Messiahhood.
Abusing the Expectation of the Mahdi and the Messiah
Many individuals throughout Islamic history can be listed to have
attained a rank near to that of the Mahdi. To cite an example,
Mahdi of the Abbasids, may God’s mercy be upon him, can be
considered as a mahdi in a sense if we take into account his sig-
nificant reforms, the straight path he was following, his respect
for his predecessors, his reverence for the Companions, as well as
his moderate and upright ideas about religious issues. Among the
Umayyads, ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was a mahdi in this sense. It
is also possible to refer to some prominent figures from Abu
Hanifa to Imam Rabbani Faruq al-Sarhandi, and from him to
Imam Ghazzali and Mawlana Khalid Baghdadi; for they are con-
sidered to have had the characteristics of the Mahdi. Such people
served Islam sincerely, without making false claims or pursuing
personal interests, and they never claimed to be the Mahdi. The
people who noticed their virtues gathered around them, forming
a circle of benevolence. However, there have always been some
opportunists, who desired to exploit such considerations.
Even while the Messenger of God was still among us, many
liars like Musaylima, Tulayha, Aswad al-Ansi, and Sajah claimed
to be prophets. In addition, in every epoch some have asserted
to be “the person who will come at the end of time.” Similar to
the people mentioned above and to the eight Dajjals who
uttered that “I, too, am a prophet” soon after the death of the
Messenger of God, there have been some people with sick souls
in every era who state “I am the Messiah” and go even further
to produce the evil claim that the Messenger of God was sent to
Perspectives
149

--- Sayfa 166 ---
the Arabs, while they have been sent for the world community.
Moreover, it is reported in the Traditions concerning the Mahdi
that the Prophet said “Someone from my family will appear and
his name will be similar to my own”13; that is, it has been indi-
cated that the Mahdi’s name will be similar to the names of the
Prophet, for example, Muhammad or Ahmad; a number of peo-
ple have changed their names to fit in with this fact.
According to what was reported by Shatibi for instance, Abu
Mansur, the ruler of the sect called Mansuriya, honored himself
with the name “Kisf,” which literally means “piece,” claiming to
be the Messiah and that the Holy verse “Were they to see a piece of
the sky falling (on them), they would (only) say: ‘Clouds gathered in
heaps!’’” is referring to himself (Tur 52:44). Indicating this pas-
sage and claiming that he was the kisf he soon gathered support-
ers around him, as if he had indeed descended from Heaven.
Ignoring the actual meaning of the verse, and only taking into
account the action of descending from the sky, he argued to be
the kisf mentioned in this verse thinking of himself as a stone that
had descended upon humanity. Similarly to what Shatibi report-
ed, Ubaydullah of the Rafizis, who thought of himself as the
Mahdi, had two councilors, Nasrullah and Fath. Nasrullah in
Arabic means the “help of God,” while Fath means “victory.” As
if to justify his status, this so-called Mahdi assured them with the
argument that “You are the ones the chapter Nasr in the book of
God refers to; as the verse surely addresses us, the promise that
Islam will be embraced by people in crowds will come true via
our own efforts”:
When comes the Help of God, and Victory, and you see the
People enter God’s Religion in crowds, celebrate the Praises of
your Lord, and pray for His Forgiveness: For He is All-
Forgiving.” (Nasr 110:1-3)
These two examples, reported by a man of significance like
Shatibi, are sufficient in terms of providing evidence for how
names and attributes can be abused, how they are used in the
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
150

--- Sayfa 167 ---
service of disorder, and how they cause bloodshed in a particu-
lar geographical area.
The issue of awaiting a savior and the abuse of this expecta-
tion has not remained restricted only to religious life. Some peo-
ple, for instance, awaited a savior in economical terms while oth-
ers did so in a social context. Those who awaited a savior for
economy focused their attention upon Karl Marx during a chaot-
ic time of Europe which was mired in blood by the uprising of
workers. Such people have highly regarded his works Das Kapital
and The Communist Manifesto which he wrote with Engels, and
thus regarding him as the savior of humanity, and in particular,
the working-class (the proletariat). Dr. Ikbal stated the following
words about Marx in Payam Mashrik (News from the East): “a
prophet without a holy book (!), who is voicing the people’s
viewpoint”; he further depicts Marx as an ignorant, impolite, and
impious character who is after various kinds of expectations; and
this Marx was indeed greeted by some as the Messiah. Likewise,
from Lenin to Trotsky, many others have been applauded as sav-
iors. At times in the Islamic world, too, some have been viewed
as saviors in nearly every country: from Egypt to the Sudan and
from Syria to Somalia. Some have even gone to such an extreme
in apostasy, ignorance, heedlessness and unbelief that they even
said, “Muhammad was the Prophet of the Arabs, or Madina; yet,
this one is ours.”
Several mahdis emerged among the followers of the Rafizi
thought throughout history. Similar to the argument that the per-
son who founded the Muwahhideen State was the Mahdi, many
political groups that emerged during the times of the Umayyads
and Abbasids were convinced that their leaders were Mahdis. The
first sovereign of the Shiite (Ismaili) Fatimid State, which was
established in North Africa and exercised power over Egypt later
on, was believed to be the Mahdi by those who founded and sus-
tained this state. Placing a child on the throne, they would gath-
er around this pseudo-savior whom they considered to be the
grandson of the Prophet, thus abusing the Mahdi—Messiah issue.
Perspectives
151

--- Sayfa 168 ---
Furthermore, the Fatimids declared independence causing further
disorder as well as segregation in the Muslim community during
a phase in which the Muslims suffered at the hands of both the
Crusaders and the Mongols.
As for recent history, it is as if the Mahdi-Messiah issue has
provided a playground in which disorder can frolic. It has been
abused to a great extent by a number of people, from the Mahdi
of Somali to the great Mahdi in Sudan; the latter was killed and
cremated by the English and his ashes were then scattered on the
Nile—Dr. Ikbal wrote a great deal about this matter. There is also
Bahaullah, who was applauded as the Promised Messiah, and
Gulam Ahmad, who was engaged in Hindu yoga and meditation,
having a tendency toward revealing the power of the soul and see-
ing hallucinations when he felt dizzy, due to his asceticism. This
last person called himself respectively a mujaddid (reviver of reli-
gion), the Promised Mahdi, the Expected Imam, and finally the
Promised Messiah. Later came Elijah Muhammad, who declared
himself to be a prophet.
A particular case in point is the Shiites’ attempt to keep the
idea of the Mahdi on their agenda by announcing that “One of the
Twelve Imams has been hidden somewhere while still alive, so as
to be able to appear at a later date.” It is very ironic that they expect
the savior who kept cover from the evil of the Abbasids will sud-
denly make his appearance as if from behind the Mountain Qaf,14
during the time of the Dajjal (Anti-Christ), which is a much
greater evil than was present under the rule of the Abbasids. This
expectation should be investigated in terms of the essentials of
faith as well.
The expectation of a perfect Heracles has always been an
everlasting characteristic of the oppressed and victimized nations.
Many lazy, passive, and weak souls, who have completely sealed
themselves to abolishing false beliefs through their own efforts,
are busy awaiting such a Heracles who is to descend from the sky.
As a matter of fact, there exists such a reality and there is a ten-
dency to await a Mahdi in Sunni thought as well; however, the
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
152

--- Sayfa 169 ---
Mahdi, as understood by the Ahl al-Sunna, has not been attrib-
uted supernatural features at all. On the contrary, he is believed
to be a ruler who will lead the society to Islam, and a man of sci-
ence, heart, and spirit.
It Is Necessary To Watch Out for Abuses
Having been subject to abuses throughout the history, the belief in
the Messiah and Mahdi might still be open to exploitation, while
liars who claim to be prophets as well as imitators of the Mahdi and
so-called shaykhs may well spring up. If a person can claim to be
the Messiah, as Gulam Ahmad did, it is, then, necessary to study
and analyze the issue in terms of the essentials of faith. What does
he mean by such a claim? If he is trying to say that the Messiah has
entered into him, as have some people attributed divinity to Jesus,
and that he regards himself in this way, this is unbelief according to
Muslim faith; the word “deviation” is too mild a term for such a sit-
uation. Yes, such a claim is blatant unbelief.
By this utterance and claim such a person may mean to say
that he is on a spiritual journey in the orbit of Jesus the Messiah,
and that those who observe him are able, in some way, to see a
(kind of) Messiahhood through him, due to the level he has
attained. If this is what is meant, it is a paradox, as a person who
has actually reached that level would never make such a claim.
In addition, claiming to be a person of such a spiritual rank is
the height of vanity.
Abd al-Qadr al-Jilani may have really been a Mahdi, though
he had never claimed such a thing. Likewise, Muhammad
Bahauddin Naqshbandi might also have been a genuine Mahdi;
yet, he had never associated himself with that rank. Though he
equally deserves to be addressed as Mahdi in this sense, Imam
Rabbani did not even consider himself to merit the quality of
being human. To speak more frankly, those who belong to the
horizon mentioned above are surely the ones who avoid claims
and quests for high spiritual rank and status.
Perspectives
153

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Perfect analysis is required for such claims: Is it a wrong
association arising from sharing the same level of spirituality?15 Is
it an error which stems from an overestimation by society? Is it
the voicing of the confusion of that same society? Or is it rather
that this person truly thinks that he is a chosen one? If they real-
ly believe so and claim to be the Mahdi, then this is an obvious
sign of vanity, deviation, and a groundless claim that should be
refuted. If, in the same way, they argue that they are the Messiah,
then this is nothing less than the worst kind of unbelief. Nobody
can claim “I am the Messiah,” as Jesus the Messiah came, and
took his leave of us, going as prophet. This being the case, any-
one who claims to be the Messiah is without a doubt perform-
ing an action that is as grave as claiming to be a prophet, that is,
they are blaspheming. If a person born of certain parents claims
to be the Messiah, it means that they have been reincarnated as
well, an idea that finds no place in Islamic belief, where such a
claim is regarded as a deviation, or even unbelief. From this per-
spective, one would never attempt such an argument if following
the way of Ahl al-Sunna and walking in the light of the Prophet.
As I have mentioned earlier, Bediüzzaman Said Nursi put
forth the idea that If there is a need for Islam, the manifest reli-
gion, to express itself in various places in the world again, the
Messiah will come back right away, even from the remotest cor-
ner of the other world. However, in order to shed light upon his
general outlook, he interpreted the descent of Jesus as a spiritual
personality. He further stated that the Messiah would be repre-
sented by a group or a section of the society. Yet, in this context,
giving a particular name, or perceiving the personality of Jesus
epitomized in another person, or declaring that a specific person
is the Messiah, be he the great Conqueror Mehmed II, or Imam
Rabbani, are all in essence unbelief. It is an evil claim that gen-
uine believers are afraid to utter; rather they are on constant alert
to avoid it.
Some naïve people might easily call those whom they overes-
timate as “the Mahdi.” As we have tried to emphasize, however,
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
154

--- Sayfa 171 ---
even if the Messiah were to come and descend in person, he
would not do so as a prophet. The fact that he will obey the cur-
rent guide of Muslims in addition to the fact that the Messenger
of God, Muhammad, was the last prophet, both indicate that he
will neither descend as a prophet nor will his spirit pass into
another. If he were to appear as spiritual personality, neither those
involved in this spiritual personality nor the leading figure would
never come up with such a claim. Similarly, the person in ques-
tion, or rather the spiritual personality, who bears the attributes of
the Mahdi, would not claim to be the Mahdi nor would they ever
make such an assertion. Thus, even if they do not believe them-
selves to be the Messiah, if a person remains silent against the
overestimation of others regarding him who proclaim him the
Messiah or the Mahdi, this means that he is keeping silent against
deviation or unbelief, depending on the gravity of the claim.
Accordingly, such a person would deserve more to be called “a
mute devil,” based on the statements of God’s Messenger.16 Indeed,
if one is addressed as “the Messiah” but, on the other hand, remains
silent purposefully, not attempting to warn others against making
this deviation, then such a person is no less than a mute devil. If
the person in question wanders around claiming that “I am the
Mahdi,” they indeed float on misery, and have gravely deviated
from the path. It is out of the question that a Muslim would
approve of any such claims.
This issue, which was destined to be abused throughout
time, has unfortunately become a tool exploited by the enemies
of the religion, used to defame sincere believers. Moreover,
some other people are backed by certain powers to emerge with
such claims to use against Muslims. Such cases may well come
to the fore in the near or distant future, just as they did in the
distant and recent past. In Turkey, people who have deviated, as
well as those who do not believe at all, the ignorant with diplo-
mas, and representatives of violence who rule over the fate of
the Turkish nation or Muslim nations around the world might
well take advantage of the expectation of the Mahdi-Messiah
Perspectives
155

--- Sayfa 172 ---
and exploit the meaning of such a title on behalf of their plots.
This will be done in the name of deceiving Muslims through the
exploitation of Islamic concepts and by condemn sincere Muslims
to annihilation. This is a particular danger during the current
phase in which Muslims around the world are suffering under
oppression; the masses are depressed. Therefore, it is of the
utmost importance that care and caution be adopted against
such plots and against the exploitation of such concepts.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
156

--- Sayfa 173 ---
5.3.
How are those who are hostile to dialogue activities
today relevant to “Kharijites, Karmatis, Anarchists”?
K
armatism is a heretical esoteric sect founded by Hamdan
ibn Karmat in the ninth century AD. Hamdan took
advantage of the poverty of people and was influential,
especially in Iraq and its periphery, voicing “collective property”
and claiming shares from the rich. These people may have
appeared religious on the outside, however, they had an econom-
ic theory, political zeal and objectives. They attempted to rebel
against the Abbasid caliphate, gathering forces around them, and
they tortured Muslims of the Sunni path for years, martyring
many. They ambushed pilgrims on their way to the Hajj, attacked
the sacred city of Makka, and they even stole the Hajar al-Aswad
from the Ka‘ba and took it to Basra.
Not accepting marriage as an institution, Karmatis named
forbidden acts as being “fine arts.” They treated women as col-
lective property and led the youth astray through prostitution,
the legitimization of drinking wine and alcoholic drinks, and
made every kind of indulgence lawful. In short, enslaved by
their carnal desires and aspirations the Karmatis designed a reli-
gion of their own; they labeled anyone who did not follow their
way as being “hell-bound,” and thus managed to fabricate dis-
unity for a long time. In one sense, they can be seen to be the
anarchists or nihilists of their time.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
Modern Kharijites
The Kharijites were another heterodox faction which blamed
Caliph ‘Ali, first for conceding to arbitration and accepting the
treaty at the Battle of Siffin and second for not handing over the
caliphate to Muawiya and thus being guilty of a “grievous sin.”
They declared all others who did not think likewise—including
the Companions of the Prophet—infidels. Although they appar-
ently believed in Islam, their vision was narrow and deprived of
sound thinking. Action always took precedence over knowledge
and learning for them; they were subsequently dragged into
bigotry, hostility, and intolerance, getting mired in harshness,
violence, and crudity. They were distracted by their slogans and
action, which they had turned into a religion shaped by their
rioting and restless character. They were motivated, not by
knowledge, but by slogans, enthusiasm, and reactionary mood.
Perhaps they read the Qur’an time after time, but it was a liter-
al reading and they always opposed any interpretation other
than theirs. They regarded those who thought otherwise as infi-
dels whom were to be obliterated; they were cruel and tyranni-
cal without a single drop of mercy.
Today, we have seen some people who behave like modern
Karmatis and Kharijites, obstructing endeavors for dialogue and
understanding, disrupting the dreams of peace and friendship.
They too call themselves Muslims; yet, they have attacked the
religion from some esoteric approach, replacing it instead with
their own passions and thrills. Some others, entrapped in big-
otry, have construed the literal meaning of the Qur’an and the
hadith as the only primary essentials, sharpening their blades of
hatred and hostility against other Muslims. A subgroup within
them has adopted a deep esoteric understanding, considering
themselves as having attained a transcendental existence, and
look down on other Muslims. Still others, however, have blind-
ly adhered to overt divine commandments (nass) with no effort
whatsoever to use their mind to interpret them. They have been
deprived of any proper techniques of teaching faith or of under-
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
158

--- Sayfa 175 ---
standing others; they have no code of conduct, good morals, or
respect. What all of these people have done was to start the fire
of disunity and to fan the movement of tolerance.
These two groups were later joined by a third: anarchist souls.
The Karmati zeal and the Kharijite restlessness pushed some
Muslims into the web of terrorists, causing them to be involved
with chaos, threatening and even murdering people. Whatever the
motive was, be it national or religious, some imprudent individu-
als were manipulated by some dark power sources. They were
denied the slightest share of religion by their actions; yet they com-
mitted murders on behalf of it, and handed over their trump card
to those who were already standing opposed to religion.
Anarchists, Murderers of Innocents!
Anarchists legitimized the actions of some tyrants against
Muslims. They came into being as rebels against the state, and
they refused to recognize democracy or the secular system. The
natural outcome of such a situation was that the state used it as
an excuse to suppress such insurgences. In the meantime,
obscure suspicions were construed as actual incidents and many
innocent people were hurt on the false grounds that “there is a
possibility that they may be dangerous.” In Islam there are no
suicide bombers. All throughout history Islam has never issued
permission to murder innocent people; this is out of the ques-
tion. However, as a consequence of the actions of some people,
people similar to the Karmati and Kharijites, who have been
deceived or manipulated by drugs or in some other way, many
other innocents have been defamed, and pristine image of Islam
has been tarnished. Muslims, the representatives of submission
to God and security, have been depicted as potential terrorists.
Two factors can be listed which aggravate the issue: the first
is the fury, coercion, and determination of the tyrants; the sec-
ond is the actions and conduct of some imprudent people which
substantiate the cause of the tyrants.
Throughout the process, the greatest harmed have been
those in the middle, those in doubt and hesitation. They have
Perspectives
159

--- Sayfa 176 ---
observed what has been going on, and seeing in the front those
anarchist souls, nihilists, and a few Karmatis and Kharijites, they
thought “they have done far too much, they deserve punish-
ment.” In this way, they have endorsed the coercive operations of
the tyrants, perceiving them as being carried out in defense of the
system. Moreover, those in the administration either then delib-
erately overlooked all that was happening, or were incapable of
comprehending the true extent of things. Those people who hes-
itated in the middle were overwhelmed by their doubts and con-
sented to the deterioration of the atmosphere of tolerance and to
the hands that had been extended for peace being pulled back.
It is also important to note that it is always easier to inflict
damage; damage can be influential, even if it is apparently small
in size or carried out by only a few. Destruction is easy. Libeling,
lying, slandering can always be done very easily by a few hired
writers. Many people, as well as many institutions, have been
defamed in this way. They have even organized slander cam-
paigns concealed by the so-called “freedom of press.” These cam-
paigns were always brought to a court of law to be refuted and
compensated; however, these trials lasted months and a verdict
was reached at a much later date. The evil intentions had already
been fulfilled, leaving behind tainted images in some minds.
A small marginal minority which was unsatisfied with every-
thing was behind all this wickedness. They believed in a kind of
caste system in which they formed the eyes, ears, nose, and
mouth of Divine Existence, whereas the rest of the people were
made the fingernails, or in the words of the poet Necip Fazil,
they were simply pariahs. If something good were to take place,
it was surely accomplished only by them; if any achievement
were made, it was certainly them who were to be associated with
it. How is it possible that religious people are first to be remem-
bered when dialogue and tolerance are mentioned? How can it
be that Muslims are in the forefront of education? This is not
possible, it should be these others who are being appreciated for
these activities, as they form the eyes and ears, not those whose
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
160

--- Sayfa 177 ---
essence is fingernail. You may call them a marginal group or an
oligarchic minority, these arrogant people damaged extensively
the peaceful aura that could have surrounded us; what they did
was destructive.
Attacking Dialogue
Karmati zeal, Kharijite thought, and the anarchist mood have been
seen in the past, and they can reappear at any time. As long as peo-
ple of faith can recover and have an opportunity to express them-
selves, take a stand in favor of dialogue and understanding, voice
peace everywhere and to everyone, surely there will be some oth-
ers who will be disturbed by them. Perhaps we should ask them
this question: “People of faith act upon certain principles and their
numbers constantly grow as they are welcomed by everyone; why
don’t you use your own arguments of unbelief so that you may
grow in number too? You are not appreciated by the society. You
have to reach such a level that you are countable, inspire confi-
dence, and become beloved so that you may be welcomed.”
I would prefer not to have mentioned these three groups of evil
people, especially as we are experiencing the blissful month of
Ramadan. The mention of evil blockades mercy; thus, talking
about these people breathing evil may prevent the divine mercy
pouring down upon us these days. To ensure that these blessings
are continued perhaps we should always speak about the good-
doers and take action for the good. I was inspired by the recent
fast-breaking dinners of representatives of many different
thoughts dedicated to tolerance, each holding each other’s hand,
exchanging glances; no more are their looks of “the other.” I wish
some people had not sabotaged such activities in the past, that
they did not take on hostility and could embrace these gatherings
with good intentions; I wish they could at least respond to those
hands extended for peace, by holding out an olive branch.
Everyone shows their true character. We are also supposed
to continue showing our true character. Our path is that on
which we are inspired with faith in God and on which we take
Perspectives
161

--- Sayfa 178 ---
positive action. Our duty is to invite others for “conversations
about the Beloved for another hour,” as the Companions would
do, and in that way to reinforce our faith and to enthusiastical-
ly walk, making the truths of belief accessible to others; it does
not matter what some other people say or do.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
162

--- Sayfa 179 ---
5.4.
How would you describe the moral transformation of
the Prophet’s Companions after the advent of Islam?
T
he Messenger of God lived in an age that well-manner
had been long forgotten and in a place in which daugh-
ters were subject to infanticide. You will have an idea of
their well-manner, by only looking at the way they spoke. At
that time of the history, a child called his father by name; like
“‘Umar”, like “Abu Bakr” and his mother like “Umm Salama.”
Once a bedouin asked questions to the Prophet one after anoth-
er about obligations of a believer and then as if in a negotiation
said, “By God who sends you down, I will not perform neither
more nor less than this.” Someone named Dhu’l-Khuwaysira,
while dividing the shares, came to the Prophet and said, “Be
just, O Muhammad” in an inappropriate manner. Let’s suppose
that manner was toward ourselves; well, it is possible we could
be unjust. However, the one who was being addressed in this
inappropriate manner was the Prophet who was under the pro-
tection of God. He, on the other hand, absorbed all of these
rude acts and language. Why? Because it is the most important
task to help someone earn the eternal bliss and he was facing
every cruelty in order for his community to reach the salvation,
the eternal bliss.
Among people like these, came out the Companions of the
Prophet who are a miracle of the Qur’an because the Qur’an led
them to the morality step by step with these verses below:

--- Sayfa 180 ---
O You who believe! Do not put yourselves forward before God
and His Messenger; but fear God, for God is He Who hears
and knows all things. O you who believe! Do not raise your
voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him
in talk, as you may speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds
become vain and you do not perceive. (Hujurat 49:1-2)
The phrase in the first verse: “Do not put yourselves forward
before God and His Messenger” means, when a question asked
or if there a problem occurred in the presence of the Prophet, do
not jump to answer or solve the matter for God will let His con-
sent known through the Prophet; and following his footsteps is
to obey God’s rules. Therefore, do not attempt to teach the
Prophet how he will answer by getting into the conversation
before him. Therefore, well-manner toward the prophets is well-
manner toward God since they open our way to the eternal bliss
by bringing down the revelation and by illuminating it with their
teachings.
When the second verse “Raise not your voices above the
voice of the Prophet” was revealed, Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas
went home and started crying out that he was doomed to
Hellfire. The Prophet asked his neighbor, Sa‘d bin Muadh about
Thabit. He went to see how he was doing. Thabit said, “When I
heard this verse I thought that I will be one of the residents of the
Hellfire because I have the highest pitched voice.” Then Sa‘d nar-
rated the situation to the Prophet. The Prophet called him and
said that he indeed will be among the residents of Heaven. Sa‘d
had a very high pitched voice by nature so the Prophet told him
that it was his natural voice and what was meant in this verse was
he who spoke in an inappropriate manner in a very rude way.
Educated and disciplined by the Qur’an, the Companions
have captured the degree of perfection in well-manner. They
became the examples for the future generations. Nobody raised
their voices in the presence of the Prophet any more and every-
body spoke and acted in a very well-mannered way. Nobody
among them spoke before his turn, accorded his voice before
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
164

--- Sayfa 181 ---
speaking and tried to finish their question or comment the
shortest way possible. They were aware that any rude behavior
toward the Prophet would cancel all of the good deeds they had
performed. And a time came that their well-manner toward him
reached to a degree in which like they had a bird on top of their
head and in order to make that bird not to fly away, they were
afraid of moving a muscle. So they were that quite. They set the
examples for us by not wasting any of words of the Prophet in
their life.
Perspectives
165

--- Sayfa 183 ---
NOTES

--- Sayfa 185 ---
CHAPTER I
WISDOM IN THE MESSAGE OF THE QUR’AN
1
Bukhari, Iman, 37; Muslim, Iman, 1.
2
Hakim, Mustadrak, 2/437; Tabari, Tafsir, 19/22; Bayhaki, Sunan al-Kubra, 3/363.
3
Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 51, tafsir al-sura (3) 6; Ibn Khuzayma, Sahih, 1/116;
Hakim, Mustadrak, 3/548; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 16/441-442.
4
Muslim, Zuhd, 10; Musnad, 4/168.
5
Bukhari, Manaqib 22; Muslim, Fadail al-Sahaba, 100.
6
Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, 2/121.
7
Muslim, Jihad and Siyar 58, Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 3/560-561.
8
Tabarani, Mu‘jam al-Awsat, 6/250; Baykhaki, Shuab al-Iman, 1/136.
9
Abu Dawud, 2/53; Muslim, 5/170.
CHAPTER 2
ETHICS AND SPIRITUALITY
1
Muslim, Birr, 43
2
Bukhari, Riqaq, 38
3
Muslim, Tawba, 29-30
CHAPTER 3
VIRTUES AND HARDSHIPS IN THE SERVICE OF ISLAM
1
Nursi, Bediüzzaman Said, Sunuhat-Tuluat, 36.
2
Tirmidhi, Fitan 73; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2/390.
3
Tabarani, Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 10/173; Hakim, Mustadrak, 4/349.
4
Ibid.
5
Bukhari, Hajj, 1, Sayd 24; Muslim, Hajj, 407.
6
For more about tahajjud see: Tirmidhi, Mawaqit al-Salat, 51; Abu Dawud, Salat,
49;  Ibn Maja, Masajid 14.
7
For the hadiths stating that God forgives His servants’ sins through the five daily
prayers see: Bukhari, Mawaqit, 6; Muslim, Masajid, 282; Tirmidhi, Amthal, 5;
Nasai, Salat, 7; Imam Malik, Muwatta, safar, 91.
8
For the hadith stating that a servant is made closer to God through supererogatory
prayers, see: Bukhari, Riqaq, 38; Musnad, 6/256.
9
See Baqara 2:22, Naba 78:6.
10 Taha 20:53; Zukhruf 43:10-14.
11 Anbiya 21:32.
12 Nursi, Bediüzzaman Said, The Flashes Collection, 26th Flash, Sözler, Istanbul: 2000.
13 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiya, 2/285.
14 Bukhari, Maghazi, 79; Muslim, Tawba, 53.
15 Imam Malik, Muwatta, Qadar, 3.
16 Nursi, Bediüzzaman Said, The Letters, Seeds of Truth, 32nd epigram, The Light,
Inc., New Jersey: 1998.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
17 Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 45, Jihad, 15; Muslim, Imara, 149-151; Abu Dawud, Jihad, 26.
18 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4/342; Tabarani, el-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 8/140; Darakutni, Sunan,
1/51.
19 Bukhari, Tafsir al-Sura, 3; Hakim, Mustadrak, 2/326.
20 Nisa 4:125.
21 Bukhari, Anbiya, 19, Manaqib, 13; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2/96, 331.
22 Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 5; Abu Dawud, Adab, 9.
23 Zumar, 39:2, 11.
24 Bukhari, Ahkam 5, 6, Ayman, 1; Muslim, Imara, 13, 16, 17; Abu Dawud, Imara,
2; Tirmidhi, Nudhur, 5; Musnad, 5/173.
25 Bukhari, Iman 37; Muslim, Iman 1, 5, 7; Abu Dawud, Sunan, sunna, 16.
26 Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk, 4/250-252; Yaqubi, Tarikh, 2/126-127.
27 Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, 3/306-307; Mas‘udi, Muruj al-dhahab, 2/303.
28 Muslim, Fadail, 59; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6/465; Ibn Hajar, Isaba, 2/187;
Ali al-Muttaqi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, 10/505; Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiya, 4/137.
29 Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 7/276; Munawi, Fayd al-Qadr, 3/278.
30 Muslim, Imara, 133; Tirmidhi, ‘Ilm, 14; Abu Dawud, Adab, 115.
31 Bukhari , Adhan, 8; Abu Dawud, Salat, 38.
32 Bukhari, Tafsir al-Sura, (17) 5, Tayammum, 1; Muslim, Iman, 326-327, Masajid, 3
CHAPTER 4
SCIENTIFIC ISSUES
1
Bukhari, Tib, 19; Musnad, 2/443.
2
Muslim, Iman, 249, Fitan, 118; Tirmidhi, Tafsir, 6; Musnad, 2/201, 491.
3
Bukhari, Tib, 1; Ibn Maja, Tib, 1.
4
Abu Dawud, Tib 1; Tirmidhi, Tib, 2, 5; Ibn Maja, Tib 1; Muslim, Salam, 88-89;
Ibn Maja, Tib, 6.
5
See Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Isti‘ab, 4/1711; Ibn Kathir, Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, 7/90-91;
Ibn Athir, Kamil fi al-Tarikh, 2/560.
CHAPTER 5
PERSPECTIVES
1
Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 1; Muslim, Fada’il al-Ashab, 208-9.
2
Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 1; Muslim, Fada’il al-Ashab, 212.
3
Ibn al-Athir, Kamil fi al-Tarikh, 4/106.
4
Bukhari 3:180; Ibn Hanbal 4:324; Tabari 3:75
5
Abu Dawud, Adab, 151-152; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5:253
6
Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa l-nihaya, 7, 152.
7
Another narration of the hadith is as follows: “Certainly, Costantinople will be
conquered. How good is the commander who will conquer it, and how good is his
army.” Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4/335; Hakim, Mustadrak, 4/422.
8
Abu Dawud, Mahdi, 4, 5; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1/99.
9
Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat al-Kubra, 1/162; Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk, 1/529.
10 Ibn Maja, Fitan, 34; Darimi, Mahdi, 1
11 Ahmad ibn Hanbal,  Musnad, 2/117-118.
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
170

--- Sayfa 187 ---
12 Nursi, Bediüzzaman Said, The Letters, 19th Letter, 4th Sign, The Light, Inc., New
Jersey: 1998.
13 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 52; Abu Dawud, Mahdi, 4; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1/376,
377, 420.
14 Islamic theology acknowledges the existence of this mountain called Qaf, however,
there is no recorded information about its nature. Bediüzzaman briefly explains in
his Muhakemat (First Article, 12th Introduction, 3rd Issue) that the horizon itself
might be this mountain as it is believed that the world is surrounded by this
mountain. He further asserts that it might be a mountain that will appear in the
Hereafter, but its foundations are in this world. It is used in eastern tales to denote
unreachable distances, impossible missions, and mysterious destinations.
15 Here we can give the example Khidr, who is a beloved servant of God and an
important figure in Sufism. He holds a high spiritual rank and those who reach this
rank through spiritual journeying are sometimes confused with the Khidr himself
(for further reading, see Nursi, S., The Letters, Kaynak, Izmir: 1998)
16 Ibn Qayyim, Jawziya, Jawab al-Kafi, p. 69, 113; Nawawi, Sharh al-Sahih al-
Muslim, 2/20.
Notes
171

--- Sayfa 189 ---
A
Abbasids, 149, 151, 152
‘Abd al-Qadir Jilani, 147
‘Abdullah ibn Jahsh, 134
Abraham, (the Prophet), Khalil (friend)
of God, 85
Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, 138, 139
Abu Bakr, 29, 69, 78, 90, 135, 163
Abu Dawud 109, 146, 169, 170, 171
Abu Dhar, 69
Abu Hanifa, Imam, 149
Abu Jahl, 28, 29, 30, 134
Abu Lahab, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
Abu Mansur, 150
Abu Talha, 137
Abu Yusuf, Imam, 89
Age of Happiness, 67, 81
Ahl al-Bayt, 143, 147
Ahl al-Sunna, 43, 44, 153, 154
Ahmad Badawi, 147
Ahmad Rufai, 147
‘Aisha, mother of believers, 17, 67
AIDS, 103, 109
ajal, (the appointed time of death), 9
‘alam al-shahada, 5
‘Ali, ibn Abi Talib, 67, 78, 134, 136,
158
Ali Kuþçu, 128
Alparslan, 140, 141
Ansar, 138, 169
‘Aqaba, 82
aqtab al-arbaa, 147
arsh (the Throne), 16
Azrail, the archangel of Death, 8, 15,
18, 19, 20
B
Badr, the battle of, 18, 26, 30
Bahaullah, 152
Bahira, 145
Basit, 68
bast, 68
Berbers, 133
Bukhari, 133, 134, 146, 169, 170
C
Caesar, 135
Children of Israel, 144, 145
Chosroes, 135
Christianity, 61, 144
coelacanth, 120
D
Dabbat al-ard, 103, 104, 105, 107,
108, 109, 110, 111, 112
Dagestan, 133
Dajjal, (Anti-Christ), 152
Day of Judgment, 99, 100
Dhu’l-Khuwaysira, 163
Dihya (Companion), 148
Drosophila, 121
E
Elijah Muhammad, 152
Engels, 122, 151
INDEX

--- Sayfa 190 ---
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
174
F
Fadl, ibn Abbas, 26, 27, 67
al-Farabi, 128, 134
fasting, 21, 22
Fatimid State, Shiite (Ismaili), 151
fatwa, 115
fitna, 87
five mysteries, 3, 4, 8
Fuqaha al-Arbaa, 144
G
Gabriel (the archangel), 3, 4, 17, 18,
67, 71, 89, 126, 135, 148
Gelenbevi, 128
gharaba, 110
Ghazzali, Imam, 149
Gulam Ahmad, 152, 153
H
hadith, 6, 17, 66, 71, 73, 105, 106,
107, 109, 110, 112, 140, 146,
147, 158, 169; hasan, 146
Hajar al-Aswad, 157
Hajj, 67, 157, 169
Hamdan ibn Karmat, 157
haqiqat al-Ahmadiyya, 135
heart, the, 15, 22, 23, 54, 66, 68, 70,
71, 72, 79, 82, 84, 85, 86, 91
Hereafter, 7, 28, 39, 50, 53, 61, 67,
85, 96, 100, 132, 171
Holy Spirit, 144
Hudayfa, 81
I
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), 128
Ibn Sina (Avicenna), 134
Ibrahim Desuki, 147
iftiraq, 134
ihsan, 3, 79
Ikbal, Dr., 151, 152
iman, 3, 169, 170
irshad, 139, 144
Istanbul, 138, 139, 169
J
Jalaladdin Dawwani, 128
Jesus, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148,
153, 154
Judaism, 144
K
Ka‘b ibn Malik, 82
Ka‘ba, 26, 28, 63, 157
kalam, 16, 42
Karmatis, 157, 158, 160
Kashmiri of India, 146
kawthar, 96
Kazakhstan, 134
Khadija, mother of believers, 90
Kharijites, 157, 158, 159, 160
Khaybar, 136, 139
Khwarizmi, 128
Kýlýçarslan, 140
Kosovo, 141
L
latif, 17
leprosy, 105
M
Madina, 90, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139,
145, 151
Mahdi, 139, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148,
149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154,
155, 170, 171
Mahdi al-Rasul, 144
makhafa, 69
Makka, 28, 29, 30, 81, 90, 135, 136,
157
Malazgirt (Manzikert), Battle of, 140
Malik, Imam, 82, 89, 144, 169

--- Sayfa 191 ---
Mansuriya, 150
Maqam al-Mahmud, 99, 100
mardud, 116
Marx, Karl, 151
Masad (sura), 26
Mawlana Khalid Baghdadi, 149
Mehmed II, the Conqueror, 140
Messenger of God. See Muhammad
Messiah, 143, 144, 145, 146, 148, 149,
150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155
Molla Husrev, 128
Moses, 85, 144
Mountain Qaf, 48, 152
Mu‘awiya, 138
Muawiya, 158
Mughira ibn Shu‘ba, 137
Muhajirun, 138
Muhammad, the Messenger of God,
29, 63, 82, 136, 143, 145, 146,
149, 155, 163; Prophet, 17, 25,
55, 99, 111, 145, 149
muhasaba, 23
mujaddid, 152
mukhlas, 85
Murad I (Hüdavendigar), 140
Muslim, 3, 31, 48, 67, 72, 95, 96, 97,
104, 105, 118, 131, 132, 133,
134, 135, 146, 149, 152, 153,
155, 169, 170, 171
Muwahhideen State, 151
N
nafs (selfhood, carnal self), 49, 86, 87
nazar, 66
Necip Fazil, 160
Negus, 135
New Testament, 144
Nimrod, 76, 82
Noah, 95
nur, 17, 107
Nursi, Said (Bediüzzaman), 5, 55, 64,
80, 127, 154
O
Omar Khayyam, 127
P
Paradise, 21, 22, 36, 73, 91, 97, 145
Pharaoh, 76, 82
plague, the, 27, 103, 110
primordial nature (fitra), 13, 59
Prophet John (the Baptist), 144
Prophet Muhammad. See Muhammad
Q
qabdh, 68
Qadisiya, the battle of, 137
Quraysh, 90
R
Rabbani, Imam, 149, 153, 154
Ramadan, 23, 24, 161
Resurrection (the Hour), 3, 4, 89,
108, 127
Rightly Guided Caliphs, 132
Romanus Diogenus, 141
Ruqiyya, daughter of the Prophet, 135
S
Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas, 136
Salahaddin Ayyubi, 140
salat (prescribed daily prayers), 70,
72, 169, 170
Satan, 21, 23, 66, 68, 69, 71-73
Sayyiduna, 85
Selim I, 140
Serbs, 141
Shaddad, 76, 82
shari‘at al-fitra, 113
shari‘at al-fitriya, 16, 116
Shatibi, 150
Shaykh Naqshbandi, 147
shirk, 43, 73, 77, 78
Index
175

--- Sayfa 192 ---
Questions and Answers About Islam Vol. 2
176
shukr, 24
Siffin, the Battle of, 158
Sirat, bridge of, 97
Sunna, 43, 44, 51, 83, 153, 154, 170
T
Tabuk, 82
tafakkur, 23
tahajjud, 72, 169
Tamassul, 17, 18, 20
tashri‘i commands, 16, 62, 131, 135
tawhid, 41, 42, 43, 46, 51, 78
Testaments (Old and New), 138
Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas, 164
Tirmidhi, 134, 146, 169, 170, 171
Trench, the Battle of, 146
Turkey, 155
Turkmenistan, 133
U
Ubaydullah (of the Rafizis), 150
Uhud, the Battle of, 146
‘Umar, 69, 78, 84, 90, 137, 149
‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 84, 149
umm al-mu’minin, 90
Umm Jamil, 25, 27
Umm Maktum, 136, 137
Umm Salama, 109, 163
Unseen, knowing the, 4, 5, 6, 7
‘Uqba ibn Nafi‘, 133
usul al-khamsa, 114
Utba ibn Walid, 81
‘Uthman, 78, 133, 135
Uzbekistan, 134
W
wajib, 52, 70
wudu‘, 96
Y
yaqin, 109, 111
Yazid, 138
Z
Zahrawi, 128
Zayd (ibn ‘Amr), 139, 145
Zubayr ibn Awwam, 18