--- Sayfa 1 ---
Questions and Answers about Islam (Vol.1)
M. Fethullah Gulen
Published: 2000
Categorie(s):
Tag(s): Islam Iman Faith Allah Muhammad God Prophet Religion Ques-
tions "Islam and Science" Satan Jihad
1

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Publisher's Note
Skepticism has been slowly subverting and destroying religious faith. In
Europe, where this mood began and from where it was exported, Chris-
tianity could not withstand the doubts and questions of its adherents.
The result was a widespread rejection and denial of God and religion.
The Muslim world has not been immune to this malign influence. Espe-
cially in the early years of the modern age, a number of Muslims aban-
doned Islam while others killed themselves, saying that life without faith
had no meaning.
Islamic civilization has been under cultural attack for the better part of
a thousand years. The Muslims' minds and hearts of have been targeted;
Islam's principles, values, and symbols have been misrepresented and
abused. This led to a loss of Muslim economic and military power, which
forced Islam to give up its jurisdiction over public life. In addition, this
long process caused a severe decay in our collective consciousness, one
that can be cured only with the medicine of the Qur'an and faith.
Islamic scholars have been aware of these facts. The late Orner Nasuhi
Bilmen said: "Contemporary Islamic scholars should review the latest trends in
philosophy that cast doubts and trouble into the minds of many, and should pre-
pare new works of kalem. (theology) to answer them." Said Nursi said: "As cri-
ticism became popular and widespread, materialism had the chance to infect and
spread like a plague of the spirit, borrowing ideas and inspiration from science
and knowledge. As it combined with a false sense of freedom and pride, it became
even more widespread."
Some novels presented materialism as an imagined world designed to
appeal to the whole imagination, not just the intellect. As a result,
materialism's attendant attitudes spread faster than ever. In particular,
they infected the minds of those young Muslims who did not read or re-
flect to any appreciable degree. Whether in small circles or large gather-
ings, skepticism was on the main agenda.
Wherever faith and religion were mentioned, always the same doubts
and questions were raised. Some people who wished to respond could
not do so. In effect, they closed their ears to the voices of skepticism. In
the indignation of their own secure faith, they repressed their own
doubts and questions. While they could not answer, their faith was
simply so firm, the pleasure they took in worship so serious and pro-
found, that doubt had no chance to take root. Some reacted excessively,
accusing those who had doubts of heresy and refusing to consider the in-
tention behind their questions.
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Such attitudes and accusations only aggravated the situation.
When those who honestly sought answers could not get them, they
were disappointed and pushed even closer to a dangerous moral vacu-
um. Some already were trapped in the downward spiral of rejection and
denial. Determined materialists found this situation well suited to their
purpose of establishing an ideological conflict between Islam and
"modem" skepticism. This conflict caused many to deviate; at the least, it
left deep scars.
In the past, unbelief was the result of ignorance. When people learned
about the truth, they were enlightened and found peace of mind. Re-
cently, however, those who follow unbelief, rejection, and denial con-
sider themselves knowledgeable in all fields, based on their claim that
they accept and believe something only on rational or scientific grounds.
Such people believe that the only knowledge or understanding that they
need is that which they can acquire on their own terms. Thus, their abil-
ity to seek the truth has been blunted, and very few acquire any real
guidance.
The unbelievers sought to convert others to unbelief. But since the ma-
jority of those others were Muslim, the unbelievers could not do any real
lasting damage. Nevertheless, cloaked in science and rational philo-
sophy, the activity of unbelief continues in many forms, blowing like an
unreliable wind from all directions.
The quality of the believers' submission is impaired, for it is under
constant threat and attack. Furthermore, the lifestyle engendered by mo-
dem skepticism has introduced unprecedented levels and types of vice
and evil into Muslim societies. It is therefore common to meet people
who have doubts and questions, and who are in danger of losing that
which can secure their success here and in the hereafter.
The author of this book, sensitive to such questions, uses patient argu-
ment to answer some of these doubts and questions. Those who question
in a sincere desire for knowledge will not hear themselves accused;
rather, they will find clear and reasoned analyses of matters of the
highest significance, analyses that will point their minds and hearts to-
ward peace.
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
About the Author
Born in Erzurum, in eastern Turkey, in 1941, M. Fethullah Gülen is an
Islamic scholar and thinker, and a prolific writer and poet. He was
trained in the religious sciences by several celebrated Muslim scholars
and spiritual masters. Gülen also studied the principles and theories of
modern social and physical sciences. Based on his exceptional skills in
learning and focused self-study, he soon surpassed his peers. In 1959,
after attaining excellent examination results, he was awarded a state
preacher’s license (in Edirne), and was promoted to a post in Izmir, Tur-
key’s third largest province, in 1966. It was here that Gülen started to
crystallize his theme and expand his audience base. In his sermons and
speeches he emphasized the pressing social issues of the times: his par-
ticular aim was to urge the younger generation to harmonize intellectual
enlightenment with wise spirituality and a caring, humane activism.
Gülen did not restrict himself to teaching in the inner cities. He
traveled around the provinces in Anatolia and lectured not only in
mosques, but also at town meetings and corner coffee houses. This en-
abled him to reach a more representative cross-section of the population
and to attract the attention of the academic community, especially the
student body. The subject matter of his speeches, whether formal or in-
formal, was not restricted explicitly to religious questions; he also talked
about education, science, Darwinism, about the economy and social
justice. It was the depth and quality of his speeches on such a wide range
of topics that most impressed the academic community, and won their
attention and respect.
Gülen retired from formal teaching duties in 1981, having inspired a
whole generation of young students. His efforts, dating from the 1960s,
especially in educational reform, have made him one of the best-known
and respected figures in Turkey. From 1988 to 1991, he gave a series of
sermons as preacher emeritus in some of the most famous mosques in
major population centers, while continuing to deliver his message in the
form of popular conferences, not only in Turkey, but also in Western
Europe.
Main Ideas
In his speeches and writings Gülen envisions a twenty-first century in
which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual dynamic that will
revitalize
long-dormant
moral
values;
an
age
of
tolerance,
4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
understanding, and international cooperation that will ultimately lead,
through intercultural dialogue and a sharing of values, to a single, in-
clusive civilization. In the field of education, he has spearheaded the es-
tablishment of many charitable organizations to work for the welfare of
the community, both within and without Turkey. He has inspired the
use of mass media, notably television, to inform the public, of matters of
pressing concern to them, individually and collectively.
Gülen believes the road to justice for all is dependent on the provision
of an adequate and appropriate universal education. Only then will there
be sufficient understanding and tolerance to secure respect for the rights
of others. To this end, he has, over the years, encouraged the social elite
and community leaders, powerful industrialists as well as small busi-
nessmen, to support quality education. With donations from these
sources, educational trusts have been able to establish many schools,
both in Turkey and abroad.
Gülen has stated that in the modern world the only way to get others
to accept your ideas is by persuasion. He describes those who resort to
force as being intellectually bankrupt; people will always demand free-
dom of choice in the way they run their affairs and in their expression of
their spiritual and religious values. Democracy, Gülen argues, in spite of
its many shortcomings, is now the only viable political system, and
people should strive to modernize and consolidate democratic institu-
tions in order to build a society where individual rights and freedoms
are respected and protected, where equal opportunity for all is more
than a dream.
Interfaith and Intercultural Activities
Since his retirement, Gülen has concentrated his efforts on establishing
a dialogue among the factions representing different ideologies, cultures,
religions and nations. In 1999, his paper “The Necessity of Interfaith Dia-
logue” was presented to the Parliament of World’s Religions in Cape
Town, December 1-8. He maintains that “dialogue is a must” and that
people, regardless of nation or political borders, have far more in com-
mon than they realize.
Given all of this, Gülen considers it both worthwhile and necessary for
a sincere dialogue to be established in order to increase mutual under-
standing. To this end, he has helped to establish the Journalists and
Writers Foundation (1994), whose activities to promote dialogue and tol-
erance among all strata of the society have been warmly welcomed by
5

--- Sayfa 6 ---
people from almost all walks of life. Again to this end, Gülen visits and
receives leading figures, not only from among the Turkish population,
but from all over the world. Pope John Paul II at the Vatican, the late
John O’Connor, Archbishop of New York, Leon Levy, former president
of The Anti-Defamation League are among many leading representatives
of world religions with whom Gülen has met to discuss dialogue and
take initiatives in this respect. In Turkey, the Vatican’s Ambassador to
Turkey, the Patriarch of the Turkish Orthodox Church, the Patriarch of
the Turkish Armenian community, the Chief Rabbi of the Turkish Jewish
community and many other leading figures in Turkey have frequently
met with him, portraying an example of how sincere dialogue can be es-
tablished between people of faith.
In his meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican (1998), Gülen
presented a proposal to take firm steps to stop the conflict in the Middle
East via collaborative work on this soil, a place where all three religions
originated. In his proposal, he also underlined the fact that science and
religion are in fact two different aspects that emanate from the same
truth: “Humankind from time to time has denied religion in the name of
science and denied science in the name of religion, arguing that the two
present conflicting views. All knowledge belongs to God and religion is
from God. How then can the two be in conflict? To this end, our joint ef-
forts directed at inter-religious dialogue can do much to improve under-
standing and tolerance among people.”
Gülen released a press declaration renouncing the September 11th ter-
rorist attacks on the USA, which he regarded as a great blow to world
peace that unfairly tarnished the credit of believers: “… terror can never
be used in the name of Islam or for the sake of any Islamic ends. A ter-
rorist cannot be a Muslim and a Muslim cannot be a terrorist. A Muslim
can only be the representative and symbol of peace, welfare, and
prosperity.”
Gülen’s efforts for worldwide peace have been echoed at conferences
and symposiums. “The Peaceful Heroes Symposium” (April 11-13, 2003)
at the University of Texas, Austin, produced a list of peacemakers over
5,000 years of human history. Gülen was mentioned among contempor-
ary heroes of peace, in a list which includes names such as Jesus,
Buddha, Mohandas Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa.
Gülen contributes to a number of journals and magazines. He writes
the editorial page for several magazines. He writes the lead article for
The Fountain, Yeni Ümit, Sızıntı, and Yağmur, leading popular and spir-
itual thought magazines in Turkey. He has written more than forty
6

--- Sayfa 7 ---
books, hundreds of articles, and recorded thousands of audio and video-
cassettes. He has delivered innumerable speeches on many social and re-
ligious issues. Some of his books—many of which have been best-sellers
in Turkey—have been made available in English translations, such as,
The Messenger of God: Muhammad - An Analysis of the Prophet’s Life,
Questions and Answers about Faith, Pearls of Wisdom, Prophet
Muhammad as Commander, The Essentials of the Islamic Faith,
Towards the Lost Paradise, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism. A
number have also been translated into German, Russian, Albanian,
Japanese, Indonesian, and Spanish.
The educational trusts inspired by Gulen have established countless
non-profit voluntary organizations-foundations and associations- in Tur-
key and abroad which support many scholarships.
Though a well-known public figure, Gülen has always shied away from
involvement in formal politics. Gülen’s admirers include leading journal-
ists, academics, TV personalities, politicians, and Turkish and foreign
state authorities. They see in him a true innovator and unique social re-
former who practices what he preaches. They see him as a peace activist,
an intellectual, a religious scholar, a mentor, author and poet, a great
thinker and spiritual guide who has devoted his life to seeking the solu-
tions for society’s ills and spiritual needs. They see the movement he
helped to nurture as a movement dedicated to education, but an educa-
tion of the heart and soul as well as of the mind, aimed at reviving and
invigorating the whole being to achieve competence and providing
goods and services useful to others.
7

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Chapter 1
God
Does God Exist?
The existence of God is too evident to need any arguments. Some saintly
scholars have stated that God Himself is more manifest than any other
being, but those who lack insight cannot see Him. Others have said that
He
is
concealed
from
direct
perception
because
of
His
Self-
manifestation's intensity.
However, the great influence of positivism and materialim on science
humanity makes it necessary to discuss such arguments. This way of
thinking reduces existence to what can be directly perceived and thereby
blinds itself to the invisible dimensions of existence, which are far more
vast than the visible. Since we must strive to remove the veil drawn by
materialism and positivism, we will review briefly some of the tradition-
al demonstrations for God's necessary existence.
Before doing so, it is worth reflecting upon the historical fact that,
since the very beginning of human life, the overwhelming majority of
humanity has believed in God's existence. This alone is enough to estab-
lish God's existence. Unbelievers cannot claim intellectual superiority
over believers, for the latter contain many innovative scientists, scholars,
researchers and, most importantly, saints and Prophets (the experts in
this
field).
Also,
people
usually
confuse
the
non-acceptance
of
something's existence with the acceptance of its non-existence. While the
former is only a negation or a rejection, the latter is a judgment needing
proof. No one has ever proven, and cannot prove, God's non-existence.
In contrast, countless arguments prove His existence.
This point may be clarified through the following analogy: Imagine a
large palace with 1,000 entrances, 999 of which are open and one of
which appears to be closed. How can you claim that the palace cannot be
entered? This is what unbelievers do by confining their (and others') at-
tention only to the door which appears to be closed. The doors to God's
8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
existence are open to everybody, provided that they sincerely intend to
enter through them.
Some of those doors—the demonstrations for God's existence—are as
follows:
• Creation is contingent. In other words, it is equally possible for
something to exist or not to exist. Also, it is possible for something to
come into existence at any time, place, and form, and with any character.
No thing or person has any role in determining how, when, or where it
comes into existence, or what character and features it will have. Some
power has to choose. This power must be infinite, and have absolute will
and all-comprehensive knowledge. Necessarily, this power is God.
• Things are finite. Everything is changeable. Given this, everything is
contained by time and space and therefore must have a beginning and
an end. That which has a beginning needs a beginningless one to bring it
into existence. As an unending regress through the originator of each ori-
ginator is unacceptable, reason demands the existence of one who is
infinitely self-existent and self-subsistent, who does not change. This one
is God.
• Life. Life is a riddle but transparent. It is a riddle that scientists can-
not explain with material causes, and transparent because it shows or re-
flects a creative power. Through both of these characteristics, life de-
clares: "God created me."
• Orderliness in creation. Everything in the universe, and the universe
as a whole, displays a magnificent harmony and order. This is seen in
every item and in their harmonious interrelationships. This is true to
such an extent that one part's existence necessitates the whole's existence,
just as the whole's existence requires all its parts' existence. A single de-
formed cell may lead to the whole body's death. Similarly a single
pomegranate requires for its existence the collaborative and cooperative
existence of air, water, soil, and the sun, as well as their well-balanced
mutual cooperation. Such harmony and cooperativeness point to a creat-
or of order, one who knows everything in all its relations and character-
istics, one who can put everything in order. The creator of that order is
God.
• Artistry in creation. All creation exhibits an overwhelming artistry of
dazzling worth. Yet it is created, as we see it, easily and quickly. Further-
more, creation is divided into countless families, genera, species, and
even smaller groups, each of which has so many members. Despite this
variety and abundance, we see only orderliness, art, and ease. This
shows the existence of one with an absolute power and knowledge: God.
9

--- Sayfa 10 ---
• Finality in creation. Nothing in the universe is pointless. As ecology
shows in particular, everything in creation, no matter how apparently in-
significant, has a significant role in existence and serves a certain pur-
pose. The chain of creation up to humanity, the last link in creation, is
evidently directed toward a final purpose. Since this requires a wise one
who pursues certain purposes in creation, and since only humanity has
the consciousness to pursue those purposes, the wisdom and purposive-
ness in creation necessarily point to God.
• Mercy and providence. All living and non-living beings are in con-
tinuous need of many things, even a small portion of which they cannot
supply by themselves. For example, the universe's operation and main-
tenance demand the existence of such universal laws as growth, repro-
duction, gravitation, and repulsion. However, these "natural" laws have
no external, visible, or material existence; their existence is completely
nominal. How can something that exists only nominally, which has no
knowledge and consciousness, be responsible for a miraculous creation
requiring absolute knowledge and wisdom? How can it have the power
of choice and preference? So, one who has all these attributes has estab-
lished these natural laws and uses them to veil His operations for a cer-
tain purpose.
Plants require air, water, heat, and light. But they can obtain none of
these on their own. Our needs are infinite. Fortunately, all of our essen-
tial needs, from the very beginning of our earthly existence to our death,
are met by someone beyond our own capacity and intervention. We
enter this world and find everything prepared to meet our all sense, in-
tellectual, and spiritual needs. This clearly shows that one who is infin-
itely merciful and knowledgeable provides for all created beings in the
most extraordinary way, and causes all things to collaborate to that end.
• Mutual helping. As mentioned above, everything in the universe
helps everything else. This mutual helping is so comprehensive that, for
example, just as almost all things (including air, water, fire, soil, the sun
and sky) help us in the most extraordinarily prearranged manner, so do
bodily cells, members, and systems cooperate to keep us alive. Soil, air,
water, heat, and bacteria cooperate to keep plants alive. This cooperation
and mutual helping, observed among unconscious beings but requiring
knowledge and deliberate purpose, show the existence of one who ar-
ranges them in that miraculous way.
• Cleanliness. Until we began over-polluting our air, water, and land,
the natural world was cleansed and purified continually. Even now, it
preserves its original purity in many regions where the ways of modern
10

--- Sayfa 11 ---
civilization have not yet taken hold. Have you ever wondered why
nature is so clean, why forests are so clean although many animals die
there every day? Have you ever considered that if all flies born in a
single summer were to survive, our planet would be covered with layers
of fly bodies? Have you ever noticed that nothing is wasted in nature?
Every death is the beginning of a new birth. For example, a dead body
decomposes and is integrated into the ground. Elements die and are re-
vived in plants; plants die in animal and human stomachs and are pro-
moted to the higher rank of life.
This cycle of death and revival is one reason for the universe's continu-
al cleanliness and purity. As well as bacteria and insects, winds and rain,
black holes, and oxygen all serve to sustain the universe's purity. This
purity points to one who is all-holy, whose attributes include cleanliness
and purity.
• Countenances. Countless human beings have lived since Adam's
creation. Despite their common origin—a sperm and ovum, which are
formed from the same sort of foods consumed by one's parents—and al-
though they are composed of the same structures, elements, organisms,
every person has a unique countenance. This shows one with an abso-
lutely free choice and all-encompassing knowledge, and He is God.
• Divine teaching and directing. To direct our lives and learn what is
good or bad for us takes at least 15 years. However, many animals ac-
quire this knowledge soon after their birth. A duckling can swim as soon
as it hatches. Ants start to dig nests in the ground when they leave their
cocoons. Bees and spiders quickly learn how to make their honeycombs
and webs, respectively, that are such marvels that we cannot produce
them. Who teaches young eels born in the Atlantic Ocean to find their
way to their ancestral home in the Pacific Ocean? The birds' migration is
still a mystery. How can you explain such astounding facts other than by
attributing them to the teaching or directing of one who knows
everything and has arranged the universe and its inhabitants in such a
way that they can direct their lives?
• The spirit and the conscience. Despite enormous scientific advances,
we cannot explain life. Life is the gift of the Ever-Living One, Who
"breathes" a spirit into each embryo. Our ignorance of the spirit's nature
and its relation with the body does not negate its existance. The spirit is
sent to the world to be perfected and acquire a state appropriate for the
other life. Our conscience is the center of our inclinations toward right
and wrong. Everybody feels this conscience on some occasions. So, the
spirit and conscience are strong arguments for the existence of One God.
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
• Our innate dispositions and history. We are innately disposed to
good and beauty, and adverse to evil and ugliness. We also are inclined
to virtues and moral values. Unless corrupted by external factors and
conditions, we seek the good and moral values, which are universal. The
values we seek naturally are the same virtues and morality promulgated
by all Divine inspired religions. As history witnesses, humanity has nev-
er lived without a religion. Just as no system has superseded religion in
human life, the Prophets and religious people always have been most in-
fluential people and left indelible marks on human history. This is anoth-
er irrefutable proof for the existence of the One God.
• Human intuition. We feel many intuitions and emotions, which are a
sort of message from immaterial realms. Among them, the intuition of
eternity arouses in us a desire for eternity, which we seek to fulfill in
many ways. However, it can be realized only through belief in and wor-
ship of the Eternal One Who inspired this intuition and desire in us. True
human happiness lies in satisfying this desire for eternity.
• Consensus. If a few people who never tell the truth come and tell us
at various times the same thing, we may believe them in the absence of
any alternative. But when thousands of Prophets who never lied, and
countless saints and believers who adopted truthfulness as a most essen-
tial pillar of belief, all agree that God exists, how can we reject their testi-
mony for that of a few liars?
• The Qur'an and other Scriptures. Proofs for the Qur'an's Divine ori-
gin are also proofs for God's existence. The Qur'an teaches with great
emphasis and force, as does the Bible in its uncorrupted parts, the exist-
ence of One God.
• The Prophets. Thousands of Prophets came and guided humanity to
truth. All of them were justly renowned for their truthfulness and other
praiseworthy virtues. All gave priority to preaching the existence and
Oneness of God.
12

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Who Created God?
People with no inner spiritual life sometimes ask: If God created
everything, who created God? The Prophet said that some people would
ask this very question: "A day will certainly come when some people will sit
with their legs crossed and ask: 'If God created everything, who created God?'"1
At best, the question is based on perceived "cause and effect" relation-
ships. Everything can be thought of as an effect and attributed to a prior
cause that, in turn, is attributed to a prior cause, and so on. However, we
must remember that cause is only a hypothesis, for it has no objective ex-
istence. All that objectively exists is a particular sequence of circum-
stances that is often (but not always) repeated. If such a hypothesis is ap-
plied to existence, we cannot find a creator of the first cause, because
each creator must have had a prior creator. The end result is a never-end-
ing chain of creators.2
The Creator must be Self-Subsistent and One, without like or equal. If
any created being "causes" anything, that capacity was created within
that being, for only the Creator is Self-Existent and Self-Subsistent. Only
the Creator truly creates and determines possible causes and effects for
His creation. Therefore, we speak of God as the Sustainer, who holds and
gives life to all of His Creation. All causes begin in Him, and all effects
end in Him. In truth, created things are "0"s that will never add up to
anything, unless God bestows real value or existence by placing a posit-
ive "1" before the "0".
In the sphere of existence, what we call causes and effects have no dir-
ect or independent influence. We may have to use such words to under-
stand how a part of creation is made intelligible to us and available for
our use. But even this confirms our dependence upon God and our an-
swerability before Him. God does not need causes and effects to create;
rather, we need them to understand what He has created.
1.Bukhari, I'tisam, 3.
2.The futile notion of a never-ending chain of creators was one of the arguments
used by Muslim theologians to explain the necessity of believing in God.
13

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Why Can't We See God?
God is absolutely other than His creation, for the Creator cannot have the
same kind of being as His creation. Although this is self-evident, some
people still ask why we cannot see God directly.
Direct vision is very limited. Consider the following: A tooth contains
innumerable bacteria. No bacteria is aware of the tooth in which it lives,
for that would mean that it has removed itself from the tooth and used
some artificial means (e.g., telescopes and microscopes) to obtain an ap-
proximate idea of the tooth's surroundings and its relationship to the hu-
man body. Even if this were possible, such awareness does not mean
understanding.
Our senses are in a similar situation. We know a great deal about our
environment, but all of our knowledge is just a minute fragment of the
whole. However, our knowledge is conditioned by understanding. We
need to have a general idea about what we see in order to understand it.
For example, how could we make sense of a tree without some prior
idea, no matter how vague, of it? Given such limitations, how can we
know or see the Creator of everything?
As created and finite beings, our potential and capacity are limited.
Our Creator, on the other hand, is Infinite. We live and die within His
creation, strive for understanding and virtue, and seek our salvation by
His Mercy. Prophet Muhammad3 said: "Compared with the Seat of Honor,
the whole universe is as small as a ring thrown upon a desert. Similarly, com-
pared with the Throne, the Seat of Honor is as small as a ring thrown upon the
desert."4 These statements show just how far His Infinitude exceeds our
power of apprehending it. If we cannot conceive of the reality of the Seat
of Honor and the Throne, how can we even begin to conceive of Him?
In the Qur'an, we read that: Vision comprehends Him not, but He compre-
hends all vision (6:103). After the Prophet's ascent to the heavens, his
Companions asked him if he had seen God.5 Abu Dharr reported that, on
one occasion, he answered: "What I saw was the Light. How could I see
Him?"6 On another occasion he answered: "I saw a Light."7 These
3.In traditional Islamic literature, every mention of the Prophet is followed by a
phrase of blessing, usually "upon him be peace and blessings." In the case of the
Companions and other pious Muslims, the phrase "may God be pleased with him (or
her)" is used. Both of these are religious obligations. We have not followed this prac-
tice in this book, as it is foreign to American literary style. This is not meant as a sign
of disrespect, for they are assumed to be there.
4.Tabari, Tafsir, 3:77.
14

--- Sayfa 15 ---
statements clarify the well-known saying: "The light is the limit or veil of
God."8 This light, which He created, stands between us and God. We can
only see by within that light, which makes limited sight possible, and
also shields or veils us from God. Just as we see only a part of it, we also
see only a part of what veils Him.
Consider the matter from another angle. Ibrahim Haqqi says: "In all of
creation, there is nothing like, equal, or contrary to God. God is above all
form. Indeed, He is immune to and free of form." We can distinguish dif-
ferent things only because they have a like, an equal, or a contrary thing.
For example, we know "long" by comparing it to "short." In the absence
of such means of comparison, as in the case of God, we have no way to
compare or distinguish. This is the meaning of "God is above all form."
Those who ask to see God directly seek to think of or know His Being
directly. Just as we cannot see Him, we cannot think of or know His Be-
ing, for He is beyond all form, quality, quantity, and human conception
or reasoning. In the words of Muslim theologians: "Whatever conception of
God we form in our minds, He is other than it." And the Sufis say: "God is
beyond all our conceptions, and we are surrounded by thousands of veils."
Men and women of wisdom have said that God exists but cannot be
comprehended by human reason or perceived by human senses. The
only way to acquire knowledge of Him is through the Prophets, whom
He appointed as bearers of His Revelation. Given this, we must accept
the guidance of Revelation if we want to know about Him.
Consider the following analogy. Imagine that you are in a closed
room. When someone knocks on the door, you might be able to form
some vague impressions about who is knocking. However, you can only
guess at his or her attributes. All that you know for certain is that
someone is knocking. You can open the door and ask the person knock-
ing to make himself or herself known to you. In this way, you can ac-
quire more accurate knowledge of his or her true attributes.
This analogy helps us approach the question of how to seek God. Look
at creation. Its sheer immensity, unity of form, beauty and harmony, use-
fulness and demands upon our labor and understanding make us aware
5.The Companions of the Prophet are those who gathered around him to receive in-
struction and follow his example as closely as possible. They are considered the elite
and vanguard of the Muslim nation, and are accorded the highest respect and
admiration.
6.Muslim, Iman, 291; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5:147.
7.Muslim, Iman, 292.
8.Muslim, Iman, 293; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 13; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4:13.
15

--- Sayfa 16 ---
of the Creator's existence. When we see a wide range of diverse fabrics
produced from a single material, we know that someone has produced
it, for we understand that it could not have produced itself. Similarly, we
can deduce from what we can see of this creation that someone—the
Creator—has made it.
But this is where the similarity ends. While we can find those who
made the fabric and persuade them to make themselves known to us, we
cannot do so with the Creator. This would be like the pieces of fabric de-
manding that their producers reveal themselves. Clearly, such a thing is
impossible. Without assistance from the Creator, all we can do is specu-
late about who is knocking.
What opens this door for us is Revelation. Through God's Revelation
to the Prophets and their teaching, we can respond to creation as signs
manifesting the Creator's Existence and Attributes.9 Through the Proph-
ets, we learn to contemplate and call upon His Attributes. A true under-
standing of them requires that we follow the way of the Prophets: inner
experience and contemplation, which can be achieved only by our sin-
cere and total observance of the Divine decrees, objective study, and pro-
found meditation. If our inner faculties are not developed, we cannot
grasp the meaning of creation and so cannot contemplate the Divine At-
tributes manifested within creation.
Even then, it is not possible for just anyone to comprehend the Divine
Essence. That is why it is said: "His Names are known, His Attributes are
comprehended, and His Essence exists." In the words of Abu Bakr: "To com-
prehend
His
Essence
means
to
confess
that
His
Essence
cannot
be
comprehended."
Our duty is to remain committed to our covenant with God, and to be-
seech Him as follows:
O You alone who are worshipped. We cannot attain to true knowledge
of You, yet we believe that You are nearer to us than our jugular veins.
We feel Your existence and nearness in the depths of our hearts through
the universe, which You created and opened to us like a book, and
through the wonderful harmony of form between all parts of Your cre-
ation. We come to perceive that we are integrated into the whole realm
of Your theophanies, and thus our souls are rested and consoled, and our
hearts find serenity.
9.For example, the One, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate, the All-Knowing,
and the All-Powerful.
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Why did God Create the Universe?
When analyzing this issue, some facts must be kept in mind. While we
perceive things from a human perspective, God does not. While we act
out of necessity or desire, God does not. In other words, we cannot
ascribe human attributes and motivations to God.
Who is distressed by the universe's creation? Who does not desire to
enjoy its benefits or seek happiness? Very few people express real sorrow
at being in this world. Some have killed themselves, but their numbers
are very small. The overwhelming majority of people are glad to be alive,
to be here, and to be human. Who complains of being cared for by his or
her parents, or of being nourished by that love during childhood? Who
complains of being a young person, during which time the exhilaration
of life is felt in the very bones? Which mature adult complains of having
a family, children, and leading a harmonious life with them? How can
we hope to measure the happiness of Muslims who, even as they are cul-
tivating the seed for the next world, are ensuring success in this world?
They are discovering the keys to the gates of ultimate happiness, and so
are content and feel no distress.
The universe, which has been ornamented with every sort of art, is like
an endless parade or exhibition designed to attract us and make us re-
flect. Its extraordinary diversity and magnificent adornment, the sheer
abundance and flow of events, present a certain reality to our senses and
minds. This reality indicates the existence of an agent who brings it into
being. Through the reality of His works and deeds we come to know the
Doer, and so His Names. Through these Names, we try to know His At-
tributes. Through the channels and prayers opened to our hearts, we
strive to know Him in Himself. This raising up of our being is inspired
across a wide domain of reality—things, events, the vast realm of
humanity's stewardship, as well as the relation or connection between us
and the universe and the realm of God's Names and Attributes.
But why did God create all of this? Consider the following: Great
sculptors can produce, from the hardest stone or wood, life-like statues
that express the most delicate feelings. But we cannot know these
sculptors as sculptors unless their abilities are revealed. We can come to
know or deduce their abilities from the statues or the process used to
produce them. Every potentiality wishes to reveal the reality hidden
within itself, to demonstrate what it knows by assuming an outward
form. Seeds strive to sprout, sperms strive to join the egg in the womb,
and floating bubbles strive to reach ground as drops of water.
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
The urge to show our potentialities, and thus to be seen and known by
others, is an expression of weakness or defect, as all beings and their
wishes are merely shadows of the original essence. However, the Creator
has no defect or weakness. Remember that no single or composite mani-
festation of the essence is similar to the actual essence.
All artistry in the universe informs us of God's Names. Each Name,
displayed by what has been created, illuminates our way and guides us
to knowledge of the Creator's Attributes. They stimulate and awaken our
hearts by His signs and messages carried to our senses.
The Creator wills to introduce Himself to us clearly and thoroughly.
He wills to show His Splendor through the variety and beauty of cre-
ation; His Will and Might through the universe's magnificent order and
harmony; His Mercy, Compassion, and Grace through His bestowal of
everything upon us, including our most secret wishes and desires. And
He has many more Names and Attributes through which He wills to
make Himself known.
In other words, He creates and places things in this world to manifest
His Might and Will. By passing all things through the prism of the intel-
lect and understanding of conscious beings, He arouses their wonder,
admiration, and appreciation. Great artists manifest their talents through
works of art; the Owner of the universe created it simply to manifest the
Might and Omnipotence of His Creativity.
18

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Since God Knows What We Will Do, Why Does He Send Us
Here?
In short, we are sent here to improve our abilities and skills through the
responsibilities He ordains for us. Not all people are created with the
same ability and the same disposition; rather, they are like rough miner-
als waiting to be purified and refined.
For example, artists want to express their talents, and so are known by
the resulting works of art. In the same way, creation's majesty, splendor,
and artistry present and reflect His sacred Names and Attributes. To
show us His art,10 He created the universe and exhibited aspects of His
mysterious, hidden treasures within it. To show us how His Names, At-
tributes, and Divine Art become manifest, He created the universe step
by step. He grants us countless opportunities to know Him better and to
acquire sound knowledge about Him. He is the absolute Creator who
makes everything from one, and adds thousands of benefits to whatever
He wills.
Humanity is placed in creation to be tested, purified, and prepared for
eternal bliss in Paradise. In one hadith, Prophet Muhammad said:
"Human beings are like minerals. One who is good in jahiliyya (pre-Islamic Ar-
abia) is also good in Islam."11 For example, 'Umar enjoyed dignity, glory,
and honor before Islam, but acquired even more when he became a
Muslim.12 He gained a calmer dignity, more tenderheartedness, and the
grandeur of faith. Before his conversion, he might have been tough,
quick-tempered, and haughty, one who thought he had everything; af-
terward, he was a most modest and humble person. Therefore, when we
see well-mannered, dynamic, energetic, audacious, and spirited people,
we hope that they will become Muslim.
Islam deals with the most precious and valuable mineral—humanity.
It kneads, improves, and matures each individual so that all impurities
are expelled. The Companions were 100 percent pure. Muslims gradu-
ally began to decline in purity, to such an extent that in our own time
10.For example, through His Attributes of Might, Power, Knowledge, Wisdom,
Beauty, and Mercy.
11.Bukhari, Iman, 10, Anbiya', 8–14; Muslim, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 168, Manaqib, 25; Ibn
Hanbal, Musnad, 3:101.
12.'Umar ibn al-Khattab, the second caliph of the Islamic state, was a man of high
standing in pre-Islamic Makka. A fierce opponent of the Prophet, after his conversion
he became one of the most respected Muslims, both in his own time and throughout
history. He was a major asset to the young Muslim community.
19

--- Sayfa 20 ---
some people retain hardly any purity. As a result, we have experienced
great troubles and problems.
God knows the final result of this test, as He is not bound by time.
Therefore, He tests us so that we may become aware of what we really
are by testing ourselves against ourselves and against others. This testing
is a process to determine our value, to learn if we are iron or gold. We
are tested in what we strive for and in what we do. One day, we shall
enter God's presence and give account of ourselves: But their hands will
speak to us, and their feet bear witness to all that they did (36:65).13
13.In the context of this verse, "hands and feet" symbolize everything that allows us
to act, such as our body, faculties, and opportunities. In other verses, "eyes, ears, and
skin" serve the same function.
20

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Chapter 2
Religion
The Qur'an Says: There is No Compulsion in Religion (2:256)
What Does This Mean?
Compulsion is contrary to the meaning and purpose of religion, which
essentially is an appeal to beings endowed with free will to affirm and
worship their Creator. Intention and volition are necessary bases of all
actions (including formal worship), attitudes, and thoughts for which the
individual is religiously accountable. Without that basis, accountability
has no meaning. According to Islam, actions are not considered reli-
giously acceptable or valid unless they are done with the appropriate in-
tention. Compulsion also contradicts the religious–legal principle that ac-
tions are to be judged only by intentions.14
Islam does not allow Muslims to be coerced into fulfilling its rites and
obligations, or non-Muslims to be forced into accepting Islam. Under
Islamic rule, non-Muslims always are allowed full freedom of religion
and worship if they agree to accept Islamic rule. This is indicated by their
payment of jizya (capitation tax) and kharaj (land tax). In return, the state
protects their lives, property, and religious rights.15
The Islamic way of life cannot be imposed or sustained by force, for
faith (iman) is essential to it. And as we know, faith is a matter of the
heart and conscience, both of which are beyond force. In the absolute
sense, therefore, compulsion is impossible, for one can believe only with
and from the heart.
From the time of Adam, religion has not coerced anyone into unbelief
or forced anyone to stray from righteousness. However, the powers of
unbelief always seek to coerce believers away from their religion and
their faith. No believer has tried to coerce an unbeliever to become a
14.Bukhari, Bad' al-Wahy, 1; Muslim, Imara, 155; Abu Dawud, Talaq, 11.
15.Traditionally, the jizya was not levied on non-Muslims who participated with
Muslims in military engagements.
21

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Muslim, whereas unbelievers continually try to lead believers back to
unbelief.
Some ask why some Qur'anic verses describe fighting and jihad as ob-
ligatory, on the grounds that this appears to sanction compulsion.
Fighting and physical jihad were commanded because, at that time,
the unbelievers fought the believers in order to eradicate their religion.
The command to fight enabled and established an ethos that recognizes
the right of religious freedom and extends it to all. In other words, Islam
understands and practices the principle of "there is no compulsion in reli-
gion." Muslims had the confidence and self-assurance to understand that
once that principle becomes part of the collective ethos, people will re-
cognize Islam's truth and enter it of their own will. Historically, that is
what happened throughout the territories under Islamic rule and, of
course, far beyond.
We can look at this matter from another perspective. The command to
wage war against unbelief pertains to certain circumstances. As civiliza-
tions rise, mature, decay, and fall, similar or the same circumstances will
occur and recur. Tolerance and letting-be will be replaced by persecu-
tion, which calls for force to re-establish religious freedom. At other
times, the attitude expressed in: To you your religion, and to me my religion
(109:6) will be more appropriate.
The present is a period of the latter sort, one in which jihad is seen in
our resolution, perseverance, forbearance, and devoted, patient preach-
ing. And so we teach and explain. We do not engage in coercion, for
there would be no benefit in our doing so. The misguidance and corrup-
tion of others is niether the target nor the focus of our efforts. We pro-
voke, target, or offend no one. But, we try to preserve our own guidance
in the face of misguidance. And in our own lives, we strive to establish
the religion.
Just because a particular Qur'anic command is not applicable in
present circumstances does mean that it is no longer applicable or relev-
ant. Rather, it means that the command can be applied correctly or prop-
erly only in certain circumstances. We do not know when such circum-
stances will recur, only that they will. Meanwhile, the principle underly-
ing the command remains relevant and applicable: religious persecution
is abhorrent at all times and in all places. In the law and history of Islam,
this principle has meant that under an Islamic polity, no non-Muslim can
be coerced to enter the faith, and that all persons are free, both individu-
ally and communally, to live their faith.
22

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Even non-Muslim, Western scholars, who often are hostile to Islam, ac-
knowledge that Jews, Christians, and other non-Muslims ruled by
Muslims generally enjoyed much greater economic prosperity, dignity,
and prestige, and had far more freedoms than under non-Islamic
rule—even that of their own co-religionists. Nor did this situation
change significantly in the Western world until a through-going secular-
ization diminished the importance of religious beliefs, rites, and solidar-
ity. Intolerant states did not become legally tolerant so much as legally
indifferent.
Religious tolerance is, in some sense, a sociopolitical characteristic spe-
cial to Islam, one derived directly from the Muslims' understanding of
and commitment to the Qur'anic principle of "there is no compulsion in
religion."
Even in modern times, Western political constitutions typically make
space for individual religious freedom, as opposed to collective and com-
munal religious freedom. The Islamic polity recognizes the relevance
and importance of community to the practice and continuance of reli-
gious beliefs and traditions. That is why, in lieu of jizya, Muslims protec-
ted the lives and property as well as the rites and places of worship of
their non-Muslim subjects. Also, non-Muslims were recognized as dis-
tinct communities with their own schools and institutions. The condi-
tions for such a display of successful religious pluralism were a just, im-
partial central authority and the discipline of non-provocation. A collect-
ive ethos of tolerance cannot be sustained without that discipline. For ex-
ample, neither Muslims nor non-Muslims were allowed to blaspheme or
otherwise mock and undermine each other's beliefs and rites.
Such disciplines and the related deterrent sanctions do not amount to
coercion and compulsion. Islam also applies Muslim-specific deterrent
sanctions to maintain the Islamic social order and ethos. An analogy may
clarify this point. Most states have armed forces. These forces are com-
posed either of volunteers or conscripts. Both types of soldiers are gov-
erned by the same disciplines (and sanctions). There is no "conscription"
into Islam, for you can enter only by repeating the shahada.16 To be valid
and acceptable, this declaration must be voluntary and sincere. After
that, the duties and obligations of Islam apply equally to all Muslims.
Of course, the system and its discipline is not external and as rigid as
an army discipline is and has to be. Nevertheless it is a discipline, and
16.The Muslim profession of faith: "There is no god but God, and Muhammad is His
Messenger." After reciting this statement, a person is considered a Muslim and a
member of the Muslim community.
23

--- Sayfa 24 ---
breaches entail sanctions based on the seriousness of the matter. Typic-
ally, the disciplines of Islam are acquired gradually. Due to their inherent
naturalness and ease and, most especially, because they are based on
Divine and not human commands, they are readily internalized and wel-
comed in the heart.
When a sergeant shouts "Attention!" at his soldiers, they jump to a
command that is always and only external—one obeys only because one
must. By contrast, when the leader of a Muslim congregational prayer
calls Allahu akbar, everyone present gives himself or herself the same
command—it is internal as well as external. One obeys because one
wants and consents to do so, and one is glad that one must. The solidar-
ity and cohesion of a Muslim congregation (as the variety and rhythm of
its members' movements demonstrates) is the solidarity of individuals
gathered by consent to share in the same noble endeavor. Each fulfils his
or her duty a little behind or a little ahead of another, but still together
with all. It does not look like, nor is it, the mechanical solidarity of uni-
formed soldiers on parade.
Unsurprisingly, most breaches of discipline are slight, informal, and
informally put right—usually by one Muslim advising a fellow Muslim
to do the right thing and stop doing the wrong thing. Elaborating, exag-
gerating, or even reporting on someone's shortcomings or sins of others
is considered a grave fault in Islam. Forbearance, forgiveness, patience
for others, strictness for oneself—this is the more commended and gener-
ally practiced stance of the overwhelming majority of Muslims.
However, certain kinds of breaches threaten the social ethos as a
whole. If such threats are not countered, the social ethos becomes eroded
and society's general order and stability is undermined. Where informal
private efforts to correct matters right have failed or are of no use, formal
public measures, including force, must be applied. For example, Islam
forbids the consumption of intoxicants, gambling, adultery, fornication,
fraud, theft, and other harmful practices. It considers them both sins and
crimes subject to punishment. If these vices are allowed to take root and
spread, society has failed to fulfill its duty to the law and moral ethos of
Islam. Collective action must be taken to prevent or undo widespread
corruption within the social body. While such action includes positive ef-
forts to educate the community in the corresponding virtues, it also must
accept the negative action of imposing appropriate penalties on those
who wilfully and systematically introduce vices into society that will
destroy its discipline and Islamic character.
24

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Consider the issue of apostasy. Under Islamic law, apostasy is re-
garded with the same gravity as treason is regarded by most states and
all armed forces. The hope must be to prevent, by pleading, prayers, per-
suasion, and all other legitimate means, such a crime from becoming
public and offensive to society. Those who insist on pursuing this path
must be asked to reconsider and repent. If they reject this opportunity,
the penalty is death. No lesser penalty could express society's abhorrence
of breaking one's covenant with God. The shahada, by which the indi-
vidual enters Islam, is a most weighty affair. To overturn it is to insult
the whole balance of creation and its relationship with the Creator. If
apostasy were regarded as an individual affair only, personal conscience
would be tantamount to degrading religion to a plaything, a literary
toy—now a pleasure or convenience, now a displeasure or nuisance, ac-
cording to the whim or caprice of the moment.
"There is no compulsion in religion" because we have free will and be-
cause "Truth stands clear of falsehood." Truth has an absolute authority
within the human conscience, which calls it urgently to affirm its Creator
and Sustainer. In both individual and collective life, the Truth's absolute
authority demands a flexible but strong and steady discipline. Discipline
and forbearance, as well as compassionate understanding and patience,
are the proper responses to all breaches—but only up to and until the
discipline itself is threatened with destruction. Like every discipline, the
discipline of Islam imposes its burdens. But unlike any other, the re-
wards for carrying those burdens with sincere devotion are sanity,
serenity, and ease in this life and in the life to come.
25

--- Sayfa 26 ---
What is the Point of Worship, and Why Does it Have to Be
Done in a Certain Way?
Consider our position in this universe. We are neither omnipotent nor
self-sufficient, and so have needs, many of which we cannot satisfy. We
are weak and vulnerable, and subject to worry, illness, and other negat-
ive events. When we look at the sheer abundance of animate and inanim-
ate things around us, as well as their tremendous harmony and order,
we cannot help but reflect on our own frailty and relative insignificance.
This realization awakens a deeply embedded need to acknowledge the
Divine and to worship the great mysterious power that controls
everything. Since whatever we can see and touch is both transient and
dependent on something else, it is unworthy of our worship, for logic
dictates that behind them is a Supreme Being, a Transcendent Will guid-
ing and controlling everything. This Being, therefore, must be the goal of
our worship.
Reflecting more carefully on existence, we see the all-encompassing
lawfulness and order of things and events, as well as their uniformity,
regularity, and obedience to an All-Powerful Will. We thus become
aware of the fact that everything has a part in that lawfulness and order.
That part is its purpose or duty. As we realize that each one of us is also
just a part, we conclude that each individual's existence cannot be a pur-
poseless accident; rather, each individual has a specific purpose and
duty to fulfil.
In aesthetic terms, we can never emulate the beauty of creation. From
our own form to the vigorous and lively beauty of the innumerable
forms and colors surrounding us, not to mention the those of the stars
and planets, everything causes a strong desire within us to know the
Creator. It is as if everything were designed and produced elsewhere
and then simply placed before us so that we could marvel at them while
using and benefiting from them. The world is presented as a richly laid
table of foods and ornaments for our use. As we reach for any item, we
inevitably sense the Giver's presence, and so experience an even greater
joy and wonder.
In religious terms, such sentiments and conceptions aroused in human
consciousness, as it were by nature, are a stage in acknowledging the
Beautiful Names and Attributes of the Creator making Himself known
through His creation. Every blessing, excellence, and beauty speaks of
the one who made it possible. Every system, balance, and order indicates
the one who established and sustains it. In sum, we naturally feel
26

--- Sayfa 27 ---
grateful for what God has provided and so worship Him in response to
His making Himself known.
Based on this, the Mu'tazilis and (to some extent) the Maturidis,17 say
that even in the absence of Prophets or guides, we should be able to gain
some knowledge of God by observing the universe and then act accord-
ingly. There is some evidence to support this argument. Before Islam,
many people, including Muhammad, were born and lived in Makkah,
the heartland of Arab paganism and idolatry. No one showed them the
way to God or spoke to them of the Oneness of God (tawhid). And yet
history records the remarks of a desert nomad of that time: "Camel drop-
pings point to a camel's existence. Footprints on the sand tell of a travel-
er. Heaven with its stars, the Earth with its mountains and valleys, and
the sea with its waves—don't they point to the All-Powerful, Knowing,
Wise, and Caring Maker?"
If even a simple bedouin could understand this much, what about oth-
ers? What about Muhammad, who one day would be appointed to deliv-
er God's final Revelation? Long before the Revelation began, he under-
stood the world's reality, perceived the Truth (al-Haqq) in the grand
Book of the Universe, and began to search for it. Taking refuge in Hira
cave, he devoted himself to worship. 'A'isha, narrating directly from
Khadija, said that he gave himself up to prayer, only occasionally coming
home for provisions.18 This might indicate that we can reach some de-
gree of knowledge and so worship God.
Zayd ibn 'Amr, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab's uncle, reached a similar under-
standing. Although he died before Muhammad's Prophethood, he intuit-
ively felt the truth of Islam in the air, as well as the meaning and signific-
ance of Prophet Muhammad's coming. As he lay dying, he called his
family members and said: "The light of God is on the horizon. I believe it
will emerge fully very soon. I already feel its signs over our heads." Ad-
dressing God, he continued: "O Great Creator! I have not been able to
know You thoroughly. Had I known, I would have put my face upon the
ground before You and never raised it in quest of Your pleasure."19
Evidently, a pure conscience free of any traces of paganism and poly-
theism can understand its own station and duty when it seen creation's
17.Two schools of thought that appeared in the early years of Islam. The Mu'tazilites
used the techniques of Greek logical argument to attack orthodox Muslim theology.
The Maturidis used the same techniques and argument to defend it.
18.Bukhari, Sahih, Bad' al-Wahy, 3.
19.Ibn Sad, Tabaqat, 1:161–62; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba.
27

--- Sayfa 28 ---
splendor and harmony, and thus seek to serve and please the One who
created and ordained all things.
Knowing God entails worshipping Him. As he provides everything
for us, we are obliged to serve Him. One of these blessings is that of
prayer. God tells us how to pray so that we will do it correctly and
effectively.
God told the Prophet how to pray, and we are told to follow his ex-
ample. There are certain rules to follow. Before beginning, we must puri-
fy ourselves with the proper ablution. Depending on our circumstances,
this can be ghusl (full ablution), wudu' (regular ablution), or tayammum
(ablution in the absence of water). Then we say Allahu akbar, meaning
that nothing is greater than God. Standing in a peaceful, respectful still-
ness, with hands joined together on our chest, indicates our complete
surrender. Concentrating as fully and deeply as possible allows us to ex-
perience, based upon our level of spiritual development, the Prophet's
ascension in our spirit.
Rising up inwardly, we bow down physically to renew our surrender
and express our humility. As we do so, we experience a different stage in
our servanthood and so prostrate in fuller reverence and humility. Ac-
cording to the depth of surrender there, we enter into different realms.
Hoping for further progress, we raise our head, say a few words, and
then lower it again for the second prostration. After this, we may experi-
ence the meaning of the hadith in Muslim's Sahih: "The servant is never
closer to God than when prostrating in worship. Make more supplica-
tions while prostrating"; and the meaning of: Who sees you when you stand
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves (26:218–19).
Praying in the manner taught through Divine teachings and guidance
is the best worship, for it flows from the love, awe, and submission to
God that belief in Him and knowledge of His Divine Being engender.
Following the method prescribed by God and His Prophet please Him
further and benefit us the most.
We are in constant need of help, guidance, and counsel. Imagine that a
successful business owner gives you sound and free advice on how to
run your business. Would you refuse such advice? If we pray according
to the revealed method, we avoid the pitfalls of excess and impropriety,
and obtain advantage and blessings beyond our imagination. Maybe say-
ing Allahu akbar releases the Divine Mercy and inspires our soul to un-
dertake a journey like the Prophet's ascent to heaven. Maybe reciting the
opening chapter of the Qur'an opens the way to the highest mystery.
28

--- Sayfa 29 ---
With every word, gesture, movement, and pattern, we may be opening
hidden doors and secret locks leading to hidden realms and eternal bliss.
Prayer straightens all ways and opens all doors. God hears our recitals
and supplications, and angels gather around us when we prostrate with
sincerity. No one can claim that such things do not happen—rather, the
sayings of Prophet Muhammad confirm that they do. This is why the
most accepted pattern of worship is the one prescribed by God.
When we buy something, do we make up our own instructions con-
cerning how to use it, or do we use the instructions provided by the
manufacturer? As the Creator knows what will cause us to prosper in
this world and the next, we should follow what He has revealed and
how His Messenger practiced it in his daily life. It is we who need to
worship God; not God who needs to be worshipped—He is free of all
need.
29

--- Sayfa 30 ---
What is the Primordial Covenant?(Qalu Bala)
This matter is directly mentioned in the Qur'an:
And whenever your Sustainer brings forth their offspring from the loins of
the children of Adam, He (thus) calls upon them to bear witness about them-
selves: "Am I not your Lord?"—to which they answer: "Yes, indeed, we do bear
witness thereto." [Of this we remind you] lest you say on the Day of Resurrec-
tion: "Verily, we were unaware of this." (7:172)
According to this verse, every soul was required, at some point, to
bear witness to its recognition of the Divine Existence and Unity.
Qur'anic commentators continue to debate when this covenant was
made. Therefore, we will look at a few considerations as to when and
how and to whom this question was put.
• When we were as yet nothing and received the command Be!, we
gave an affirmative existential response to God's creative act, which is
represented or dramatized as a question–answer or a covenant.
• When were still in the form of atoms or even particles not yet formed
as atoms, the Lord of the Worlds, Who cherishes and leads everything to
perfection, made these particles feel the desire and joy of being human.
He therefore took the promise and covenant from them, which is con-
sidered a "Yes" from all atoms to God's creative call, though it was far
beyond their own power to even imagine such an affirmation.
Such question–answer or offer–acceptance is not in words or state-
ments. For this reason, the event has been interpreted allegorically by
some, as if the question were put, answered, and had a particular legal
value and effect, although it is not an actual verbal or written contract. In
fact, without taking into account God's power and innumerable ways of
communicating with His creatures, considering this covenant to be an
ordinary contract can lead only to difficulty and error.
This acknowledgement and declaration, this covenant bearing witness
against ourselves as regards our recognition of the Divine Existence and
Unity, is the ground of our knowing and feeling ourselves, of compre-
hending that we are nothing other than ourselves. In other words, this
covenant is the ground of self-knowledge. It means that we start to look
into the mirror of knowledge (ma'rifa), witness the realization of diverse
truths reflected in our consciousness, and acknowledge and declare that
witnessing. However, the offer–acceptance, the perceiving–making per-
ceived, the covenant, is not overt or amenable to direct perception. Per-
haps it becomes perceived after many warnings and orders, and thus the
30

--- Sayfa 31 ---
significance
of
moral
and
religious
guidance,
counselling,
and
enlightenment.
The ego or self (nafs) is created and entrusted to us so that we may
know and declare the Creator's Existence and Unity. Therefore, we prove
God's Existence with our own existence, and show God's Attributes with
our own attributes. For example, our deficiencies and imperfection show
God's all-sufficiency and perfection; our privations show God's wealth
and abundance; and our inability, weakness, and poverty show God's
power, favor, and benevolence. The covenanted self is God's first favor
and bestowal upon humanity. Our proper response is to know and de-
clare God's Existence throughout creation and to perceive His Light in all
lights. This is how the primordial covenant is fulfilled. The covenant is
like a command that is accepted through understanding the meaning of
the magnificent Book of Creation written by the Divine Power and Will,
of our comprehending the secrets of the lines of events.
The question–answer of the covenant should not be thought of in a
material or corporeal sense. God commands beings according to their
particular individual nature, and listens to their needs and speech and
whatever issues from them. Thus, He understands all and fulfils their
needs. In the scholastic theologians' terminology, the Almighty under-
stands all languages and dialects; issues commands and communicates
truths in them; explains and expounds humanity and the universe; and
takes promises and makes covenant with them in the form of words, for
which the technical term is kalam-i lafzi. There is also a Divine Speech
specific to animals as inspiration, and to angels as divine discourse. Al-
though their precise natures are unknown to us, obviously it is non-
verbal and consists of different manifestations of the so-called kalam-i
nafsi.
Divine Speech is so diverse and extensive—from the inspiration com-
ing to the human heart to the discourse addressed to the angels—and the
forms of communication between the Creator and His creation are so dif-
ferent and occur in such different realms that those who inhabit one
realm cannot hear or detect the communications belonging to another
realm.
It is a serious mistake to suppose that we can hear everything. It is
generally accepted that the range of our hearing, like our sight, is quite
limited. What we see and hear is almost nothing when compared to that
which we cannot see or hear. For this reason, God's communicating with
the atoms or systems within this creation, His composing, decomposing
31

--- Sayfa 32 ---
or re-composing them, occur in such sublime ways that our limited per-
ceptive powers cannot detect or understand them.
We cannot know exactly when God made this covenant with us, for
such knowledge is beyond the ability of our limited senses and faculties.
In fact, He might have made it not with our whole being, but with a spe-
cific part, such as our soul, conscience, or one of the soul's sub-faculties.
There is general agreement that the human soul is an entity independ-
ent of the body. Since the soul came into existence before the physical
body, and in a sense has a particular individual nature outside of time,
and since the questioning and acceptance in the covenant was with the
soul, our limited powers cannot comprehend or report it fully. The soul
hears and speaks without words and voice, as it does in dreams, and
communicates extrasensorily and without the medium of sound waves,
as in telepathy. This special form of communication is registered and re-
corded in its own specific way. When its time is due, it will assume its
specific form and, using that language, speak and bring to the mind all
original associations. At that time, we will see that the covenant has re-
mained imprinted upon the human soul. In addition, it will be adduced
as an argument against its possessor on the Day of Judgment.
The souls of all human beings were gathered in a realm that was not
veiled by an intervening realm, and so saw everything clearly. After this,
they gave God an oath of allegiance. When He asked them to witness
against themselves: "Am I not your Lord?" they replied: "Yes, we witness
that You are our Lord and our God." However, as is common today,
some people have never turned to that section of their soul (their con-
science). Thus, they have not come across that profoundly inherent cov-
enant in themselves, for they have no interest in it and have not tried to
see beyond the corporeal world that intervenes between them and
reality.
If their minds were not clouded by the conditioning biases under
which they live, they would see and hear the answer to the covenant in
their conscience. This is the main purpose of inward and outward, as
well as subjective and objective contemplation and search. Engaging in
such activities saves the mind from self-obsession and frees ideals. With
an open mind and a genuinely free will, people can try to read the delic-
ate writings in their consciences. Some people who have habituated
themselves to looking into the depths of their hearts cannot discover in
books the thoughts and inspiration they acquire through such inward
observation and contemplation. Even the allegorical meanings and allus-
ive signs in the Divine Books can become manifest in their true
32

--- Sayfa 33 ---
profundity if studied in such a manner. But people cannot attain such a
profound level of inward observation and contemplation, or understand
what they might discover there, if they cannot overcome their own
selves.
Let's look at the when of this covenant. It is really difficult to derive
anything definite from the Qur'an and Hadith on this matter. Some com-
mentators argue that the covenant is taken in the realm of atoms, when
the person is in a state of uncomposed, separate atoms, and with the
atoms and the soul of which the person will be composed. Others say
that the covenant is taken while the sperm is travelling toward the egg,
when the individual begins to form in the mother's womb, when it be-
comes a foetus, when spirit is breathed into the foetus, when the child
reaches puberty, or when the person is religiously responsible for his or
her actions.
While each claim has its own supporting arguments, it is difficult to
show a serious reason for preferring one to another.
In fact, this event could happen in the realm of spirits, in a different
realm where the soul relates to or gets in touch with its own atoms, in
any embryonic stage, or in any stages till the individual reaches puberty.
God Almighty, Who realtes to both past and present simultaneously,
Who sees and hears past and present together at the same instant, could
take the covenant at all of the stages mentioned. As believers, we hear
such a communication from the depth of our consciences and know that
our hearts have borne witness to such a covenant.
As a stomach expresses its emptiness in its own language, as a body
tells its aches and pains in its own words, so the conscience informs us of
this event in its own language and words. It suffers pain, distress, and af-
fliction. Moaning with pangs of regret, it becomes restless to keep the
promise made, and always hopes for the good and the best. When it
draws attention by its sighs and moans, it feels relieved, fortunate and
happy, just as children do when they draw their parents' attention. When
it cannot express its need or find anyone to understand it, it writhes in
pain and distress.
Are there any rational proofs that the covenant really took place?
Some issues that are difficult to explain by reason. Yet the possibility
of such things can be mentioned. In fact, we cannot object to what God
has affirmed.
Essentially, the Almighty speaks to His creations in many ways. We
also use different ways and styles when communicating with others.
Apart from words, we have various outer and inner faculties, sentiments
33

--- Sayfa 34 ---
and perceptions, mind and soul. Sometimes we speak to ourselves in
words audible only to our hearts and minds. Such speech is not utter-
ance, but pertains to the soul or self. At times, we communicate with oth-
ers using these non-verbal methods.
At times we speak, hear, and listen to conversations in our dreams.
But those who are awake and nearby hear nothing. After waking up, we
tell them what we spoke and heard. So this is another mode of speech.
Some awake people can see the pictures or tablets shown to them from
the World of Ideas and speak to its inhabitants. Materialists do not be-
lieve in such things, and may refer to them as hallucinations. It does not
matter; let them say so… But we know that one of Prophet Muhammad's
distinctions was that he was granted vision of the such tablets, pictures
from the World of Ideas and from other worlds, and that he conveyed to
humanity what he saw, heard, and understood. So this is another mode
of speech.
Revelation to the Prophets is yet another. We know that the Prophet
was fully awake and conscious when the Revelation came. Sometimes he
would be lying on the ground with his head on his wife's knee, sitting
and leaning against a Companion's shoulders, while his knee was touch-
ing the knee of the Companion sitting next to him, or among a group of
people. At such times, he felt, received, and experienced the revelation
with its full weight, and conveyed the Divine message in its entirety.
Those in his presence realized, from what they could see, that the Proph-
et was receiving Revelation, although they could not hear it. They could
"hear" and understand it only after he communicated it to them verbally.
It was as if the dimensions were different.
Another way of speaking is Divine inspiration. God inspires saints,
and influences, imparts, or dictates something into their hearts in such a
way that they can deduce something. When they guess, or speak or act,
God makes them do or say just the right thing by His mercy. So this is
yet another mode of speech.
Another way of communication from heart to heart, and from mind to
mind, is telepathy. This method is defined as sending thoughts or mes-
sages to another person's mind by extrasensory means. Many scientists
have studied this phenomenon in the hope of benefiting from it. The
atheistic and materialist Soviet regime did sustained work on telepathy,
no doubt in the hope of gaining a military advantage.
Based on the above, it is clear that God created numerous, perhaps un-
limited, modes of speech and communication.
34

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Returning to the question of "Am I not your Lord?" in the primordial
covenant, we do not know how God asked this question. If it took the
form of Divine inspiration to saints, it would not be correct to expect
some kind of audible voice. If it was a question asked of the soul, cer-
tainly it would not resemble a question asked of the body or flesh—or
vice versa.
The crucial point here is that if we attempt to evaluate what they see,
hear, or experience in other realms with worldly criteria and measures,
we will end up in error. A hadith states that the angels Munkar and
Nakir interrogate the dead in their graves. So, to whom or what do they
direct their quesitons? But whether they question the soul or the body,
the result is the same. Though the dead hear the questions, others buried
nearby and living passers-by cannot hear them. Even the most sophistic-
ated modern listening devices placed in or near the grave will not detect
anything, for it takes place in a different dimension. Some scientists have
claimed that there are many more dimensions than just the three that are
familiar to us. As place, context, and dimensions change, the mode of in-
terrogation and communication must change and assume an appropriate
form.
As the primordial covenant is between God and our soul, we cannot
expect to feel and retain the influence of that instant in any physical way.
Rather, we should expect it to be reflected in our conscience, as only our
conscience and the inspirations that come to it can sense such a thing.
Once, while I was talking about this issue, someone told me that he did
not feel that question and answer of the covenant in himself. I replied:
"Not feeling it is a difficulty for you. Try to solve it."
As for me, I felt it and remember quite well that I did so. If I am asked
how I feel it, I say that it is by my desire for eternity, and by my infinite
desire despite my limited, transitory existence. Essentially, I cannot
know and comprehend God because I am limited. How can I compre-
hend the Unlimited, the Infinite, the Everlasting, the Absolute, the
Almighty? But because of my endless desire and enthusiasm for the In-
finite and Eternal, I realize that I feel it. I aspire to infinity and eternity,
even though I am a tiny creature in a limited world in a limited universe;
one destined to live for a while and then die; one whose range of views
and opinions are expected to be fixed, confined, and narrow. Despite this
I yearn for Paradise, the Vision of God, and the Divine Beauty. If I
owned the whole world, my anxieties and griefs would still torment me.
Because I have such aspirations, I say: "I felt it."
35

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Our conscience, with all its subfaculties and sections, always tries to
remain attached to God and never lies. If you give it what it requires, it
can attain peace and tranquillity. That is why the Qur'an points out that
our heart, which is a subtle inner faculty, can attain peace only if the con-
science can attain it: For without doubt in the remembrance of God do hearts
find satisfaction (13:28).
Such philosophers as Bergson, leaving all rational and traditional
proofs aside, argue that the conscience proves God's existence. The Ger-
man philosopher Kant said: "I felt the need to leave behind all the books
I read in order to believe in God." Bergson refers to his "intuition," and
his only proof is his conscience.
Yes, one's conscience is in agony if it rejects God, for it can find ease
and satisfaction only through belief in God. If we really listen to what
our conscience is saying, we will feel the desire for the Eternal and Abid-
ing God. This feeling, perception, or quality is equivalent to the response
of: "Yes, we bear witness thereto" to the question: "Am I not your Lord?"
expressed silently within the human conscience. If we pay close atten-
tion, we can hear this voice, which wells up from the depths of our souls.
To look for it in our mind or body is futile, for it already exists, latent
and inherent, in every human conscience. However, it can prove its exist-
ence only on its own terms. Only those close to the state of the Prophets
and saints, and who follow their ways, can see it clearly and make others
see it.
Such matters cannot be proven in the manner of a simple, physical ex-
istent like a tree. However, those who listen to their conscience, who turn
their gaze inward and observe what happens there, will see, hear, and
know the primordial covenant between us and our Maker.
36

--- Sayfa 37 ---
What Does the Islamic Concept of Fitra (Primordial Nature)
Mean?
In an authentic hadith, the Prophet Muhammad says that every new-
born is born in the Islamic fitra, after which the parents cause the child to
become either Christian or Jew or a member of another religion.
The hadith means that everyone has the innate potential to become a
Muslim. Meaning peace, salvation and obedience, Islam is, first of all, the
natural religion of all creatures. Since everything in nature has been cre-
ated to render absolute obedience to God and functions according to His
laws, all creatures are Muslims. Considered from the viewpoint of their
bodily structure, every human being and jinn, regardless of their reli-
gion, is muslim, since all bodies operate according to the laws determ-
ined for them by God. If a new-born could lead a completely isolated life
free of environmental effects, he or she would remain a natural Muslim.
This hadith has another meaning: A new-born's mind is like a blank
tape on which everything can be recorded. If he or she could be protec-
ted from any external effect that would bring about some impurity in his
or her brain, such a person easily could receive anything related to Islam
and become a perfect Muslim. But if the mind is made impure with
many adverse elements, or if non-Islamic dogmas and traditions are fed
into it, the person will become a follower of those religions or face great
difficulties while trying to become a good Muslim.
Every new-born is like a seed to grow a good Muslim, for everyone
comes to the world as the seed of a future Muslim. Adverse conditions
cause this seed to be deformed or spoiled and, consequently, to become a
follower of another religion or, according to the surrounding conditions,
of no religion at all. Therefore, improving one's family and environment-
al conditions is vitally important if we want to produce good Muslims.
After a child has reached the age of puberty, sins are a primary factor in
deforming the seed. For this reason, it is said that every sin has the po-
tential to guide the sinner to unbelief. So, we must do our best to protect
ourselves against sins. Family, education, and environment are also of
great importance for this purpose.
37

--- Sayfa 38 ---
What is Guidance, and Can We Guide Others?
Guidance is a light kindled in someone by God as a result of his or her
use of free will in the way of belief. As we affirmed earlier, only God can
guide to the truth. There are many verses in the Qur'an that state this ex-
plicitly. For example:
If God willed, he could have brought them all to the guidance. (6:35)
If it had been your Lord's will, all who are on the Earth would have believed,
all together. (10:99)
You do not guide whom you like, but God guides whom He wills. (28:56)
You cannot make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf to hear the call
when they have turned to flee. Nor can you guide the blind out of their devi-
ation. You can make none to hear save those who believe in Our Revelation so
that they surrender and become Muslims. (30:52–53)
Since it is God Who guides, we implore Him in every rak'a of our
daily prescribed prayers: Guide us to the Straight Path (1:6). God's Messen-
ger says: "I have been sent to call people to belief. It is none but God only
Who guides them and places belief in their hearts."
Besides the verses above and many other similar ones, other verses
state that God's Messenger calls and guides people to the Straight Path:
Surely you call them to the Straight Path (23:73) and:
Thus We have revealed a Spirit to you from Our Command. You did not
know what was the Scripture, nor what the Faith was, but We have made it a
light whereby We guide whom We will of Our servants. You are indeed guiding
to the Straight Path. (42:52)
These verses are not contradictory. As we said above, God creates
everyone with the potential to accept belief. However, the family, educa-
tional, and environmental conditions have a certain role in guidance or
misguidance. So, in order to call people to belief, God sent Messengers
throughout human history and gave some of them Books whereby
people could reform themselves. Prophet Muhammad, the last Messen-
ger, received the Qur'an from God via revelation. The Qur'an, being the
last Divine Book and uncorrupted, contains the principles of guidance.
The Messenger's personal conduct and good example, which embody
its teaching, also make his way of life a means to guidance. He recites the
Divine Revelation, shows people the signs of God, and destroys their
misconceptions, superstitions, and sins. In fact, every thing, event, and
phenomenon is a sign pointing to God's Existence and Unity. Therefore,
if you want to believe sincerely and without prejudice, struggle against
carnal desires and the temptations of your evil-commanding self, and
38

--- Sayfa 39 ---
use your free will to seek the truth, God will guide you to one of the
ways leading to Him. He declares in the Qur'an:
Be aware of God and seek the means (of approach to and knowledge of) Him,
and strive in His way in order that you may succeed and be prosperous [in both
worlds]. (5:35)
As for those who strive in Us [in Our way, for Our sake, and to reach Us],
We guide them to Our paths; God is with the good. (29:69)
In order to find or to deserve guidance, you must strive for it sincerely
and search for the ways leading to it. Those whom God has blessed with
guidance should set good examples for others, and then call others to it
through all lawful (Islamic) means. In many verses, God commands His
Messenger to do just that:
Warn your tribe of near kindred [of their end and the consequences of their
deeds and of the punishment of Hell). (26:214)
Remind and give advice, for you are one to remind. (88:21)
Proclaim openly and insistently what you are commanded. (15:94)
Call to the path of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason
with them in the most courteous manner. (16:125)
Surely in the Messenger of God you have a good example for him who hopes
for God and the Last Day, and remembers God oft. (33:21)
The Messenger communicated God's revelations to people and called
them to belief in the best and most effective way. He also bore all diffi-
culties and persecutions, and rejected the most alluring bribes to stop
calling people to belief in God. He continued his mission without expect-
ing any worldly reward. Since he sought only God's good pleasure and
to cause people to be prosperous in both worlds, when he conquered
Makka (an event marking his triumph to make God's Word prevail
among his people) he forgave those who had persecuted both him and
his followers for 21 years, saying: "No reproach this day shall be on you.
God will forgive you. He is the Most Merciful of the Merciful. Go! You
are free."
He once told 'Ali: If someone finds guidance at your hand, this is bet-
ter for you than having red camels.20 According to the rule that "the one
who causes is like the doer," the one who leads another to guidance re-
ceives the same reward as the new believer, without any decrease in his
or her own reward. Similarly, the Messenger says:
Whoever establishes a good path receives the same reward as those
who follow that path thereafter until the Last Day, without any decrease
in their reward. Whoever establishes an evil path is burdened with the
20.Bukhari, Jihad, 102; Muslim, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 35.
39

--- Sayfa 40 ---
same sins as those who follow it thereafter until the Last Day, without
any decrease in their burden.21
Those who lead others to guidance should not remind them of this by
saying such things as: "If I hadn't been a means to your guidance, you
never would have been guided." This is a grave sin and shows ingratit-
ude to God, for only God guides and causes one to lead another to
guidance.
Similarly, those use by God to guide someone to guidance, should
never attribute their deed to themselves. Rather, they should say
something like: "Praise God, for He has made me, a poor and needy per-
son, a means for so meritorious a deed as leading someone to guidance.
God is so powerful, so merciful to His servants, and so munificent that
He creates clusters of grapes on wood. The wood has no right to ascribe
to itself the grapes growing on it. I am no better than that wood."
As for those who have found guidance, they should think: "Seeing my
need and helplessness, God, my Master, used one of His servants to lead
me toward guidance. All praise be to Him." Nevertheless, the one led to
guidance should be thankful to the person so used by God. After all,
since God is the Creator of us and whatever we do, He also creates the
means that enable guidance and misguidance. But this does not negate
or diminish our free will when it comes to guidance or misguidance.
21.Muslim, Zakat, 69; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 203.
40

--- Sayfa 41 ---
What is the Purpose of Spiritual Tension?
Spiritual tension (or metaphysical tension) is an inward posture, a sort of
standing to moral and spiritual attention. In its positive aspect, it means
that believers hold an exceptionally strong and determined disposition
for all that is good and permitted. They are preoccupied with such mat-
ters, and always work to achieve them.
It has other meanings as well: a desire for religion and all things re-
lated thereto; the pursuit of religious thoughts and sentiments, ascetic-
ally and yet with love; the mind's devotion to religion, as lovers in mys-
tical poetry constantly think of each other; peoccupation with religion at
all times and in all conditions; yearning for religion to become "the life of
the life," just as lovers long for union again after separation. It also means
trying to awaken everybody to the thought and sense of religion, espe-
cially your own people, as the very purpose of life; being distressed and
suffering for the sake of religion; establishing systems and institutions to
serve people and God, and ensuring that they continue to function effect-
ively; loving God and His Prophet more than anything else; and clasping
tightly and sincerely to the way of life that the Prophet brought.
In its negative aspect, spiritual tension is being averse to unbelief, im-
morality, and corruption; expressing this aversion constructively; fleeing
evil, vice, and destructive ways and things; and continually resisting sin
and temptation.
This is how spiritual tension can preserve the vigor and vitality of be-
lievers' faith and way of life. If the believers have any weakness or are
lacking in zeal, they cannot be effective servants of God, for bringing
what He wills to realization is possible only through ardent desire and
strenuous effort to establish the harmony, order and system that God
wills. If we lack determination and perseverance, or our ourselves influ-
enced by unbelief and misguidance and unable to free ourselves, we
have lost our spiritual tension. True believers cannot step into misguid-
ance, and our tension must be full and exact, just like our love and desire
for faith.
The attitudes to be adopted and rejected so as to retain spiritual ten-
sion are defined in the Hadith. Among many others are the following:
"None of you can be a believer until you love me more than you love
your parents and children" and "There are three things that enable you to
taste the sweetness of real belief. These are: When God and His Prophet
are dearer to you than anything else, when your love for anyone is solely
41

--- Sayfa 42 ---
for God's pleasure, and turning to unbelief is as abhorrent to you as be-
ing flung into the fire."
Those who find and sense these in their conscience are aware of their
belief. However deeply innate and natural filial love and relationship
are, one's interest, love, relationship, and devotion to God and His
Prophet ought to be stronger. We say this in the light of logic, reason,
thought, and judgment. In fact, our interest in and attachment to God
and His Prophet is an expression of meditation and perception, of
searching and finding. Nothing else is preferable to this love, if we can
reach it in our conscience by searching and meditating, and it is the first
attribute of those who have tasted the sweetness of belief.
To prefer God and His Prophet to everything else means, in a broader
sense, to prefer the basic elements of belief to everything else. If the love
of God is in our hearts and the light of God is on our faces, everything
exists and its being existent has meaning. Otherwise, there wouuld be no
difference between existence and non-existence. Believers who integrate
themselves with such an understanding love all believers, and to some
extent all creation, without prejudice, partiality, or ulterior motives. This
is because by immersing themselves in the love of God, believers can
love other persons and things only for the sake of God. This is a very im-
portant part of establishing the congregation that God wills.
It is also important to hold the spiritual tension against unbelief. Be-
lievers, if they have experienced the sweetness of belief, should feel dis-
gust and aversion—even hatred— toward unbelief, corruption, perver-
sion, immorality. and ingratitude. One who loses this aversion cannot
desire to see unbelief eradicated from the hearts of people and replaced
by belief. To realize that aim, believers must have a profound enthusi-
asm and love for belief and a strong hatred for unbelief. For believers'
spritual tension, and even for that of a nation and humanity, it is neces-
sary to oppose all sorts of unbelief: evil, vice, anarchy, unrest, and
disorder.
The greatest harm or enemies have inflicted upon is is to destroy our
spiritual tension. They have described jihad (struggle) against unbelief as
oppression and cruelty, conquest and invasion. As the poet Iqbal said,
they turned lions with a glorious history into sheep. Treated in this way,
those Muslims who have lost their spiritual tension remain largely unaf-
fected by invasion, exploitation, and humiliation. Nor do they resist if
their personal pride, honor, honesty or good name are attacked and
blemished. Believers who maintain their spiritual tension acquire what
they long for and then avoid and seek to remove what God dislikes.
42

--- Sayfa 43 ---
In short, spiritual tension means having an aversion to unbelief and er-
ror, as well as a passionate desire for belief. The crucial point here is that
this tension does not mean fighting in the streets. Rather, it means living
the excitement, enthusiasm, agitation, and emotions generated by the
thousands of daily fights in your conscience; being in pain because of
mental and spiritual suffering; being preoccupied and busy with
people's problems; being ready and willing to risk all for the sake of oth-
ers; "dying" and being "revived" many times a day; feeling the people's
sufferings in yourself when you see them led astray, dragged toward
Hell, and pulling each other down; feeling others' pangs of conscience
and the tortures of Hell in your own conscience, while living in such a
suffocating
and
lethal
atmosphere
of
unbelief,
deviation,
and
unawareness.
Such believers can earn the reward of martyrdom through displaying
such dedication and commitment. Nothing can depress or terrorize such
people—not worsening conditions, difficult circumstances, or the dark-
ness, fog, or smoke (of ignorance)—for they are immune to unbelief. This
is what we understand by spiritual tension. A society that loses this ten-
sion has perished in its spirit already, even though its outer form contin-
ues to exist. God allows oppressors and tyrants to attack such societies,
to send their corpses the way of their already departed souls.
Death begins in the soul and heart, and later takes the body away.
Physical defeat always follows spiritual defeat. God never lets people
who keep their souls alive to be downtrodden. Those who cannot sustain
their spiritual tension are destined to die. It is mere caprice and fancy for
such people to suppose that they have a religious life. If a revival does
take place, it is because some people have retained their spiritual tension.
The only reliable support and power in all affairs is from God only.
How can spiritual tension be restored?
Maintaining spiritual tension is harder than getting it. That is why de-
termination and perseverance are needed to get it. Tension slackens due
to familiarity and habit. Believers may become used to the terms and
ways of their cause, and so gradually grow bored with it. Sometimes
selfishness, passion, ambition, envy, covetousness, avarice, love for rank
and position, comfort, and lethargy dampen their enthusiasm and love
for acting upon and serving in the way of God. Such a development can
result in the loss of already acquired spiritual qualities and a paralyzed
willpower. If active believers start making excuses and not showing up
where they are expected, their tension is slackening and they are in
43

--- Sayfa 44 ---
danger of losing it altogether. Without spiritual tension, believers cannot
serve God, Islam, and people.
Fortunately, there are people around us who should be praised for
their good examples in this regard. For instance, I will never forget the
reply of one such person when I asked him for some reason whether or
not he had stayed at home for a couple of days: "I never stay at home
after I have undertaken a task."
Doctors prescribe medications and inoculations for illnesses and ad-
vise us to follow their recommendations closely, whether we want to or
not. We pay attention to and follow such medical advice for our physical
disorders. Should we not be even more (or at least equally) attentive to
what is prescribed for our spiritual disorders? How can we preserve our
spiritual tension, and ultimately attain the companionship of the Prophet
and his Companions, if we are not attentive to such matters?
I have several recommendations:
• Do not stay alone, for "the wolf will devor a lamb that has left the
flock." Those who are separate from their congregation and stay away
from their friends will devoured by Satan. Their decline starts by lament-
ing that which they could not do. While it lasts, such an activity is good.
However, soon they will begin to criticize and belittle their friends' activ-
ities, an attitude that worsens little by little until they deny the purpose
and ideals of the cause and starts to claim that what is being done is in-
appropriate or unnecessary. When this point is reached, such people are
in serious danger of becoming lost. They can be rescued only if their ab-
sense from the congregation and isolation from their friends are put
right. This is why all possible gateways leading to this outcome must be
kept shut from the outset.
• Always look for fresh ways to extend and revive your learning and
knowledge, spiritual knowledge (ma'rifa) in particular, and be persistent
and consistent in seeking. God opened the universe like a book before
our eyes, and sent Prophets and Divine Books to teach us about it.
Countless pious saints and learned scholars have soared in knowledge
and wisdom, seeking to understand and explain the book of the Laws
(the Shari'a) and the book of creation. Like honeybees collecting from
thousands of flowers, they contributed their part in producing whole-
some honey in their hives of knowledge. Everything should be studied
carefully and evaluated as happening in accordance with the require-
ments and purposiveness of Divine Wisdom. If we can do this, we can
say that we are acting in harmony with Divine Wisdom. Those who can-
not do so gradually lose their vitality in the basis of knowledge and
44

--- Sayfa 45 ---
quickly fall into decay and corruption. After a while, they become
ineffectual.
• Contemplation of death is also an important factor here. Dying be-
fore one's appointed time is another name for attaining real life. To cut
away the interminable worldly ambitions that exhaust us is only possible
by death, by understanding that all of our true friends are waiting for us,
and that true happiness and bliss exist on the other side of the grave.
Is it not our highest ideal to reach the beloved friend (the Prophet),
Paradise, and the Divine Beauty? We should try our best, and never
avoid any hardships in the way that leads to that point. I like horses very
much and use the simile of a horse to describe people who follow the
cause of God. A horse never says it is tired or offers excuses while run-
ning, and runs until its heart breaks and it dies. Death becomes its excuse
for not running. All of us who strive in His cause should be like
horses—we should run in the way of God, without pause or excuse, until
we die.
• Choose a friend who will rouse, caution, and warn you. Such friends
will notice our slackness and put us back on track by warning and coun-
selling. Though it might be a little awkward at first, following this sug-
gestion will result only in good.
As soon as you feel a little slackness, a deflection in your heart, and a
lack of enthusiasm, talk with your friend and let him know what is going
on. Your friend will help you recover. Although the advice may strike
you at first as a little harsh, even offending, only good will result, for it
will save you from even more painful situations and replace your spir-
itual pain with spiritual pleasure. I have often turned to such a friend,
someone who is younger than me and used to be my student, and his
suggestions always have benefitted me. Everyone can form such a rela-
tionship, provided that it is done gratis and for the love of God.
• We have a proverb that says: "Working iron does not get rusty." This
applies to those who serve God. It is a psychological fact that we are
more concerned with our own affairs than those with others, for even if
they are important in principle, they affect us only secondarily and indir-
ectly. This natural psychological disposition should be evaluated and
used carefully. Each person should assume a responsibility and a task,
whether small or large, and assume ownership or sponsorship of the ser-
vices done or to be done.
As long as we sincerely follow these suggestions, in sha' Allah we will
preserve and strengthen our spiritual tension and reach the horizon of
active women and men of service.
45

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Will Religion, Supposedly Developed by ''Primitive'' People
to Explain the Unknown, Eventually Become Unnecessary?
Those who answer the above question with a resounding "yes" base their
answer upon the following suppositions: People who could not explain
or control a certain natural phenomenon attributed it to a creator. Or,
people gave certain beneficial natural yet unreliable phenomena an aura
of sacredness. In some cases, this went as far as deification. Supposedly,
this was how the Ganges became sacred to the Indians, the Nile to the
Egyptians, and cows to both of them. Confronted by insecurity, people
sought security by revering and appeasing the supposed source of secur-
ity or insecurity.
Some cultures split this aura of sacredness between two deities, one
good the other evil, which led to attributing love and mercy to one, and
terror and punishment to the other. The argument also is used to explain
Heaven and Hell, and eventually concludes that religion became a
comforting middle-class illusion and tool used by the powerful and the
religious establishment to manipulate the masses. In other words, in
communist terminology, religion became the opiate of the people.
I reject this argument for the following reason: Religion is not a
byproduct of fear or a lack of reason.
The Arabic word for religion is din. Among its many meanings are
obedience, recompense, and a path. These meanings are interlinked. The
path is the way that leads, through obedience, to God, the All-Mighty.
After we die, we will have to give a full account of what we did while on
this path. In a more technical sense, din may be defined as "the complete
Divine Law that guides a person of sound mind to do good." Just as the
law distinguishes a legally responsible person from one who is not leg-
ally responsible, the demands of the religious life are addressed to
people who can reason. Religion exists because we can reason and
understand.
Furthermore, our free will allows us to obey or disobey God. Obedi-
ence is required, but it is not imposed. The idea that religion comes about
simply because some benefit is desired in an area beyond human control
is untenable. True religion does not negate free will. On the contrary, it
points out that nature was created to benefit us and to enlarge our poten-
tial. It also emphasizes that we can choose our own way by exercising
our God-given freedom to do so.
As for religion being an outgrowth of defective reason, I beg to differ.
In truth, religion is primarily grounded in faith. Although we can deduce
46

--- Sayfa 47 ---
the existence of the universe's Creator through reason, such a deduction
is vulnerable and insecure. Sound belief in God is possible only through
a true Prophet's guidance. Every Prophet was endowed with certain
signs (e.g., miracles) confirming his appointment by God. The Divine
Scripture with which he was sent is the most significant miracle. Regard-
less of when we were born, we are required to follow the Book and the
Prophet's beliefs and actions.
A Prophet does not exercise ordinary worldly power over his follow-
ers. Rather, all Prophets endured extraordinary hardship and suffering.
They demanded and expected nothing from the world, although they
could have acquired whatever they desired if they agreed to abandon
their missions. Prophet Muhammad experienced Heaven's beauties and
spiritual delights during his miraculous ascent to the Divine Presence.
Yet he chose to return to his people and endure their torment, contempt,
and ridicule. He was not a man of physical or spiritual pleasure, but one
who had dedicated his life to serving humanity for the sake of God.
Some might ask if anyone can have direct access to God and so receive
a Revelation directly from Him. Such a thing is impossible, for only a
person with a perfectly purified soul can receive Revelation. And, one
can have a perfectly purified soul only because God chooses and then
purifies him so that he can be endowed with Prophethood: God chooses
Messengers from the angels and from humanity (22:75). Just as God chose
Gabriel to convey His message to His Messenger, so He chose the Proph-
ets to teach the true religion. They were men of pure character, and their
companions were distinguished souls entrusted with transmitting the re-
ligion to future generations.
If the argument that religion grows out of humanity's need to cope
with difficult events or certain natural phenomena had any foundation,
we would expect it to be occasional. When the need for it had passed, it
should have faded away, only to re-emerge when a similar need arose.
But Islam is not concerned merely with birth, death, and marriage cere-
monies or with solving a personal or collective crisis. Rather, Islam con-
cerns itself with the entire life of each individual and of each society. It
guides and protects all ordinary daily affairs, even those under our con-
trol. The call to prayer comes throughout the day, every day, and is dir-
ected to everyone, regardless of class or other criterion. It is not an an-
swer to eclipses, thunderbolts, or other natural phenomena, but the di-
vinely revealed way for each individual to become worthy of faith and
able to choose goodness.
47

--- Sayfa 48 ---
The vigor and stability of our faith depends upon worship and good
deeds. Muslims who neglect the religious obligations may end up doing
little more than speaking well of certain ancestors who lived a discip-
lined, religious life. Faith not nourished by worship and good deeds
eventually withers away. Praying five times a day strengthens our faith
and renews our covenant with God. As long as we worship with an alert
and conscious intent, we receive assurance from God and thereby
strengthen our will and ability to fulfill all our obligations.
Islam contains certain rules and norms to order our everyday life. For
example, Muslims are required to seek God's approval through their
dealings with others as well as through formal or informal prayer. Com-
mercial transactions must adhere to the Divine Law, which is another
element that reinforces faith. By doing so, Muslims submit to the God's
decree in that particular matter and so transcend their own worldly pref-
erences. For example, Muslim merchants must inform their customers of
any defect in the items offered for sale. While this will lower or even can-
cel the resulting profit, Muslim merchants who do so will have the satis-
faction of obeying God and not serving their own desires. When they
pray,
this
satisfaction
will
return
to
strengthen
their
faith
and
commitment.
Such observance gives us a practical means to reach the Divine Pres-
ence. The Messenger told us to aspire to this end. He once related a story
of three men who, trapped in a cave by a boulder, promised God that
they would do a good deed if He allowed them to get out of the cave
alive. While we cannot resemble the Messenger physically, we can—and
should—try to resemble him in our behavior and actions. Doing so is our
way of promising God that we will do good deeds if He will protect us
from Hell.
Islam teaches that virtue also consists of avoiding sins. This pursuit of
virtue, whether by observance or avoidance, prayer and remembrance,
or establishing the Revealed Law and justice, are essential elements of
Islam's unity. Such unity is integral, for one part cannot be separated
from another. Faith, worship, remembrance of God, the Prophet's ex-
ample, and the Divine law are all vital and integral elements of the din.
God created humanity as His vicegerent on Earth. As He is Himself
Absolute, Transcendent, and independent of all things, He does not need
our worship. Rather, it is we who need to worship Him. We do so by His
will, for we cannot manage it ourselves. God wills, as spelled out in the
Qur'an, that we lead a balanced life. He has opened a clear, straight path
so that we will not go astray. If we follow this straight path (the Qur'an),
48

--- Sayfa 49 ---
we can develop our full individual and collective potential and attain to
true humanity.
We need religion. Indeed, if we understood what we truly need, we
would realize, acknowledge, and cultivate our innate disposition toward
eternal happiness. We would proclaim our true need and desire: "O God,
give us a way of which You approve, so that we may be safe from any
deviance."
While even the wisest philosophers have gone astray, the most ordin-
ary Muslims have been able to lead upright lives because they followed
the clear way of Prophet Muhammad. Indeed, Muslims who seek God's
approval and take the Prophet as their guide can lead a most fruitful life,
one in harmony with their deepest nature as responsive and responsible
creatures of God.
Religion is not formulated by some people to manipulate others or to
cope with the natural world. God revealed religion out of His Mercy, be-
cause we need it and cannot be truly human without it. Only those who
have passed through the trials of religious experience are worthy of
eternal happiness and will be distinguished in the Hereafter. The Mes-
senger said: "As you distinguish your horse in a herd by the blaze on its
head, so will I distinguish my community in the Hereafter by the bright-
ness of the parts of the body washed in wudu'."
The clear way of religion, as revealed by God through His Prophets,
consists of fundamentals and branches. The fundamentals always have
been the same for all Divinely revealed religions, although the branches
(the manner of worship and observances) have differed. God placed cer-
tain methods of worship upon a people according to their prevailing so-
cial conditions and capacities.
For example, belief in the Resurrection has been central to every reli-
gion, and every Prophet preached it. If this belief had not been so em-
phasized, religion would have been reduced to a socioeconomic or psy-
chological system of rules and norms, and thus powerless to inspire
good and prevent evil. If this belief had not existed, sincere worship of
God and sincere sacrifice for His sake would not have been performed.
We acquire many virtues by believing that whoever has done an atom's
weight of good shall see it, and whoever has done an atom's weight of evil shall
see it (99:7–8). In trying to follow His way as closely as we can, we look
forward to that moment when we shall see Him without any veil.
Alongside such constant fundamentals, God has revealed changes in
His Law by abrogating what went before. This does not mean that He
changed His mind. Rather, it represents His Mercy in response to our
49

--- Sayfa 50 ---
moving through a stage of infancy (the time of Prophet Adam) to one of
maturity (the time of Prophet Muhammad). As the last and most perfect
Divine religion, Islam will prevail until the Day of Judgment. Even if the
earlier Scriptures and Laws had retained their original purity, they could
not have retained their legitimacy, since their authority from God was
abrogated by the advent of Islam.
In conclusion, true religion is the assemblage of Divine Revelations
and Divine Laws by which we can know bliss in this world and the next.
Our peace and happiness depend upon leading a religious life, for only
through religion can the Law be observed in all the inner and outer
spheres of our existence. Only religion makes it possible for us to deserve
Paradise and the vision of God. Such achievements are beyond the
power of every human-made civilization, regardless of how advanced
they are.
50

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Submission, Sense, and Reason
Many people ask how Islam, which requires submission to God, can be
in accord with sense and reason. What we must realize here is that these
two realities are not mutually exclusive. Islam does mean submission to
God, and Islam is indeed in accord with sense and reason.
The principles of Muslim life are set forth in the Qur'an. If they were
not, how could we know them? The Qur'an is an uncorrupted revelation
of reality. The demonstrations presented therein concerning Divinity re-
quire Prophethood, since only Prophets can make the Divine known to
humanity. Such demonstrations appeal to reason and sense, as do those
concerning death and resurrection. Our intuition of eternity actually
arises from eternal life itself. If this were not so, how could we intuit its
existence, based upon our limited human knowledge and experience?
I will limit myself to arguing that all matters related to faith in Islam
can be demonstrated by reason. Yet such demonstration means little or
nothing at the level of truly profound human perception.
By definition, every act of God accords with sense and reason, for He
is the All-Wise and the All-Knowing. We are bound to conclude that our
best works, when compared to His, are of almost no significance. This
world, which He gave us to live in, always will far exceed all that our liv-
ing can add to it. Moreover, we can add to it only what God allows us to
add. Given this, we can deduce that each of God's actions has a definite
purpose. This realization is wholly pleasing to sense and reason.
All that we see around us when contemplating the Divine laws so
evident in His creation, as well as our inner personal conviction, makes it
impossible for us not to believe in God. That belief in God, that sense of
His Being, whether in the outer world or within ourselves, inevitably
leads us to submit to Him. In this way, a path moving from sense and
reason ends in submission. And submission means a willing, intended
obedience to God by obeying all His commands and prohibitions.
God has sure reasons for His commands and prohibitions, some of
which we can understand. One such reason is that they are for our own
individual or collective benefit. Take the five daily prayers, each of
which must be prayed during its allotted time. Some benefits are imme-
diately obvious: self-discipline and order, stability of faith and com-
munity. The manner of praying also is prescribed for definite reasons.
The value of washing certain bodily parts before worship has obvious
health and other benefits. Congregational prayer enables and sustains
the community's existence. Zakat (the alms-tax) contributes significantly
51

--- Sayfa 52 ---
to preserving responsibility and balance between rich and poor people.
Fasting has undeniable health benefits. As a further example, the Islamic
penal code, (when applied by God-conscious rulers and) if studied in the
light of sense and reason, leads to submission to the All-Wise and All-
Mighty.
Regarding pilgrimage (hajj), the Qur'an says: Pilgrimage to the House is
a duty to God for all who are able to make the journey (3:97). Obeying this
command is an act of submission that leads to the experience of hajj,
which leads us to contemplate its benefits: a worldwide conference for
Muslims, an occasion for us to be together for the sake of God and free of
all human and therefore artificial discrimination based on race, sex, col-
or, or level of education.
Whether we start from an act of submission and the use of our sense
and reason, or use our sense and reason and then are led to submission,
Islam is confirmed, for it is grounded in sense, reason, and submission.
52

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Can Islam Solve Every Problem?
Yes, it can. What we say on this subject has been said already by many
people. The many conversions to Islam even in the West are a strong ar-
gument for Islam's ability to solve a wide range of problems.
Who knows how to run a factory better than its designer and builder?
When we want to get a simple electronic device to work, we consult
someone before we use it. In the same way, the One who created us
knows best how our individual and social life should be conducted. Ob-
viously, He also would give us the best and the most suitable system by
which to conduct ourselves: Islam.
Today we can see the ruin of human-made systems all around us. Cor-
rupt and bankrupt, held up for a while by temporary success, they nev-
ertheless continue to crumble. Feudalism, capitalism, socialism, and
communism all have collapsed or are in ruins, leaving behind nothing
but distress and lamentation. Islam, however, remains with us and has
lost none of its original vigor. The West is well aware of this, for many of
its people warmly welcome Muslim spiritual guides and preachers. Even
some churches are used to serve Islam in one way or another. The world
is moving toward a new understanding of Islam, and there is wide-
spread conviction that Islam will solve our "unsolvable" problems.
If your enemies appreciate your virtues, you are indeed worthy of ad-
miration. Today, even the enemies of Islam seem to have recognized its
virtues. In Europe, many who have accepted Islam do not confess it pub-
licly due to social or political fear. Moreover, a large majority of them are
members of the church.
To get a concrete, substantial answer, we must ask a specific, detailed
question. To deal with all problems and indicate how Islam resolves each
one within the confines of this book is impossible. If those who argue
that Islam cannot solve our problems would indicate a particular prob-
lem, I would be happy to provide a particular answer.
53

--- Sayfa 54 ---
Why does Islam Allow Slavery?
There are historical, social, and psychological dimensions to this ques-
tion. First, the very word slavery conjures up revulsion, sorrow, and
deep disgust, especially when we remember how slaves were treated in
ancient Rome and Egypt. Pictures of people building the pyramids, of
gladiators fighting each other to the death for the spectators' amusement,
and of people bound by shameful yokes and chains around their necks
come to mind when we hear that word.
Nearer to our own time, we have the western European variety of
slavery. The barbarity and bestiality of this enormous trade beggars all
description. The trade was principally in Africans who were transported
across the oceans, packed in specially designed ships, and considered
and treated as livestock. These slaves were forced to change their names,
abandon their religion and language, deprived of all hope for freedom,
and were kept for labor or breeding purposes. A birth among them was
celebrated as if it were a death.
It is difficult to understand how human beings could conceive of fel-
low human beings in such a light, still less treat them thus. But it cer-
tainly happened. Documentary evidence shows, for example, how ship-
masters would throw their human cargo overboard to claim compensa-
tion for their loss. Slaves had no legal or other rights, but only obliga-
tions. Their owners had the absolute right to dispose of them as they
wished—brothers and sisters, parents and children, were separated or al-
lowed to stay together according to the owner's mood or economic
convenience.
Centuries of this dreadful practice made western Europe rich from its
slave-based exploitation of such commodities as sugar, cotton, coffee.
When it abolished slavery, first as a trade and then altogether with much
self-congratulation, only the slave-owners were compensated. In other
words, the attitudes that made slavery possible remained.
Not many years after its abolition, Africa was colonized by western
Europe with consequences for the Africans no less terrible than slavery
itself. Moreover, because their attitude to non-Europeans has changed
little, if at all, the slaves' descendants continue to live in poor social and
political conditions. Those who live amid Europeans remain despised in-
feriors. Anthropological museums in western European capitals only
closed their public displays of bones and stuffed bodies of fellow (but
non-white) human beings several decades ago—displays that had been
54

--- Sayfa 55 ---
organized
by
European
scientists,
doctors,
learned
people,
and
humanitarians.
In short, the institution of slavery disgusts the human heart, as do the
attitudes of inhumanity that sustain it. If the institution no longer form-
ally exists but the attitudes persist, can we say that humanity has made
any progress? This is why colonial exploitation replaced slavery, and
why the chains of unbearable, unrepayable international debt have re-
placed colonial exploitation. Slavery has disappeared, but its inhuman
and barbarous structures are still securely in place.
Before we turn to the Islamic perspective on slavery, let's recall a name
famous even among western Europeans: Harun al-Rashid. This ruler,
who enjoyed such authority and power over Muslims, was the son of a
slave. Nor is he the only such example. Slaves and their children enjoyed
enormous prestige, authority, respect, and (shall we say it) freedom
within the Islamic system, in all cultural, political, and other spheres of
life. How was this possible?
Islam amended the institution of slavery and educated masters about
slaves. The Qur'an states many times that everyone is descended from a
single ancestor (Adam), and that no one is inherently superior to anyone
else because of race, nation, or social standing. The Prophet applied these
principles in his own life, and his Companions learned them and accep-
ted them as laws and as social norms. The Prophet stated:
"Whoever kills a slave shall be killed. Whoever imprisons and starves
a slave will be imprisoned and starved. Whoever castrates a slave will be
castrated."22
"You are sons of Adam, and Adam was created from clay."23
"No Arab is superior to a non-Arab, and no non-Arab is superior to an
Arab. No white person is superior to a black person, and no black person
is superior to a white person. Superiority is based on righteousness and
God-fearing alone."24
Because of this compassionate attitude, slaves and those described as
poor and lowly were respected by those who enjoyed high social
status.25 'Umar expressed such respect when he said: "Master Bilal,
whom Master Abu Bakr set free."26
Unlike other civilizations, Islam requires that slaves be thought of and
treated within the framework of universal human brotherhood. The
22.Abu Dawud, Diyat, 70; Tirmidhi, Diyat, 17; al-Nasa'i, Qasama, 10:16.
23.Tirmidhi, Tafsir, 49; Manaqib, 73; Abu Dawud, Adab, 111.
24.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 411.
25.Muslim, Birr, 138; Jannat, 48; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 54, 65.
55

--- Sayfa 56 ---
Prophet said: "Your servants and your slaves are your brothers (and sis-
ters). Those who have slaves should give them from what they eat and
wear. They should not charge their slaves with work beyond their capab-
ilities. If you must set them to hard work, in any case I advise you to help
them." He also said: "None of you should (when introducing someone)
say: 'This is my (male) slave' or 'This is my female slave.' Rather, call
them 'my daughter,' 'my son,' or 'my brother.'"
For this reason, 'Umar and his slave took turns riding a camel while
traveling from Madina to Jerusalem to take control of Masjid al-Aqsa.
While he was caliph, 'Uthman had his slave pull his own ears in public,
since he had pulled his. The Companion Abu Dharr, applying the hadith
literally, made his slave wear one half of his suit while he wore the other
half. These Muslims, and many others, showed succeeding generations
of Muslims how to treat slaves as full human beings worthy of the same
respect, dignity, and justice given to non-slaves.
This constructive and positive treatment necessarily affected the
master's attitude. Slaves retained their humanity and moral dignity, and
had a place within the master's family. Even when they were freed, not
all wanted to leave their masters. Starting with Zayd ibn Harith, this
practice became quite common. Although the Prophet gave Zayd his
freedom, the latter chose to remain. Masters and slaves were able to re-
gard each other as brothers and sisters because their faith enabled them
to understand that differences between people are not permanent. There-
fore, neither haughtiness nor rancor were acceptable.
In addition, there were strict principles enforced as law, such as:
"Whoever kills a slave shall be killed; whoever imprisons and starves a slave
shall be imprisoned and starved." Besides sanctions mandating proper treat-
ment, slaves also enjoyed the legal right to earn money and hold prop-
erty independently of their masters, to keep their religion, and to have a
family and family life with the attendant rights and obligations. Along
with personal dignity and a degree of material security, Islamic laws and
norms allowed slaves a still more precious opening—the hope and
means of freedom.
Human freedom is God-given, and therefore everyone's natural and
proper condition. Thus to restore a person, either wholly or partly, to
26.Muslim, Birr, 138; Jannat, 48; Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 54, 65. [5] Bilal, one of the earliest
Muslims, was a black Ethiopian slave. He eventually was chosen by the Prophet to be
the official muezzin (caller to prayer) of the Muslim community. Abu Bakr, one of
the pre-Islamic Makkan elite and also an early convert, was the Prophet's political
successor and the first of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs. Bukhari, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 23.
56

--- Sayfa 57 ---
this condition is one of the highest virtues. Freeing half of a slave's body
is considered equal to saving half of one's own body from God's wrath in
the next world. Freeing a slave's whole body is considered equal to sav-
ing one's whole body. Seeking freedom for enslaved people is an accept-
able reason for engaging in warfare. Muslims were encouraged to enter
into agreements and contracts that enabled slaves to earn or be granted
their freedom after a certain time or, most typically, on the owner's
death. Unconditional emancipation was regarded as most meritorious
and worthy in the Hereafter. Sometimes groups of people would buy
and free large numbers of slaves in order to obtain God's favor.
Freeing a slave also was the legal expiation for certain sins or failures
in religious duties, such as breaking an oath or a fast—a good deed to
cancel a moral lapse. The Qur'an orders that a person who accidentally kills
a Muslim must free a believing slave and pay the blood-money to the victim's
family (4:92). A killing affects both the society and the victim's family.
The blood-money is a partial compensation for the latter, while freeing a
slave is a bill paid to the community—it gains a free person. To free a liv-
ing person in return for a death was considered like bringing someone
back to life. Both personal and public wealth was used to free slaves. The
Prophet and Abu Bakr were known for this practice. Later on, especially
during the reign of 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, public zakat funds were
used for this purpose.
A possible question: Islam regards slavery as a social evil, regardless
of how well slaves are treated or how many rights they enjoy. Therefore,
why was it not abolished, as happened with alcohol, interest, gambling,
or prostitution? Why did the Prophet condone it?
Until the evil of the European slave trade, slavery was largely a
byproduct of war, for the victors normally enslaved the survivors. Dur-
ing Islam's early years, there was no reliable system of exchanging pris-
oners of war. The available means of dealing with them were execution,
placing them in prison, allowing them to go home, or distributing them
among the Muslims as spoils of war.
The first option must be ruled out on the grounds of its barbarity. The
second is practicable only for small numbers and for a limited period of
time, provided that there are enough resources to care for them. This op-
tion was used, for prisoners were taken in the hope of ransom payments.
Many Makkans held by the Muslims were so satisfied with their treat-
ment that they became Muslims and changed sides. The third option is
imprudent in times of war. This leaves, as a general practice, only the
57

--- Sayfa 58 ---
fourth option. Islam instituted humane laws and norms for what is, in ef-
fect, the rehabilitation of prisoners of war.
While living among Muslims, slaves saw at close quarters the truth of
Islam in practice. Many slaves were won over by the kind treatment they
received and Islam's humanity, not to mention their access to many of
the legal rights enjoyed by Muslims, and, ultimately, by the chance to re-
gain their freedom. Thousands of ex-slaves can be found among the
great and famous names in Islam, and their won examples became a
norm for future Muslims—imams such as Nafi' (Imam Malik's teacher)
and Tawus ibn Qaisan, to name only two.
In general, Muslims considered slavery a temporary condition. Unlike
Western civilization, whose values are now so much in fashion, slavery
was not an inherited condition that engulfed whole generations in deep-
ening spirals of degradation, despair, and hopelessness. On the contrary,
enjoying a status as fundamentally equal to everyone else, slaves in
Muslim society could and did live in secure possession of their dignity as
creatures of the same Creator. They had access to the mainstream of
Islamic culture and civilization—to which, as we have noted, they con-
tributed greatly. In Western societies where slavery was widespread,
particularly in North and South America, the descendants of slaves, even
generations after their ancestors' formal emancipation, remain largely on
the fringes of society, a sub-culture or anti-culture—which is only some-
times tolerated, and mostly despised, by the dominant community.
When the Muslims were secure against foreign conquest, why did
they not free all of their former captives or slaves? Again, the answer has
to do with existing realities. Those former captives or slaves did not have
the personal, psychological, or economic resources needed to establish a
secure and dignified independence. Remember what happened in the
United States when the slaves were suddenly freed by President Lincoln.
Many were abruptly reduced to destitution and homelessness by their
former owners (who were compensated) who no longer accepted any re-
sponsibility for them. They were thrown, without any preparation, into
the wider society from which they had been so long excluded by law.
In contrast, observant Muslim masters who embraced their slaves as
brothers and sisters encouraged them to work for their freedom, recog-
nized their rights, helped them support a family, and helped them find a
place in society before freeing them. The example that comes to mind is
that of Zayd ibn Harith, who was brought up in the Prophet's own
household and set free. He married a noblewoman and was appointed
58

--- Sayfa 59 ---
commander of a Muslim army composed of many noblemen and Com-
panions. There are many similar examples.
There are two important points to emphasize here: the Muslims' atti-
tude toward slavery, and the condition of slaves in non-Muslim coun-
tries. Islam considers slavery an accidental and therefore temporary con-
dition, one that is to be reformed step by step until it almost completely
disappears. However, it has been observed that some Muslims, espe-
cially rulers, continued to hold slaves. Islam cannot be blamed for this,
for it is the individual Muslim's own spiritual deficiency that caused him
or her to behave in such a manner.
The other point is that personal habits engender a second nature.
When Lincoln abolished slavery, most slaves had to return to their
former owners because they had never learned how to take the initiative
and choose for themselves. As a result, they could not live as free people.
Given this psychological reality, prisoners of war were distributed
among Muslims so that one day they could live a true Islamic social life
as free people in a Muslim society and enjoy their full legal rights.
Islam sought to abolish slavery gradually. In the first step, it enabled
slaves to realize their true human consciousness and identity. After that,
it educated them in Islamic and human values, and inculcated in them a
love of freedom. Thus, when they were freed, former slaves were
equipped to consider all kinds of possibilities related to becoming useful
members of the community: farmers, artisans, teachers, scholars, com-
manders, governors, ministers, or even prime ministers.
Islam attempted to destroy the institution of "individual slavery," and
never envisaged or tried "national slavery." So, as a Muslim, I pray to
God that enslaved—colonized, oppressed—peoples will enjoy real
freedom.
59

--- Sayfa 60 ---
Chapter 3
The Qur'an
Did Prophet Muhammad Write the Qur'an?
As this question has generated a great deal of literature, I shall confine
my answer to the most pertinent points.
This allegation is made by Orientalists, just as it was by their prede-
cessors: Christian and Jewish writers who deeply resented the spread of
Islam. The first people to make it were the Prophet's own opponents, as
we read in the Qur'an: Whenever Our signs are recited to them in a clear way,
those who deny say concerning the truth, when it (the truth) comes to them:
"This is plain magic." Or do they say: "He has forged it." (46:7–8). They were
desperate to protect their interests against the rising tide of Islam and
hoped, as do their modern counterparts, to spread doubt about the
Qur'an's Divine authorship so that Muslims would start doubting its au-
thority as well.
The Qur'an is unique among Scriptures in two respects, which even its
detractors accept. First, the Qur'an exists in Arabic, its original language
and one that is still widely spoken today. Second, its text is entirely reli-
able. It has not been altered, edited, or tampered with since it was
revealed.
In contrast, Christianity's Gospels have not survived in their original
language; the language of the earliest surviving version of these Scrip-
tures is a dead language. In addition, and their texts have been shown to
be the work of many people over generations, edited and re-edited,
altered and interpolated, to promote sectarian interpretations. They have
lost their authority as Scriptures, and serve primarily as a national or cul-
tural mythology for groups whose remote ancestors created their partic-
ular versions. This is, more or less, the Western scholarly consensus on
the status of these once-Divine Books.
For almost 200 years, Western scholars have subjected the Qur'an to
the same rigorous scrutiny. However, they have failed to prove that it
was subjected to a similar process. They discovered that Muslims, like
60

--- Sayfa 61 ---
Christians, sometimes split into disputing factions. But unlike Christians,
all Muslim factions sought to justify their position by referring to the
same Qur'an. Other versions of the Gospels might be discovered or un-
covered. However, all Muslims know only one Qur'an, perfectly pre-
served in its original words since the Prophet's death, when Revelation
ended.
Muslims also have a record of the Prophet's teaching in the Sunna, the
record of how he implemented Islam in daily life. Many, but certainly
not all, of the Prophet's actions and exact words are preserved in the
hadith literature. These two sources could not be more dissimilar in
quality of expression or content. All Arabs who heard the Prophet speak,
regardless of religious affiliation, found his words to be concise, forceful,
and persuasive, but nevertheless like their own normal usage. When
they heard the Qur'an, however, they were overwhelmed by feelings of
rapture, ecstasy, and awe. One senses in the hadith the presence of an in-
dividual addressing other people, a man pondering weighty questions
who, when he speaks, does so with an appropriate gravity and in pro-
found awe of the Divine Will. The Qur'an, on the other hand, is per-
ceived immediately as imperative and sublime, having a transcendent,
all-compelling majesty of style and content. It defies sense and reason to
suppose that Qur'an and hadith have the same origin.
The Qur'an is absolutely different from any human product in the
transcendence of its perspective and viewpoint. Occasionally in a few
scattered phrases or passages of other Scriptures, readers or listeners
may feel that they are in the presence of the Divine Message addressed
to humanity. In the Qur'an, every syllable carries this impression of sub-
lime intensity belonging to a message from One who is All-Knowing and
All-Merciful.
Furthermore, the Qur'an cannot be contemplated at a distance, or dis-
cussed and debated in the abstract. It requires us to understand, act, and
amend our lifestyles. It also enables us to do so, for it can touch us in the
very depths of our being. It addresses us in our full reality as spiritually
and physically competent beings, as creatures of the All-Merciful. It is
not addressed to just one human faculty, such as philosophical reason-
ing, poetic or artistic sensibility, our ability to alter and manage our en-
vironment or political and legal affairs, our need for mutual compassion
and forgiveness, or our spiritual craving for knowledge and consolation.
The Qur'an also is directed to everyone, regardless of age, gender, race,
location, or time.
61

--- Sayfa 62 ---
This transcendence and fullness can be felt in every matter that the
Qur'an mentions specifically. For example, caring for one's elderly par-
ents is placed beside belief in God's Oneness, and providing decently for
a divorced wife with reminders to be conscious of the All-Knowing and
All-Seeing. While the reasoning behind such placement is God's alone,
His believing servants know and can report its effect: It enables the inner
self-reform that makes the steady, cheerful, and humble performance of
virtuous actions possible. Thus, the one who does the deed does it grace-
fully, and its recipient is not oppressed or humiliated by it.
The Qur'an challenges its detractors to compose a chapter that can
equal it. No one has successfully met this challenge. In fact, such an
achievement is impossible, for only God can assume the Qur'an's all-
transcendent and all-compassionate perspective. Our thoughts and as-
pirations are affected and conditioned by surrounding circumstances.
That is why, sooner or later, all human works fail or fade away into ob-
solescence, and why they are too general to have any real influence or
too specific to do much good beyond the specific area they address.
Whatever we produce is of limited value for just these reasons. As stated
in the Qur'an: Say: if all of humanity and the jinn were to gather together to
produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like of it, even if they
backed each other with help and support (17:88).
The Qur'an is the Word of the All-Knowing and All-Seeing, who
knows everything about His creation. It therefore comprehends and tests
its audiences as it teaches. For believers, the consciousness of being be-
fore the Divine Message can make their skins shiver, in the words of the
Qur'an, so suddenly and fully does the atmosphere around and within
them change.
The Qur'an's substance also is a compelling argument for its Divine
authorship. Those who allege that someone wrote it provide no proof to
support their assertion. Other Scriptures, due to human intervention,
make claims that we know to be untrue. For example, they give a partic-
ular account of creation or of a natural phenomenon (e.g., the Flood),
which we know from modern scientific facts, such as fossils or astronom-
ic discoveries, to be false. People altered those Scriptures to suit their
own understanding, with the result that the progress of science has
rendered
their
understanding
and
their
now-corrupted
Scriptures
largely irrelevant and obsolete. However, the Qur'an has not been sub-
ject to such mistreatment.
If someone wrote the Qur'an, how could it be literally true on matters
that were completely unknown at the time of its revelation? Do not the
62

--- Sayfa 63 ---
unbelievers realize that the Heavens and the Earth were one unit of creation be-
fore we split them asunder? (21:30). Only in the last few years have we been
able to contemplate this verse about the first moment of the universe in
its literal meaning.
Similarly, when we now read: God raised the Heavens without any pillars
that you can see. Then He established Himself on the throne [of authority]. He
has subjected the sun and moon [to a law]; each runs its course for a term ap-
pointed. He regulate all affairs, explaining the signs in detail, that you may be-
lieve certainly in the meeting with your Lord (13:2), now we can understand
the invisible pillars as the vast centrifugal and centripetal forces main-
taining the balance amid the heavenly bodies. We also understand from
this and related verses (e.g., 55:5; 21:33, 38, 39; and 36:40) that the sun and
moon are stars with a fixed life-span, that their force of light has or will fade
away, and that they follow an orbit that has been determined with the most
minute exactness.
A literal understanding of these verses does not diminish the respons-
ibility that comes with understanding—that you may believe certainly in
the meeting with your Lord. The purpose of the verses has not changed;
only our knowledge of the phenomenal world has changed. In the case
of former Scriptures, scientific progress has made their inaccuracies ever
more visible and their associated beliefs ever more irrelevant. Just the
opposite is true with the Qur'an—scientific progress has not made even a
single verse harder to believe or to understand. On the contrary, such
progress had made many verses more understandable.
Yet some people still allege that the Prophet wrote the Qur'an. While
asserting that they are on the side of sense and reason, they allege what
is humanly impossible. How could a seventh-century man know things
that only recently have been accepted as scientifically established truths?
How is that humanly possible? How is it on the side of reason and sense
to claim such a thing? How did the Prophet discover, with an anatomical
and biological accuracy only recently confirmed, that milk is produced in
mammal tissues? How did he discover how rain clouds and hailstones
form, or determine a wind's fertilizing quality, or explain how land-
masses shift and continents form and reform? With what giant telescope
did he learn of the universe's ongoing physical expansion? By what equi-
valent of X-ray vision was he able to describe in such great detail the dif-
ferent stages of an embryo's evolution within the uterus?
Another proof of the Qur'an's Divine origin is that what it predicts
eventually comes true. For example, the Companions considered the
Treaty of Hudaibiyya a defeat; the Revelation stated that they would enter
63

--- Sayfa 64 ---
the Sacred Mosque in full security and that Islam would prevail over all other
religions (48:27-28). It also promised that the Romans [Byzantines] would
vanquish the Persians several years after their utter defeat in 615, and
that the Muslims would destroy both of these current superpowers
(30:2-5), at a time when there were scarcely 40 believers, all of whom
were being persecuted by the Makkan chiefs.
Although the Prophet was the ideal man, he could make mistakes on
matters not related to Islam or Revelation. For example:
• When he exempted certain hypocrites from jihad, he was criticized:
God forgive you! Why did you let them stay behind before it became clear which
of them were truthful and which were liars? (9:43).
• After the Battle of Badr, he was rebuked: You (the believers) merely
seek the gains of the world whereas God desires [for you the good] of the Here-
after. God is All-Mighty, All-Wise. Had there not been a previous decree from
God, a stern punishment would have afflicted you for what you have taken…
(8:67–68).
• Once he said he would do something the next day and did not say
"if God wills." He was warned: Nor say of anything, I shall be sure to do so-
and-so tomorrow, without adding "if God wills." Call your Lord to mind when
you forget, and say: "I hope that my Lord will guide me ever closer than this to
the right way" (18:23–24), and You feared the people, but God has a better right
that you should fear Him (33:37).
• When he swore that he would never again use honey or drink a
honey-based sherbet, he was admonished: O Prophet. Why do you hold to
be forbidden what God has made lawful to you? You seek to please your wives.
But God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (66:1).
In other verses, when the Prophet's higher duties and responsibilities
are brought into clear focus, the limits to his authority are made known.
There is a clear space between the Messenger and the Message revealed
to him, as clear as between a person and his or her Creator.
Orientalists deny the Divine authorship out of fear of Islam. Many
miracles are associated with the Qur'an. One of the clearest is how
quickly it established a distinctive and enduring civilization by serving
as its constitution and framework. It mandated the administrative, legal,
and fiscal reforms necessary to sustain a vast state of different cultural
communities and religions. The Qur'an inspired a genuinely scientific
curiosity to study nature and travel in order to study different peoples
and cultures. By urging people to lend money for commercial ventures
and to abandon interest, it made sure that the community's growing
wealth would circulate. It inspired the first-ever public literacy and
64

--- Sayfa 65 ---
public hygiene programs, as both were necessary for worship. The
Qur'an also commanded the organized redistribution of surplus wealth
to the poor and needy, to widows and orphans, for the relief of captives
and debtors, the freeing of slaves, and for the support of new Muslims.
One could expand this list considerably, for only the Qur'an has ever
achieved what many people have desired. Do we not know of at least
one human idea of how to establish or run an ideal society, at least one
system or formula for solving equitably social, cultural, or political prob-
lems? Have any of them ever worked or lasted?
Those who deny the Qur'an's Divine authorship also fear its power
and authority, and that some day Muslims might obey its commands
and restore their civilization. They would prefer that the Muslim elite, as
well as other Muslims, believe that the Qur'an is a human work belong-
ing to a certain time and place, and therefore no longer relevant. Such a
belief would relegate Islam to Christianity's current status: a tender
memory of something long gone.
Such people want Muslims to believe that the Qur'an belongs to the
seventh century. They admit, in order to beguile Muslims, that the
Qur'an was very advanced for its time. However, now they are the ones
who are advanced, who offer a lifestyle of intellectual and cultural free-
dom, and who are civilized, whereas the Qur'an and Islam are backward.
But, scientific progress proves the Qur'an's accuracy on questions related
to the phenomenal world and helps us to better understand the Qur'an,
just as improvements in our understanding of human relationships and
human psychology will establish its truth in these areas.
Claiming that a person wrote the Qur'an only reflects the failure to un-
derstand that all individuals are indebted to God, Who has given us
everything. We do not create ourselves, for our lives are given to us, as
are our abilities to contemplate, comprehend, and feel compassion. We
are given this extraordinarily subtle, varied, and renewable world to ex-
ercise these abilities. In addition, the Qur'an is a gift of mercy, for there is
no way it could have had a human author.
65

--- Sayfa 66 ---
Why Was the Qur'an Revealed Over A Period of 23 Years?
Before I answer this question, let's note that if the Qur'an had been re-
vealed all at once, people would ask: "Why was it sent down all at once
and not in stages?" The ultimate answer to such questions lies with God,
the All-Wise and All-Knowing. Our decisions are based on a very limited
viewpoint, as we are limited creatures. The Divine Decree, on the other
hand, considers everything—our moral and spiritual well-being, worldly
happiness, future and present—and weaves the whole into a single pat-
tern that is coherent with Grace and Wisdom. Thus, the benefit we de-
rive from the Divine commandments is immeasurable, and the blessing
that flows from obeying them is beyond our imagination. And so it is
with the method that God chose to reveal the Qur'an.
The Revelation began when it was time for humanity to reach matur-
ity. The Prophet's mission and that of his community was to become the
most complete, progressive, and dynamic exemplars for humanity, and
to achieve such a level of advancement that they would be the masters
and guides for all subsequent people. But these reformers first had to be
reformed. Their qualities and characters had been conditioned by the
surrounding non-Islamic environment in which their people had been
living for centuries. Islam was to turn their good qualities into qualities
of unsurpassed excellence, and to purge their bad qualities and habits in
such a way that they would never reappear.
If the Qur'an had been revealed all at once, how would they have re-
acted to its prohibitions and commandments? Certainly, they would
have been unable to understand, let alone accept and apply, them in the
ideal manner. This lack of gradualism would have been self-defeating, as
proven by history: Wherever Islam was taken, it spread gradually but
steadily, and so became firmly established.
We see people all around us who cannot free themselves from their
bad habits and addictions. If you confined such people, even if you con-
vinced them to abandon their habits for their own benefit, they would
not be happy with you. On the contrary, they would feel angry, bored,
and irritated. They would complain and try to escape from your pro-
gram of reform, so that they could revert to their habits as soon as pos-
sible. All the arguments and documented evidence of specialists and ex-
perts would not persuade them to change. Even those who were cured
occasionally suffer a relapse. Indeed, some of those who campaign
against such harmful habits as smoking and consuming alcohol still in-
dulge in them!
66

--- Sayfa 67 ---
Remember that the Qur'an came to change not one or two habits; it
came to change everything: ways of living and dying, marrying, buying
and selling, settling disputes, and how to perceive one's relation with the
Creator, among others. Given the scope of the change envisioned, we can
begin to grasp why it was revealed in stages.
The gradual revelation of the Qur'an prepared the people to accept
and then live the virtues, excellent manners, and lofty aspirations it de-
manded. That so much was achieved in only 23 years is a miracle. As
Said Nursi said: "I wonder if the scholars of today went to the Arabian
peninsula, could they accomplish in 100 years even 1 percent of what the
Prophet accomplished in 1 year?" Current campaigns to eradicate such a
peripheral vice as smoking employ famous scholars, individuals, institu-
tions, and the whole network of mass media—yet they still result in
overall failure. If 20 fewer people die on the road per year after a cam-
paign against alcohol, it is considered a great success. What the Prophet
accomplished, at God's bidding, over 23 years far surpasses what all of
humanity has managed to achieve since that time.
The Qur'an was revealed in stages so that its audience could under-
stand, internalize, and apply its prohibitions, commands, and reforms.
Revelation came when the need for guidance arose, without discour-
aging or grinding down morale: warning and condemnation preceded
prohibition, appeal and exhortation preceded command. For instance, al-
cohol and other intoxicating drinks were prohibited in three or four
stages; female infanticide in two stages; uniting warring tribes and build-
ing up a close-knit society based on brotherhood, thus raising the collect-
ive consciousness, in several stages. These difficult reforms were not ges-
tured at or expressed in slogans—they were achieved.
Today, we design our projects according to past experience and future
possibilities. Taking possible social and economic fluctuations into ac-
count, we make our plans flexible in order to leave room for any neces-
sary modifications. Just like a young tree, the early Muslims grew
slowly, adapting gradually to new conditions and thus developing nat-
urally. Every day new people were coming into Islam. New Muslims
were learning many things, gaining in Islamic consciousness, training
themselves to act upon Islam, and thus becoming members of a society
rather than separate individuals or mutually hostile clans. Their charac-
ters and personalities, their whole lives, were reshaped and reordered in
accordance with Islamic precepts and the Qur'anic guidance.
Such was the magnitude of their spiritual, moral, intellectual, and even
physical regeneration. This transformation was achieved through a
67

--- Sayfa 68 ---
balanced synthesis of worldly life and spiritual advancement, and it
happened gradually, slowly yet continuously, and harmoniously.
68

--- Sayfa 69 ---
Why Does the Qur'an Open With Iqra' (Recite, Read)?
The Divine command to proclaim Islam opens with the sublime imperat-
ive: iqra'. Usually translated as "recite," it also means to "rehearse aloud"
or to "read." It is addressed to humanity, as the Prophet represents hu-
manity in its relationship to God. Iqra' is thus a universal injunction, an
opening for each individual to move away from imperfection and to-
ward virtue and happiness both in this world and the next.
Iqra' is a command to read the signs the Creator placed in creation so
that we can understand something of His Mercy, Wisdom, and Power. It
is a command to learn, through experience and understanding, the
meaning of His creation. Moreover, it is an infallible assurance that the
creation can be read, that it is intelligible. The better we learn to read it,
the better we grasp that the created world is a single universe whose
beauty and harmony reflect the Guarded Tablet (85:21) upon which, by
the Divine decree, all things are inscribed.
Every created thing resembles a pen that records its actions. But only
humanity can read what is written. That is why the Qur'an tells us to
"read" instead of to "behold" We are to know the creation, not just to ex-
perience it, as is the case with all other creations.
Science is the study of nature, of how the universe functions, and of
the harmony and principles governing all interactions. It accumulates
knowledge via observation and classification, explanation and experi-
ment. The balanced order, delicate interrelatedness, and prolific dynam-
ism thereof cannot be attributed to chance. Logic dictates that a Single,
Supreme Being created and sustains all of this.
Every order or system is conceived and designed before it is estab-
lished. Think of the Guarded Tablet as a detailed design, and the Qur'an
as its verbal exposition. Given this, the universe may be considered a re-
flection in our world of that final design. We hardly can think of creation
as a single universe, let alone conceive of a design and then produce one.
Our duty is to read it and seek the full meaning of everything. We do
this through trial and error, for that is the only way we can learn.
What sort of knowledge are we trying to acquire? There are many
types of knowledge and understanding: that based on beholding or act-
ively seeing something, inner (comprehensive knowledge) or outer
(description and measurement), implementation of the lesser under-
standing (technology) or of the spiritual understanding (contemplation
and worship, which yield wisdom), learning and teaching, self-based or
69

--- Sayfa 70 ---
other-based, the learner's or teacher's belief in independence of action or
being, and of the believer's surrender and trust to the Creator.
Such diversity happens side by side and continually, for the universe
contains certain laws and categories that condition all being and action
within it. These laws and categories are placed therein by the Creator,
Who administers and sustains their harmonious operation. Among them
are the following:
• A movement from one to many, from simplicity to complexity
• A process of becoming, the coming into existence (within the
many) of similar, diverse, or opposed elements
• A dynamic, enduring balance among the many
• Succession or alternation, the transfer of property, vigor, power, or
knowledge from one to another
• Acquisition, loss, and reacquisition, or learning, forgetting, and
relearning
• Striving and persevering, or energy and commitment
• Breaking down and recomposition, or analysis and synthesis
• Inspiration that uncovers and reveals, or intuition that pierces and
makes clear.
Since humanity is subject to these and other conditions, people are
very diverse in all aspects. However, as these natural differences and
contrasts are in a dynamic, prolific balance, people have different (and
changing) conceptions of and approaches to such matters as science and
faith.
As a result of such diversity, some teachings—even those of the Proph-
et—may be lost sight of for a time. But one day they will be recollected
and taught again. After such a large increase in the number and variety
of people, the loss of traditions and histories, as well as fragmentation, is
natural. All of these will be repaired, though, for this process has
happened many times in the past and will happen again in the future.
Divinely inspired Scriptures, Prophets, and laws were sent success-
ively, in part as an assurance of this process. The Prophet was blessed
with a character that harmonized something of the distinguishing excel-
lence of all previous Prophets. In him were blended the most profound
spiritual knowledge and wisdom, the will to move and decisively order
collective affairs, to inspire human hearts and direct their spiritual crav-
ing, to heal differences between people, and to achieve lasting reconcili-
ation. He demonstrated the ideal balance, in individual as well as in col-
lective affairs, between the claims of justice and compassion. His life is
full of suffering, forbearance, steadfastness in defeat, and of relief,
70

--- Sayfa 71 ---
success, and victory. His style of expression was always brief, to the
point, memorable, and perfect. Alongside the Qur'an, he was the foun-
tainhead of a spiritual awakening and of a great and enduring
civilization.
That is why responding to iqra' means wider responsibilities and a
greater degree of inner and outer trial and striving for Muslims than for
members of other religions. This greater trial is a means of grace and
honor, for it enables a richer harmony of more diverse virtues in each
Muslim and in the community.
Recent scientific discoveries have clarified certain Qur'anic verses.
Such advances in knowledge occur successively, as the universe pro-
ceeds upon its decreed course and in the measure of understanding ap-
pointed for us. We must acknowledge and praise the efforts and achieve-
ments of researchers and scientists, but they should not lead us to ingrat-
itude and insolence (the roots of unbelief). Rather, we should reaffirm
our dependence upon the Creator for guidance both in our quest for and
application of knowledge. We must not idolize ourselves, lest we be for-
saken and left with the human will to power as the only judge in our
affairs.
Should that happen, scientific research and achievement will remain
with those who seek to use them for their own temporary advantage.
Science will become a weapon against religion, a helpless servant of
selfish and generally atheistic and materialistic ideologies. The end result
might be an irretrievable degradation in the quality of individual and
community life. We can see all around us that applying new technologies
is making more and more people increasingly impatient, arrogant, irre-
sponsible, and hard-hearted. Some even claim that they are answerable
only to themselves, as if they were self-created! And yet their lives re-
main full of unhappiness, stress, anxiety, unsatisfied needs, and the delu-
sion that they are free.
The sheer pace of the current scientific advance has turned human so-
cieties and individuals into laboratory experiments with no sure know-
ledge of the consequences or final outcome. To counteract this, we must
see that the Divine command of iqra' is reunited with contemplation,
that we relearn how to "read" consciously so that we can acquire true un-
derstanding and wisdom.
If we can do this, we will begin to deliver science from the futility and
dry formalism in which it is bound, and help to clarify its philosophical
foundations and social and moral relevance. We also will be able to in-
dicate the true range of human perception, intellect, and intuition, and
71

--- Sayfa 72 ---
make people aware of their proper balance and use. Then, those who
consciously study creation will read its signs with a religious seriousness
and humility, and will acquire knowledge that is civilizing and beneficial
for humanity.
That we are meant to read in this way and for this purpose is beyond
doubt. The first thing created was the Pen, and the first word of the
Revelation was iqra'. But to read in such a way requires that our inner
and outer faculties be alert and harmoniously directed to the phenom-
ena. Any defect in our inner faculties impacts the proper functioning of
the others.
When referring to a malaise of the spirit, the Qur'an speaks of blind-
ness, deafness, and dumbness. The Creator's signs are first "read" with
the eyes. The first sounds of Revelation are "heard" with the ears, which
then channels them to the understanding. All that is seen and heard is
expounded, interpreted, and communicated by the tongue, so that un-
derstanding can be deepened.
If people have a poor inner life, they will be able to see, hear, or give
voice to only that which affects their immediate survival or pleasure.
Reading the signs will be impossible, for they will see only mechanically
related bodies and surfaces, and their minds will focus on the rules and
laws that will place them under control. As their inner life atrophies,
contemplation and compassion will be replaced by ugliness, triviality,
and barbarism. Left to themselves, such people will master neither their
immediate needs and pleasures, nor their constant insecurity, anxiety,
and dissatisfaction. In truth, they are blind, deaf, and dumb, and the uni-
verse is no more than a narrow prison for them.
72

--- Sayfa 73 ---
Why Does the Qur'an Not Discuss Scientific Issues That Con-
cern Us Today?
The Qur'an was revealed for specific purposes: to make us aware of the
Creator, to affirm that He is known through His creation, to direct us to
belief and worship, and to order individual and collective life so that we
attain real happiness here and in the Hereafter. The Qur'an deals with
each subject according to the importance attached to it by God.
Given the above reasons, the Qur'an is comprehensive. This can be
seen by the countless books and commentaries written about its various
aspects. The perfection of its style and eloquence has been attested to by
the greatest Muslim literary masters of every century, and has inspired
them to excellence not only in Arabic but also in other Islamic languages.
By basing themselves on Islam, Muslim scholars of humanity or the
physical world have been able to comprehend the real nature of things
and events. Through the Qur'an's wisdom, psychologists and sociolo-
gists have resolved the thorniest problems related to individual or col-
lective affairs. Moralists and pedagogues have turned to the Qur'an as an
infinite, inexhaustible resource for educating future generations.
Today, many people want to know what the Qur'an says about sci-
entific and technological matters, and how it relates to modern positive
sciences. Many books have been written on this subject. They have tried
to relate Qur'anic truths to advances in scientific knowledge. Many of
these books were influenced by the culture and science of their time. But
despite the care and pains expended on these commentaries, people
doubt their accuracy and find them over-elaborate and far-fetched. In
particular, efforts to make Qur'anic truths correspond to particular sci-
entific hypotheses appear to distort, misrepresent, and even slight the
Qur'an.
When explaining the Qur'an, we must be objective and remain faithful
to its precision, soundness, and clarity. Instead of interpreting it in the
light of certain phenomena and a non-Qur'anic specialist language,
everything should be interpreted and evaluated in the Qur'anic context.
Of course, the Qur'an is best understood by a nuanced knowledge of
Arabic's vocabulary and grammatical rules, and the occasions of the
verse's revelation. Thus the best understanding and interpretation is that
of the Companions, then of the Successors (the following generation),
and then of the first commentators, such as Ibn Jarir. These, and not the
later ones, are the most in accord with scientific truths established later
on.
73

--- Sayfa 74 ---
We offer several examples from the Qur'an to illustrate the argument.
• The Omnipotent Creator says that the future will be the age of
knowledge and information, and thus, as a natural consequence, of faith
and belief: Soon We shall show them Our signs on the furthest horizons, and
in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that this is truth. Is it not
enough that your Lord witnesses all things? (41:53)
From the earliest days of Islam, Sufis accepted and referred to this
verse as a sign and assurance of the spiritual wisdom they sought.
However, reading this verse from the viewpoint of scientific progress, its
mere existence will be seen to be a miracle.
Everything within the compass of our thinking and research affirms
the Creator's Oneness, as the true nature and interrelationship of micro-
cosm and macrocosm are further disclosed and better understood. When
we see hundreds of books on this subject, we understand that what was
Divinely revealed is near to being proved. Even now we feel that soon
we shall hear and be able to understand the testimonies and praises to
God through thousands of tongues belonging to nature: The seven
Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, declare His Glory. There is not a
thing but celebrates His praise. And yet you do not understand how they declare
His Glory. Truly He is Oft-Forbearing, Most Forgiving (17:44).
This verse tells us that all parts of creation speak to us, in the language
of their being, of their submission to and glorification of the One God.
However, very few people can hear and understand this universal
praise. The sincere Muslims who will bring all people to hear this praise
are also few, dispersed, and feeble.
• What the Qur'an reveals about an embryo's formation and develop-
mental phases in the uterus is striking: O mankind! If you have a doubt
about the Resurrection, (consider) that We created you out of dust, then out of
sperm, then out of a leech-like cloth, then out of a lump of flesh, partly formed
and partly unformed, in order that We may manifest (what We will) to you…
(22:5)
In another verse, the development is explained in greater detail, and
the distinct phases are emphasized more clearly:
We created man from a quintessence (of clay). Then We placed him as (a drop
of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly fixed. Then we made the sperm into a clot of
congealed blood. Then of that clot We made a lump (embryo); then we made out
of that lump bones and clothed the bones with flesh. Then We developed out of it
a new (distinct, individual) creature (23:12–14)
And
74

--- Sayfa 75 ---
He makes you in the wombs of your mothers in stages, one after another, in
three veils of darkness … (39:6)
These three veils of darkness can now be glossed in detail: the para-
metrium, miometrium, and the endometrium are three tissues envelop-
ing three water-, heat-, and light-proof membranes (the amnion, corion
and the wall of the womb).
• What the Qur'an says about milk and its production: And verily in
cattle (too) will you find an instructive sign. From what is from their bodies,
between excretions and blood, We produce, for your drink, milk, pure and agree-
able to those who drink it (16:66).
The Qur'an narrates the process in remarkable detail: the partial diges-
tion of food and its absorption, followed by a second process and refine-
ment in the glands. Milk is wholesome and agreeable for people, yet it is
a secretion rejected by the cow's body and bloodstream as useless.
• The Qur'an reveals that all things in nature are created in pairs:
Glory be to God, who created in pairs all things, of what the soil produces, and
of themselves, and of what they know not (36:36).
Thus everything has a counterpart, whether opposite to it or comple-
mentary. This is obvious in the case of people, animals, and certain
plants. But, what about the pairs in all things … and of what they know
not? This may refer to a whole range of inanimate as well as animate en-
tities, subtle forces and principles of nature. Modern scientific instru-
ments confirm that everything does occur in pairs.
• The Qur'an recounts, in its own unique idiom, the first creation of
the world and its inhabitants: Do not the unbelievers see that the Heavens
and the Earth were joined together (as a single mass), before We clove them
asunder? We made from water every living thing. Will they not then believe?
(21:30).
The Qur'anic account is clear and should not be mixed with the differ-
ent creation hypotheses put forward by others. It states that every living
thing was created of water. The Qur'an does not concern itself with how
this unique source of life came into being, but with the fact that the uni-
verse is a single miracle of creation. Everything in it is an integral part of
that miracle, bears signs that prove it, and is interconnected. The verse
emphasizes the vitality and significance of water, which constitutes
three-quarters of the mass of most living bodies.
• The sun has a special and significant place in creation. The Qur'an
reveals its most important aspects in just four words: And the sun runs its
course (mustaqarr) determined for it. That is His decree, the Exalted in Might,
the All-Knowing (36:38).
75

--- Sayfa 76 ---
In fact, mustaqarr here may mean a determined route in space, a fixed
place of rest or dwelling, or a determined route in time. We are told that
the sun has a specific orbit and that it moves toward a particular point in
the universe. Our solar system, as we now know, is moving toward the
constellation Lyra at an almost inconceivable speed (every second we
come ten miles closer to that constellation, almost a million miles a day).
We also are told that when the sun has finished its appointed task, it will
abide by a command and come to rest.
Such words were spoken at a time when people generally believed
that the sun made a daily circuit around the Earth.
• Another four-word inspiring and eloquent Qur'anic verse says that
the universe is expanding: And the firmament: We constructed it with power
and skill, and We are expanding it (51:47–48).
This verse reveals that the distance between celestial bodies is increas-
ing, for the universe is expanding. In 1922, the astronomer Hubble
claimed that all galaxies, except the five closest to Earth, are moving fur-
ther into space at a speed directly proportional to their distance from
Earth. Thus, a galaxy one million light years away is moving away at a
speed of 168 km/year, one two million light years away at twice that
speed, and so on. Le Maître, a Belgian mathematician and priest, later
proposed and developed the theory that the universe is expanding. No
matter how we express this reality, the Qur'an clearly presents the reality
of this expansion.
• The Qur'an indicates various laws of physics, such as attraction and
repulsion, rotation and revolution in the universe: God raised the heavens
without any pillars that you can see… (13:2)
All celestial bodies move in order, balance, and harmony. They are
held and supported in this order by pillars invisible to our eyes. Some of
these "pillars" are repulsion or centrifugal force: … He holds back the sky
from falling on earth except by His leave… (22:65).
From this verse, we understand that the heavenly bodies may at any
moment collapse on the Earth, but that the All-Mighty does not allow it.
This is an instance of the universal obedience to His Word, which in the
language of contemporary science is explained as a balance of centripetal
and centrifugal forces.
• Qur'anic commentators have considered one verse as a reference to
travelling to the moon, which is now a reality: By the moon's fullness! You
shall surely travel from stage to stage (84:18–19).
Some earlier commentators understood this verse figuratively, as a ref-
erence to one's spiritual life considered as an ascent from one stage to the
76

--- Sayfa 77 ---
next, or as a general process of change from one state to another. Later
on, Qur'anic interpreters tried to explain it in non-literal terms, for the lit-
eral meaning did not agree with what they "knew" about actually travel-
ling such a distance. But in fact, the more appropriate sense of the words
following the oath (By the moon!), given the verse's immediate context,
is that of really travelling to the moon, whether literally or figuratively.
• The Qur'anic account of the Earth's geographical shape and change
in that shape are particularly interesting: Do they not see how We gradually
shrink the land from its outlying borders? Is it then they who will be victors?
(21:44)
The reference to shrinking from its borders could relate to the now-
known fact that the Earth is compressed at the poles, rather than to such
earlier believed ideas as the erosion of mountains by wind and rain, of
the sea-shores by the sea, or of the desert's encroachment of cultivated
lands.
At a time when people generally believed that the Earth was flat and
stationary, the Qur'an explicitly and implicitly revealed in several verses
that it is round. More unexpectedly still, it tells us that its precise shape
is more like an ostrich egg than a sphere: After that He shaped the earth
like an egg, whence He caused to spring forth the water thereof, and the
pasture thereof (79:30–32).
The Arabic verb daha means "to shape like an egg." The derived noun
dahia is still used to mean "an egg." Some interpreters, who might have
viewed it as contrary to what they "knew," misunderstood the meaning
as "stretched out," perhaps fearing that the literal meaning might be diffi-
cult to understand and so mislead. Modern scientists have established
that the Earth is shaped more like an egg than a perfect sphere, that there
is a slight flattening around the poles, and a slight curving around the
equator.
• As a final example, consider what the Qur'an says about the sun and
the moon: We have made the night and the day as two signs; the sign of the
night We have obscured, while the sign of the day We have made to enlighten
you… (17:12)
According to Ibn 'Abbas, the sign of the night refers to the moon, and
the sign of the day to the sun. Therefore, from the words the sign of the
night We have obscured, we understand that the moon once emitted
light and that God took its light from it, thereby causing it to darken or
become obscured. While the verse thus accurately recounts the moon's
past, it points to the future destiny of other heavenly bodies.
77

--- Sayfa 78 ---
Many other Qur'anic verses are related to scientific facts. Their exist-
ence indicates that our quest for knowledge is a portion of Divine Mercy
graciously bestowed upon us by our Creator. Indeed, Divine Mercy is
one of the Qur'an's names for itself, and all that it contains of truth and
knowledge is beyond our ability to relate or to hold in our minds.
We must remember, however, that while the Qur'an contains allusions
to many scientific truths, it is not a science textbook. It is a book of guid-
ance leading humanity to right belief and right action so that we may be
worthy of Divine Mercy and Forgiveness. Muslims must ensure that the
pursuit of scientific and other types of knowledge is guided by the light
of the Qur'an, which so encourages and supports it, and not by the spirit
of arrogance, insolence, and vainglory. The latter path, that of unbeliev-
ers, leads only to the mind's desolation, our own degradation and that of
the Earth, our temporary home entrusted to us by God.
78

--- Sayfa 79 ---
When Modern Science Agrees With the Qur'an
We refer to many branches of science and scientific facts today and use
them to analyze various things and events—even religious matters. We
refer to them, either one at a time or in groups, to provide evidence of
God's Existence and Oneness to those who need such evidence.
Similarly, when looking at science in the light of the Qur'an, we point
out that it contains information about the nature of things that agrees
with modern scientific findings. Consider medicine. I once read a book
called Medicine is the Niche of the Faith. It really is so, and we must ac-
knowledge God when studying our bodily existence and development.
For instance, the Qur'anic description of the embryo corresponds exactly
to what we know today. Furthermore, the Qur'an does not contain a
single statement on this matter that modern science can criticize. How
could an unlettered desert Arab living more than 1,400 years ago know
such facts, which were discovered recently by X-rays and other sophist-
icated equipment only after many centuries of intensive scientific re-
search? We use such Qur'anic statements to argue for the Qur'an's Divine
origin.
This,
in
turn,
corroborates
the
truth
of
Muhammad's
Prophethood.
We refer to science and scientific facts when explaining Islam because
some people are determined to reject anything that is not "scientific." Ma-
terialists and those opposed (or indifferent) to religion have sought to ex-
ploit science to defy religion and use its prestige to spread their thinking.
Many people have followed their lead, which means that we have to use
the same tools of science and technology to show that they do not contra-
dict Islam and to lead people to the right path.
I agree with such an argument. Muslims should be well-versed in sci-
entific facts to refute the claims of materialists and atheists. Many
Qur'anic verses urge us to reflect and study, to observe the stars and
galaxies. They impress upon us the Creator's magnificence, and exhort
us to travel and observe the miraculousness of our organs and creation.
The Qur'an's verses place all of creation before our eyes. Touching upon
a multitude of facts, it tells us that those who truly fear God, among His
servants, are those who have knowledge (35:28), and so encourages us to
seek knowledge,27 to reflect and research. However, remember that the
27.In Islamic terms, knowledge is not restricted to religious knowledge, but includes
all types of knowledge beneficial to humanity. For us, this certainly includes scientif-
ic knowledge.
79

--- Sayfa 80 ---
first condition for all such activities is that they comply with the spirit of
the Qur'an, lest we begin departing from it.
Our knowledge of science and its facts can and should be used to ex-
pound Islamic facts, not to impress others or silence their arguments.
Our primary aim must be to win the pleasure of God and make sure that
our audience understands the points we are making.
It is wrong to regard science as superior to religion and to seek to justi-
fy substantial Islamic issues and Islam as a whole through modern sci-
entific facts. Such attempts show that we have doubts about Islam and
thus need science to reinforce our own belief. It is also wrong to accept
science or scientific facts as absolute, for such things are subject to
change. At best, they only support what the Qur'an says. In no way can
the unchangeable and eternal Qur'an be confirmed by that which is
changeable and temporary. Given this, Muslims should use science only
as a tool to awaken sleeping or confused minds.
Science and scientific facts are true only as long as they agree with the
Qur'an and hadith. Even definitely established scientific facts cannot up-
hold the truths of faith; they can be only instruments to give us ideas or
to trigger us to reflect. God, not science, establishes the truths of faith in
our conscience, for faith comes only by Divine guidance. Those who seek
to acquire faith from science may never feel the existence of God within
their own consciousness. In reality, they will be nature worshippers, not
worshippers of God.
We are believers because of the faith in our hearts, not the knowledge
in our heads. Objective and subjective evidence can take us only so far.
After that, we must drop all such things in order to make any spiritual
progress at all. When we follow our heart and conscience within the
Qur'an's light and guidance, God may guide us to the enlightenment for
which we are looking. As the German philosopher Kant said: "I felt the
need to leave behind all the books I read in order to believe in God."
80

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Chapter 4
Prophethood and The Prophets
What is the Role of Prophethood and of Prophets?
Prophethood is the highest rank and honor that a man can receive from
God. It proves the superiority of that man's inner being over all others. A
Prophet is like a branch arching out from the Divine to the human realm.
He is the very heart and tongue of creation. He possesses a supreme in-
tellect that penetrates into the reality of things and events.
Moreover, he is the ideal being, for all of his faculties are harmoni-
ously excellent and active. He strives and progresses steadily toward
Heaven, waits upon Divine inspiration for the solutions to the problems
he faces, and is the connecting point between this world and the Beyond.
His body is subject to and follows his heart, figuratively the seat of spir-
itual intellect, as does his heart. His perceptions and reflections are al-
ways directed to the Names and Attributes of God. He goes to what he
perceives, and arrives at the desired destination.
A Prophet's perception, developed to the full-seeing, hearing, and thus
knowing-surpasses that of all other people. His perception cannot be ex-
plained in terms of different light, sound, or some other wavelengths.
Ordinary people cannot acquire a Prophet's knowledge.
By conveying the Divine message and guidance, the Prophets give us
a limited insight into creation so that we can know some of its meaning.
Without them, we would be unable to see or understand the true nature
and meaning of things and events, or to deal with our surrounding en-
vironment. They also teach us something of God and His Names and
Attributes.
Their first mission is to teach the reality, the true purpose and mean-
ing, of this life. Since God is beyond our perception and comprehension,
the Prophets have to be the most obedient, careful, conscious, and self-
disciplined of people while performing their tasks. If they had not
spoken in clear terms about the Creator, we could not think, know, or
say anything correct about God.
81

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Everything in the universe tries to exhibit the Names and Attributes of
the All-Mighty, All-Encompassing Creator. In the same way, the Proph-
ets note, affirm, and are faithful to the subtle, mysterious relation
between God and His Names and Attributes. As their duty is to know
and speak about God, they enter into the true meaning of things and
events and then convey it directly and sincerely to humanity.
When we are in a new or unfamiliar place, we need a guide to show us
around. This analogy applies to the role of Prophets. Would the One
who created everything so that we might know Him not provide guides,
in the form of Prophets, to inform us of His Names and Attributes and
guide us along the right path? To overlook such a need would render the
creation useless and futile, yet we know that God does not engage in
such activities. Thus, it seems most likely that all people would be in-
formed of such things by a Prophet sent to them by God.
The Qur'an is explicit on this point: For We sent among every people a
Messenger (with the command): "Serve God and avoid evil" (16:36). But many
people gradually forgot these Divine teachings and fell into such errors
as deifying the Prophets and others or engaging in idolatry. We can see
this in the deities of Mt. Olympus in ancient Greece, the sanctification of
the Ganges river in India, and in many other places. Even accepting that
there must be a tremendous difference between the original and the cur-
rent form of many religions, it is quite impossible to understand the con-
ditions that caused Confucius to appear in China and Brahma and
Buddha in India. It is equally difficult to guess what their original mes-
sages were and to what degree they have been corrupted.
If the Qur'an had not introduced Jesus to us, we would not have an ac-
curate idea of his life and teachings. Over time, priests (and others)
mixed the truth of Jesus with ancient Greek and Roman philosophies
and idolatry, attributed divinity to human beings, and anthropomorph-
ized God. The Trinity is an obvious example. Perhaps Romne would ac-
cept Christianity as its official state religion only if the various pagan
festivals, holy days, rites, and rituals were incorporated. Without the
Qur'an's enlightening revelation, it would be very difficult to tell Jesus
Christ from Adonis or Dionysus.28
Considering that Christianity is relatively recent, and what the Christi-
ans did to their Prophet and their Book, we wonder how many other
people fell into the same error. One reliable hadith says: "A Prophet's
disciples will carry out his mission after his death, but some of his
28.Two originally ancient Greek "gods" that were widely worshipped in Greece and
those lands under its cultural sway, as well as in the Roman Empire.
82

--- Sayfa 83 ---
followers will later upset everything he established."29 This is a very im-
portant point. Many of the religions we now consider false turned to
falsehood, superstition, and legend over time through the deliberate
malice of their enemies (or the mistakes of their followers), despite their
possible origin in the purest, Divine source.
To say that someone is a Prophet when he is not is unbelief, as is the
case with refusing to believe in a true Prophet. On the other hand, if the
case of false religions is similar to that of Christianity, we should look at
them with some caution and reserve judgment. We should consider
what Buddhism or Brahmanism may have been in their true, original
forms, as well as the doctrines attributed to Confucius or the practices
and beliefs of shamanism. Maybe they still have some remnants of what
they originally were.
Many once-pure religions have been distorted and altered. Therefore,
it is essential to accept the purity of their original foundation. The Qur'an
says: There never was a people without a warner having lived among them
(35:24), and We sent among every people a Messenger (16:36).
These revelations declare that God sent Messengers to each group of
people. The Qur'an mentions the names of 28 Prophets, out of a total of
124,000 (or perhaps 224,000). We do not know exactly when and where
many of them lived. But we do not have to know such information, for:
We did in times past send Messengers before you; of them there are some whose
stories We have related to you, and some whose stories We have not related to
you (40:78).
Recent studies in comparative religion, philosophy, and anthropology
reveal that many widely separated communities share certain concepts
and practices. Among these are moving from polytheism to monotheism,
and praying to the One God in times of hardship by raising their hands
and asking something from Him. Many such phenomena indicate a sin-
gular source and a single teaching. If primitive tribes cut off from civiliz-
ation and the influence of known Prophets have a sure understanding of
His Oneness, though they may have little understanding of how to live
according to that belief, a Messenger must have been sent to them at
some time in the past: For every people there is a Messenger. When their Mes-
senger comes, the matter is judged between them with justice, and they are not
wronged (10:47).
What about those who claim to have been sent no Prophet? Are they
held accountable for their beliefs and actions? According to the verse
quoted above, a Prophet has been sent to every people. There may be
29.Muslim, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 210–12; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 417.
83

--- Sayfa 84 ---
periods when darkness seemed to prevail, but such periods are only
temporary. Nevertheless, there is the possibility that the Prophet's work
was destroyed so completely by erroneous ideas and rites that the true
teachings were lost. In such cases, people may have remained in dark-
ness unknowingly or against their own will. Such people will not be
punished or blamed for the wrong they may do, until and unless they
have been warned: We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (17:15),
for warning precedes responsibility and reward or punishment.
Muslim scholars have different opinions on this matter. For instance,
Imam Maturidi and his school argue that no people can be excused, for
there is enough evidence pointing to the One Creator to guide anyone to
belief in Him. The 'Ashari school, referring to the above verse, argues
that warning and guidance must precede judgment, and that people can
be held responsible only if they have been sent a Prophet.
Others combine these two positions: Those who have not been sent a
Prophet and so did not enter willfully into unbelief or idolatry are ahl al-
najat (people who will be excused and so escape punishment and who,
as God wills, may be saved). This position is based on the fact that some
people cannot analyze their surroundings, penetrate to their meaning, or
deduce the right course of belief and action. They first have to be taught
the right way, given explanations and directions on how to act, and then
they can be rewarded or punished according to what they do with the
new knowledge. Those who willfully enter unbelief, fight belief and reli-
gion, or knowingly defy God and His commandments will be questioned
and punished, regardless of how isolated they are.
84

--- Sayfa 85 ---
How Many Prophets Were There? Were They All From
Arabia?
Prophets were raised and sent to their people in different lands and at
different times. One hadith puts the number of Prophets at 124,000; an-
other mentions 224,000. Both versions, however, should be evaluated
critically according to the science of hadith. The exact number is not im-
portant; rather, we should realize that no people has ever been deprived
of its own Prophet: There never was a people without a Warner having lived
among them (35:24) and: We never punish until We have sent a Messenger
(17:15).
To punish a people before warning them that what they are doing is
wrong is contrary to His Glory and Grace. The warning precedes re-
sponsibility, which may be followed by reward or punishment: Anyone
who has done an atom's weight of good shall see it. And anyone who has done
an atom's weight of evil shall see it (99:7–8). If a Prophet has not been sent,
people cannot know what is right and wrong and so cannot be punished.
However, since every individual will be called to account for his or her
good and evil deeds, we may infer that a Prophet has been sent to every
people: We sent among every people a messenger with (the command): "Serve
God and avoid evil" (16:36).
The Prophets were not raised only in Arabia. In fact, we do not even
know all of the Prophets who were raised there, let alone elsewhere. We
know only 28 of them by name (from Adam to Muhammad), and the
Prophethood of three of them is uncertain.30 We do not know exactly
from where they emerged. Supposedly, Adam's tomb and the place of
his reunion with Eve is Jidda, but this information is uncertain. We know
that Abraham spent some time in Anatolia, Syria, and Babylon. Lot was
associated with Sodom and Gomorrah, around the Dead Sea; Shu'ayb
with Madyan; Moses with Egypt; and Yahya and Zakariyya with the
Mediterranean countries—they may have crossed to Anatolia, since
Christians link Mary (Mayam ibn 'Isa) and Jesus with Ephesus. But these
associations remain suppositions at best.
We know the names of some Prophets sent to the Israelites, but not the
names of any others or where they appeared. Moreover, because their
teachings have been distorted and lost over time, we cannot say any-
thing about who they were and where they were sent.
30.Luqman (31:12), Uzayr (9:30), and Zul-qarnain (18:83-98).
85

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Take the case of Christianity. Following the Council of Nicea (325 CE),
the original doctrine of God's Oneness was dropped in favor of the
human-made doctrine of the Trinity. For the Catholic Church, Jesus be-
came the "son" of God, while his mother Mary became the "mother" of
God. Some believed, rather vaguely, that God was immanent or present
in things. Thus, Christianity came to resemble the idolatrous beliefs and
practices of ancient Greece, and its followers began to associate other
things and people with God, a major sin in Islam.
Throughout history, deviations and corruption of the Truth started
and increased in this way. If the Qur'an had not informed us of the
Prophethood of Jesus and of the purity and greatness of Mary, we would
have difficulty in distinguishing the cults of and rites of Jupiter (Zeus)
and Jesus, Venus (Aphrodite) and Mary.
This same process may have happened to other religions. As such, we
cannot say definitely that their founders or teachers were Prophets or
that they taught in a specific location. We only can speculate that Con-
fucius, Buddha, or even Socrates were Prophets. We cannot give a defin-
ite answer because we do not have enough information about them and
their original teachings. However, we know that the teachings of Con-
fucius and Buddha influenced great numbers of their contemporaries
and continue to do so.
Some say that Socrates was a philosopher influenced by Judaism, but
they offer no proof. Words attributed to him by Plato imply that Socrates
was "inspired" from a very early age to "instruct" people in true under-
standing and belief. But it is not clear if these words are attributed cor-
rectly or exactly what his people understood them to mean. Only this
much is reliable: Socrates taught in an environment and manner that
supports the use of reason.
Professor Mahmud Mustafa's observations of two primitive African
tribes confirm what has been said above. He remarks that the Maw-
Maws believe in God and call him Mucay. This God is one and only, acts
alone, does not beget or is begotten, and has no associate or partner. He
is not seen or sensed, but known only through His works. He dwells in
the heavens, from where he ordains everything. That is why the Maw-
Maws raise their hands when praying. Another tribe, the Neyam-
Neyam, expresses similar themes. There is one God who decrees and or-
dains everything, and what he says is absolute. He makes everything in
the forest move according to His will, and sends thunderbolts against
those with whom he is angry.
86

--- Sayfa 87 ---
These ideas are compatible with what is said by the Qur'an. The Maw-
Maws's belief is very close to what we find in the Qur'an's Surat al-Ikh-
las. How could these primitive tribes, so far removed from civilization
and the known Prophets, have so pure and sound a concept of God? This
reminds us of the Qur'anic verse: For every people there is a messenger.
When their messenger comes, the matter is judged between them with justice,
and they are not wronged (10:47).
Professor Adil of Kirkuk, Iraq, was working as a mathematician at Riy-
adh University when I met him in 1968. He told me that he had met
many Native American Indians while earning his Ph.D. in the United
States. He had been struck by how many of them believe in One God
who does not eat or sleep or find himself constrained by time. He rules
and governs all of creation, which is under His sovereignty and depend-
ent on His will. They also referred to some of God's attributes: the lack of
a partner, for such would surely give rise to conflict.
How does one reconcile the alleged primitiveness of such peoples with
such loftiness in their concept of God? It seems that true Messengers con-
veyed these truths to them, some soundness of which can still be found
in their present-day beliefs.
Some people wonder why there were no female Prophets. The over-
whelming consensus of Sunni scholars of the Law and Tradition is that
no woman has been sent as Prophet. Except for a questionable and even
unreliable tradition that Mary and Pharaoh's wife were sincere believers,
there is no Qur'anic authority or hadith that a woman was sent to her
people as a Prophet.
God the All-Mighty created all entities in pairs. Humanity was created
to be the steward of creation, and thus is fitted to it. The pairs of male
and female are characterized by complex relation of mutual attraction
and repulsion. Women incline toward softness, weakness, and compas-
sion; men incline toward strength, force, and competitive toughness.
When they come together, such characteristics allow them to establish a
harmonious family unit.
Today, the issue of gender has reached the point where some people
refuse to recognize the very real differences between men and women
and claim that they are alike and equal in all respects. Implementing
these views has resulted in the "modern" lifestyle of women working
outside the home, trying to "become men," and thus losing their own
identity. Family life has eroded, for children are sent to daycare centers
or boarding schools as parents are too busy, as "individuals," to take
proper care of them. This violence against nature and culture has
87

--- Sayfa 88 ---
destroyed the home as a place of balance between authority and love, as
a focus of security and peace.
God the Wise ordained some principles and laws in the universe, and
created human beings therein with an excellent and lofty nature. Men
are physically stronger and more capable than women, and plainly con-
stituted to strive and compete without needing to withdraw from the
struggle. It is different with women, because of their menstrual period,
their necessary confinement before and after childbirth, and their con-
sequent inability to observe all the prayers and fasts. Nor can women be
available continually for public duties. How could a mother with a baby
in her lap lead and administer armies, make life and death decisions, and
sustain and prosecute a difficult strategy against an enemy?
A Prophet must lead humanity in every aspect of its social and reli-
gious life without a break. That is why Prophethood is impossible for
women. If men could have children, they could not be Prophets either.
Prophet Muhammad points to this fact when he describes women as
"those who cannot fulfil the religious obligations totally and cannot real-
ize some of them."31
A Prophet is an exemplar, a model for conducting every aspect of hu-
man life, so that people cannot claim that they were asked to do things
that they could not do. Exclusively female matters are communicated to
other women by the women in the Prophet's household.
31.Bukhari, Hayd, 6.
88

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Was Muhammad's Mission Limited and Temporary?
All of the available information and resources, including his life, shows
that his mission was universal and eternal.
Such men as Alexander the "Great," the Roman Caesars, Napoleon,
Hitler, and the imperialists of Europe, Russia, and America all sought ex-
tensive dominion for the sake of worldly power and authority. But when
Prophet Muhammad ordered his followers to spread Islam all over the
world, his aim was to remove the obstacles preventing human happiness
in this world and the next, to prevent them from going to Hell, and to en-
able them to regain their lost values and inherent purity. As the final
Messenger, always under His Guidance and Command, his life was a
struggle to spread the light of Islam as far as possible so that others
might hear the Divine Message. Certainly he succeeded.
Let's go over some points that demonstrate his mission's universality:
• While still in Makka, he sent some Muslims to Abyssinia. Through
the efforts of those believers, many Abyssinians had the chance to know
and embrace Islam. While this migration was undertaken to escape in-
tense persecution at home, it also caused the king Negus and other
Abyssinian nobles to convert to Islam. This was one of the first proofs of
universality.
• Among the early Muslims were Bilal (from Abyssinia), Suhayb (from
Rum [Byzantium]), Salman (from Persia), and others. Although they
were from different nations and races, they were in the first rank of
Muslims. Furthermore, the fact that such people and many more non-
Arabs were given higher ranks and esteem than many Arabs shows that
Islam, from the beginning, had a universal perspective.
• Long before the conquest of Iraq and Persia, the Prophet told Suraqa
that one day he would wear the bracelets of Chosroes, son of Ormuz,
Emperor of Persia. This indicates that the Prophet knew that Islam
would be carried to Iraq and Persia, and implies that it had to be carried
there. It happened just as the Prophet predicted.
• While resting in the house of Umm Haram bint Milhan (his paternal
aunt and wife of 'Ubada ibn Samit), the Prophet slept for a short while.
When he awoke, he said smilingly: My community has been shown to
me. I saw it waging war on the seas like kings sitting on thrones."32 Forty
years later, Umm Haram accompanied 'Ubada on the conquest of
Cyprus. She died and was buried there, where her grave can still be seen.
32.Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, 7:152.
89

--- Sayfa 90 ---
As before, it was an indication from the Prophet that his Companions
would, and must, carry the Divine Message overseas.
• Once the Prophet told his Companions: "Egypt will be conquered
after my death. Be kind and benevolent to its people. Deal with them
gently, for there is kinship and duty between you and them."33 So he in-
formed them that Islam would reach Egypt during their lifetimes, and
asked them to preserve the kinship established by his marriage to Mary,
the Egyptian Copt.
• Before the Battle of Khandaq, while he was digging the ditch, the
Prophet foretold the conquest of Hira, the fall of the columns of Chos-
roes' palace (the Persian Empire), and the capture of Damascus. It
happened as he foretold.34
Many Prophetic traditions and Qur'anic verses also state clearly that
his Prophethood was for all nations and all times. Among them are the
following:
• In one hadith, the Prophet says: "Each Messenger was sent to his
own nation. I was sent to humanity."35 In another tradition, it is narrated
as "to blacks and whites." Confirming this, al-Tabari narrates a different
hadith: "I was sent to all both as a mercy and a Prophet. Complete my
mission. May God's mercy be on you."36
• When Chosroes' envoy visited him, the Prophet said to him: "In the
near future, my religion and its sovereignty will reach Chosroes'
throne."37
• Centuries before the conquest of Anatolia and Constantinople (now
Istanbul), he foretold that Muslim armies would reach Europe and that
Constantinople would be conquered. Many attempts were made to real-
ize this and be blessed, for, in the words of the Prophet: "Constantinople
will be conquered. Blessed is the commander who will conquer it, and
blessed are his troops."38 Since that city was a symbol of a large domin-
ion, the Prophet was directing his community to carry Islam worldwide.
The Qur'anic verses related to the Prophet's mission are all self-explan-
atory. They say unmistakably that the Divine Revelation, through the
Prophet, was meant for all humanity. Muhammad was commissioned to
warn both humanity and jinn. For instance:
33.Al-Tabari, 4:228.
34.Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, 4:99.
35.Bukhari, Jihad, 122.
36.Al-Tabari, 2:625.
37.Al-Kamil, 2:146.
38.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4:335.
90

--- Sayfa 91 ---
This is no less than a message to (all) the worlds (38:87).
This is but a warning; an eloquent Qur'an to admonish the living and to pass
judgment on the unbelievers (36:70).
We have sent you to all humanity, giving them glad tidings and warning
them, but most people understand not (34:28).
Say: "O People! I am sent unto you all, as the Messenger, to whom belongs
the dominion of the heavens and the Earth. (7:158)
The Qur'an expressly tells us that former Prophets were sent to their
particular community or nation, and draws our attention to the differ-
ence between them and Prophet Muhammad. For instance:
We sent Noah to his people. He said: "O my people! Worship God! You have
no other God but Him." (7:59)
To the 'Ad, We sent Hud, one of their own brethren. He said: "O my people!
Worship God! You have no other god but Him." (7:65)
To the Thamud, We sent Salih, one of their own brethren. He said: "O my
people! Worship God! You have no other god but Him." (7:73)
We also sent Lut; He said to his people. (7:80)
To the people of Madyan We sent Shu'ayb, one of their own brethren. (7:85)
Moreover, with almost every mention of these Prophets, the Qur'an
states that they were raised from among their own brethren and sent to
their own nation. Thus, there is no ambiguity over who was a Prophet
for his own nation and who was the one for humanity.
Since the first revelation, the Prophet has been heard and respected al-
most everywhere. His teachings, which have established a way of life for
peoples as far apart as China and Morocco, have touched the hearts of
countless people in every part of the world. They have been—and re-
main—the most enduring model for a balanced, civilized life, and have
led to human development in every field.
Despite the most vicious and sustained oppression of Muslims, the
vandalizing of their culture, the misrepresentation of their values and
history, Islam's principles and ideals remain fresh and vivid in the hearts
of the great majority of Muslims. Indeed, true Muslims are respected,
and even many non-Muslims agree that our problems can be resolved
only by applying those principles. Islam's sheer endurance, through the
conquest and defeat of its followers as well as among so many different
peoples and languages, cultures, and climates, proves that Prophet
Muhammad's mission is for all people and eternal.
91

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Why Was the Prophet Polygamous?
Some critics of Islam have reviled the Prophet as a self-indulgent lib-
ertine. They have accused him of character failings that are hardly com-
patible with being of average virtue, let alone with being a Prophet and
God's last Messenger, as well as the best model for humanity to follow.
However, based on the easily available scores of biographies and well-
authenticated accounts of his sayings and actions, it is quite clear that he
lived the most strictly disciplined life, and that his marriages were part
of the numerous burdens he bore as God's last Messenger.
The reasons for his multiple marriages vary. However, all of them
were related to his role as leader of the Muslim community, and his re-
sponsibility to guide the new Muslims toward the norms and values of
Islam.
When Muhammad was 25, before he was called to his future mission,
he married Khadija, his first wife. Given the surrounding cultural envir-
onment, not to mention the climate and such other considerations as his
youth, it is remarkable that he enjoyed a reputation for perfect chastity,
integrity, and trustworthiness. As soon as he was called to Prophethood,
he acquired enemies who did not hesitate to raise false calumnies against
him—but not once did any of them dare invent something unbelievable
about him.
Khadija was 15 years his senior. This marriage was very high and ex-
ceptional in the eyes of the Prophet and God. For 23 years, their life was
a period of uninterrupted contentment in perfect fidelity. In the eighth
year of Prophethood, however, she passed away, leaving the Prophet as
the sole parent of their children for 4 or 5 years. Even his enemies are
forced to admit that, during these years, they can find no flaw in his
moral character. The Prophet took no other wife during Khadija's life-
time, although public opinion would have allowed him to do so. When
he began marrying other women, he was already past 55, when very
little real interest and desire for marriage remains.
How could a Prophet by polygamous? This question is often asked by
people without any religion, or by Jews and Christians. In respect to the
first group, they have no right to reproach people who follow a religious
way of life. Their own conduct with the opposite sex follows nothing but
their own desire, regardless of what they say. They do not worry about
the consequences of such liaisons to themselves, to the resulting chil-
dren, or how their loose behavior impacts young people in general.
Viewing themselves as free, they engage in such condemned practices as
92

--- Sayfa 93 ---
homosexuality and, even more extreme (but hopefully limited), incest,
pedophilia, and multiple male/female partners (meaning that the child's
true father is unknown). Such people criticize the Prophet only to drag
others down to their own level.
Jews and Christians who attack the Prophet for his polygamy do so
out of their fear and jealous hatred of Islam. They forget that the great
Jewish patriarchs, called Prophets in the Bible and the Qur'an and
revered by the followers of all three faiths as exemplars of moral excel-
lence, all practiced polygamy on a far greater scale.
Polygamy did not originate with the Muslims. Furthermore, in the
case of the Prophet this practice has far more significance than people
generally realize. In a sense, the Prophet had to be polygamous to trans-
mit his Sunna (the statutes and norms of Islamic law). As Islam covers
every part of one's life, private spousal relations cannot remain un-
touched. Therefore, there must be women who can guide other women
in these matters. There is no room for the allusive language of hints and
innuendoes. The chaste and virtuous women of the Prophet's household
were responsible for explaining the norms and rules of such private
spheres to other Muslims.
Some of the Prophet's marriages were contracted for specific reasons:
• Since his wives were young, middle-aged, and old, the requirements
and norms of Islamic law could be exemplified in relation to their differ-
ent life stages and experiences. These were learned and applied first
within the Prophet's household, and then passed on to other Muslims by
his wives.
• Each wife was from a different clan or tribe, which allowed the
Prophet to establish bonds of kinship and affinity throughout the rapidly
expanding Muslim community. This also enabled a profound attachment
to him to spread among all Muslims, thereby creating and securing
equality and brotherhood in a most practical way and on the basis of
religion.
• Each wife, both during and after the Prophet's life, proved to be of
great benefit and service to the cause of Islam. They conveyed his mes-
sage and interpreted it to their clans: the outer and inward experience,
and the qualities, manners, and faith of the man whose life was the em-
bodiment of the Qur'an—Islam in practice. In this way, all Muslims
learned about the Qur'an, hadith, Qur'anic interpretation and comment-
ary, and Islamic jurisprudence, and so became fully aware of Islam's es-
sence and spirit.
93

--- Sayfa 94 ---
• Through his marriages, the Prophet established ties of kinship
throughout Arabia. This gave him the freedom to move and be accepted
as a member in each family. Since they regarded him as one of their own,
they felt they could go to him in person and ask him directly about this
life and the Hereafter. The tribes also benefited collectively from their
proximity to him: they considered themselves fortunate and took pride
in that relationship, such as the Umayyads (through Umm Habiba), the
Hashimites (through Zaynab bint Jahsh), and the Bani Makhzum
(through Umm Salama).
What we have said so far is general and could, in some respects, be
true of all Prophets. However, now we will discuss the life sketches of
Ummahat al-Mu'minin (the mothers of the believers), not in the order of
the marriages but from a different perspective.
Khadija was the Prophet's first wife. As mentioned above, she married
him before his call to Prophethood. Even though she was 15 years his
senior, she bore all of his children, except for Ibrahim, who did not sur-
vive infancy. Khadija was also his friend, the sharer of his inclinations
and ideals to a remarkable degree. Their marriage was wonderfully
blessed, for they lived together in profound harmony for 23 years.
Through every trial and persecution launched by the Makkan unbeliev-
ers, she was his dearest companion and helper. He loved her very deeply
and married no other woman while she was alive.
This marriage is the ideal of intimacy, friendship, mutual respect, sup-
port, and consolation. Though faithful and loyal to all his wives, he nev-
er forgot Khadija and mentioned her virtues and merits extensively on
many occasions. He married another woman only 4 or 5 years after
Khadija's death. Until that time, he served as both a mother and a father
to his children, providing their daily food and provisions as well as bear-
ing their troubles and hardships. To allege that such a man was a sensu-
alist or driven by sexual lust is nonsensical.
'A'isha was the daughter of Abu Bakr, his closest friend and devoted
follower. One of the earliest converts, Abu Bakr had long hoped to ce-
ment the deep attachment between himself and the Prophet through
marriage. By marrying 'A'isha, the Prophet accorded the highest honor
and courtesy to a man who had shared all the good and bad times with
him. In this way, Abu Bakr and 'A'isha acquired the distinction of being
spiritually and physically close to the Prophet.
'A'isha proved to be a remarkably intelligent and wise woman, for she
had both the nature and temperament to carry forward the work of
Prophetic mission. Her marriage prepared her to be a spiritual guide and
94

--- Sayfa 95 ---
teacher to all women. She became one of the Prophet's major students
and disciples. Through him, like so many Muslims of that blessed time,
her skills and talents were matured and perfected so that she could join
him in the abode of bliss both as wife and as student.
Her life and service to Islam prove that such an exceptional person
was worthy to be the Prophet's wife. She was one of the greatest author-
ities on hadith, an excellent Qur'anic commentator, and a most distin-
guished and knowledgeable expert on Islamic law. She truly represented
the inner and outer qualities and experiences of Prophet Muhammad.
This is surely why the Prophet was told in a dream that he would marry
'A'isha. Thus, when she was still innocent and knew nothing of men and
worldly affairs, she was prepared and entered the Prophet's household.
Umm Salama of the Makhzum clan, was first married to her cousin.
The couple had embraced Islam at the very beginning and emigrated to
Abyssinia to avoid persecution. After their return, they and their four
children migrated to Madina. Her husband participated in many battles
and died after being severely wounded at the Battle of Uhud. Abu Bakr
and 'Umar proposed marriage to her, aware of her needs and suffering
as a destitute widow with children to support. She refused, believing
that no one could be better than her late husband.
Some time after that, the Prophet proposed marriage. This was quite
right and natural, for this great woman had never shied from sacrifice
and suffering for Islam. Now that she was alone after having lived many
years in the noblest Arabian clan, she could not be neglected and left to
beg her way in life. Considering her piety, sincerity, and what she had
suffered, she certainly deserved to be helped. By marrying her, the
Prophet was doing what he had always done: befriending those lacking
in friends, supporting the unsupported, and protecting the unprotected.
In her present circumstances, there was no kinder or more gracious way
of helping her.
Umm Salama also was intelligent and quick to understand. She had all
the capacities and gifts to become a spiritual guide and teacher. When
the Prophet took her under his protection, a new student to whom all
women would be grateful was accepted into the school of knowledge
and guidance. As the Prophet was now almost 60, marrying a widow
with many children and assuming the related expenses and responsibil-
ities can only be understood as an act of compassion that deserves our
admiration for his infinite reserves of humanity.
Umm Habiba was the daughter of Abu Sufyan, an early and most de-
termined enemy of the Prophet and supporter of Makkah's polytheistic
95

--- Sayfa 96 ---
and idolatrous religion. Yet his daughter was one of the earliest
Muslims. She emigrated to Abyssinia with her husband, where he even-
tually renounced his faith and embraced Christianity. Although separ-
ated from her husband, she remained a Muslim. Shortly after that, her
husband died and she was left all alone and desperate in exile.
The Companions, at that time few in number and barely able to sup-
port themselves, could not offer much help. So, what were her options?
She could convert to Christianity and get help that way (unthinkable).
She could return to her father's home, now a headquarters of the war
against Islam (unthinkable). She could wander from house to house as a
beggar, but again it was an unthinkable option for a member of one of
the richest and noblest Arab families to bring shame upon her family
name by doing so.
God recompensed Umm Habiba for her lonely exile in an insecure en-
vironment among people of a different race and religion, and for her des-
pair at her husband's apostasy and death, by arranging for the Prophet
to marry her. Learning of her plight, the Prophet sent an offer of mar-
riage through the king Negus. This noble and generous action was a
practical proof of: We have not sent you save as a mercy for all creatures
(21:107).
Thus Umm Habiba joined the Prophet's household as a wife and stu-
dent, and contributed much to the moral and spiritual life of those who
learned from her. This marriage linked Abu Sufyan's powerful family to
the Prophet's person and household, which caused its members to re-
evaluate their attitudes. It also is correct to trace the influence of this
marriage, beyond the family of Abu Sufyan and to the Umayyads in gen-
eral, who ruled the Muslims for almost a century.
This clan, whose members had been the most fanatical in their hatred
of Islam, produced some of Islam's most renowned early warriors, ad-
ministrators, and governors. Without doubt, it was this marriage that
began this change, for the Prophet's depth of generosity and magnanim-
ity of soul surely overwhelmed them.
Zaynab bint Jahsh was a lady of noble birth and a close relative of the
Prophet. She was, moreover, a woman of great piety, who fasted much,
kept long vigils, and gave generously to the poor. When the Prophet ar-
ranged for her to marry Zayd, an African exslave whom he had adopted
as his son, Zaynab's family and Zaynab herself were at first unwilling.
The family had hoped to marry their daughter to the Prophet. But when
they realized that the Prophet had decided otherwise, they consented out
of deference to their love for the Prophet and his authority.
96

--- Sayfa 97 ---
Zayd had been enslaved as a child during a tribal war. Khadija, who
had bought him, had given him to Muhammad as a present when she
married him. The Prophet had freed immediately him and, shortly after-
wards, adopted him as his son. He insisted on this marriage to establish
and fortify equality between the Muslims, and to break down the Arab
prejudice against a slave or even freedman marrying a free-born woman.
The marriage was an unhappy one. The noble-born Zaynab was a
good Muslim of a most pious and exceptional quality. The freedman
Zayd was among the first to embrace Islam, and he also was a good
Muslim. Both loved and obeyed the Prophet, but they were not a com-
patible couple. Zayd asked the Prophet several times to allow them to di-
vorce. However, he was told to persevere with patience and not separate
from Zaynab.
But then one day Gabriel came with a Divine Revelation that the
Prophet's marriage to Zaynab was a bond already contracted: We have
married her to you (33:37). This command was one of the severest trials the
Prophet, had yet had to face, for he was being told to break a social ta-
boo. Yet it had to be done for the sake of God, just as God commanded.
'A'isha later said: "Had the Messenger been inclined to suppress any part
of the Revelation, surely he would have suppressed this verse."
Divine wisdom decreed that Zaynab join the Prophet's household, so
that she could be prepared to guide and enlighten the Muslims. As his
wife, she proved herself most worthy of her new position by always be-
ing aware of her responsibilities and the courtesies proper to her role, all
of which she fulfilled to universal admiration.
Before Islam, an adopted son was considered a natural son. Therefore,
an adopted son's wife was considered as a natural son's wife would be.
According to the Qur'anic verse, former "wives of your sons proceeding
from your loins" fall within the prohibited degrees of marriage. But this
prohibition does not apply to adopted sons, for there is no real consan-
guinity. What now seems obvious was not so then. This deeply rooted
tribal taboo was broken by this marriage, just as God had intended.
To have an unassailable authority for future generations of Muslims,
the Prophet had to break this taboo himself. It is one more instance of his
deep faith that he did as he was told, and freed his people from a legal
fiction that obscured a biological, natural reality.
Juwayriya bint Harith the daughter of Harith, chief of the defeated
Bani Mustaliq clan, was captured during a military campaign. She was
held with other members of her proud family alongside her clan's
"common" people. She was in great distress when she was taken to the
97

--- Sayfa 98 ---
Prophet, for her kinsmen had lost everything and she felt profound hate
and enmity for the Muslims. The Prophet understood her wounded
pride, dignity, and suffering; more important, he understood how to
deal with these issues effectively. He agreed to pay her ransom, set her
free, and offered to marry her.
When the Ansar and the Muhajirun realized that the Bani Mustaliq
now were related to the Prophet by marriage, they freed about 100 famil-
ies that had not yet been ransomed. A tribe so honored could not be al-
lowed to remain in slavery. In this way, the hearts of Juwayriya and her
people were won. Those 100 families blessed the marriage. Through his
compassionate wisdom and generosity, the Prophet turned a defeat for
some into a victory for all, and what had been an occasion of enmity and
distress became one of friendship and joy.
Safiyya bint Huyayy was the daughter of the chieftains of the Jewish
tribe of Khaybar, who had persuaded the Bani Qurayza to break their
treaty with the Prophet. From her earliest days, she had seen her family
and relatives oppose the Prophet. She had lost her father, brother, and
husband in battles against the Muslims, and eventually was captured by
them.
The attitudes and actions of her family and relatives might have nur-
tured in her a deep desire for revenge. However, 3 days before the
Prophet reached Khaybar, she dreamed of a brilliant moon coming out
from Madina, moving toward Khaybar, and falling into her lap. She later
said: "When I was captured, I began to hope that my dream would come
true." When she was brought before the Prophet as a captive, he set her
free and offered her the choice of remaining a Jewess and returning to
her people, or entering Islam and becoming his wife. "I chose God and
his Messenger" she said. Shortly after that, they were married.
Elevated to the Prophet's household, she witnessed at first hand the
Muslims' refinement and true courtesy. Her attitude to her past experi-
ences changed, and she came to appreciate the great honor of being the
Prophet's wife. As a result of this marriage, the attitude of many Jews
changed as they came to see and know the Prophet closely. It is worth
noting that such close relations between Muslims and non-Muslims can
help people to understand each other better and to establish mutual re-
spect and tolerance as social norms.
Sawda bint Zam'ah ibn Qays was the widow of Sakran. Among the
first to embrace Islam, they had emigrated to Abyssinia to escape the
Makkans' persecution. Sakran died in exile, and left his wife utterly des-
titute. As the only means of assisting her, the Prophet, though himself
98

--- Sayfa 99 ---
having a hard time making ends meet, married her. This marriage took
place some time after Khadija's death.
Hafsa was the daughter of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, the future second ca-
liph of Islam. This good lady had lost her husband, who emigrated to
both Abyssinia and Madina, where he was fatally wounded during a
battle in the path of God. She remained without a husband for a while.
'Umar desired the honor and blessing of being close to the Prophet in
this world and in the Hereafter. The Prophet honored this desire by mar-
rying Hafsa to protect and to help the daughter of his faithful disciple.
Given the above facts, it is clear that the Prophet married these women
for a variety of reasons: to provide helpless or widowed women with
dignified subsistence; to console and honor enraged or estranged tribes;
to bring former enemies into some degree of relationship and harmony;
to gain certain uniquely gifted men and women for Islam; to establish
new norms of relationship between people within the unifying brother-
hood of faith in God; and to honor with family bonds the two men who
were to be the first leaders of the Muslim community after his death.
These marriages had nothing to do with self-indulgence, personal desire,
or lust. With the exception of 'A'isha, all of the Prophet's wives were
widows, and all of his post-Khadija marriages were contracted when he
was already an old man. Far from being acts of self-indulgence, these
marriages were acts of self-discipline.
Part of that discipline was providing each wife with the most meticu-
lously observed justice, dividing equally whatever slender resources he
allowed for their subsistence, accommodation, and allowance. He also
divided his time with them equally, and regarded and treated them with
equal friendship and respect. The fact that all of his wives got on well
with each other is no small tribute to his genius for creating peace and
harmony. With each of them, he was not only a provider but also a
friend and companion.
The number of the Prophet's wives was a dispensation unique to him.
Some of the merits and wisdom of this dispensation, as we understand
them, have been explained. All other Muslims are allowed a maximum
of four wives at one time. When that Revelation restricting polygamy
came, the Prophet's marriages had already been contracted. Thereafter,
he married no other women.
In this time of sexual permissiveness and sexual scandals within cer-
tain religious and social circles, some people are claiming that poly-
gamy is a social evil. Why, they ask, did Prophet Muhammad practice
it?
99

--- Sayfa 100 ---
Some critics of Islam have reviled the Prophet as a self-indulgent lib-
ertine. They have accused him of character failings that are hardly com-
patible with being of average virtue, let alone with being a Prophet and
God's last Messenger, as well as the best model for humanity to follow.
However, based on the easily available scores of biographies and well-
authenticated accounts of his sayings and actions, it is quite clear that he
lived the most strictly disciplined life, and that his marriages were part
of the numerous burdens he bore as God's last Messenger.
The reasons for his multiple marriages vary. However, all of them
were related to his role as leader of the Muslim community, and his re-
sponsibility to guide the new Muslims toward the norms and values of
Islam.
Can you be more specific?
When Muhammad was 25, before he was called to his future mission,
he married Khadija, his first wife. Given the surrounding cultural envir-
onment, not to mention the climate and such other considerations as his
youth, it is remarkable that he enjoyed a reputation for perfect chastity,
integrity, and trustworthiness. As soon as he was called to Prophethood,
he acquired enemies who did not hesitate to raise false calumnies against
him-but not once did any of them dare invent something unbelievable
about him. Khadija was 15 years his senior.
This marriage was very high and exceptional in the eyes of the Proph-
et and God. For 23 years, their life was a period of uninterrupted con-
tentment in perfect fidelity. In the eighth year of Prophethood, however,
she passed away, leaving the Prophet as the sole parent of their children
for 4 or 5 years. Even his enemies are forced to admit that, during these
years, they can find no flaw in his moral character. The Prophet took no
other wife during Khadija's lifetime, although public opinion would
have allowed him to do so. When he began marrying other women, he
was already past 55, when very little real interest and desire for marriage
remains.
How could a Prophet be polygamous?
This question is often asked by people without any religion, or by Jews
and Christians. In respect to the first group, they have no right to re-
proach people who follow a religious way of life. Their own conduct
with the opposite sex follows nothing but their own desire, regardless of
what they say. They do not worry about the consequences of such liais-
ons to themselves, to the resulting children, or how their loose behavior
impacts young people in general. Viewing themselves as free, they en-
gage in such condemned practices as homosexuality and, even more
100

--- Sayfa 101 ---
extreme (but hopefully limited), incest, pedophilia, and multiple male/
female partners (meaning that the child's true father is unknown). Such
people criticize the Prophet only to drag others down to their own level.
Jews and Christians who attack the Prophet for his polygamy do so
out of their fear and jealous hatred of Islam. They forget that the great
Jewish patriarchs, called Prophets in the Bible and the Qur'an and
revered by the followers of all three faiths as exemplars of moral excel-
lence, all practiced polygamy on a far greater scale.
Polygamy did not originate with the Muslims. Furthermore, in the
case of the Prophet this practice has far more significance than people
generally realize. In a sense, the Prophet had to be polygamous to trans-
mit his Sunna (the statutes and norms of Islamic law). As Islam covers
every part of one's life, private spousal relations cannot remain un-
touched. Therefore, there must be women who can guide other women
in these matters. There is no room for the allusive language of hints and
innuendoes. The chaste and virtuous women of the Prophet's household
were responsible for explaining the norms and rules of such private
spheres to other Muslims.
How did the Prophet select his wives?
Some of the Prophet's marriages were contracted for specific reasons:
• Since his wives were young, middle-aged, and old, the requirements
and norms of Islamic law could be exemplified in relation to their differ-
ent life stages and experiences. These were learned and applied first
within the Prophet's household, and then passed on to other Muslims by
his wives.
• Each wife was from a different clan or tribe, which allowed the
Prophet to establish bonds of kinship and affinity throughout the rapidly
expanding Muslim community. This also enabled a profound attachment
to him to spread among all Muslims, thereby creating and securing
equality and brotherhood in a most practical way and on the basis of
religion.
• Each wife, both during and after the Prophet's life, proved to be of
great benefit and service to the cause of Islam. They conveyed his mes-
sage and interpreted it to their clans: the outer and inward experience,
and the qualities, manners, and faith of the man whose life was the em-
bodiment of the Qur'an-Islam in practice. In this way, all Muslims
learned about the Qur'an, hadith, Qur'anic interpretation and comment-
ary, and Islamic jurisprudence, and so became fully aware of Islam's es-
sence and spirit.
101

--- Sayfa 102 ---
• Through his marriages, the Prophet established ties of kinship
throughout Arabia. This gave him the freedom to move and be accepted
as a member in each family. Since they regarded him as one of their own,
they felt they could go to him in person and ask him directly about this
life and the Hereafter. The tribes also benefited collectively from their
proximity to him: they considered themselves fortunate and took pride
in that relationship, such as the Umayyads (through Umm Habiba), the
Hashimites (through Zaynab bint Jahsh), and the Bani Makhzum
(through Umm Salama).
Part of that discipline was providing each wife with the most meticu-
lously observed justice, dividing equally whatever slender resources he
allowed for their subsistence, accommodation, and allowance. He also
divided his time with them equally, and regarded and treated them with
equal friendship and respect. The fact that all of his wives got on well
with each other is no small tribute to his genius for creating peace and
harmony. With each of them, he was not only a provider but also a
friend and companion.
If a Muslim man is allowed only four wives, why did the Prophet
have eleven?
The number of the Prophet's wives was a dispensation unique to him.
Some of the merits and wisdom of this dispensation, as we understand
them, have been explained. All other Muslims are allowed a maximum
of four wives at one time. When that Revelation restricting polygamy
came, the Prophet's marriages had already been contracted. Thereafter,
he married no other women.
102

--- Sayfa 103 ---
Chapter 5
Satan
What Satan is and Why He Was Created?
Satan was created from fire, like the jinn with whom he mostly kept
company. Before his obedience and sincerity was tested through Adam,
he had been in the company of angels, acting and worshipping as they
did. Unlike angels who follow orders and never rebel against God (66:6),
Satan can choose his own path of conduct.39 When God tested him to-
gether with the angels by commanding them to prostrate before Adam
(i.e., humanity), the seeds of self-conceit and disobedience in his nature
burst open and swallowed him: I am better than him. You created me
from fire, whilst him you did create of clay (38.76).
Satan was created for important purposes. First of all, if Satan did try
continually to seduce humanity, our creation would have been meaning-
less and futile. God has innumerable servants who cannot rebel and
therefore do whatever they are commanded. In fact, the existence of an
absolute Divine Being Who has many beautiful Names and Attributes re-
quires, not by way of external necessity but due to the essential nature of
His Names, that His Names be manifest.40 He manifests all of His Names
only through humanity.
Since He has free will, He gave us free will, by which is meant the abil-
ity to choose between alternatives. In addition, God endowed us with
great potentials. The purpose of the constant inner and outer struggles
that we face is the direct result of our ability to choose and to develop
those potentials. Just as God sends hawks upon sparrows so that the lat-
ter can develop their potential to escape, He created Satan and allowed
him to tempt us so that we can rise to higher spiritual ranks and
39.Known as Iblis before refusing God's command to prostrate before Adam, he has
limited free will.
40.Such as the Creator, the All-Merciful, the All-Providing, the All-Living and Giver
of Life, the All-Beautiful, and the All-Powerful, among others.
103

--- Sayfa 104 ---
strengthen our willpower by resisting temptation. As hunger stimulates
people and animals to further exertion and discovery of new ways to be
satisfied, and fear inspires new ways of defence, Satan's temptations
cause us to develop our potentials and to be alert against sin.
Angels do not rise to the higher spiritual ranks, for Satan cannot tempt
them or lead them astray. Animals have fixed stations, meaning that they
can neither ascend or descend. Only humanity is faced with an infinite
number of ranks or stations, and only we can rise or fall accordingly.
There is an infinitely long line of spiritual evolution between the ranks of
the greatest Prophets and saints down to such people as Pharaoh and
Nimrod.
Given this, we cannot claimed that the creation of Satan is an evil. Al-
though Satan is an evil creature, God's creation involves the whole uni-
verse and should be understood in relation to the results, not only with
respect to the acts themselves. Whatever God does or creates is good and
beautiful either in itself or in its effects. For example, rain and fire pro-
duce many effects, almost all of which are useful. If some people are
harmed by water and fire through their own abuse of them, we cannot
claim that their creation is not wholly good. Similarly, the main purpose
for creating Satan is to enable us to develop our potentials, strengthen
our willpower by resisting temptation, and to rise to higher spiritual
ranks.
Some argue that many people fall into unbelief and so enter Hell be-
cause of Satan's temptations. To such people, I respond: Although Satan
was created for many good and universal purposes, people can be de-
ceived by him. However, Satan cannot compel us to commit a wrong or
a sin; his power is limited to that of suggestion and encouragement. If we
are so weak that we allow Satan to deceive us and thus follow him, it is
our own fault that we end up in Hell. This is a suitable punishment for
our misuse of an important faculty on which God conferred existence so
that we can develop our potentials and achieve high spiritual ranks. Our
task is to use our free will, which largely makes us human and allows us
to have the highest position in creation, in the cause of intellectual and
spiritual evolution. If we do not do so, it means that we complain of be-
ing honored with free will and of our own humanity.
Second, quality is far more important than quantity. Given this, we
should consider qualitative (instead of quantitative) values when
judging. For example, 100 date pits are worth only 100 cents as long as
they remain as seeds. Their value can increase only if they are planted
and grow into palm trees. But if only 20 actually grow into palm trees,
104

--- Sayfa 105 ---
can we say that it is "evil" to plant and water them? Clearly, it is wholly
good to have 20 trees in exchange for 20 puts, since 20 trees will give
20,000 pits.
Again, say that 100 peahen eggs are worth 500 cents. But if only 20
eggs produce chicks, who would consider it an evil to risk producing 20
chicks at the expense of the other 80 eggs? On the contrary, it is wholly
good to have 20 birds at the expense of 80 eggs, worth 400 cents, because
those 20 chicks will be worth far more money, and some will even lay
eggs.
The same is true with humanity. By resisting Satan and our evil-com-
manding selves, humanity has gained thousands of Prophets, countless
saints and people of wisdom, knowledge, sincerity, and good morals. All
of these people are the sun, moon, and stars of the human world. In ex-
change for such people, far more lower-quality pepole were lost.
105

--- Sayfa 106 ---
What About Involuntary Thoughts and Fancies?
Involuntary evil thoughts, fancies, or associations of ideas usually are the
result of Satan's whispering. Just as a battery has two poles, so do our
hearts have two central points or poles. Like the two poles of a battery,
there are two central points or poles in man's heart: One receives angelic
inspiration, and the other is vulnerable to Satan's whispering.
Satan attacks those believers who are trying to deepen their belief and
devotion. If they are scrupulous and delicate in feeling, he attacks them
from different directions. When confronted with unbelievers, who follow
him voluntarily by indulging in passing fancies and bodily pleasures, he
whispers to them new and original ideas. In this way, he encourages
them to increase their unbelief and learn new ways of struggling against
true religion and all believers.
Satan's attacks from different directions. When God cursed Satan be-
cause of his haughty disobedience, Satan asked for respite until the Day
of Judgment and permission to try to seduce human beings. God granted
his request, and Satan retorted: Then I shall come upon them from before
them and from behind them and from their right and from their left, and you
will not find most of them grateful (7:17).
Satan does everything he can to seduce us. We are very complex be-
ings, for God manifests all of His Names on us in this world of testing.
We are sent here to be trained so that we can serve as a mirror to God
and earn eternal happiness. In order to do this, we must train and devel-
op all of our God-given feelings, faculties, and potentials. If some of
these are not trained (e.g., intellect, anger, greed, obstinacy, and lust) and
directed to lofty goals, but abused and used for disagreeable purposes,
we will place our present and future life in danger. This is also true if we
do not restrict our natural desires and animal by satisfying them in ac-
ceptable ways.
Approaching us from our left, Satan uses our animal aspect's feelings
and faculties to tempt us into sin. When he approaches us from the front,
he drives us to despair over our future, whispers that the Day of Judg-
ment will never come, that whatever religions say about the Hereafter is
mere fiction, and that religion belongs to the past and so is irrelevant to
our present and future. When he comes upon us from behind, he tries to
make us deny Prophethood, God's Existence and Unity, Divine Scrip-
tures, angels, and other essential matters of belief. Through such whis-
pers and suggestions, Satan tries to sever our connections with religion
and steer us toward sin.
106

--- Sayfa 107 ---
Satan cannot seduce devout, practicing believers in these ways. Rather,
he approaches from the believer's right and encourages him to display
and ostentation, to taking pride in their virtues and good deeds. He
whispers that they are such good believers, until the believers' feelings of
self-conceit and desire for praise are aroused. When this point is reached,
believers begin to travel the road to perdition. For example, if we pray
the superrogatory late night prayer and then proclaim it so that others
will praise us, and if we begin to take credit for our accomplishments
and good deeds while criticizing others behind their backs, it means that
we have fallen under Satan's influence. We must do our best to resist
Satan when he comes upon us from this direction.
Another of Satan's ruses is to make unimportant things seem import-
ant and vice versa. If believers dispute with each other over a secondary
matter (e.g., using a rosary when glorifying God after the daily pre-
scribed prayers) while their children are being dragged along ways of
unbelief and materialism, or are drowning in the swamp of immorality,
this indicates that Satan has seduced them.
Satan's whispering disagreeable thoughts and fancies. If Satan fails to
seduce devout believers, he whispers some disagreeable thoughts and
fancies to them. For example, through the association of ideas, he pushes
believers toward having some negative conceptions of the Divine Being
or of thinking about unbelief or disobedience. If we dwell on such
thoughts, Satan pesters us until we fall into doubt about our belief or
despair of a virtuous life.
Another ruse is to cause good, devout believers to suspect the correct-
ness or validity of their religious acts. For example: Did I pray perfectly?
Did I wash my face and hands completely while making wudu'? Have I
washed the specific bodily parts the required number of times? Believers
pestered with such involuntary thoughts, fancies, and doubts should
know that their hearts have no part in them. Just as thieves attempt to
rob rich people and strong countries try to control rich countries, so does
Satan make a last-ditch effort to seduce believers by troubling their
hearts.
This is similar to a sick person having a high temperature. We know
that antibodies formed in a patient's blood to inhibit or destroy harmful
bacteria or germs. This causes the body's temperature to rise. Similarly, a
heart troubled with Satan's evil suggestions defends itself by fighting
against them. Thus, the heart does not generate such thoughts, and
neither does it approve of or adopt them. A reflection of something foul
107

--- Sayfa 108 ---
is not itself foul and cannot make us foul. In the same way, thinking
about unbelief is not the same thing as actual unbelief.
We might even say that Satan's evil suggestions actually benefit believ-
ers, for they cause us to remain alert, to struggle against our carnal selves
and Satan, and to progress toward ever-higher spiritual ranks.
108

--- Sayfa 109 ---
How to Keep Free of Satanic Suggestions?
In fact, the guile of Satan is ever feeble (4:76). It is like a cobweb appearing
before you—it cannot prevent you from going forward, and you do not
have to attach any great importance to it. Satan only suggests or whis-
pers, gilds sinful acts and presents them in falsely ornamented wrappers.
Believers must never accept his invitations. When Satan resorts to whis-
pering, we should realize that he is using his weakest strategy and ig-
nore him. If we pay attention to these whisperings, we may be defeated.
Like a commander whose fear causes him to hallucinate and then dis-
patch his soldiers to the wings, thereby leaving the center exposed, be-
lievers who listen to Satan weaken their ability to resist bot him and their
carnal selves. In the end, such believers are defeated.
Believers who want to avoid this trap should remain far away from
sins, all of which Satan tries to make attractive. Heedlessness and neglect
of worship are invitations to Satan's "arrows": If anyone withdraws himself
(or herself) from remembrance of the All-Merciful, We assign unto him (or her)
a devil as a comrade (43:36).
Remembering the All-Merciful, thinking about noble or sacred phe-
nomena, and living a religious life protect us from Satan's attacks: If a
suggestion from Satan occurs to you, then seek refuge in God. He is All-
Hearing, All-Knowing. Those who fear God and ward off (evil), when a passing
notion from Satan troubles them, they remember, and behold, they see (7:200–1).
The Messenger advised: "If you become angry while standing, sit
down; if you are sitting, lie down or stand up and do wudu'." Once while
returning from a military expedition, the Prophet called a halt at a cer-
tain place. They were so tired that they slept through the dawn prayer.
When they woke up, the Prophet told them that they had to leave imme-
diately, for "Satan rules here." The Prophet also says that Satan flees
when the call to prayer is made.
Satan also uses obscene scenes to lead believers astray. He torments us
with calls to illicit pleasures. On such occasions, we must remind
ourselves that indulging in any illicit pleasure will engender remorse
and may endanger both our present and future lives. We must never for-
get that the life of this world is but a passing plaything, a comforting illu-
sion, and that the real or true life is that of the Hereafter. When some
Companions hesitated to take part in the summer expedition to Tabuk
because of the scorching heat, God warned them: The heat of Hell is
much more intense, if they would but understand (9:81).
109

--- Sayfa 110 ---
When Satan whispers evil thoughts, believers should realize that he is
using his weakest strategy and that it can be ignored. Dwelling on such
thoughts only exaggerates and aggravates our weakness or susceptibil-
ity. We also must avoid heedlessness and make sure that we do not neg-
lect of worship, for such oversights attract Satan's attention. If we re-
member the All-Merciful, focus on noble or sacred phenomena and liv-
ing a religious life, we will be able to resist Satan.
110

--- Sayfa 111 ---
Why Does Satan Insist on His Unbelief?
Shaytan, the Arabic word for Satan, means "being cast down from the
Divine Presence, driven away in disgrace from God's mercy." Satan is
like one who had all the trump cards but played them against himself, or
like one who lost everything while on the verge of winning.
The Qur'an describes Satan's condition as follows:
We created you and gave you shape; then We bade the angels to bow down to
Adam, and they bowed down. Not so Iblis [Satan]; he refused to be of those who
bow down. God asked: "Why didn't you bow down when I commanded you to
do so?" He replied: "I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him from
clay." (7:11–12)
Satan has gone so far astray that he cannot hear or realize the truth. He
has become so perverse that he is the victim of his own vicious circle of
depravity. In other words, he first victimized himself with his pride, van-
ity, and conceit. With his first satanic dialectic (I am better than he), he
made his first tour of the vicious circle. He deprived himself of all the
ways to beg pardon, and even to be forgiven, by making such excuses as:
"I am better than he." Such a response clearly shows his conceit as well as
his outpouring of pride, vanity, and arrogance.
Satan erred. So did Adam and Eve (Hawa') when they ate from the
forbidden tree. However, as soon as they realized their mistake, Adam
and Eve begged God to forgive them: Our Lord! We have wronged our
own souls: If you forgive us not and bestow not upon us Your mercy, we shall
certainly be lost (7:23). God granted their request, and so the vicious circle
could not be established. Satan, on the other hand, attempted to justify
himself and sought to prove his right and innocence by denying his mis-
take even after being warned about it. His continued insistence on being
superior to Adam caused him to doom himself.
Many verses describe Satan's enmity, jealousy, and fight against hu-
manity, as well as his impertinence, ignorance and disobedience toward
God. Among them are the following: Satan said: "Then by Your power, I
will put them all in the wrong" (28:82) and I will lie in wait for them on your
Straight Way. Then I will assault them, from their right, and their left. Nor will
You find in most of them gratitude for Your mercies (7:16-17).
Thus he became the archenemy of humanity. His error, self-defence, ar-
rogance and rebellion resulted in his expulsion (7:13). This, along with his
vow to corrupt people, removed him far away from the all-encom-
passing, enlightening, and elevating atmosphere of God's mercy. He in-
dulged in and completely submitted himself to satanic logic, and chose
111

--- Sayfa 112 ---
the way of the most wicked seducer. The more he seduced, the more dis-
tant he became; the more distant he became, the more he felt malicious
envy and rancor. This process caused him to acquire a second nature in-
tegrated with ingratitude, intrigue, malice and depravity.
As the distance grew, he became more vicious and corrupt. His rancor,
vanity, and conceit increased. He dared to dispute with God, and re-
moved himself even further His Mercy. His rebellion against and defi-
ance of God sealed his doom: His heart was sealed. There now was noth-
ing but evil in his heart, and any chance to do good or to reform himself
was destroyed.
We are very honored beings. If we realize our full potential, we can be-
come angelic. But we can also go in the other direction. Consider the fol-
lowing: Muslims who observe all of their religoius duties and maintain
excellent relations with others may, on occasion, lose their self-control
and explode. At such times, they lose all their gentleness, compassion,
pardon and tolerance. If you study them when they are in such a condi-
tion, you will see only hatred, malicious envy, rancor, and anger like the
sparks of Hell. If you try to advise or counsel them at such times, you
will not be able to get through to them.
Everyone has seen and experienced similar states. But we always re-
tains the potential, through God's Mercy, of passing through such states
and recovering virtue. By contrast, Satan is permanently in a state of
hatred, malicious envy, and rancor. He can think only of evil and devil-
ishness, for he no longer knows how to think of goodness. Although he
knows God, Satan has forgotten compassion, gentleness and tolerance,
all of which are mere obstacles to his self-conceit. In short, he worships
his own self-hood. Our primary defense against falling into a similar
state is to rely upon and believe in God. We resign ourselves to Him and
depend on Him. May He save us from following Satan.
112

--- Sayfa 113 ---
Chapter 6
Destiny and Free Will
Can We Choose Our Actions?
Based on the verse cited above, it seems that God controls us. However,
the Qur'an says that God has given us reason, intellect, and free will so
that we can choose the way of good or evil. How can we reconcile these?
The Arabic word hidaya usually is translated as "guidance." However,
it also has other meanings: rectitude, the straight way, the way to Islam,
and the way of those upon whom God has bestowed His blessings. The
Arabic word dalala usually is translated as "going astray." Among its
other meanings are corruption, error, the way of those who persistently
adhere to false beliefs and willfully break God's law, and those who re-
fuse to listen to the truth and thus go astray out of their own heedless-
ness or negligence.
Being guided and being left astray relate to God and depend on His
Will. He creates hidaya to manifest His Name al-Hadi (the One Who
Guides) and dalala to manifest His Name al-Mudil (the One Who Leads
Astray). He creates, or in other words, enables or "gives" being guided or
being led astray. This does not mean that He leads someone on the right
path or astray. Rather, being guided or being led astray result from our
own intentions and actions, for such is a consequence of our attitudes
and inclinations. It has nothing to do with an arbitrary predestination.
Guidance can be received by various actions: going to a mosque;
listening to a sermon, a lecture, or the Qur'an; reflecting seriously on the
Qur'an's verses and their meaning; spending time with pious people; re-
ceiving advice from sincere, spiritual guides and teachers of religion, and
trying to benefit from their purity and lofty ethos; and reflecting on the
true nature of life and death. Such practices lead to mental and spiritual
enlightenment. If you start to do such things, no matter how apparently
small or insignificant, God accepts it as a means to grant guidance.
Therefore God guides, but the individual initiates the process. On the
other hand, if you frequent such places as bars, nightclubs, or non-
113

--- Sayfa 114 ---
Islamic places of worship, in effect you are asking to be led astray. If God
wills, He will let you go astray. If He does not, He will save you from
such a destiny by any means He wishes.
Our share in determining whether we will be guided or go astray is in-
finitesimally small. If we follow misguidance, God creates the results
from our own actions in accordance with the laws of cause and effect
that He has decreed for His creation. It is a necessary condition of moral
responsibility that we freely initiate actions that will lead us to misguid-
ance if we choose to do so, despite all the warning and instruction we re-
ceive. Later on, God will punish or forgive us as He pleases.
Consider this example. When you listen to the Qur'an or a sermon, or
read something about Islam, you experience certain feelings, a kind of in-
ner uplifting and illumination. However, someone living next door to
the mosque might consider the call to prayer, the sermons, and the pray-
ers sources of irritation and complain that they are a public disturbance
and nuisance. In either case, God uses our reactions and inclinations to
create and enable the necessary results, wholly dependent on His Will,
that may follow from that response.
Consider a different example. As we eat and drink, all kinds of nutri-
ents, proteins, vitamins, carbohydrates, and so on are sent to where they
are needed in our bodies. The mere wish or act of placing food in the
mouth does not enable nourishment. First the faculties necessary to
identify and move the food into the mouth, a complex coordination of
brain and muscle activity, must be engaged and operative. No part of
this process is controlled consciously or understood by the individual.
Then, as the food enters the mouth, salivary glands begin to operate.
Data about taste and flavor are passed to the brain, processed, and direc-
ted to the stomach, informing it of the precise combination of chemical
substances necessary to digest that particular food and turn it into nour-
ishment. And this is only the beginning!
As we have no conscious control over the process of nourishing our
own body, we cannot say: "I put the food in my mouth, planned and ar-
ranged everything for the meal, digested it, distributed it to where it was
needed, and fixed my body temperature for everything to function prop-
erly and efficiently. I did all this on my own!" If we did, would we not be
ascribing to ourselves the actions of God? We should acknowledge real-
ity: "When I put food in my mouth, wonderful processes begin to oper-
ate. An unseen, powerful hand puts these processes in motion for the ne-
cessary amount of time. The One who initiates and sustains all these pro-
cesses is God."
114

--- Sayfa 115 ---
By moving our will and inclination toward Divine Guidance, we may
prove ourselves capable and worthy of it. For instance: I long to talk
about religion with fullness and ease, to express my heartfelt feelings so
well that others may be moved and benefit—but I fail to achieve what I
wish, and can do only so much. I wish to convey Qur'anic law and God's
commandments through persuasive, sincere words—but I get stuck at
some point and become tongue-tied. I long to be totally immersed in the
rapture of prayer and to be rid of all worldly concerns while pray-
ing—but I can hardly manage one prayer out of a thousand in this way.
In sum, I contribute a sincere wish or a will, even though I may not real-
ize my goal. The realization of this belongs to the All-Mighty.
The love and pleasure of faith, the earnest desire for Heaven, and an
inclination to be content and submissive in the face of whatever comes
from God are gifts that only He can place in our hearts and souls. We
choose and incline, and God accepts and bestows His Blessings and
Guidance. Saduddin Taftazani said: "Faith is a flame that God lights in a
person's soul as a consequence of his or her use of free will." In order to
obtain so great a favor, we must use our free will. You press a button and
your life is illuminated. This seemingly small effort of will, this inclining
toward faith, becomes the means to acquire Guidance and to be illumin-
ated by Divine Light.
Some people may ask: If God lets go astray whomever He wills and guides
aright whomever He wills (74:31), how does He call His servants to account?
We cannot attribute evil to God, for that comes from ourselves:
Whatever good happens to you is from God; and whatever evil happens to you is
from yourself (4:79). We have only ourselves to blame for what we suffer,
for God does not wrong any one as much as an atom's weight (4:40). What
happens to us is based upon our choices and actions, and accords with
the law of cause and effect that God has decreed for His creation. Thus,
those who persistently adhere to false beliefs and refuse to listen to and
obey Divine commandments gradually lose the ability to perceive the
truth, until a seal is set upon their hearts. Since God instituted these
laws, sealing the heart and leading astray are attributed to Him. But in
reality, such is the consequence of that person's free choice and inclina-
tion. Such a fate is neither predestined nor unjust.
Happiness in the Hereafter is the natural consequence of our effort to
attain righteousness and inner illumination while alive: None does He
cause to go astray save the iniquitous, who break their bond with God after it
has been established, and cut asunder what God has joined, and spread corrup-
tion on Earth (2:26–27). God does not cause anyone to go astray, except
115

--- Sayfa 116 ---
those who He knows will refuse to seek faith. Here the causing to go
astray denotes God's leaving the individual alone and removing His
blessings. God may forsake one who He knows will choose to deny the
truth and persevere in denial. Deserving His favor and blessings or de-
serving their withdrawal depend upon our free choice, and nothing else.
116

--- Sayfa 117 ---
What Happens to People Born and Living in Non-Islamic
Countries?
Those who ask this question imply: "Since we believe in God and His
Prophet, we will go to Paradise. But those who were born and live in
non-Islamic countries do not benefit from the Divine Light and Guid-
ance, so they will go to Hell." The question is a debating ploy, claiming
on one the hand a greater concern for non-Muslims than that possessed
by God and, on the other hand, sneaking in a criticism of Islam.
First, there is no general statement or decree in Islam that those who
live in non-Islamic countries will go to Hell. Rather, the decree is this: If
those who heard the Prophet's message and invitation, and witnessed
the truth and light of Islam, reject it and turn away from it, they will go
to Hell. Whether those who have heard the Divine Message live in Islam-
ic countries is beside the point; what matters is that they heed and obey
that Message. Those who do not do so will go to Hell-even if they were
born and lived in Islamic countries.
Many Muslim scholars and theologians have spoken and written on
what the Qur'an and the hadith say on the subject. But why do people
dwell upon this sort of question? How will an answer affect or change
their lives? Will it gain them anything in the Hereafter? Is there a differ-
ence between those who are willful unbelievers and those who do not
believe because they have never heard of Islam? Will the latter go to Hell
and suffer the same punishment?
The Ash'aris held that one who has not heard the name of God or the
teachings of Islam will be "excused". God, as He wills, rewards such
people for the good they have done, and they enjoy the blessings of
Paradise.
The Maturidi view is somewhat similar to the Mu'tazili view. If such
people find the Creator through the use of reason, even though they do
not know His Names or Attributes, they will be saved. If they do not do
this, they will not be saved. This position is not so different from that of
the Ash'aris.
According to the Maturidis, it does not matter where one lives, for
anyone can see the sun and moon rise and set, the stars sparkle,
creation's balance and order, the splendor and regularity amid the
enormous variety of creation, the grandeur of mountains and the gentle
easing breezes on their slopes, and the thrilling colors and movements of
flowers, trees, and animals. All of these are signs of the Owner, Creator,
Sustainer, and Administrator of all things. Therefore, people can observe
117

--- Sayfa 118 ---
and acknowledge the Creator's absolute existence, power, and grace
without knowing His Names and Attributes, or His Books and Messen-
gers. Such people are among the excused. That is why, when asked this
question, we should refer to the view of the great imams of Islam.
Imam Ash'ari deduces his judgment from: We never punish until We
have sent a Messenger (17:15). People cannot be punished for a wrong
until due warning has reached them through a true Messenger.
According to the Maturidis, reason can distinguish good from evil. But
it would be mistaken to say that reason can work everything out by it-
self. This is why God uses Messengers to relay His rulings of what is
good and evil, and leaves nothing to fallible human judgment and exper-
ience. The Maturidi argument goes like this: Reason can work out that
adultery and fornication are evil, because such practices interrupt genea-
logy and lineage and cause it to be lost, which, in turn, cause problems in
inheritance and other matters. Reason can work out that theft is evil, for
it allows no one to live in any degree of security; and that alcohol and
other intoxicants are evil, because they cause people to lose conscious-
ness, damage health, make them vulnerable to many illnesses, and can
affect their offspring.
The same is true for what is good. Reason can grasp that faith in God
is good, for it leads us to satisfaction and inner contentment. Even in this
world, we begin to sense the contentment that we will have in Paradise.
The way to faith is not so difficult. A bedouin once came to the Prophet
and explained how he attained faith: "Camel droppings point to the ex-
istence of a camel. Footprints on the sand tell of a traveler. Heaven with
its stars, the Earth with its mountains and valleys, and the sea with its
waves-don't they point to the Maker, All-Powerful, Knowing, Wise, and
Caring?" As he attained faith in God through his mind, we cannot under-
rate the role of reason and thinking in faith.
Setting out from this point, Maturidi says that one may find the Creat-
or through reason. There are many examples from pre-Islamic times.
One is Waraqa ibn Nawfal, Khadija's cousin, who felt that a Prophet
would come during his lifetime because many of the signs had been ful-
filled. When the first Revelation came to Muhammad, Khadija sought
Waraqa's advice. He confirmed the truth of Muhammad's mission and
revelations. Understanding that no good would ever come from the
idols, Waraqa ignored them and, based on own judgment, believed in
the existence of the One God.
Another such person was Zayd ibn 'Amr, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab's
uncle. Knowing that the coming of a Prophet was imminent, he ignored
118

--- Sayfa 119 ---
the idols and worshipped the One God. Although he died before
Muhammad's Prophethood, he intuitively knew it was coming. On his
deathbed, he called his son Sa'id, 'Umar, and other family members and
said: "The light of God is on the horizon. I believe it will emerge fully
very soon. I already feel its signs over our heads. As soon as the Prophet
comes, without losing any time, go and join him."
Any human-made "god" or "goddess" cannot be God or answer
people's needs, for such things need those who created them. How can
something that has needs and wants answer and provide for those who
call upon it? Through such simple reasoning, we can realize our need to
know the Lord of Heaven and Earth. When we direct our mind and reas-
on to Revelation, our need to know is met and the way to eternal bliss is
opened.
In sum, the only people who will go to Hell are those who see or hear
about the Prophet and the Qur'an but do not seek further knowledge of
them. Those who remain in darkness involuntarily, because they had no
chance to hear about these things, may benefit from Divine Grace and
not be blamed and punished for their wrong deeds.
This question brings to mind the difference between the early and
present-day Muslims, and our duties toward non-Muslims. The first
Muslims lived Islam fully, represented and spread it over a large area,
and thereby awakened humanity's collective conscience. When we read
their biographies, we see such greatness in their thinking and living that
it becomes obvious why those who came into contact with them em-
braced Islam. They were so fearless and indomitable, so unconcerned
with the pleasures and sufferings of worldly life, that they made a lasting
impression upon the world.
Thanks to their sincerity and zeal, many people learned of Islam with-
in a very short time. By the time of Caliph 'Uthman (ruled 644-56), Islam
had spread from the Straits of Gibraltar to the Aral Sea, from Anatolia to
the Great Wall of China. During the time of Mu'awiya (ruled 661-80),
Muslims reached the Atlantic Ocean. All of Morocco, Tunisia, and Alger-
ia were under the glorious flag of Islam.
Since these Muslims lived Islam in its entirety, most people in those
lands loved and respected them. Their exemplary lives led many to
Islam. Indigenous Christians and Jews often preferred Muslim rule to
that of their co-religionists. Once when the Muslim rulers had to leave
Damascus, the Christian community and its religious leaders prayed in
their churches that the Muslims would not have to leave. When the
119

--- Sayfa 120 ---
Muslims left, the Christians promised to live under their rule and pay
the due tax if they could return.
The sincerity of these Muslims brought many people into Islam.
Indeed, it is impossible to imagine how it could have been otherwise
when those people saw the early Muslims, for each of them was an
"'Umar" in sincerity and commitment. They kept long vigils during the
night, and were legendary warriors on horseback during the day. They
won over so many hearts and impressed people that all believed the
whole world would soon belong to Islam.
Today, Muslims cannot provide security even in a small area for just
their own community. Given this, the achievements of early Muslim ad-
ministrations can be seen in their true light and greatness. In return for
their security, reliability, wisdom, subtlety of mind and piety, the doors
of many castles and cities were opened to them-not as honorary title-
holders or visitors, but as governors and rulers.
When the Muslims took over Syria and Palestine, the commanders
asked for the keys to Masjid al-Aqsa. The Patriarch told them that he
would give them only to the person described in their holy books, for
only that man was worthy to receive them. While they were disputing,
Caliph 'Umar and one of his servants set out from Madina. No one knew
how he would travel. But the Patriarch and priests knew how the right-
ful holder of keys would come.
'Umar borrowed a camel from the state treasury, and he and his ser-
vant took turns riding it. When the Muslim commanders heard of this,
they prayed that 'Umar would be riding when they had to cross the
Jordan river. They thought that, as the Byzantines were used to pomp
and magnificence in their rulers, 'Umar might shame himself if he were
leading the camel upon which his servant was riding, and crossing the
river with rolled-up trousers.
In fact, most political pomp is injustice and inequity, and 'Umar was
trying to avoid it. What his commanders feared came to pass. 'Umar's
garment, worn and battered by the journey, also had many patches on it.
When the Patriarch saw 'Umar, he cried out: "This is the man whose de-
scription we have in our books! Now, I shall give him the key." Because
of the special knowledge obtained from their books, the priests knew
how 'Umar would look and how he would cross the river. Handing the
key and Masjid al-Aqsa to the Muslims caused many people to embrace
Islam.
With whole-hearted ardor, 'Uqba ibn Nafi' set forth to spread the word
of Islam. The conquest of Africa fell to his lot. After successive victories,
120

--- Sayfa 121 ---
some people envied his fame and misinformed the Caliph about him.
The Caliph was provoked, and 'Uqba was dismissed from his post, arres-
ted, and kept from spreading Islam. Imprisoned for 5 years, his only sor-
row and great longing were expressed thus: "I wish I could have spread
Islam all over Africa. I was prevented from achieving this. That is the
only thing I regret."
Freeing and then appointing 'Uqba governor of Africa, Yazid made it
possible for him to relaunch the conquest of Africa and spread Islam.
'Uqba reached the Atlantic Ocean in a single campaign. He could not
help riding his horse into the ocean and crying out: "O God! If this dark
sea had not prevented me going further, I would carry Your Holy Name
overseas!"
I relate these historical accounts to remind us of how Islam was repres-
ented in the past and how it is now. The early Muslims took present-day
Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, North Africa, Bukhara, Tashkent, Samarkand-
places that would produce Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi, Ibn Sina, al-
Farabi, Biruni-within 25 years. These early Muslims carried Islam to al-
most every part of the then-known world, and made the glorious flag of
There is no god but God, Muhammad is His Messenger wave over many
lands.
As for ourselves, we scarcely can speak the Truth to our neighbors, let
alone go to foreign lands and tell the people there. Some of our neigh-
bors may be willing to listen, but we cannot persuade even them. Our
words come back to us cold, as if from walls of ice. They leave our
mouths but do not penetrate the hearts and souls of people.
We point this out only to draw attention to immeasurable distance
between ourselves and the Companions. They conveyed Islam to all
peoples and lived only to do this. When they could not do so, they felt
sorrow and pain for the lands and people unaware of the Truth. By con-
trast, we cannot represent Islam fully in our individual lives, and still
less can we convey its message to people abroad. We have neither aban-
doned our personal needs and preoccupations, nor given the highest pri-
ority to working in the way of God. We remember the ways to our
homes, our jobs, and our worldly lives only too well. Those of us who
went to non-Muslim countries did so for economic reasons, not to take
the name of God to those lands. That is why we are so unable to spread
Islam among them.
If non-Muslims are now lost in deviation, corruption, and unbelief due
to our own ignorance, laziness, and incompetence, we shall be called to
account for it. Giving lectures and organizing seminars and panels can
121

--- Sayfa 122 ---
be considered moving toward being on the way of God, not true service
to Islam. If true service to Islam is likened to a great palace, we are still
wandering around the first entrance. Because we have not yet entered
upon the task, many people are going astray. Sometimes we speak to
them of Islam, but we have not saved ourselves from futile internal dis-
putes and conflicts.
We are nowhere near representing Islam at the level of 'Umar, 'Uqba
ibn Nafi', and others of that caliber. Who knows how their opponents
were struck with fear at seeing their determined courage, their indomit-
able devotion to God; or struck with wonder by their reliability, generos-
ity, justice, and humanity, all of which moved them to wonder about and
then embrace Islam. The fact that many of the countries in which
Muslims now live were conquered by these early Muslims shows what
absolute sincerity in the way of God can achieve.
Considered from this angle, the question of non-Muslims, especially
those living in non-Islamic countries, takes on a different aspect. We
need to see them with a greater tolerance, and say: 'Shame on us! We
have not been able to convey Islam to them so that they can leave the
darkness in which they live." It will help to narrate here the true story of
a German family.
A Turkish worker lived with a German family. He paid great attention
to his religious duties, and performed them sensitively. Except for work-
ing hours, whenever he was with the German family he told them about
Islam. After a while, the father became Muslim. His wife said to him, as
did the wife of 'Amir ibn Tufail: "We have always been together so far.
Let's be together in the future, too, together on the Sirat Bridge and also
in Paradise. If Islam really makes one reach heavenly realms, as you said,
why should I stay back from such a blessing while you enjoy it?" So she
embraced Islam. The children followed her, and the family group of
Islam was completed and the home became an outpost of Paradise.
Several days later, the husband came and said these startling words to
the Turkish worker: "I could not express my love and gratitude to you,
because you have been an honored guest to us. However, sometimes I
get very angry and wish to beat you up. You came and the Qur'an, the
Prophet, and God followed you. My home became a heavenly abode. But
I had a father. He was a very straight, good man. He passed away a few
days before you came. Why couldn't you have come a bit earlier and told
him of Islam as well?"
These words indeed represent the voice, the complaint, the rebuke of
the whole non-Muslim world. We have failed to take Islam to them.
122

--- Sayfa 123 ---
Even in our own countries we have been unable to exert enough effort or
support the cause of Islam to make our own people know it properly.
Another aspect of the question is this: Those who took us away from
Islam always promised a Western standard of life. But 150 years later we
are still beggars at the doors of the West. Little has changed, and we can-
not say that we have progressed in any important sense. The West con-
tinues to treat us as servants who leave their countries in return for poor
wages. Even if we presented its people with the golden principles of
Islam, the message that will open the gates of Paradise for them, they
will reject both Islam and us. In part, this is because we are despised
laborers at their disposal. As usual, the rich have difficulty imagining
that they need anything from the beggars at their doors.
Muslims have been defeated in so many fields many times over, and
remain dependent on the West. Why should the West listen to us? Only
if we can live and represent Islam thoroughly, go to the non-Muslims
with a commanding confidence in our own honor, dignity, and greatness
and only for the sake of God, can we hope that they will listen to us and
accept Islam. We cannot continue to accept our negative image in their
eyes, but how can we change this unless we regain and reassert our
former identity?
In the Hereafter they will be asked why they did not embrace Islam,
and we will be asked why we did not convey it to them. So, the respons-
ibilities of both Muslims and non-Muslims should be considered equal.
Any judgments about non-Muslims should be made justly and up-
rightly. We cannot condemn non-Muslims to Hell simply for being non-
Muslims, nor can we dream that people will embrace Islam just because
we ask them to do so.
We believe that the global balance will change in the near future. Espe-
cially in Turkey, Turkish Central Asia, Egypt, Pakistan, and some other
places, Muslims will regain their consciousness and raise up strong indi-
viduals who will resemble the early Muslims in their desire to establish
Islam and its high values in other lands. Only through sustained and sin-
cere effort will Islam once again become a major and respected factor in
the world, and will the voices of its followers be heard. This is not im-
possible. Those who will realize it will be Muslims of good character
whose souls have bonded with Islam, not those inconsistent and inad-
equate Muslims who follow their bodily needs and desires and only con-
cern themselves with Islam once in a while.
123

--- Sayfa 124 ---
Why Are There Fortunate and Unfortunate People?
God bestows material wealth and poverty upon individuals for reasons
known only to Him. For example, a poor person might inherit wealth
when a rich family member or relative dies. Some people inherit intelli-
gence, shrewdness, and business acumen, while others who could un-
dertake these responsibilities successfully are denied the chance to do so.
The Prophet is reported to have said that God bestows this world's
goods upon whomever He pleases, but knowledge only upon those who
petition Him for it. This hadith, although defectively transmitted, is most
significant. Clearly, material possessions should not be seen as necessar-
ily good in themselves. God does not always bestow material security
and happiness upon those who ask Him for such things.
There is good in whatever He bestows. For the faithful individual who
does good deeds and gives in charity some of what has been bestowed,
wealth is a means of good. If, however, the individual is of weak faith
and has strayed from the path of right action and charity, wealth be-
comes a means of evil. For someone who has deserted the path of right
action, poverty might be just the excuse needed to engage in inner or
outer (or both) rebellion against God. Those who do not submit totally to
God, or who do not try sincerely to act upon the teachings of Islam, will
find their wealth a means of distress, a severe and demanding test: Know
that your children and your worldly goods are but a trial and a temptation, and
that God's reward is great (8:28).
We should recall here a saying of the Prophet: "Among you are such
people that if they raise their hands and swear by God, He grants them
whatever they want and never makes them swear falsely. Bara ibn Malik
is one of them."41 This man, the younger brother of Anas, lived a life of
complete poverty at the barest level of subsistence, not having enough
food or a place to sleep. Although poor and ragged in appearance, such
people were the most loved and appreciated for their sincere piety. They
were praised, and their actions were esteemed in the Prophet's assurance
that they were among those whose promises God Himself keeps.
It is recorded that once when 'Umar entered the Prophet's room, he
saw upon the Prophet's back the marks of the rough matting upon which
he had been sleeping. He began to cry, asking why the Byzantine and
Persian emperors lived in such pomp and luxury while the Messenger
slept on so rough a bed. The Prophet replied: "Don't you agree that they
should have this world and we the Hereafter?"42 Years later during his
41.Bukhari, Sulh, 8; Muslim, Qasama, 24.
124

--- Sayfa 125 ---
caliphate, when the treasuries of these two empires flowed into the
Muslim treasury, 'Umar continued to live a life of bare subsistence.
It is not poverty in itself that is good, but rather the state of mind that
has disciplined (and triumphed over) the worldly self (nafs) and set its
sight upon eternal life. Poverty may be a means to achieve that state of
mind. But in some people it leads to inner distress, rancor, and ingratit-
ude toward God, which is a root of unbelief. Similarly, affluence and ma-
terial security may delude certain people into pride and self-esteem,
causing them to neglect the needs of others and their debt to God. Such
arrogance and ingratitude also is a root of unbelief.
The surest way for believers to progress is to understand that
whatever God gives is designed to perfect them. Regardless of personal
circumstances, believers should strive to improve the welfare of others
and trust inwardly and outwardly in the All-Mighty and All-Merciful.
The best attitude toward this world, which is only a resting place on the
way to our everlasting destination, is expressed in this brief poem:
I accept, my Lord, whatever comes to me from You,
For whatever comes to me from You is my good;
Whether a robe of honor comes or a shroud,
Whether a sharp thorn or a sweet, fresh rose,
If it comes with Your blessing, it is my good that comes.
42.Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 11.
125

--- Sayfa 126 ---
Why Are Some People Created ''More Equal'' Than Others?
God created each one of your cells, as well as those of all other animate
and inanimate parts of creation, and gave us our human nature. He has
given us everything; we have given Him nothing. So how can you com-
plain or accuse Him of being unjust? Injustice comes from not giving
what is due. But we are not "due" anything, for since we have given Him
nothing it is impossible for Him to owe us anything.
God, the All-Mighty, created each of us out of nothing. Moreover, He
created us human, when He could have created us as something else or
not at all. If you observe and investigate your surroundings, you can see
many creations that are different from you. Whether they are inferior or
superior to you is a matter of your own judgment.
Another aspect is the Providence of God. God may deprive individu-
als of something they value in order to grant them a manifold return in
the Hereafter. In this way, God makes people feel their need, powerless-
ness, and poverty. This causes them to turn to Him with a greater sincer-
ity and a fuller heart, thereby becoming worthier of His Blessing and Fa-
vor. Thus your apparent loss is really a gain. This is comparable to mar-
tyrdom, which God rewards with Paradise. Martyrs attain such a rank
on the Day of Judgment that even the most righteous and sincere long
for it and wish that they had been martyred. What such people receive in
eternity is infinitely greater and more valuable than what they lose here.
Although some disadvantaged or disabled people may blame God for
their disabilities, and thereby stray from or abandon their faith, many
more are strengthened in their faith. It is completely mistaken to use an
exaggerated—indeed false—sympathy with the disabled as a pretext for
unbelief. It is far better—even essential—that an ardent yearning for
eternal life be aroused in such people, for then they can become worthy
of an immense reward in the Hereafter.
If the disabilities of some lead others who enjoy good health to recog-
nize that they have much to be thankful for and to improve themselves,
their humanity, and their closeness to God, the Wisdom in Divine
Providence is confirmed and, to the degree possible, understood.
126

--- Sayfa 127 ---
Are the Manner And Time Of Death Predetermined?
Every event, including the manner and time of death, are predestined.
Everything occurs within the framework of the Divine Decree, and also
within an individual plan for each being. Such plans are always in har-
mony with one another. This is a system established by God in the past
eternity. It never changes, and will continue in the future eternity.
The established and universally acknowledged principles of the posit-
ive sciences confirm that everything has been made and runs according
to such a design and determination. In the absence such predestination,
the universe's order, harmony, and magnificence could not be under-
stood or explained, nor could any scientific advances be made. God's
preordained, mathematical, and geometrical design in the universe al-
lows us to conduct laboratory research via reliable principles so that we
can explore both humanity and space.
Saying that science is no more than a means to reflect and make
known what already exists, to give some names and titles to its govern-
ing principles, does not diminish its discoveries or technological inven-
tions. By pointing out science's place and weight, we only recall the sig-
nificant fact that such order and harmony prevailed long before any sci-
entific discoveries and inventions were made, for the Creator made them
the very foundation of the universe.
Some sociologists attempt to apply to humanity principles that seem to
prevail for all other beings. This is extreme fatalism, which deserves to
be criticized severely. And yet it may be helpful to the extent that it ac-
knowledges the very predestination on which the universe and its order
depend.
Each fact related to faith and creed does not need human support or
acceptance, or human acknowledgment of its reasonableness, because it
comes from God. However, it helps our cause of calling people back to
the right path if we can counter their claims. That is why we engage in
such a discourse. Otherwise, it is obvious that everything functions ac-
cording to a perfect balance, harmony, and order, all of which suffices to
prove their predestination by an All-Mighty Sovereign. Since existence
began, they have acted in full obedience and submission to His Will,
Power, and Preordaining.
Predestination has a different essence for humanity. Although we
were created by necessity and at the same time as other creatures, our
free will makes us unique. God gave us the moral freedom to think, reas-
on, form opinions, and make choices so that we would have personality,
127

--- Sayfa 128 ---
individuality, and character. Indeed, the question only arises because
some people consider humanity to be the same as any other member of
creation.
We have a real (although limited) free will, power of choice, and in-
clination. Depending on how we use these, we earn good or evil, reward
or punishment. As we bring the results of our deeds upon ourselves
through our own conscious or unconscious choices, we cannot blame
God for what we ourselves set in motion. The ratio of reward or punish-
ment to a particular deed is up to God.
There is a second aspect: How is human free will reconciled with
God's all-encompassing knowledge?
In His knowledge, existence and all that is beyond it are not bound by
the human concept of "time." Thus, such human concepts as "before,"
"after," "cause," and "effect" have no meaning and do not occur in what
we consider to be the proper sequence. Simply stated, they just are. As a
result, God is simultaneously aware of our inclination, what we will do,
what we do, and what the result will be. This fact is a recognition of our
free will, because our inclination is taken into account and given import-
ance. In other words, God reveals that He will create whatever we in-
cline toward and, as He foresees the consequences, predetermines those
consequences accordingly. This means that He accords full importance to
our free will. No one is forced to follow a prescribed course, and so
everyone can be held accountable for what they do.
Fate and predetermination operate according to God's knowledge. To
foreknow something does not determine or cause it to be or to happen as
it does. Divine Will and Power make things come into existence on the
basis of our inclination. Therefore, the things that happened and came
into existence did not do so because they were foreknown. On the con-
trary, they are known as they are. The same is true of predestination. For
example, a weather forecaster does not "cause" the weather by
"predicting" it accurately. God All-Mighty's Power to foreknow and fore-
see the outcomes of choices and inclinations, and thus to assure that they
will be fulfilled, does not mean that He causes them.
I end this discussion with one more example. Some people say that
murderers cannot be held accountable for their deed, because they were
"predestined" to do it and the victim was "predestined" to die in that
manner. Such a claim is ludicrous. The truth is that God takes their in-
clinations into account, prepares the circumstances according to how
they will act, and is perfectly fair in calling them to account for their
heinous sin.
128

--- Sayfa 129 ---
Why Are Whole Nations no Longer Punished?
Both the Bible and the Qur'an relate how God destroyed the people of
Prophet Lot and Prophet Noah. Noah's people refused to abandon their
idolatry and evil ways and embrace Islam, even though he called upon
them do so for centuries, and so God destroyed them by a great flood.
Lot's people consistently ignored his warnings to abandon their lustful
and perverted ways, and so God destroyed them with fire and
brimstone.
To answer this question, we have to go back in history. Beginning with
Adam, the first man, God has sent Prophets to invite His servants to the
right path and eternal bliss. All Messengers were responsible only for
their own people. However Prophet Muhammad, the last Prophet, was
sent for all humanity and creation. His people, defined as all Muslims re-
gardless of when and how they embraced Islam, are known as his
community.
Today, many Muslims and non-Muslims are committing sins that
were unheard of during earlier times. But since the Prophet was sent to
humanity, we are shielded from the total annihilation or punishment vis-
ited upon earlier peoples: But God will not send them a punishment while
you are among them. Nor is He going to send it while they continue to ask for
pardon (8:33).
Another Qur'anic verse enlightens us about his mission's generality
and comprehensiveness as well as the greatness and significance of his
person. Jesus is quoted as entreating on behalf of his people: If you punish
them, they are Your servants—If you forgive them, You are the Exalted in
Power, the Wise (5:118). On the other hand, the All-Mighty said to Prophet
Muhammad: "I will not send a punishment while you are among them
and while they ask for My forgiveness."
Thus the Prophet's community has two important shields against Div-
ine Wrath: the Prophet's physical (during his lifetime) and spiritual (after
his death) presence, and the existence of sincere believers who seek His
forgiveness and are allowed to do so by those in power.43
Many
hadith
record
the
Prophet's
frequent
pleading
for
his
community's salvation.44 One such prayer was made at 'Arafat and
Muzdalifa during his Farewell Pilgrimage. There he asked God, among
other things, not to punish his community. Some of his prayers were
43.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:159.
44.Muslim, Hajj, 147; Al-Bidaya wa l-Nihaya, 5:159.
129

--- Sayfa 130 ---
accepted and some were not. His Companions narrated his words as
follows:
I asked God not to send a Divine Punishment upon my community.
He accepted my prayer and replied: "I will not send a punishment upon
them, but they will cause destruction among themselves. If they become
sinners, I will let them quarrel and fight among themselves." Then I
asked God again to lift such things from my community, but He did not
agree to this.45
In conclusion, whole peoples will not be destroyed as long as sincere
believers among the sinful multitudes worship and serve God, spread
His Name and Word, seek His forgiveness, and strive to reform them-
selves and others.
45.Muslim, Fitan, 19–20.
130

--- Sayfa 131 ---
Chapter 7
Death
What is Death?
The body is an instrument of the spirit, which governs and controls it in
its entirety.
When its appointed hour comes, an illness or failure of bodily func-
tions is like an invitation to the Angel of Death, known as Archangel
'Azra'il in Islam. God is obviously the One Who causes people to die. But
to save people from complaining about Him, as death appears as a dis-
agreeable event to many people, God uses 'Azra'il as a veil between
Himself and the taking of souls. He also puts illnesses or some other
calamity as another veil between 'Azra'il and death so that people are
saved from complaining about him.
131

--- Sayfa 132 ---
What About the Angel of Death?
Since all angels were created from light, they can be present in any place
and in any form simultaneously. They also can perform countless tasks
at the same time. Therefore, 'Azra'il can take millions of souls simultan-
eously and without any confusion. Each Archangel has subordinates that
resemble him and are supervised by him. When believers die, angels
come to them with smiling, radiant faces. They are followed by 'Azra'il,
'Azra'il and his subordinates charged with taking these souls, or by one
of his subordinates. The Qur'anic verses: By those who pluck out viol-
ently; by those who draw out gently (79:1–2) indicate that the angels who
take the souls of believers differ from those who take the souls of unbe-
lievers. The souls of the latter, who have embittered and frightened faces
at death, are plucked out violently.
132

--- Sayfa 133 ---
What Do We Feel At the Time of Death?
At the time of death, believers experience the opening of windows from
their places in Paradise. Prophet Muhammad stated that the souls of
such people are drawn out as gently as the flowing of water from a
pitcher. Better than that, martyrs do not feel death's agonies of and do
not realize that they are dead. Instead, they think that they have been
transferred to a better world and enjoy perfect happiness.
Prophet Muhammad told Jabir, the son of 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr, who
was martyred at the Battle of Uhud:
Do you know how God welcomed your father? He welcomed him in
such an indescribable manner that neither eyes have seen it, nor ears
heard it, nor minds conceived of it. Your father said: "O God, return me
to the world so that I can explain to those left behind how pleasant mar-
tyrdom is." God replied: "There is no longer a return. Life is lived only
once. However, I'll inform them of your circumstances you are in," and
He revealed: Never think of those slain in the way of God as dead; rather, they
are alive and are provided in the Presence of their Lord (3:169). If you led a
good, righteous life, you will have a happy death. If you led a wicked
life, you will have a wicked death.
Prophet Muhammad, the most advanced in worshipping God, and
'Umar advised performing the prescribed prayers while one is dying.
Khalid ibn Walid, one of the few invincible generals in world history,
asked those beside his death-bed to fetch his sword and horse. Such
people as 'Uthman, 'Ali, Hamza, Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, and many others
dedicated themselves to the cause of Islam and so died as martyrs.
133

--- Sayfa 134 ---
Should We Fear Death?
Those who believe and do righteous deeds have no reason to fear death.
Although it appears to us as decomposition and the extinction of life and
its pleasures, in fact it is no more than a discharge from the heavy duties
of worldly life, a change of residence, and a transferral of the body. It is
an invitation to and the beginning of everlasting life.
As the world is continually enlivened through acts of creation and pre-
determination, so is it continually stripped of life through other cycles of
creation, determination, and wisdom. The death of plants, the simplest
level of life, is a work of Divine artistry, like their life—in fact, it is more
perfect and better designed. When a fruit pit dies underground, it seems
to decompose and rot away. But in fact, it undergoes a perfect chemical
process, passes through predetermined states of re-formation, and ulti-
mately grows again into an elaborate, new tree. This shows clearly that
death is the beginning of a new and more elaborate life.
The "death" of fruits, vegetables, and animal flesh in a person's stom-
ach causes them to rise to the degree of human life. Thus, their death can
be regarded as more perfect than their lives. Since the death of plants is
so perfect and serves such a great purpose, our own deaths must be even
more perfect and serve a still greater purpose. After all, we occupy the
highest level of life. Given this, we certainly will be brought into eternal
life.
Death discharges us from the hardships of worldly life. This turbulent,
suffocating, and narrow dungeon, which becomes more difficult to en-
dure with the onset of old age and illness, admit us into the Eternal,
Beloved One's infinitely wide circle of the mercy. There, we will enjoy
the everlasting company of our loved ones and the consolation of a
happy, eternal life.
134

--- Sayfa 135 ---
The Happens to the Spirit in the Intermediate World?
Following death, each person's spirit is taken to God's Presence. If it led a
good, virtuous life and became refined, the angels charged with taking it
to His Presence wrap it in a piece of satin and take it, through the heav-
ens and all inner dimensions of existence, until they reach His Presence.
Along the way, angels at all stations welcome it and ask: "Whose spirit
is this? How beautiful it is!" The angels conveying it introduce it with the
most beautiful titles it acquired in the world: "This is the spirit of that
one who (for example) prayed, fasted, gave alms and bore all kinds of
hardship for God's sake." Finally, God Almighty welcomes it and then
orders the angels: "Take this back to the grave where its body is buried,
so that it can answer the questions of Munkar and Nakir, the interrogat-
ing angels."
The spirit of a wicked person is treated with disdain everywhere it
passes, and is thrown back to the grave after being presented to God's
Presence.
Whatever evil happens in the world is due to our own sins. If sincere
believers cannot always resist the temptation to sin, out of His Mercy
God allows some misfortunes to strike them so that they may be purified
thereby. God may also subject them to severe death agonies in order to
forgive some of their sins or to promote them to higher (spiritual) ranks.
In any case, their spirits are taken very gently. If there are still some sins
that need to be forgiven, the believers will suffer some sort of punish-
ment in the grave and then be freed from Hell's punishment. In addition,
since the grave is the first station toward eternal life, where everyone
will receive what they have earned, it is also the place of preliminary in-
terrogation. While in their graves, everyone will be questioned by two
angels about their worldly deeds. And almost everyone, except the
Prophets, will undergo some suffering.
As is recorded in reliable books, 'Abbas (the Prophet's uncle) wanted
to see 'Umar in a dream. However, he only saw him 6 months later.
When 'Abbas asked 'Umar where he had been, the latter replied: "Don't
ask! I've only just now finished accounting (for my life)."
Sa'd ibn Mu'adh was one of the greatest Companions. When he died,
Gabriel told the Messenger: "The Divine Throne trembled because of
Sa'd's death." Innumerable angels took part in his funeral. After his buri-
al, the Messenger spoke in amazement: "Glory to God! What (will hap-
pen to others) if the grave squeezes even Sa'd?"
135

--- Sayfa 136 ---
In the grave, everyone is questioned by the angels Munkar and Nakir,
who ask such questions as: Who is your Lord? Who is your Prophet?
What is your religion? Believers can answer these questions with great
ease; unbelievers cannot. These questions are followed by others dealing
with the person's life.
The relation between the spirit and its body differs according to the
worlds in which they live. In this world, the spirit is confined within the
body. If the evil-commanding self and bodily desires dominate the spirit,
the spirith will deteriorate and doom the person. But if the spirit can dis-
cipline the evil-commanding self through belief, worship and good con-
duct, and free itself from servitude to bodily desires, it is refined and ac-
quires purity and laudable qualities. This will bring happiness to the
spirit in both worlds.
After burial, the spirit waith in the intermediate world, the world
between this one and the Hereafter. Although the body decomposes into
the ground, its essential particles do not rot. According to a hadith, this is
the coccyx (ajb al-dhanab) We do not know whether this term refers to a
person's genes. But regardless of part it is, the spirit will use it to main-
tain its relation with the body. This part will also serve as a foundation
upon which God will re-create us on the Day of Judgment. God will
make the elements of this foundation conducive to eternal life while des-
troying and re-creating the world and resurrecting us on the Day of
Resurrection.
What does the spirit do in the intermediate world? The intermediate
world is the realm where the spirit feels the "breath" of the bliss of
Paradise or the punishment of Hell. Those who led virtuous lives will be
met by their good deeds (e.g., prayers, recitations, charity, etc.) in the
form of amiable companions. Windows will be opened so that they can
see heavenly scenes. And, as stated in a hadith, the grave will be like one
of Paradise's gardens. However, even these people will suffer some pun-
ishment if they have some unforgiven sins, for such punishment will
purify them of all sins and make them worthy of Paradise after the
Resurrection.
Unbelievers will be met by their If unbelief and evil deeds, which will
assume the forms of bad companions and such vermin as scorpions and
snakes. They will be shown scenes of Hell and will experience the grave
as one of Hell's pits.
Do some bodily parts or cells remain alive after death? While we live
in this world, it is our spirits that suffers pain and feel joy and happiness.
The spirit seems to feel pain through the nervous system, and uses this
136

--- Sayfa 137 ---
system to communicate with all bodily parts. Just how it does this re-
mains a mystery to science, as does the type of interaction going on
between the spirit and the body, especially the brain. Any bodily failure
that results in death terminates the functioning of the nervous system.
However, scientists have established that certain cells brain continue to
live for a while after death. Scientists have studied the post-death signals
received from the brain. If they can decipher such signals, such fields as
criminology will benefit greatly when it comes to solving "unsolvable"
crimes.
The following verses, which tell us how God revived a dead purson
during the time of Moses, suggests this:
When Moses said to his people: "God commands you to sacrifice a cow" …
they sacrificed her, a thing they had scarcely done. And when you killed a living
soul, and disputed thereon, God disclosed what you were hiding so We said:
"Smite him with part of it." Even so He brings to life the dead, and He shows
you His signs, that haply you may have understanding. (2:67, 72–73)
Torments of the grave and Hell. Given the above understanding of the
spirit, and the fact that it will remain in contact with the body's essentials
particles while in the intermediate world, it is meaningless to discuss
whether the spirit, the body, or both will suffer in the grave. However, as
pointed out above, God will rebuild people on the Day of the Resurrec-
tion from or with those essential bodily particles, and they will be resur-
rected on the "morning" of the eternal life.
Since the spirit lives the worldly life together with the body and shares
all its joys and griefs, God will resurrect people both bodily and spiritu-
ally. The Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama'a agree that the spirit and the body
will go to either Paradise or Hell together. God will build bodies in forms
peculiar to the Hereafter, where everything will be alive: This life of the
world is but a pastime and a game. Lo! the home of the Hereafter, that is life if
they but knew. (29:64)
What gifts we can send to the spirit after death? The spirits in the in-
termediate world will see and hear us, provided God allows this. He
may even permit some saintly people to see, hear, and communicate
with them.
After we die, our record of deeds is not closed. If we leave behind
good, virtuous children, books, or institutions from which people contin-
ue to benefit, or if we have brought up people beneficial to humanity or
contributed to their upbringing, our reward will continue to increase. If,
we leave behind only evil things, our sins will continue to increase as
long as they harm others.
137

--- Sayfa 138 ---
So, if we want to benefit our loved ones who have gone to the other
world, we should be good heirs. We should help the poor, take part in
Islamic services, and lead a good and virtuous life, and spend what they
left us to promote Islam and help those who need some help, whether
Muslim or non-Muslim. All of these activities will cause their reward to
increase.
138

--- Sayfa 139 ---
Why Does One Creature's Life Depend on the Death Of
Another?
Just as day replaces night, spring follows winter, and autumn takes the
place of summer, death follows life. The Creator, Who governs
everything, does nothing in vain. He creates the most beautiful and in-
tricate beings out of the lowest, seemingly unpromising, materials. Since
it is the very nature of His creativity to bestow freshness and novelty
continually upon His creation, and since He sets on and motivates
everything to mature and develop, risings and settings necessarily suc-
ceed each in this world.
Before going further into the subject, let's define death. Death is not a
final exhaustion of nature, an annihilation that operates of itself, or a
total extinction into a void. Rather, it is a transformation, a change of
place, state, and dimension; a completion of service, a release from its
burden, to attain peace and ease. For every living thing, it is a sort of re-
treat or transition to its own essence and truth. For this reason, death is
as desirable as life. It is as pleasing as meeting friends, and a blessing as
great as acquiring immortality.
Materialists who do not grasp death's meaning and truth always see it
as horrifying and so compose gloomy odes to it. All such people have
seen and felt the same things about death, and have made the same com-
plaints about it.
Since death is a separation from life and the living, it affects our minds
and those sentiments that make us human. It is impossible to deny such
an influence, to silence the heart in the face of death. Death arouses con-
siderable tumult in our hearts and minds, though it may be short-lived.
Belief in the Resurrection causes all such sorrows to be forgotten, for it is
like presenting a kingdom to a person who has lost everything, or assur-
ing a person about to be hanged of eternal life and happiness.
According to those who understand the real meaning of death, death
is no more than a release from service, a change of abode, and a journey
to where most of one's friends have already gone. Those who do not un-
derstand this see only its horrifying surface meaning: death as an execu-
tioner, a gallows, a bottomless pit, a dark passage into the void.
When believers begin to experience death, the beauties and rewards of
Heaven begin to appear before them. When unbelievers, who are de-
prived of this pleasure of faith, think of death, they begin to feel the tor-
ment and fire of Hell that they nurture within their conscience. Their suf-
fering is not just limited to their own feelings, for in their hearts they also
139

--- Sayfa 140 ---
feel the grief and suffering of all those with whom they share interests,
pleasures, and concerns. Their suffering and loss of happiness increases
the burden of grief for whoever regards death as a final end.
Believers consider death a release from service and life's burdens and
hardships, and know that everything continues to exist in other realms
(in its identity as form and idea). Thus, they view death as an advance-
ment, a perfection, an acquisition of a higher essence and nature. Since
death carries the fruit of eternal existence and bliss, it is also a great
blessing and a Divine gift.
However, every advancement and perfecting, every blessing and ac-
quisition of it, must pass through preparatory stages: close examination,
molding, and purifying. Spiritual progress and the subsequent advance-
ment to higher levels comes only through such trials and purifications.
For example, crude ores perish in the purifying furnace before they yield
the pure metal. Until the ores are processed in this way, they continue to
exist in soil and rock, without the metal ever being tested and then
presented in its true form.
If we accept this analogy, we can understand that while death appears
to be a cessation, a passing into extinction or nothingness, in reality it is a
passing into a higher, more elevated mode of being. When every non-
sentient particle appears to move with an eager animation toward its ap-
parent extinction, it actually is running toward the perfection prescribed
for it. When oxygen and hydrogen atoms combine, they die in their sep-
arate identities only to be reborn as water, which is essential to the vital-
ity of all living forms. Thus we can say that death is a changing of place
and form, not an end or extinction. From the tiniest particles to the
greatest compounds within the universe, all changes, transformations
and decompositions result in what is most beautiful, fresh, and excellent.
That is why we define death as the movement of beings to a higher mode
rather than as their extinction.
In another respect, death is the time when one being resigns and hands
over its affairs to its successor(s). This is enacted in the sight of Him Who
has sovereignty and dominion over all things. Each creature is charged
with presenting itself in a unique parade before the presence of the One
Who gave it existence. Just before its parade is over, and the picture or
record of it made and stored, the parade of its successor(s) begins, which
relieves the parade ground of sameness and refreshes the scene with
new and active beings. Each being acts out its role and moves aside so
that others may appear, act out their roles, and show their skills. The
140

--- Sayfa 141 ---
freshness, liveliness, beauty, and excellent diversity seen in creation is
the result of these comings and goings.
Death also may be understood as silent advice, in the sense that noth-
ing is self-existent. In other words, nothing can survive by itself or has
permanence. A fading and ultimately dead light indicates a source of
light that is unfailing and eternal. For those who grieve and complain
about the transience and perishing of all things, this is a good lesson on
how to mature and attain true happiness. Whatever or whoever captiv-
ates our hearts will leave us one day, which causes us to yearn for an
eternal being to love and to be loved by. In our transient world, such a
yearning is the first stage of moving toward or attaining eternity. Death
is the mysterious uplifter that raises people to that dignity.
Given this, we can liken death to a healing hand, one that nurses to
full health, that hurts us only as a doctor would hurt us: by giving a ne-
cessary inoculation or lancing, rather than a grim sword or sickle laying
everything to waste. Considering death as a merely utilitarian way of
making room for new generations is mistaken, for death is not absolute
annihilation or extinction. Rather, what disappears does so only from
within the horizons of our limited understanding, for the identity of
every particular (as form and idea) continues to exist in our memories, in
the Preserved Record, and in God's all-encompassing knowledge. They
also exist in different dimensions and in realms beyond those dimen-
sions, beyond corporeal understanding. For example, seeds and flowers
bloom and die, but their identity as form and idea continues in the many
seeds and flowers that will bloom after them.
Consider the subject from another angle. If there were no death, would
we not live in a hell of unrelieved terror as we faced an endless existence
without a break or relief? How could we measure the worth or value of
anyone or anything, conserve or concentrate our energy, make or carry
out an intention, if time was limitless? If such a situation existed, those
who now mourn the fact of transience and death would mourn their ab-
sence. Moreover, we would not experience creation's inexhaustible vari-
ety, with all the prompts and images it gives to the human mind of
beauty, freshness, and loss with renewability. How, in the absence of
such a panorama of novelty within stability, could the human mind be
inspired to contemplate that which lies beyond and sustains the visible
world? How could we seek and worship the One who creates and
provides for the whole.
Let's deal with the subject from a different angle. If everything de-
pended on life instead of death, if beings continued to live through
141

--- Sayfa 142 ---
calamities, and if all events and life followed one direction forever, what
could have happened? What could happen mean?
Basing ourselves on what we said earlier, death contains blessing and
wisdom. Life without death would be such an absurdity and horrible
disaster that, if such a situation could be fully described, people would
cry and mourn about staying alive instead of dying.
If nothing died, neither a fly nor a human being could have lived in
the early ages of this world, for ants and varieties of ivy would have in-
vaded and occupied the entire planet. Nothing else could have survived
or thrived. And later on, if no ant or ivy ever died, there would have
been thick layers of them covering the Earth. As such statements cannot
be disputed, we can see what a great blessing death is, and the great wis-
dom in allowing dead things to decompose.
How much of the Earth's enthralling beauty and splendor could be
seen with such a huge number of ivy plants and ants? What would this
world, created to exhibit the splendor and magnificence of His art, be if
such a situation prevailed? How could we witness the power, might,
knowledge, and grace of the Creator and Owner of this world?
The absence of death also would give rise to another problem: The
magnificent wisdom and order in the rule of this universe shows that
nothing in it was created in vain. The Absolute Owner of the physical
and spiritual domains creates the most worthwhile things out of what
may appear to us the most worthless, making the valueless into the
priceless. New and excellent creations is engendered from the cells
serving as bodily forms for His servants, especially those making up the
human souls that God has recalled and holds in His realms. If the bodies,
which He valued so highly that He "breathed" human souls in them,
were allowed to decompose into nothing, the Creator's Omniscient Wis-
dom would be contradicted. Any such notion is absolutely contrary to
His Divine Honor, and so cannot be entertained.
In conclusion, all of creation, its balance and order, the control and ad-
ministration by which its complex harmonies are sustained, is so magni-
ficent that it inspires all people whose hearts and minds are open to the
beauty and pleasure around them. The dividing, combining, and moving
of atoms; the growth of plants and trees; the gushing of rivers to the sea;
the oceans' expanse, grandeur, and incalculable power; the evaporation
of salt water and its return as life-giving rain—everything races ardently
from one stage to another, higher and better.
142

--- Sayfa 143 ---
What a universe this is! See how restless it makes our minds! The mir-
acles of the All-Mighty parade before my eyes. What Truth spreads out
from the heavens is the heavens' smiling:
Veils of His light in glorious varieties of color and shade
In the grass, the sea, the mountains, the spring morning!
Born in such a world, longing to be a poet is only natural.
143

--- Sayfa 144 ---
Chapter 8
Miscellaneous Issues
Can Our Intention Save Us?
An intention that leads to the appropriate intended action being taken
may save a person. An intention that does not result in any determina-
tion to bring about the intended result cannot save a person. To have an
intention means to have an aim and a purpose. It is also a state of mind
and a commitment. To have a clear intention means realizing clearly
what one desires and which path to follow, attaining the appropriate
state of mind, and then seeking the means to achieve the envisaged
purpose.
Intention is the spring of all action. Whether conscious or not, inten-
tion gives a person the right to claim responsibility for particular actions.
It is also the firm ground of will and power to bring about particular res-
ults. Everything related to humanity and to the world, both in its incep-
tion and continuance, depends upon someone's intention.
Everything first comes into the mind as an idea and, depending upon
whether or not one plans to bring it into reality, may later become a real-
ity via perseverance. If Without the initial idea is not transformed into an
intention, a project cannot bear any useful fruit. Without perseverance,
defined as intent sustained through determination and resolve, no pro-
ject can succeed.
Intention has a decisive role with regard to good and bad deeds. Its
quality can act like a cure for any disease or disadvantage, or be the hid-
den catastrophe that destroys all accomplishments in a single moment.
Deeds that appear very small and insignificant can engender huge posit-
ive or negative consequences, based solely on the underlying intention.
All actions undertaken in the consciousness of serving God, such as
praying or temporarily refraining from some permitted pleasures, in-
crease our rewards and raise us to a higher spiritual level. Of course, the
reverse is also true. We please God by performing or renouncing certain
actions according to His law, and thereby attain the best stature.
144

--- Sayfa 145 ---
And yet at other times we may do exactly the same thing and have it
mean nothing to God, for we do it without the proper intention. For ex-
ample, martyrdom on the battlefield is one of the highest achievements
in Islam. Those who hope for it but fight only out of their own whim and
desire are not considered martyrs, and so do not receive that reward. On
the other hand, those who consistently and sincerely ask for martyrdom
but die in their own beds are considered martyrs, for they sincerely in-
tended to defend Islam and provide a better future for Muslims. They
have the right to hope for the reward of martyrdom and Paradise.
Intention is a key that opens the door of the infinite. When used prop-
erly, it opens the door to eternal happiness, for all duties performed
properly and sincerely are rewarded not according to the amount of time
spent on them, but according to the degree they involve and affect one's
life. If this key is not used properly, it leads to eternal misery and
wretchedness.
Any soldier ready for jihad, though not actually engaged in battle, is
right to hope for the same reward as those actually fighting. A sentry
waiting to stand guard is just as eligible for reward as the one actually
standing guard. The reward for being on guard in the way of God is as
much as the reward of one who prays for months.
Thus a believer may attain Paradise after a short life, while an unbe-
liever who has lived just as long will attain eternal punishment and
misery. Otherwise, according to external justice, people must be rewar-
ded according to the amount of their good and bad deeds, as well as
their virtues or vices. This would mean that they would stay in Paradise
as long as they had lived righteously, and in Hell as long as they lived
evilly. But as eternity is the ultimate end for both good and bad people,
eternal happiness or punishment lies in one's intention. An intention to
live faithfully and righteously forever will result in eternal happiness,
just as an intention to live in denial, rejection, and corruption forever will
result in eternal misfortune.
If, in their last minutes of life, conscious and devoted servants of God
were given the chance to live another 1,000 years, they would lead lives
of the same caliber. Based on this sincere intention, it would be accepted
and rewarded accordingly, for believers' intentions are more benevolent
than their deeds.46 The same would be true of unbelievers, who would
continue to live their evil lives if given the same choice. So, people are re-
warded or punished according to their intention. The intention to
46.Majma' al-Zawa'id, 1:69 and 1:109.
145

--- Sayfa 146 ---
acquire true faith and to preserve it results in eternal bliss; the opposite
results in eternal torment.
Satan will pay most dearly for the everlasting unbelief he encourages
or nurtures. Satan has undeniable effects on people, some of which are
good. As a result of his activities, some people improve their innate capa-
cities, discover and refine their hidden values and virtues, and become
more alert and conscious.
Satan attacks individuals and peoples. By sowing poisonous seeds in
our hearts, he seeks to trap us in vice and evil. Our spiritual faculties
warn us against his temptations and corruption, and call us to battle, just
as particular bodily cells raise the alarm and resist infection.
Just as resistance to disease improves the body's immunity, our spir-
itual state is strengthened by seeking refuge in the All-Mighty. Given
this, we stand to gain much more benefit than harm from Satan's attacks.
Any testing of the spirit increases its alertness, consciousness, and power
to resist. All of these make the spirit even more determined to do what is
right, and more prudent when it encounters danger. Such testing trans-
forms warriors into veterans in the way of God, martyrs and saints, and
distinguishes believers from unbelievers.
Yet Satan has no share in the reward of those who attain high virtue by
struggling against him, for he intends to lead people astray and corrupt
them out of spite and rancor. He is punished eternally for his evil inten-
tion and bad deeds:
God asked: "What prevented you from bowing down when I commanded
you?" Satan replied: "I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him
from clay." God said: Get out. It is not for you to be arrogant here. Get out, for
you are of the meanest." He said: "Give me respite till the day they are raised
up." God replied: "Be among those who have respite." Satan said: "Because you
have thrown me out of the Path, I will lie in wait for them on Your Straight
Path." (7:12–16)
After his jealous and arrogant disobedience, Satan willfully chose the
way of rebellion and unbelief. His oath to lead people astray is the begin-
ning of our never-ending tragedy.
In sum, intention is almost everything for believers, for it can elevate
our most routine acts and produce much fruit. Its quality and content
opens the door to the eternal and blissful life, as well as the door to
eternal punishment and misery. As we say: "Actions are judged only by
intentions, and a person will have only what was intended."47
47.Bukhari, Bad' al-Wahy, 1; Muslim, Imara, 155; Abu Dawud, Talaq, 11.
146

--- Sayfa 147 ---
What is the Sunna's Role Today?
A hadith says: "There is a reward as much as that of 100 martyrdoms for
one who adheres to my Sunna when my community is spoiled."
Technically, Sunna refers to the way the Prophet lived. In particular, it
refers to the ways and practices he wished Muslims to follow, and to all
actions and norms that he lived and recommended but did not make ob-
ligatory upon us.
This subject has been dealt with thoroughly by Islamic scholars, all of
whom agree that the Sunna is the way of religion, and that it is like a
staircase or a ladder to reach the Truth, one of God's Names. It is a way
of such merit that all systems and their principles, even those established
by scholars and saints, are seen as slight, dim, and obscure beside it. All
mystics, spiritual teachers, and truth-seekers have acknowledged and
spoken of the Sunna in this way, and thus encouraged everyone to fol-
low it.
God raised the Prophets and through them revealed the proper way of
life. He sent Muhammad as His last Prophet; guided him in all his acts;
and conveyed fard, wajib, sunna, and mustahab acts,48 and even adab
(manners). So, one who strives to live as the Prophet did draws closer to
God and attains a degree as described in this hadith al-qudsi:
My servants do not draw near to Me with anything more loved by Me
than the religious duties I have imposed upon them. They continue to
draw near to Me with supererogatory works so that I shall love them.
When I love them, I am their hearing with which they hear, their seeing
with which they see, their hands with which they grasp, and their feet
with which they walk.
One meaning of this is that God enables such believers to see the true
reality of things, and so makes it possible for them to evaluate things cor-
rectly and efficiently. By opening new gates and new horizons, God
leads them to the truth.
Such believers easily take wing and fly toward guidance as they es-
cape from error and corruption. When they hear a voice calling to the
truth, they come to themselves, regain enthusiasm, acquire lofty aspira-
tions, make resolutions, and start to prosper morally and spiritually.
When they speak, God makes them speak the truth. When they do
something, God directs them to good and beneficial results, and never
leaves them alone with their self (nafs). Since these servants seek His
48.Various classes of mandatory or recommended actions.
147

--- Sayfa 148 ---
approval and pleasure, God grants them the opportunities and enables
them to act according to His Divine Pleasure.
Therefore, God controlled and guided the lives of all Prophets,
blocked all ways except the one leading to His Pleasure, prevented them
from choosing ways other than His Own, and directed them to the sole
Sunna. So many people have followed the Sunna that it has become the
clear road to salvation, the only way free of deviation and leading to suc-
cess and happiness in this world and the next.
At a time when malice, depravity, and intrigue are so widespread, try-
ing to revive and restore the Sunna, to practice it alongside fard and
wajib, to assure its central place in any future society, and to make it en-
dure until the Day of Judgment are actions of the highest importance.
Such actions raise those who sincerely work for them to the rank of mar-
tyrs and assure them of an equal reward. To gain the rewards of two
martyrs would be blessing enough, but more is promised. Further, those
who strive to revive the truths of faith may earn rewards far greater than
those of 100 martyrs.
Reviving certain elements of the Sunna is particularly worthy of the
high rewards promised. For instance, one kind of slanderous gossip is
worse than adultery or murder.49 There is an obvious difference between
slandering an individual and a whole community. In such a case, a per-
sonal sin can lead to widespread evil. At a time when Muslims are being
invited to depravity, and when Islam's power, influence, and spread are
being prevented and undermined, those who strive to restore any aspect
of the Sunna will earn the reward of many martyrdoms. If their sincere
efforts coincide with the holy days, nights, and months in Islam, their re-
ward may be still greater, for God bestows much more favor upon
whom He wills.
Those who serve God are favored and blessed. In their struggle to re-
vive Islamic thought and life at a time when everything is done to op-
pose Islam, to work for establishing sound institutions with sincere and
able staffs, to raise young people's Islamic consciousness—these are parts
of a unique task that can be considered a continuance of the Prophet's
mission. If such great people and spiritual guides as 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jil-
ani and others appeared, after so many ages, to give moral support, it is
because of the great significance and need of the duties to be undertaken.
The Prophet has been seen in dreams watching over, supporting, and
giving glad tidings to those on his way. Although no less than a miracle
49.Daylami, 3:116.
148

--- Sayfa 149 ---
of the Sunna in the service of Sunna, we must not consider such things as
recognition of someone's merits and virtues.
Certain individuals, groups, and institutions engaged in this effort
surely will obtain a great share of His grace and blessing. This must be
so, for "one who caused [an event] is like the doer," and it is another as-
pect of the vastness of Divine Favor. On the other hand, the responsibil-
ity and the trust will be removed from such workers who do not main-
tain their initial purity, sincerity, enthusiasm, and momentum. Some
may be refused, excluded, and even forsaken by Providence, and the
trust will be passed to those who are more deserving.
Only if we realize and appreciate God's favor, try to do sincerely
whatever we can, and make the best use of the opportunities open to us
can we prove ourselves worthy of more and greater favors from God.
149

--- Sayfa 150 ---
Why is Atheism So Widespread?
Atheism means denying God's existence, which of course involves reject-
ing His commandments, as well as religious reflection and seriousness,
and believing in the possibility of total self-independence apart from
God. As such beliefs negate the concept of sin, people imagine that they
can live as they please. Therein lies in the corruption of people's hearts
and minds. Atheism spreads because education is misused, young
people are neglected, and schools actually defend and foster it.
Ignorance about the essentials of faith and religion is the primary reas-
on why atheism starts to grow and develop. People whose minds, hearts,
and souls have not been directed to the truth inevitably become vulner-
able. Only God's help and grace can save them. If a community does not
confront this trend decisively and successfully, its members' hearts and
minds become open to other influences that lead to deviation.
Atheism first manifests itself as a lack of interest in the principles of
faith. People with this attitude often claim that it is positive, for it repres-
ents a desire for the mind's independence and freedom of thought. As
the demands of faith are strenuous, indifference turns toward what is
easier. It seeks any pretext to excuse it from honest and serious reflec-
tion, and so falls easily into neglect, then heedlessness, atheism, and even
contempt for religion.
In fact, atheism is neither grounded on sound reasoning nor supported
by human intuition or experience. Still less is it based upon "scientific"
truth. It is no more than a mood, typically lazy but sometimes active and
militant, of not caring and of rebellion.
The countless manifestations of God within and outside ourselves
testify that there is only One Creator and Governor who administers, dir-
ects, and sustains this universe. We may think of each manifestation as a
letter or book from God to us, reflecting His Divine Attributes in a way
that we can understand. These Attributes can be traced everywhere in
creation, which is no more than a vast area for testing and teaching hu-
manity. However, some people with incorrect concepts have erred
greatly in their understanding and observation of these signs. As a res-
ult, they have presented nature, as well as it principles and relationships,
it such a way that many people (especially the young) have abandoned
true faith.
Much has been said and written about the natural world's delicate bal-
ance and innumerable subtle harmonies. Such an order can be attributed
only to the All-Mighty. Planets and stars move within an interrelated
150

--- Sayfa 151 ---
complexity of drifts and orbits that are infinitely more precise than any-
thing we could ever design or make. If what we make is accepted as
evidence of intelligent design, why is the far more vast and complicated
universe considered an exception to this rule?
Nature resembles a huge factory of enormous (actual and potential)
generative power. Its working principles are astonishingly subtle and
supple, yet firmly established in reassuring patterns and rhythms. From
where does nature get these operating rules? Some say that nature is self-
created, but how can that persuade anybody? Of course one of the oper-
ating rules is a measure of self-organizing power. But we want to know
the origin of this rule.
Principles are non-essential attributes of a thing or being and, as such,
are secondary and dependent on substance and essence. Attributes can-
not exist before or independently of the compound or organism of which
they are attributes. Thus, if a plant demonstrates a measure of self-organ-
izing power by seeking light, moisture, and nutrients for its growth, it
means that a measure of self-organizing power has been embedded in its
seed. Similarly, the principle of attraction in physics operates in and
through existent masses, distances, and forces. To claim that such prin-
ciples are the origin or source of existent things or beings is untenable.
Just as untenable is the confidence with which such claims are asser-
ted. To claim that this extraordinarily subtle and ordered universe is the
outcome of haphazard coincidences is absurd, contradictory, and quite
unscientific, for all the evidence points to the exact opposite.
As the result of long experiments and reflection, Muller declared that
reason could not explain the origin of life. He established, on the behalf
of science and scientists, the absurdity of "coincidence" as a possible ex-
planation. Similarly, after a 22-year series of studies, the Soviet Institute
of Chemistry, under the chairmanship of Oparin, proved that the laws of
chemistry and chemical reactions shed no light on the origin of life, and
that science still has no answer to this question.
When these scientists acknowledged the limitations to human inquiry,
they did so on behalf of all science and scientists. Yet such work has not
undone the damage done by earlier, less careful scientists, who offered
only guesses as reliable scientific theory. Unfortunately, general attitudes
and values continue to be shaped by such guesses and not by the realit-
ies established by better scientists.
For example, many textbooks and encyclopedias continue to present
humanity's evolution from apes to human beings as fact instead of the-
ory. In reality, a growing number of scientists, most particularly
151

--- Sayfa 152 ---
evolutionists, argue that Darwin's theory of evolution is not a truly sci-
entific theory at all. Many critics of the highest intellectual caliber admit
that we still have no idea of how this "evolution" took place. While there
is a great deal of divergent opinion among the experts about probable
causes and the actual process, the general public and less-informed sci-
entists continue to believe in it.
Various research projects and published studies cast doubt on evolu-
tion and seek to give a truer picture of nature as creation and our place
in it. Works like Why Do We Believe in God? help those who considered
non-believers in evolution as rather odd people reconsider their opinion
and reflect more wisely on the matter.
Given the fact that a sound, reliable understanding of the natural
world leads to belief in a single, universal Creator, atheism has more to
do with obstinacy, prejudice, and a refusal to give up illusions than with
the mind's independence or freedom of thought. Young people remain
vulnerable, for their understanding of their behavior's nature and con-
sequences is incomplete, their awareness of their spiritual being and
their resulting deep-seated spiritual needs is limited, and their grasp of
the balance between material and non-material values that characterizes
a total human existence is deficient. Thus they are easily deceived by
outdated concepts presented as "scientific" truths, although scientists
know (and have said) that they are no more than theories. This is why
teaching and learning about the truth are more important today than
other duties and obligations.
If this vital task is not taken up, we may be unable to rectify the
worsening situation in the future. Some of those evil consequences are
with us already. This may be the major reason for our suffering over the
years. We are the unlucky generation that was deprived of good teach-
ers—teachers who had attained inward unity and harmony of mind and
heart, truly knew themselves in their deepest thoughts and feelings, de-
sired to teach others, and were willing to suffer to promote others' happi-
ness and welfare. We hope such noble-minded teachers will arise among
us and undertake this truly humane mission to rescue people from them
current moral and spiritual suffering.
If this can be done, present and future generations will acquire the ne-
cessary stability in their thinking and reasoning about life's great ques-
tions. They will be able to resist the lure of false beliefs and illusions, and
thereby be saved from the anxiety of constantly doubting the nature and
purpose of their lives. They will be immunized, at least partially, against
atheism and its attendant self-centered and neurotic behaviors. Atheism
152

--- Sayfa 153 ---
is caused by a lack of knowledge and learning, an inability to synthesize
one's inner and outer life, and is the result of an undernourished heart
and soul. People cling to what they know, and resist what they do not
know—or at least try to remain uninterested and unconcerned.
The mass media continually presents ideas, lifestyles, and character
types that encourage self-indulgence and self-abandonment. Thus it is no
surprise that many young people try to become hippies or punks or
whatever the latest craze is; seek immediate gratification and pleasure;
and do not bother to cultivate their minds or their tastes, but prefer trivi-
ality and banality, loudness and vulgarity.
People quickly adopt ways considered exciting and attractive. What
they do not know becomes even more strange and alien, and eventually
a matter of total indifference. Thus we have to find effective ways to in-
troduce young people to the deeper ways of religious life, ways that lead
away from anxiety and toward tranquillity, away from darkness and to-
ward light.
Young people are excitable and susceptible. They crave limitless free-
dom and have an abundance of unsatisfied appetites and desires. Their
overly generous hearts and minds cause imbalance and disharmony,
which can lead them toward atheism. They prefer immediate pleasure,
however slight or brief, to the misery and distress that come in the wake
of indulgence. They jump at the pleasures and enjoyments that Satan dis-
plays to them, and so prepare their own calamity. They fly to the fire of
atheism just as moths are drawn to light.
While ignorance and unfed hearts and souls increase, materialism and
carnality gradually subvert the desire for truth and annul any nobility of
purpose. This is what happened with Faust. This man, who desired ex-
traordinary powers to do whatever he wished for a limited period, sold
his soul for a very cheap price to Mephistopheles, Satan's agent. But
when he received these powers, his noble aims of serving humanity left
him and he wasted his years of power by pursuing trivial pleasures.
When the soul is dead, the heart dies, compassion disappears, and the
mind and reason become so bewildered and confused that people be-
come helpless victims of their own passing whims or the worst fads.
Anyone who becomes obsessed with carnal passion and sensuality will
suffer crises and change direction continually, applaud every new fash-
ion in thought as if it were the truth, and swing from one ideology to an-
other—from confusion to doubt and back again. They will find no attrac-
tion in faith, in a steady sense of duty, or in a patient, enduring heart.
153

--- Sayfa 154 ---
Nor will they find any merit in moral education, self-discipline, con-
templation, the soul's improvement, or in strengthening their morals and
manners. Wholly addicted to triviality and self-indulgence, they will
deny any achievement to our ancestors and remain willfully ignorant of
what real culture and civilization can make possible: a balance between
spirituality and sanity, between virtue and happiness.
Not everyone can be saved. Therefore, we should direct our efforts to-
ward educating those young people in whom the worst habits have not
become firmly established. They must be taught the fundamental prin-
ciples of the system on which we depend and to which our existence be-
longs. They must be led to a systematic, straight, and honest way of
thinking. Those who fail in this effort will see their community or nation
continue to sink into moral and spiritual corruption until it can no longer
be rescued.
An additional cause of atheism is the deliberate rejection of all con-
straints and prohibitions. Such undesirable and unrestrained indulgence
has entered Muslim societies from western Europe via a degenerate form
of existentialism (mainly French) that rejected traditional values and
formal religious education in favor of absolute individual freedom. The
theory was that the individual would (and could) mature and develop
into a noble, moral being through personal experience.
This theory, regardless of where it has been applied, has never pro-
duced sane, caring, and compassionate human beings. Rather, it has in-
tensified misery and selfishness by isolating individuals from their famil-
ies, traditions, and even from themselves. Its adherents do not cultivate
their morals or tastes, but rather live shallow, private lives and make no
effort to find the truth. In short, they simply survive from moment to
moment in the illusory hope that they may yet find happiness.
These few reflections do not cover the whole subject. Yet I hope that
future guides, teachers, and leaders with discernment and foresight will
consider them when trying to stop the spread of deviation and atheism. I
have presented a brief insight into the problem, with the prayer that
some people may be alerted to the truth, conquer the self, and regain the
means to do what is good.
154

--- Sayfa 155 ---
What is Jihad?
Jihad is an Arabic word meaning to strive, to make an effort, to face
hardships of all kinds. After Islam, it came to mean striving in the way of
God.
The Qur'an almost equates jihad, an important Islamic duty, with
Islam. The most distinguished servants of God, whether Prophets or
saints, have attained their distinction through jihad against unbelievers
and against their own carnal selves. Jihad has a great worth in the sight
of God, because He created us to strive so that we might discover our
true being and encourage others to do likewise.
God decrees in the Qur'an:
Those believers who sit at home, other than those who have a disabling hurt,
are not equal with those who strive in the way of God with their possessions and
their selves. God has conferred on those who strive with their possessions and
their selves a rank over those who sit at home; yet to each, God has promised
good, but He has be stowed on those who strive a great reward above those who
sit at home. (4:95)
People have diverse careers, and their objectives in those careers allow
others to assess their standing. But what is our end? Whatever our rank
or occupation, each person was created from a drop of fluid and will end
as a corpse.
This is true of everything except for the work of Prophethood, for its
reward multiplies until the Day of Judgment. Prophethood contains
some spiritual quality that is not touched by mortality. A Prophet seeks
to enable people to know God and thereby reach eternity. We were not
created to be subjected to physical corruption and dissolution, along
with everything else in this world. In fact, our deepest natural tendency
is toward eternity, and it is the Prophets who alert, educate, and cause us
to realize this tendency.
In the sight of God, Prophethood is the most sacred work entrusted to
humanity, and jihad expresses this aspect of it. Due to its importance, the
Qur'an distinguishes those Muslims who swore to the Prophet that they
would perform jihad: Those who swear allegiance to you, swear allegiance
only to God. The hand of God is above their hands. So whoever breaks his oath,
breaks it only at his own peril; while whoever keeps his covenant with God, on
him will He bestow immense reward (48:10).
This verse was revealed when the Messenger told the Muslims they
would return to Makka and make pilgrimage. So they set out as pilgrims
for Makka. But when they reached Hudaibiyya, the Makkan polytheists
155

--- Sayfa 156 ---
refused to let them pass and threatened war. This unexpected objection
shocked the believers, who regarded it as a heavy blow to Islam's honor.
They did not know how to respond. The Messenger sent 'Uthman ibn
Affan to Makka to reaffirm that they had come only to make pilgrimage
and therefore in peace. The Makkan chiefs imprisoned 'Uthman and cir-
culated the rumor of his death. This news so angered the Muslims that
the Prophet demanded that they swear allegiance to him by taking his
hand. God then revealed the verse quoted above.
Another verse reads:
God has bought from the believers their lives and their wealth because
Paradise will be theirs. They fight in the way of God, slay and are slain. It is a
promise which is binding on Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Qur'an.
And who is more true to his promise than God? Rejoice then in your bargain
that you have made, for that is the supreme triumph. (9:111)
This "bargain" is the highest distinction, since whoever enters into it is
being directly addressed by God.
The Messenger said: "I wished very much that I had been slain for the
cause of God and brought to life to be slain again, and brought to life to
be slain again." He also said: "It is better to keep one's eyes open for a
day's duty, solely in the cause of God, against the danger of enemy infilt-
ration through a pass, than to possess the world and all its contents."50
We may infer from this hadith that to be alert for a day in the cause of
God, against any danger that may befall the community, is better than
possessing the Ka'ba—since the Ka'ba is among the contents of this
world.
Another hadith tells us: "The recompense from God for one's good acts
is cut off at the moment of death, except for jihad. The reward for jihad
multiplies until the Day of Judgment. Further, God exempts those who
have striven in His way from being interrogated in the grave."51
Jihad has two aspects: fighting to overcome carnal desires and evil in-
clinations (the greater jihad) and encouraging others to achieve the same
objective (the lesser jihad). The Muslim army was returning to Madina
after defeated the enemy, when the Messenger told them: "We are re-
turning from the lesser jihad to the greater one." When the Companions
asked what the greater jihad was, he explained that it was fighting with
the carnal self.52
50.Tirmidhi, Fada'il al-Jihad, 12.
51.Muslim, Imara, 163; Ibn Majah, Jihad, 7.
52.Kashf al-Khafa', 1:424.
156

--- Sayfa 157 ---
The aim of either jihad is to purify believers of sin so that they may at-
tain true humanity. The Prophets were sent for this purpose:
Thus We have sent unto you a Messenger from among you, who recites unto
you Our revelations (and makes Our signs known to you), and who purifies you
of sin and teaches you the Scripture and Wisdom, and teaches you that which
you did not know. (2:151)
We are like raw minerals to be worked upon by the Prophets, who
purify and refine us by removing the seal from our hearts and ears, and
lifting the veils from our eyes. Enlightened by the message they bring,
we can understand the meaning of the laws of nature, which are signs of
God's Existence and Unity, and penetrate into the subtle reality of things
and events. Only the Prophets can guide humanity to the high status ex-
pected of them by God.
In addition to teaching the signs, the Prophets also instruct us in the
Book and in Wisdom. As the Qur'an was the last Revelation to the Last
Prophet, God means the Qur'an when He speaks of the Scripture, and
the Sunna when He speaks of Wisdom. Therefore we must follow the
Qur'an and the Prophet's Sunna if we desire to be rightly guided.
The Prophet also teaches us what we do not know, such as how to
purify ourselves of sin, and we will continue to learn from him until the
Day of Judgment. By following his way, many great Muslims became
saints. One of them, 'Ali, said that his belief in the pillars of Islam was so
firm that his certainty would not increase even if the veil of the Unseen
were lifted.53 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani is said to have had insight into the
mysteries of the seventh heaven. These and many others, such as Fudail
ibn Iyaz, Ibrahim ibn Adham, and Bishr al-Khafi, might well have been
endowed with Prophethood if God had not sent the last Prophet already.
The dark clouds of ignorance have been removed from our intellectual
horizon through the guidance of Prophet Muhammad, and many more
scientific and technological advances will be made because of the light
he brought from God.
Jihad is the legacy of the Prophets, and Prophethood is the mission of
elevating people to God's favor by purifying them. This Prophetic mis-
sion is known as jihad, for it has the same meaning as bearing witness to
the truth. Those who perform jihad bear witness to God's Existence and
Unity by striving in His way: God bears witness that there is no god but He
and so do the angels and the people of learning, maintaining justice: there is no
god save He, the All-Mighty, the Wise (3:18). Such people also bear witness
53.Imam Rabbani, Maktubat, 1:157.
157

--- Sayfa 158 ---
to the same truth in the heavenly court, where the case of unbelievers
will be settled.
God bears witness to His own Existence and Unity, and those who
have acquired a high level of perception can grasp the reality of this
testimony. Angels bear witness to this, as they are absolutely pure in
nature, as do those endowed with knowledge. Even if everybody were to
deny God's Existence and Unity, the testimony of these groups is enough
to establish this truth.
Those who bear witness to this truth should travel throughout the
world to spread it. This was the duty of the Prophets, and it should be
our duty as well:
Messengers who brought good news to humanity and who admonished them,
so that they might have no argument against God after their coming. God is the
All-Mighty and the All-Wise. God Himself bears witness by what He has re-
vealed to you that it has been revealed with His knowledge; and so do the angels.
There is no better witness than God. (4:165–66)
God chose a man from each nation and appointed him a Prophet. From the
time of Prophet Adam, each dark era of human history was enlightened by a
Prophet's message. This continued until the time of Muhammad, who was sent
to enlighten all people's intellectual and spiritual horizons: We have sent you
(Muhammad) as a witness and a bearer of good tidings and a warner (48:8).
Prophet Muhammad is mentioned in the Qur'an as "the Prophet". The
use of the definite article distinguishes him from all other Prophets and
indicates that he is the Prophet par excellence. He has been sent as a
blessing all creation, including animals, plants, and inanimate things.
God directly addresses Muhammad in many Qur'anic verses and says:
We have sent you… This means that he is the Prophet sent by God to
bear witness to His Existence and Unity. He carried out this task during
a time of ignorance, when almost everyone denied this truth. Gradually,
his followers increased until they became the global flag bearers of this
truth. Prophet Muhammad conveyed the good news of happiness in this
world and the next for those who do good, and warnings for those who
do evil. In so doing, he performed jihad.
God has sent a Prophet to each people, which means that everyone has
some idea of Prophethood. As the term used to describe the activity of
Prophethood, jihad is so deeply engraved on the heart of every believer
that they all feel a profound responsibility to spread the truth and
thereby guide others to the Straight Path.
The lesser jihad, usually understood as fighting for God's cause, does
not refer only to actual fighting on the battlefield. Rather it is
158

--- Sayfa 159 ---
comprehensive, for it includes every action from speaking out to actual
fighting, provided that the action is done for the sake of God. Every indi-
vidual or communal action, no matter how great or small, taken to bene-
fit humanity is included in the meaning of the lesser jihad.
While the lesser jihad depends on mobilizing all material facilities and
is performed in the outer world, the greater jihad is our personal fight
against our carnal selves. These two forms of jihad cannot be separated
from each other, for only those who conquer their carnal selves can per-
form the lesser jihad, which, in turn helps us succeed in the greater jihad.
The Messenger taught us how to perform both types of jihad, and es-
tablished the principles of preaching the truth that we are to follow until
the Day of Judgment. His method of acting was very systematic. This is
actually another proof of his Prophethood, and a wonderful example of
following the way of God in behavior.
The Messenger used to pray at the Ka'ba during the first years of his
Prophethood. In addition to hoping for increased rewards from God for
doing so, his foremost intention was to preach the truth to young people.
But it was impossible to approach them because of their haughtiness.
Knowing that actions speak louder than words, he started praying at the
Ka'ba. With their curiosity aroused, they asked him what he was doing
and so gave him a good opportunity to preach to them.
The Prophet was attacked several times while praying. Once, Abu Jahl
planned to kill him with a big stone during his prostration. Abu Jahl held
the stone aloft, ready to bring it down on the Prophet, but then began to
tremble, grew pale with fear, and held his hands motionless above his
head. When asked what had happened, he answered that an awful mon-
ster had come between him and the Prophet, and that it almost swal-
lowed him.54
On another occasion when the Prophet was praying, 'Uqba ibn Abi
Mu'ait wound his turban round the Prophet's neck in an attempt to
strangle him. On hearing of this, Abu Bakr hurried to the scene to save
the Prophet and shouted: "Would you kill a man merely because he says:
'My Lord is God'?" This was an echo of the words spoken in the time of
Moses by a believer who had hurried to save him from those who
wished to kill him.
The Prophet might have been martyred in any of those assaults if God
had not protected him. He publicly demonstrated the importance of
preaching the truth even at the risk of one's life. Abu Bakr used to recite
the Qur'an loudly by the window of his house. Those who heard him
54.Muslim, Munafiq, 38.
159

--- Sayfa 160 ---
started to gather around him. His recitation attracted so many people
that the Makkan chiefs warned him to stop. Ibn Daghinnah, who had ex-
tended his protection to Abu Bakr, was forced to revoke it. However,
Abu Bakr was determined to continue his recitation.55
Whether by words or actions, the Companions never stopped per-
forming jihad, because they believed firmly that their personal and com-
munal integrity depended on their active participation in jihad. Further-
more, they understood that a Muslim can secure the protection of God
only by supporting His religion: Believers: if you help (the religion of) God,
God will help you and make you strong (47:7). In other words, Muslims who
seek protection from going astray must make struggling in the cause of
God their sole goal in life.
To understand how this is done, recall how the Prophet and his Com-
panions conducted themselves. When conditions became unbearable,
some Muslims were allowed to migrate to Abyssinia. This migration was
a kind of jihad to be carried out at that time. After a second migration, all
Muslims who remained or had returned to Makka then emigrated to
Madina.
There, the foundations were laid for both the first Islamic city-state
and a new kind of jihad, one that had to take existing realities into ac-
count. Sometimes the Muslims would run and at other times they would
go slowly. In other words, jihad needs its own strategy. The Muslims did
not retaliate against their tormenters until God gave them permission to
do so by revealing the following verse in Madina:
Permission (to take up arms) is hereby given to those who are attacked be-
cause they have been wronged; and God is able to give them victory. They are
those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because they said:
"Our Lord is God." Had it not been for God's repelling some men by means of
others, cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques wherein the name of
God is often mentioned, would have been pulled down. God helps one who helps
His religion. God is Powerful, Mighty (22:39–40).
Having borne persecution of every kind for years, the believers re-
sponded with enthusiasm. Only the Hypocrites refused to present them-
selves when the Prophet summoned the Muslims to fight the Makkans.
The Hypocrites either sat idly in their homes or fled the battlefield, for
they were slaves to their carnal selves and base desires. By contrast, all
sincere Muslims hastened the battlefield whenever they were summoned
to fight, for jihad was the means of reaching God and eternity. Therefore,
55.Bukhari, Kafala, 4.
160

--- Sayfa 161 ---
they were as enthusiastic in their response as if they had been invited to
Heaven.
Everyone considers death disagreeable, and some of the Companions
were no exception. As we read in the Qur'an: Fighting is ordained for you,
though it is hateful unto you. But it may happen that you dislike a thing al-
though it is good for you and it may happen that you love a thing although it is
bad for you. God knows; you do not know (2:216). Such dislike is a natural
human characteristic. But the Muslims never actually disobeyed God
and His Messenger, and in return God granted them success and victory.
These victories gave the believers new strength and energy and, while
attractive to the neighboring tribes, caused the Makkans great distress.
The Muslims kept their belief vigorous and active by means of jihad.
Those who abandon jihad gradually become hopeless pessimists, for
they have deprived themselves of the spirit and stop preaching the truth.
Those who persevere in jihad never lose their enthusiasm and always try
to increase the scope of their activities. Since every good deed results in a
new one, Muslims are never deprived of good: As for those who strive for
us, We guide them to our path. God is with the good (29:69).
There are as many paths leading to the Straight Path as there are num-
bers of breaths drawn in creation. Whoever strives for His cause is
guided by God to one of these paths, and is thereby saved from going
astray. Whoever is so guided lives a balanced life, neither exceeding the
limits in their human needs and activities nor in their worship and other
religious observances. Such balance is the sign of true guidance.
However great the sacrifices made in fighting unbelievers, they never-
theless all constitute the lesser jihad. This aspect of jihad is lesser only
when compared to the greater jihad. The lesser jihad should never be un-
derrated, for it enables Muslims to acquire the title of holy warrior of
Islam or the rank of martyr. Such titles open the gates to Paradise and se-
cure God's approval.
The lesser jihad consists of striving to discharge religious obligations
as perfectly as possible, whereas the greater jihad requires us to fight
against our destructive drives and impulses, such as arrogance, vindict-
iveness, jealousy, selfishness, self-conceit, and all carnal desires.
Those who abandon the lesser jihad are liable to spiritual deteriora-
tion, due to their vulnerability to worldly weaknesses. But they can re-
cover. Pride and love of comfort and ease may captivate Muslim soldiers
returning from a victorious battle, for they may think that now it is time
to relax and indulge in such things. To fight this tendency, the Prophet
warned us through his Companions. Once, when returning to Madina
161

--- Sayfa 162 ---
after a victory, he said: "We are returning from the lesser jihad to the
greater jihad."56
The Companions were as fierce as lions on the battlefield, and as sin-
cere and humble as dervishes in worshipping God on the other. They
used to spend most of the night praying to God. Once when night fell
during a battle, two of them took turns standing guard. One rested while
the other prayed. Becoming aware of the situation, the enemy shot many
arrows at him. He was hit and bled profusely, but continued to pray.
When he finished, he woke his friend, who asked in amazement why he
had not woken him sooner. His reply was: "I was reciting Surat al-Kahf
and did not wish to interrupt the deep pleasure I found therein."57
The Companions went into a trance-like state of ecstasy when in pray-
er, and would recite the Qur'an as if it were being revealed directly to
them. Thus they never felt the pain caused by arrows hitting their bod-
ies. Jihad, in its lesser and greater aspects, found complete expression in
them.
The Prophet combined these two aspects of jihad in the most perfect
way. He displayed monumental courage on the battlefield. 'Ali, one of
the most courageous Muslims, admits that the Companions took shelter
behind the Prophet at the most critical moments of the fighting. Once
when the Muslim army experienced a reverse and began to scatter in the
first phase of the Battle of Hunain, the Prophet urged his horse toward
the enemy lines and shouted to his retreating soldiers: "I am a Prophet, I
do not lie! I am the grandson of 'Abd al-Muttalib, I do not lie!"58
He was just as devoted when it came to worshipping God. He was
consumed with love and fear of God in his prayer, and those who saw
him felt great tenderness toward him. He frequently fasted successive
days. Sometimes he would spend the whole night in prayer, which
would cause his feet to swell. Once when 'A'isha thought his persistence
in prayer was excessive, she asked him why he exhausted himself so
much considering that all his sins had been forgiven. "Shall I not be a
slave grateful to God?" was his only reply.59
The Prophet was so courageous that when several Makkans came near
enough to discover him and Abu Bakr while they were taking shelter in
the cave of Thawr, he simply said: "Don't fear; certainly God is with us."
On the other hand, he was so tenderhearted that he wept profusely when
56.Kashf al-Khafa', 1:424.
57.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3:344, 359.
58.Bukhari, Jihad, 52, 61, 67.
59.Bukhari, Tahajjud, 6.
162

--- Sayfa 163 ---
reciting or listening to the Qur'an. He once requested Ibn Mas'ud to re-
cite a passage. The latter excused himself, saying he could not recite to
the one to whom the Qur'an was being revealed. But the Messenger in-
sisted, saying that he enjoyed listening to someone else recite the Qur'an.
Ibn Mas'ud then began to recite the Surat al-Nisa'. When he reached: But
how will it be with them when We bring of every people a witness, and We bring
you (O Muhammad) a witness against these? (4:41), the Prophet asked him
to stop because, for fear of God, he could no longer bear it. Ibn Mas'ud
narrates the rest of the story: "The Messenger was shedding tears so pro-
fusely that I stopped reciting."
The Prophet was as tenderhearted as he was courageous. He asked
forgiveness from God at least 70 times a day, and repeatedly urged upon
his community the need for asking forgiveness from God.
Those who succeed in the greater jihad are almost certain to succeed in
the lesser jihad, but the reverse is not true. 'A'isha narrates: "One night
the Messenger asked my permission to perform his supererogatory mid-
night prayer. I said: 'However much I wish for your company, I wish still
more to do what you wish.' Then he performed his ablution (wudu') and
began to pray. He recited: In the creation of Heavens and the Earth and (in)
the alternation of night and day are tokens (of His sovereignty) for people of un-
derstanding[3:190] over and over again, shedding tears until daybreak."60
Sometimes he got up to pray without wakening his wife, since he did
not want to disturb her sleep. 'A'isha narrates:
One night I woke up to find the Messenger was not there. Thinking
that he might be visiting another of his wives, I became very jealous. I
started to get up, when my hand touched his feet in the darkness. He
was prostrating and saying in his prayer: "O God, I seek refuge in Your
pleasure from Your wrath, I seek refuge in Your forgiveness from Your
punishment. O God, I seek refuge with You from You, I seek refuge in
Your grace from Your torment, in Your mercy from Your majesty, and in
Your Compassion from Your irresistible power. I am not able to praise
You as You praise Yourself."
Being well aware of the obligation to follow his every action, his Com-
panions did their best to be worthy of his company in the Hereafter.
Some became physically distressed at the thought of being parted from
him in the next life. For example, Thawban lost his appetite after he was
unable to participate in a military expedition. On the Prophet's return,
everyone went out to meet him. Thawban was so pale that the Messen-
ger asked about his health. Thawban replied:
60.Bukhari, Fada'il al-Qur'an, 32, 33, 35.
163

--- Sayfa 164 ---
O Messenger, I am obsessed with fear of being parted from you in the
Hereafter. You are the Messenger, so you will enter Paradise, but I don't
know whether I shall deserve it. And even if God admits me, your abode
certainly will be very much above mine. In this case, I shall not be able to
be in your company forever. I don't know how I will be able to bear this,
seeing that I cannot endure 3 days' separation from you in this world.
Thawban's worries were relieved when the Messenger told him: "You
will always be in the company of the one whom you love." To love
someone means to follow his or her example in this life, and the Com-
panions were more attentive to this than any other people.
'Umar was very eager to establish a family relationship with the Mes-
senger, for he had heard the latter say that all genealogical connections
would be useless in the Hereafter, except for those with his own house-
hold. Although the Prophet held 'Umar's hand many times and said: "We
will be this (like the two hands together) in the Hereafter too," 'Umar still
desired the family connection. He attempted to achieve this by marrying
Fatima, but she would only marry 'Ali. He married his daughter Hafsa to
the Prophet and, in the later years of his caliphate, married 'Ali's daugh-
ter Umm Kulthum. If he had wished, he could have married a neighbor-
ing emperor's daughter. But his desire was to be allied to the Prophet's
household.
Once Hafsa said to 'Umar: My dear father, from time to time foreign
envoys come and you receive embassies. You should change your gar-
ment for a new one. 'Umar was shocked by this suggestion and replied:
"How can I endure to part company with my two friends, the Prophet
and Abu Bakr? I must follow their example so strictly that I can be with
them in the Hereafter."
The Messenger and his Companions succeeded in the greater jihad,
and their devotion to God was very strong. They spent so much of their
time praying that those who saw them thought they did nothing else.
But this was not the case, for they led thoroughly balanced lives.
They were very sincere in their deeds, since they did everything for
the sake of God and constantly disciplined themselves. Once when
'Umar was giving a sermon, he suddenly said without any apparent
reason: "O 'Umar, you were a shepherd pasturing your father's sheep."
When asked after the prayer why he had said this, he answered: "It came
to my mind that I was the caliph, so I became afraid of feeling proud."
One day he was seen carrying a sack upon his back. When asked why he
was doing this, he replied: "I felt some pride within me, so I desired to
get rid of it." A later caliph, 'Umar Ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, once wrote a letter
164

--- Sayfa 165 ---
to a friend and then tore it up. When asked why, he explained: "I prided
myself on its eloquence, so I have torn it up."
Only jihad performed by such perfect souls produces effective results.
Those who have not abandoned pride, self-regard, and insincerity most
probably will damage the cause of Islam greatly. I would like to emphas-
ize that such people will never obtain the desired result.
Some Qur'anic verses or chapters describe both types of jihad. One of
them is: When the help of God comes, and victory, and you see men entering
God's religion in throngs, then glorify the praise of your Lord, and seek His for-
giveness; for He is Relenting, Merciful (110:1–3). When the believers per-
formed the lesser jihad, whether by fighting, preaching, or enjoining the
right and forbidding the wrong, God's help and victory came, and
people began to enter Islam in throngs. At that moment, the All-Mighty
decreed that His praises should be glorified and His forgiveness should
be sought. As all success and victory are from God, it is He who must be
praised and worshipped.
If we can combine our triumph over the enemy with our triumph over
our carnal selves, we will have performed jihad completely. 'A'isha nar-
rates that after the revelation of these verses, the Messenger often recited
this prayer: "I glorify You with praise, O God. I seek Your forgiveness,
and I turn in repentance to You."61
The Prophet expresses these two aspects of jihad together in one of his
sayings: "The eyes of two persons will never witness Hellfire: the eyes of
the soldier who guards the frontier and on the battlefield, and the eyes of
those who shed tears for fear of God."62 The first person is engaged in the
lesser jihad; the latter is engaged in the greater jihad. Those who succeed
in their jihad will escape the torment of Hell.
We must consider jihad in its entirety. Those who say one thing and
then do another cause nothing but trouble in the ranks of Muslims. Since
they cannot discipline themselves and overcome self-regard, ostentation,
and the desire to dominate, they bring only disharmony to the cause of
Islam. On the other hand, those who live in almost total seclusion and try
to attain some high spiritual station without working to promote the
truth merely reduce Islam to a "spiritual" system, like certain aspects of
yoga. Such people argue that a Muslim's foremost duty is to acquire spir-
itual maturity so as to be saved from Hell. What they fail to realize is that
those who regard themselves as safe from Hell are deceived, for God
61.Tirmidhi, Da'wat, 81.
62.Tirmidhi, Fada'il al-Sahaba, Jihad, 12.
165

--- Sayfa 166 ---
decrees that we should continue to serve Him as long as we live: And
serve your Lord till the inevitable (death) comes unto you (15:99).
Muslims should never regard themselves as safe from the torments of
Hell or give up hope of God's grace and forgiveness. They should
tremble with fear of God, as 'Umar did. However, this fear should not
prevent them from hoping to enter Paradise: But for those who fear the
standing before their Lord there are two Gardens (55:46).
In short, jihad consists of self-control and preaching the truth. It re-
quires overcoming one's carnal desires and encouraging others to do the
same. Neglecting the former produces social anarchy, while neglecting
the latter results in laziness. Today we must achieve a true understand-
ing of Islam in general, and of jihad in particular. This can be realized
only through strictly following the Prophet's Sunna.
166

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Are Muslims Guilty of Imperialism?
This charge continues to be leveled against the Muslim world. I would
like to counter it by asking the following questions:
Given the existing circumstances of 1,400 years ago, how would any
one living in Makka or Madina go about exploiting his own clan and
tribe? If the supposedly exploited lands and people were those of the Hi-
jaz, which were poor, unfruitful, and barren, who would have wished to
invade or exploit them? It is ludicrous to level the charge of imperialist
colonialism against the most noble-minded Muslims, who risked their
lives to spread the message of Islam; who spent the greater part of their
lives far from their children, families, homes, and native lands fighting
armies ten or twenty times their size; and who felt deeply grieved when
they did not die on the battlefield and join the earlier martyrs for Islam.
We ask ourselves what worldly gain they obtained in return for such
struggle, deprivation, and sacrifice!
Those who invaded, occupied, and exploited others with the worst in-
tentions (and results) of imperialism are power-hungry individuals or
nations. To mention a few: Alexander the "Great" and Napoleon, the Ro-
man empire and Nazi Germany, the Mongol armies unleashed by
Genghis Khan and the colonizing armies unleashed by western Europe,
Russian dictatorship (whether czarist or communist) and the American
empire (whether "manifest destiny" or "making the world safe for demo-
cracy"). Wherever such conquests came and went, they corrupted the
morality of the conquerors and the conquered, causing chaos, conflict,
tears, bloodshed, and devastation. Today their heirs, like bold thieves
who bluff property owners to conceal their theft of that very property,
turn to besmirching Islam, its Prophet, and his Companions.
True Muslims have never sought to exploit others. Nor have they let
others do so where Muslim government had jurisdiction. At a time when
Muslim armies were running from triumph to triumph, Caliph 'Umar
said: "What befits me is to live at the level of the poorest Muslims," and
he really did so. As he took only a few olives a day for his own susten-
ance, who was he exploiting?
After one battle, when a Muslim was asked to take the belongings of
an enemy soldier whom he had fought and killed, he said: "I did not par-
ticipate in the battle to take spoils." Pointing to his throat, he continued:
"What I seek is an arrow here and to fall as a martyr." (His wish was
granted.) While burning with the desire for martyrdom, who was he
exploiting?
167

--- Sayfa 168 ---
In another battle, a Muslim soldier fought and killed a leading enemy
who had killed many Muslims. The Muslim commander saw him pass
by his dead enemy. The commander went to the head of the dead soldier
and asked who had killed him. The Muslim did not want to reply, but
the commander called him back in the name of God. The Muslim felt
himself obliged to do so, but concealed his face with a piece of cloth. The
following conversation took place:
-Did you kill him for the sake of God?
-Yes.
-All right. But take this 1,000 dinar piece.
-But I did it for the sake of God!
-What is your name?
-What is my name to you? Perhaps you will tell this to everyone and
cause me to lose the reward for this in the afterlife.
How could such people exploit others and establish colonies all over
the world? To speak frankly, those who hate Islam and Muslims are
blind to the historical truth of how Islam spread.
Let's look at what exploitation and imperialism are. Imperialism or
colonization is a system of rule by which a rich and a powerful country
controls other countries, their trade and policies, to enrich itself and gain
more power at the other's expense. There are many kinds of exploitation.
In today's world, they may take the following forms:
• Absolute sovereignty by dispossessing indigenous people in order to
establish the invader's direct rule and sovereignty. Examples are western
Europe's conquest of North and South America, as well as Australia and
New Zealand, as well as the Zionists' conquest of Palestine.
• Military occupation so that the invaders can control the conquered
nation's land and resources. One example is British colonial rule in India.
• Open or secret interference and intervention in a country's internal
and foreign affairs, economy, and defense. Examples are those Third
World countries who are manipulated and controlled by various de-
veloped countries.
• The transfer of intellectuals, which is currently the most common
and dangerous type of imperialism. Young, intelligent, and gifted people
of the countries to be exploited are chosen, given stipends, and educated
abroad. There they are introduced to and made members of different
groups. When they return to their country, they are given influential ad-
ministrative and other posts so that they can influence their country's
destiny. When native or foreign people linked to exploiters abroad are
placed in crucial positions in the state mechanism, the country is
168

--- Sayfa 169 ---
conquered from inside. This immensely successful technique has enabled
Western imperialists to achieve many of their goals smoothly and
without overtly rousing the enmity of the people they wish to subjugate.
Today, the Muslim world is caught in this trap and thus continues to suf-
fer exploitation and abuse.
Whatever kind of imperialism they are subjected to, countries suffer a
number of consequences:
• Various methods of assimilation alienate people from their own val-
ues, culture, and history. As a result, they suffer crises of identity and
purpose, do not know their own past, and cannot freely imagine their
own future.
• Any enthusiasm, effort, and zeal to support and develop their coun-
try is quenched. Industry is rendered dependent upon the (former) im-
perial masters, science and knowledge are not allowed to become pro-
ductive and primary, and imitation is established firmly so that freedom
of study and new research will gain no foothold.
• People remain in limbo, totally dependent upon foreigners. They are
silenced and deluded by such empty phrases as progress, Westerniza-
tion, civilization, and the like.
• All state institutions are penetrated by foreign aid, which is in reality
no more than massive financial and cultural debt. Imports, exports, and
development are wholly controlled by or conducted according to the
exploiter's interests.
• While no effort is spared to keep the masses in poverty, the ruling
classes become used to extravagant spending and luxury. The resulting
communal dissatisfaction causes people to fight with each other, making
them even more vulnerable to outside influence and intervention.
• Mental and spiritual activity is stifled, and so educational institu-
tions tend to imitate foreign ways, ideas, and subjects. Industry is re-
duced to assembling prefabricated parts. The army tends to become a
dumping ground for imperialist countries, for its purchases of expensive
hardware ensure the continued well-being of the latter's industries.
We wonder if it is really rational to liken the Islamic conquest to im-
perialism, which brought disastrous consequences wherever it went.
The victory of Muslim armies never caused a great exodus of people
from their homes and countries, nor has it prevented people from work-
ing by putting chains on their hands and feet. Muslims left the indigen-
ous people free to follow their own way and beliefs, and protected them
in exactly the same way it protected Muslims. Muslim governors and
169

--- Sayfa 170 ---
rulers were loved and respected for their justice and integrity. Equality,
peace, and security were established between different communities.
If it had been otherwise, would the Christians of Damascus have
gathered in their church and prayed for a Muslim victory against Christi-
an Byzantium, which was seeking to regain control of the city? If
Muslims had not been so respectful of non-Muslims' rights, could they
have maintained security for centuries in a state so vast that it took more
than 6 months to travel from one end to another?
One cannot help but admire those Muslim rulers and the dynamic en-
ergy that made them so, when we compare them to present-day rulers.
Despite every modern means of transportation, telecommunications, and
military back-up, they cannot maintain peace and security in even a
small area of land.
Today, many scholars and intellectuals who realize the value of Islam's
dynamics, which brought about Islam's global sovereignty and which
will form the basis of our eternal existence in the Hereafter, expressly tell
us that Muslims should reconsider and regain them. While conquering
lands, the Muslims also were conquering their inhabitants' hearts. They
were received with love, respect, and obedience. No people who accep-
ted Islam ever complained that they were culturally prevented or ruined
by the arrival of Muslims. The contrast with the reality of Christian
Europe's conquests is stark and obvious.
Early Muslims evaluated the potential of knowledge and art in the
conquered lands. They prepared and provided every opportunity for
local scholars and scientists to pursue their work. Regardless of their reli-
gion, Muslims held the people in high regard and honored them in the
community. They never did what the descendants of the British colonial-
ists in America did to the American Indians or in Australia to the Abori-
gines, the French to the Algerians, or the Dutch to the Indonesians. On
the contrary, they treated the conquered people as if they were from
their own people and religion, as if they were brothers and sisters.
Caliph 'Umar once told a Coptic Egyptian who had been beaten by a
Makkan noble to beat him just as he had been beaten. When 'Umar heard
that 'Amr ibn al-'As had hurt the feelings of a native Egyptian, he re-
buked him: "Human beings were born free. Why do you enslave them?"
As he went to receive the keys to Masjid al-Aqsa, 'Umar visited and
talked to priests in different churches in Palestine. Once he was in a
church when it was time to pray. The priest repeatedly asked him to
pray inside the church, but 'Umar refused, saying: "You may be harassed
170

--- Sayfa 171 ---
by other Christians later on because you let me pray in the church." He
left the church's premises and prayed outside on the ground.
These are but a few examples to indicate how Muslims were sensitive,
tolerant, just, and humane toward other people. Such an attitude of
genuine tolerance has not been reached by any other people or society.
171

--- Sayfa 172 ---
Is Reincarnation Compatible With Islam?
Reincarnation (tanasukh) refers to the doctrine that after death the soul
moves on to inhabit another body, then dies again and moves on to an-
other body, until there is no longer any reason for it to do so. It is incom-
patible with Islam.
Belief in some form of reincarnation can be found in almost all societ-
ies, whether primitive or sophisticated. Variations exist according to loc-
al and regional differences in faith and popular culture. In the most ma-
terialistic societies, whose formal culture denies spiritual life, it is almost
fashionable in some circles to hold such pseudo-religious beliefs and
claim-whether seriously or not-that the spirits of the dead wander about,
sometimes assume physical form, and can influence the living until they
settle into their new bodies.
One argument for this doctrine's antiquity is the "evidence" found in
ancient literature, such as Ovid's (d. 18 CE) colorful extravagances in
which "gods" take on human and animal forms, humans assume differ-
ent shapes, and so on. But these tales do not constitute a doctrine. The
doctrine proper has nothing to do with colorful changes of form, but
with a belief that an individual soul must pass through every level of
creation and every species of life-form, whether animate or inanimate,
sentient or non-sentient.
If we reflect upon this, we soon realize that the doctrine is really a
strange elaboration on the soul's immortality. In other words, its kernel
is that the soul is immortal. That kernel is true; the rest is not. The doc-
trine also may have arisen from observing similarities in physical and
other traits between parents and offspring. Is it reasonable to obscure the
logical biological phenomena of heredity and genetics with the illogical
doctrine of reincarnation?
This doctrine is said to have emerged in the Nile basin and then
spread to other people, such as to India and than back to Greece. There,
the eloquence of the classical Greek philosophers rationalized it into a
source of consolation and hope for people who, as we all do, longed for
eternity. It entered Judaism by way of the Kabbalists, Christianity
through Jewish thinkers, and Islam via the ideas of some Sufis-despite
the efforts of Muslim theologians to refute it.
Apologists put forward some "evidence." For instance, the Kabbalists
mention the transformation of Niobe (mentioned in the Old Testament)
into a marble sculpture, and of Prophet Lot's wife into a statue of dust.
172

--- Sayfa 173 ---
Others have referred to a literal transformation of Jews into monkeys
and pigs.
Another argument explains instinct and intelligence in animals, as
well as the splendors of the plant kingdom, as the product of once-hu-
man intelligence and vitality. This idea debases humanity and shames its
proponents. We all know that there is a program and predetermined
destiny for plants and inanimate creation, but it is rather far-fetched to
trace the harmony and order we see in those kingdoms to formerly hu-
man souls. For example, and in reality, plants have a certain plant-life: a
direction of growth toward light and moisture. How can this be con-
strued to mean that its life is the result of a formerly human soul that
somehow has worked its way down to a lower level of creation?
Despite efforts to corroborate this assertion, no one has ever received a
message from a plant confirming that it contains a once-human soul. Nor
have we heard any account from someone that he or she was once the
soul of a plant or an animal. The media have publicized some accounts
of people recollecting so-called past lives and even recounting specific
incidents. However, in cases when such claims are not totally absurd,
they can be explained as recollections of what has been seen or read and
then, knowingly or otherwise, elaborated and transformed. In short,
such accounts are no more than ordinary human fictions.
The fact that Niobe and Lot's wife were transformed into sculptures of
marble or dust respectively, even if accepted literally, does not prove re-
incarnation. What we have here is only a physical transformation, not a
soul's transmigration.
As for petrified bodies, that is not an arcane phenomenon. Many such
corpses have been found, preserved by the absolute dryness of volcanic
ashes. Pompeii was destroyed in 79 CE by Vesuvius' sudden volcanic
eruption and remained buried for centuries. Recent excavations have re-
vealed numerous Niobe-like petrified bodies. In these ruins, and in the
petrified faces and bodies, so busy in their self-indulgent vices and so se-
cure in their arrogance, we can, if we wish, read the signs of Divine
wrath and punishment. Perhaps their way of life was solidified in ash
and so preserved to warn future generations. To interpret this as evid-
ence of reincarnation is untenable.
Belief in reincarnation in Egypt, India, and Greece developed out of a
distorted version of a once-sound belief in the Hereafter and from a long-
ing for the soul's immortality. Neither in Akhenaton's Egypt nor in
Pythagoras' Greece did anyone know of such a distorted idea.
173

--- Sayfa 174 ---
To Akhenaton (d. 1362 BC), when one's life ends in this world, a differ-
ent one starts in heaven. As soon as one dies, the soul sets off on its jour-
ney to reach the "Greatest Court" in Heaven. It goes so high that it
reaches the presence of Osiris, and hopes to give an account of itself in
words like these: "I have come to Your presence as I was free of sins.
Throughout my life, I did everything I could that would make devout
people pleased. I did not shed blood or steal. Neither did I make mis-
chief or mean any. I did not commit adultery or fornication." Those who
can speak so join Osiris' congregation, while those who cannot, whose
evil deeds outweigh their good, are hurled into hell and tortured by
demons.
Such sound belief also is witnessed in epitaphs relating to Akhenaton's
religion:
What You have done is too much, and our eyes cannot perceive most
of them. O One, Only God! No one possesses such might as You have. It
is You who have created this universe as You wish, and You alone. It is
You who decree the world suitable for human beings, for all animals,
whether big or small, whether they walk on the ground or fly in the sky.
And it is You alone who sustain and nourish them. Thanks to You, all
beauties come into existence. All eyes see You by means of those. Verily,
my heart belongs to You (You are in my heart).
The ideas quoted verbatim above were the things that were believed in
as truth in Egypt some 4,000 years ago.
In ancient Greece, the belief in resurrection and the soul's immortality
were quite sound. The great philosopher Pythagoras (d. c.500 BC) be-
lieved that the soul, on leaving the body, has a life peculiar to itself. In
fact, any soul has this same kind of life even before it quits the Earth. It is
commissioned with some responsibilities on Earth. If it commits any evil,
it will be punished, thrown into Hell, and tormented by demons. In re-
turn for the good it does, it will be given high rank and blessed with a
happy life. Allowing for changes that might have been made in his views
over time, we still can see that there are fundamental similarities with
Islam's creed of resurrection.
Plato's account is not so different either. In his famous treatise The Re-
public, he says that the soul forgets the material (corporeal) life totally
when it leaves the body. Ascending into an appropriate spiritual realm,
one saturated with wisdom and immortality, it is freed from all the
scarcity, deficiency, error, fear, and from the passion and love that afflic-
ted it while it lived on Earth. Now that it is free of all evil consequences
of human nature, it is blessed with eternal bliss.
174

--- Sayfa 175 ---
In essence, reincarnation is a distorted version of a sound belief. Every
creed, with the exception of Islam, has suffered such distortions. For ex-
ample, the Divinely revealed religion of Christianity and the exact iden-
tity and role of Prophet Jesus has been distorted. Had it not been for the
luminous and clarifying verses of the Qur'an and the influence of Islam,
Christianity's formal position on this matter may not have been different.
If Christianity teaches the unity of the soul and body, it owes this to
the Muslim savants of Andalusia (Muslim Spain). St. Thomas Aquinas
(d. 1274) is one of Christianity's most famous philosophers. The greater
part of his new ideas and synthesis were adapted from Islamic teachings.
He says in his distinguished book that the key concept of humanity is
that the soul and body are united in an apt composite. He adds that an-
imal souls develop with animal bodies, but that human souls are created
at some time during early development, and therefore rejects the abstract
speculations of the Neo-Platonist school.
Through a process of similar mistranslations of the original languages,
as well as various distortions, the ancient Egyptian, Indian, and Greek
religions became unrecognizable. The doctrine of reincarnation may well
be a distortion of an originally sound doctrine of the soul's immortality
and return to the Divine Judgment. After reincarnation was inserted into
the beliefs of the ancient Egyptians, it became a central theme of songs
and legends throughout the Nile region. Elaborated further with the elo-
quent expressions of Greek philosophers, it became a widespread phe-
nomenon due to the expansion of Greek influence.
Hindus consider matter as the lowest manifestation of Brahma, and
consider the convergence of body and soul as demeaning to the soul, a
decline into evil. However, death is believed to be salvation, a separation
from human defect, a possible chance to achieve an ecstatic union with
the truth. Hindus are polytheistic in practice. Their greatest god is
Krishna, who is believed to have assumed a human figure in order to
eradicate evil.
Their second greatest god is Vishnu, who has descended into this
world nine times in different shapes (human, animal, or flower). He is
expected to descend for the tenth time. Since they believe that he will
come again in the shape of an animal, killing any animal is absolutely
prohibited. This is allowed only during war. In addition, most pious and
observant Hindus are vegetarians.
According to their most important holy book, the Vedanta, the soul is
a fragment of Brahma that cannot get rid of suffering and distress until it
returns to its origin. The soul achieves gnosis by isolating itself from the
175

--- Sayfa 176 ---
ego and all wickedness pertaining to the ego, and by running toward
Brahma just as a river flows toward the sea. When the soul reaches and
unites with Brahma, it acquires absolute peace, tranquillity, and stillness,
another version of which is found in Buddhism. There is a cessation of
active seeking and a passivity of soul in the latter, whereas the soul is dy-
namic in Hinduism.
Some Jewish sects adopted reincarnation. After refusing belief in Re-
surrection and Judgment, the Jews, who can be inordinately covetous of
life yet remain fascinated by the soul's immortality, could do little else
but accept reincarnation. Later on, the Kabbalists transferred it to the
Church of Alexandria through certain regional monastic orders. The doc-
trine had a negligible effect on the manifestation of Islam. Nevertheless,
and most unfortunately, it was introduced to Muslims by the Ghulat-i
Shi'a (an extremist Shi'a faction).
All those who believe in reincarnation have one characteristic in com-
mon: the belief in incarnation. There is a shared failure of intellect to
grasp and accept God's Absolute Transcendence. As a result, people be-
lieve that the Divine mixes with the human and that the human can (and
does) mix with the Divine. This mistaken idea is all but universal, with
the exception of Islam. The central figure in each distorted religion is an
incarnation or reincarnation-Aten in Atenism, Brahma in Hinduism, Ezra
(Uzair) in Judaism, Jesus in Christianity, and 'Ali in the Ghulat-i Shi'a
faction (considered by many as outside the fold of Islam). Allegations
that some Sufi writings and sayings support reincarnation are either
plainly malicious or the result of an absurdly literal understanding of
their highly symbolic and esoteric discourse.
Throughout history Muslim scholars in every religious field, certainly
among the 90 percent of Sunnis, have rejected reincarnation as totally
contrary to the spirit of Islam. The reason for this stand is simple: The ab-
solute centrality of the Islamic beliefs that each person lives and dies ac-
cording to his or her own destiny, carries his or her own load, will be re-
surrected individually and called to answer for his or her intentions and
actions and their consequences, and that each person will be judged by
God according to the same criteria.
We list below the cardinal reasons why Islam rejects reincarnation.
• Belief in Islam requires belief in the Resurrection and Judgment,
where justice is meted out to each individual soul according to what it
did while alive. If the individual soul passes into different lives, in which
form or personality will it be resurrected, commanded to give account,
and be rewarded or punished?
176

--- Sayfa 177 ---
• This world is created for test and trial so that the soul can derive be-
nefit thereby. One focus of the test is belief in the Unseen. According to
reincarnation, those who live a bad life pass into a lower form of life after
death. If that is true, they will know the consequences of their former
life, and life as a test loses its meaning. To get around this, its adherents
say that the soul "forgets" its past existence. If that is true, what is the
point of a former life?
• If each individual passes through the cycle of birth, death, and re-
birth until eternal bliss (enlightenment) is achieved, God's promises of
reward and punishment are meaningless. Why would God engage in
such a meaningless activity?
• The Qur'an and other Divine Books state that sins will be forgiven as
a result of sincere repentance. The point of reincarnation is to "work off"
one's sins in order to obtain a better rebirth. Is it not more logical to be-
lieve in the ability of God to forgive, when and as He wills, rather than to
go through this seemingly unending and cumbersome process to
achieve, in essence, the same result?
• Long and tiresome cycles of rebirth are contrary to God's mercy, fa-
vor, grace, and forgiveness. If He wills, He takes ordinary, worthless, in-
ferior things and turns them into what is purest, best, and beyond price.
Infinite indeed are His blessings and munificence.
• Many followers of the Prophets led wicked lives before embracing
Islam. Once they converted, however, they reformed themselves within
an incredibly short time and became revered models of virtue for later
generations. Some of them surpassed previous followers and came to be
even more revered. This indicates that, by the favor of God, people can
rise easily and quickly to the summit even if they apparently were bound
for Hell. It also shows how unnecessary is the doctrine of souls
"graduating" to higher levels of being. Indeed, such a doctrine might ac-
tually weaken any incentive to moral effort.
• To believe that God, the All-Mighty, has created an individual soul
for each person is part of belief in His Omnipotence. To believe that only
a limited number of souls migrate from body to body argues the illogical
proposition that the Omnipotent is not Omnipotent. The sheer abund-
ance of life, its infinite variety, its refusal merely to repeat form is every-
where evident. Out of billions of people, we now know how to prove
that each one is absolutely unique-no two fingerprints or genetic codes
are exactly alike. This fact of individual uniqueness is found in many
Qur'anic verses. Given this, why should we assume that the Omnipotent
177

--- Sayfa 178 ---
cannot create an infinite number of individual souls and supply them
with an infinite number of bodies?
• Why has no one ever come forward and been able to prove, by
means of some marks, signs, or evidence that could confirm their "past-
life" memories, adventures, and experiences in different forms and bod-
ies? Where is the accumulated knowledge, experience, and culture of
those who have lived more than once or have completed their cycle? If
this happened in only one out of a million cases, should we not expect a
great number of people now living to have extraordinary virtue and
competence? Should we not have met a few of them by now? Where are
they?
• When somebody reaches a certain measure of physical maturity or
age, should we not expect the soul to emerge with all that it has acquired
and achieved during its past lives? Should we not expect prodigies?
There have been quite a few prodigies in recorded history. All of their
special gifts can be explained as a special combination of genetic charac-
teristics occurring in a particular time and place, which is attributable to
Divine Grace and Favor, together with the prodigy's efforts to under-
stand this gift in the tradition and context in which it is given.
• No specifically human faculty has ever been found in a non-human
entity. But if reincarnation is true, we should expect such discoveries. If a
lower form of life is the punishment for particular evil deeds in the pre-
vious life, then, presumably, the good in that life also must be carried
forward. In other words, some part of the individual's previous life
should be retained in the next life. In this case, we would expect the
boundaries of particular forms to burst open frequently-with, for ex-
ample, plants suddenly showing properties associated with animals.
Why have we never seen such events?
• If being a human or an animal is the consequence of one's deeds in a
former life, which first existed: the human or the animal, the higher or
the lower? Believers in reincarnation cannot agree on any form for the
first creature, as every generation implies a preceding generation, for
how else can the succeeding generation be considered the consequence
of the former? If, as some assert, physical life is an evil, why did the
whole thing even start? Why did life begin at all? Reasonable answers
have not been forthcoming.
178

--- Sayfa 179 ---
From the same author on Feedbooks
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith (2005)
In Essentials of the Islamic Faith, the Author explains the principal
elements of Islamic belief - belief in the existence and Unity of
God; in Resurrection and the Day of Judgment; in Divine Scrip-
tures and other familiar themes of Islamic discourse. What is spe-
cial and unique about the presentation of them in this book is that
the author is constantly aware of the encroachment (and the se-
ductive appeal) of cultural attitudes which are hostile not to Islam
only but to any religious and contemplative way of life.
Here are some of the topics covered
Does the Qur'an Allude to Scientific Developments?
Science and Religion
The Qur'an Proves Muhammad's Prophethood
The Holy Qur'an
The Prophet's Marriages
Miracles Cannot be Denied
Prophet Muhammad's Miracles
Prophet Muhammad's Predictions
Prophet Muhammad's Knowledge of the Past
Prophet Muhammad's Achievements
Muhammad's Character and High Morality
Prophet Muhammad's Life
Prophet Muhammad in the Bible
Prophethood and Muhammad's Prophethood
The Resurrection in Revealed Scriptures
The Benefits of Belief in the Resurrection
Questions on Destiny and Human Free Will
The Divine Wisdom in Creating People Differently
Divine Destiny and Decree, and Divine Grace
Destiny and Human Free Will
Divine Decree and Destiny
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
Satan and Humanity
Spells and Sorcery
Jinn and Human Beings
Angels and Jinn In This World
Jinn and Their Functions
Angels and Their Functions
179

--- Sayfa 180 ---
The Spirit In The Intermediate World
Death and The Spirit After Death
Dreams
Supernormal Phenomena
The Spirit and Its Identity
Arguments For The Existence of Invisible Beings
False Arguments About the Origin of Existence
The Existence and Unity of God
All Traditional Arguments For God's Existence
Science and Islam
Science and Quran
Questions and Answers about Islam (Vol.2) (2005)
In this book Fethullah Gulen, sensitive to the real questions people
have - the questions given rise to by the modern age - has tried,
through patient argument, to answer people's doubts and
questions.
Islam, probably the most misunderstood religion in the world, is
among the hot reading topics for people all over the world. Ques-
tions and Answers about Islam Vol. 1 and 2 have been prepared to
provide first-hand information from one of the most leading
Islamic scholars of our time.
The Statue of Our Souls - Revival in Islamic Thought and Activism
(2005)
Gulen's vision for the future is an inspiring hope, where peace and
justice are maintained in the world.This is a promise in the divine
revelation for the "righteous," who are expected to be the driving
force in reaching this goal. Attaining this rank, however, requires
that they be ordained with certain qualifications and virtues as
once manifested to the highest degree in Islamic civilization. In
this book, Gulen reminds us of these virtues and shows the path
that those lofty souls have followed in the past, leaving behind ex-
ceptional models.
Pearls of Wisdom (2005)
M. Fethullah Gulen has a vision: to raise a generation of young
people combining intellectual "enlightenment" with pure spiritual-
ity, wisdom, and activism. While many people are content to have
a similar vision and apply it on the personal level, Gulen has spent
180

--- Sayfa 181 ---
the last 40 years of his life realizing this vision on an international
level. This short book features many of Gulen's ideas that have
guided this extraordinary venture since its inception. They have
inspired millions of ordinary people to do what they normally
might never consider doing: helping people they do not know for
the sole purpose of earning the pleasure of God by helping a fel-
low human being.
Religious Education of the Child (2006)
In this work, topics such as acquainting children with mosques at
an early age, answering any lingering questions in a child's mind
from the beginning, worshipping an praying within sight of our
children (in order to set them a practical example), respect for the
Qur'an and similar topics are covered from the perspective of the
Qur'an and Sunna.
If we want our children to be courageous, we should not frighten
them with ideas of vampires, ghosts, giants, etc. We should raise
them as strong individuals with a firm faith which will enable
them to face up to any kind of difficulty.
If we really wish our children to have faith, all our attitudes and
sensitivities in certain subjects, the way we go to bed and get up,
the way we exert ourselves in prayer, the way we spread our af-
fectionate wings over our children, must all reflect our faith in Al-
lah and their hearts must be filled with such faith. We should al-
ways try to be the ideal for them, to avoid any kind of behavior
which might make them feel contempt for us.
The Messenger of God - Muhammad - An Analysis of the
Prophet's Life (2009)
Offering a deeper understanding of God’s messenger, this book on
the life of the Prophet Muhammad focuses on particular aspects of
his life that highlight his significance as a husband, a father, an
educator, and a worshiper.
The Life of the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, has been
a topic for many books and studies. Gulen's approach to the life of
Rasulullah, "the pride of humanity." is not cronical biography. It
differs from other books on the Prophet in the sense that Gülen as-
sumes a psychological and sociological analysis on the various as-
pects of the Prophet's life portraying him as a compassionate
181

--- Sayfa 182 ---
father, a profound spiritual leader, a wise statemen, a courageous
commander, a loving husband, a most reliable and trustworthy
person.
Reviews
I believe, when a Christian reads the book thoroughly, he will also
realize the true wisdom of Christ.
-- Huiqiu Huang, Dept. of Religion Chair, Fu-jen, Catholic
University, Taiwan
The author has written the work with deep love for the Messenger
of God, a love which suffuses every line.
-- Ahmed Bahgad, Al Ahram, Egypt
Towards the Lost Paradise (2010)
This book is composed of M Fethullah Gulen's selected articles
which have so far been published in different magazines. In these
articles, you will travel through the vivid expressions of M Fethul-
lah Gulen and see the collapse of one of the greatest civilisations of
the world and inward decay of believing peoples all over the
world, and you will witness the lament of a responsible Muslim
thinker for the miserable conditions of the wronged peoples of the
world. The flowery language of M Fethullah Gulen will at times
take you through a different world, the happy world of the future,
where 'flowers' sway on 'sloping hills' and birds sing of spring
everywhere, and you will come to know how it can be possible to
find such a world.
182

--- Sayfa 183 ---
www.feedbooks.com
Food for the mind
183