--- Sayfa 2 ---
The research described in this report was prepared for RAND’s
Center for Middle East Public Policy.
RAND is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and
decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND® is a
registered trademark. RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect
the opinions or policies of its research sponsors.
© Copyright 2003 RAND
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including
photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from RAND.
Published 2003 by RAND
1700 Main Street, P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1200 South Hayes Street, Arlington, VA 22202-5050
201 North Craig Street, Suite 202, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-1516
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org/
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information,
contact Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Email: order@rand.org
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Larrabee, F. Stephen.
Turkish foreign policy in an age of uncertainty / F. Stephen Larrabee, Ian O.
Lesser.
p. cm.
“MR-1612.”
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-8330-3281-X
1. Turkey—Foreign relations—1980–  I. Lesser, Ian O., 1957– II.Title.
DR477 .L37 2002
357.561'09'0511—dc21
2002015207
Cover design by Stephen Bloodsworth

--- Sayfa 3 ---
iii
PREFACE
Not since the end of the Cold War, and perhaps not since the early
days of the Turkish Republic, has Turkey’s external role been charac-
terized by so many open questions.  What place for Turkey in Eu-
rope?  What risks and opportunities for Turkey in a conflict-ridden
Middle East?  How will Ankara deal with a changing Russia, an un-
stable Caucasus, and Central Asia?  To what extent can a traditionally
competitive relationship with Greece be moderated, against a back-
ground of successive Balkan crises?  Turkey may be a pivotal state in
Western perception, but uncertainties in transatlantic relations may
make the very concept of the “West” unclear as seen from Ankara.
Above all, Turkey faces daunting political, economic, and social pres-
sures, with implications for the vigor and direction of the country’s
foreign and security policies.  The range of possibilities is now quite
wide, from a more globalized Turkey, more closely integrated in Eu-
rope and the West, with a multilateral approach toward key regions,
to a more inward-looking and nationalistic Turkey, pursuing a more
constrained or unilateral set of regional policies.
This book seeks to describe the challenges and opportunities facing
Turkey in the international environment at a time of extraordinary
flux and offers some conclusions about the country’s future.  The
analysis should be of interest to policymakers and observers in
Turkey, in the West, and elsewhere and contribute to informed de-
bate about the country’s role. The volume builds on a substantial
body of RAND work on Turkey and related topics undertaken over
the last decade.  This study extends and updates this tradition of
analysis.  In addition to exploring the internal and regional dimen-
sions of Turkish foreign policy, we have given special emphasis

--- Sayfa 4 ---
iv
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
throughout to the strategic and security issues facing Turkey.  These
include a number of new issues posed by the terrorist attacks on the
United States of September 2001 and the looming confrontation with
Iraq.
The research for this study was conducted within RAND’s Center for
Middle East Public Policy.  The center takes an integrative approach
to policy studies, applying RAND expertise in strategic and defense
analyses, science and technology, human capital, and other areas to
the complex issues facing the Middle East and nearby regions.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
v
CONTENTS
Preface .........................................
iii
Summary .......................................
ix
Acknowledgments.................................
xvii
Acronyms .......................................
xix
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION:  TURKISH FOREIGN POLICY IN
TRANSITION .................................
1
Turkey as a “Pivot” State .........................
2
Turkey as a Regional Actor........................
3
The Transnational Dimension .....................
8
Internal Change ...............................
9
Why This Book?................................
12
Chapter Two
THE CHANGING DOMESTIC CONTEXT .............
15
An Economic—and Political—Crisis ................
15
A Question of Vision ............................
18
Whither the Strong State? ........................
21
The Role of the Military ..........................
27
New Actors in a Changing Society ..................
30
Public Opinion and the Media .....................
33
Security Policy Through a Domestic Lens.............
36
Islamism, Nationalism, and Turkish Identity ..........
40
Domestic Stability and Turkey’s Foreign Policy
Potential .................................
42

--- Sayfa 6 ---
vi
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Chapter Three
TURKEY AND EUROPE ..........................
45
Turkey and EC Enlargement ......................
47
The Impact of Eastern Enlargement.................
50
The Helsinki Summit ...........................
51
The Economic Dimension ........................
54
Democracy and Human Rights ....................
56
The Kurdish Issue ..............................
58
The Islamic Factor..............................
60
Civilian Control of the Military ....................
63
Greece and Cyprus .............................
64
The Defense and Security Dimension ...............
65
The American Factor............................
68
The Difficult Path Ahead .........................
69
Chapter Four
RELATIONS WITH GREECE AND THE BALKANS .......
71
The Historical Legacy ...........................
72
The Aegean Dispute ............................
74
The Cyprus Conflict ............................
77
Prospects for a Settlement ........................
80
The Minority Issue .............................
82
New Regional Geometries ........................
83
Earthquake Diplomacy and the New Detente ..........
84
The American Factor............................
88
The Domestic Dimension ........................
92
The Wider Balkan Stage..........................
93
Chapter Five
TURKEY AND EURASIA .........................
99
Central Asia ..................................
100
The Changing Strategic Context....................
103
Growing Strategic Interest in the Caucasus ...........
104
The Energy Dimension ..........................
107
The Russian Factor .............................
112
U.S.-Turkish Strategic Cooperation in Eurasia .........
115
Iran’s Role....................................
116
The Turkish-Israeli Connection ....................
119
Black Sea Economic Cooperation ..................
121
Domestic Influences ............................
122
Prospects for the Future .........................
125

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Contents
vii
Chapter Six
THE MIDDLE EAST AND THE MEDITERRANEAN ......
127
The Policy Setting ..............................
127
A Tradition of Ambivalence .......................
130
The Gulf War and Aftermath ......................
133
Contours of the New Activism .....................
136
A Forward Strategy Toward Northern Iraq ..........
137
A Strategic Relationship with Israel................
140
Confrontation and Rapprochement with Syria .......
144
Friction and Engagement with Iran ...............
147
The Western Context for Turkish Regional Policy .......
149
Turkey and the Mediterranean ....................
152
Looking Ahead ................................
155
Chapter Seven
TURKEY AND THE UNITED STATES ................
159
Origins of a Strategic Relationship ..................
160
Gulf War and Aftermath:  An Expanded Partnership .....
165
Turkish Bilateral Interests Today ...................
169
Changing Bilateral Images........................
178
Looking Ahead ................................
182
Chapter Eight
CONCLUSION ................................
187
Whither Turkey? ...............................
187
Where Does Turkey Fit?..........................
189
How will Turkey Act?............................
191
What Place in a Globalized World? ..................
195
Implications for Turkey’s Western Partners ...........
196
Bibliography .....................................
201
About the Authors.................................
217

--- Sayfa 9 ---
ix
SUMMARY
As Turkey enters the 21st century, it faces a troubled environment,
domestically and internationally.  Uncertainties regarding the coun-
try’s future and its external policies have increased significantly as a
result of Turkey’s own economic crises and political turmoil, trou-
bling developments in nearby regions, and challenges further afield.
As a consequence, the task of understanding and assessing Turkey’s
international role has become more complex and far more difficult.
During the Cold War, Turkey acted as a bulwark against the expan-
sion of Soviet influence into the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle
East.  With the end of the Cold War, Ankara’s policy horizons have
expanded and Turkey has become a more assertive and independent
actor on the international stage.  Where once Turkey primarily
looked West, today Turkey is increasingly being pulled East and
South as well.  As a result, Turkey has been forced to redefine its for-
eign and security policy interests and to rethink its international re-
lationships.
If Turkey were a small state located in Antarctica or the South Sea Is-
lands, these changes might matter little.  But Turkey stands at the
nexus of three areas of increasing strategic importance to the United
States and Europe:  the Balkans, the Caspian region, and the Middle
East.  Thus, how Turkey evolves is important, both to the United
States and to Europe.
Turkey’s sheer size, moreover, gives it important geostrategic weight.
Turkey’s population is currently nearly 68 million—the second
largest in Europe behind Germany—and may be close to 100 million
by the middle of the 21st century.  This would make Turkey the most

--- Sayfa 10 ---
x
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
populous country in Europe.  Integrating a country and economy of
this size will place significant burdens on a European Union (EU) al-
ready reeling from the demands posed by admitting much smaller
countries from Central and Eastern Europe.  The challenges for
Turkey and Europe will be daunting.  How each side responds to
these challenges will have an important effect not only on Turkey’s
evolution but on Europe’s political and strategic evolution as well.
TURKEY AS A REGIONAL ACTOR
In the past decade, moreover, Turkey has emerged as an increasingly
important regional actor, wielding substantial military as well as
diplomatic weight.  Nowhere has this been more evident than in the
Middle East.  This growing involvement in Middle Eastern affairs rep-
resents an important shift in Turkish policy.  Under Atatürk—and for
several decades after his death—Turkey eschewed involvement in
the Middle East, but in recent years, Turkey has been heavily en-
gaged in the region.  This more active policy contrasts markedly with
the more passive approach that characterized Turkish policy before
the Gulf War.
At the same time, Turkey’s greater involvement in the Middle East
has complicated relations with Europe.  Many Europeans are wary of
Turkish membership in the EU not only because of the political, eco-
nomic, and cultural problems it would present but also because they
fear it will extend Europe’s borders into the Middle East and drag Eu-
rope more deeply into the vortex of Middle Eastern politics.  Thus,
Turkey’s Middle Eastern involvement has raised new dilemmas
about its European or Western identity.  The deeper its involvement
in the Middle East, the more problems this poses for Turkey’s West-
ern orientation and identity.
The end of the Cold War has also opened up new horizons for Turk-
ish policy in the Caucasus and Central Asia—areas that were previ-
ously closed to Turkish policy.  Although Turkey has been cautious
about exploiting these possibilities, the emergence of the Caucasus
and Central Asia has given a new dimension to Turkish policy.
Turkey now has interests in the region that it did not have during the
Cold War.  This inevitably affects its security perceptions and rela-
tions with its Western allies.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Summary
xi
At the same time, Turkey’s interest and involvement in the Caucasus
and Central Asia have complicated relations with Russia and given
the historical rivalry between the two countries new impetus.  In-
creasingly, Russia has come to see Turkey as a major rival for influ-
ence in the region and has sought to stem Turkey’s efforts to estab-
lish a geostrategic foothold there.  But Russia also remains an
increasingly important trade partner.  This gives Turkey a strong in-
centive to keep relations with Russia on an even keel.  Indeed, the
growing economic interaction between Russia and Turkey is one of
the most important developments in Turkish policy toward Eurasia
and could have a significant effect on Turkey’s relations with
Moscow over the long run.
Turkey’s relations with Europe are also undergoing important and
stressful change.  At its December 1999 Helsinki summit, the EU de-
cided to accept Turkey as a candidate for membership, after years of
keeping it at arm’s length.  Since then, Turkey has undertaken a
number of important reforms designed to meet the EU’s Copen-
hagen criteria, including abolition of the death penalty and an easing
of restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language.  However, many
Europeans are still not convinced that Turkey should be admitted,
both for cultural as well as economic reasons; their reservations are
compounded by the sheer scale of Turkey as a society.
Perhaps the area where Turkey’s relations have witnessed the most
dramatic change, however, is with Greece.  After years of hostility,
Greek-Turkish relations have slowly begun to improve, bolstered in
part by “earthquake diplomacy.”  The key question, however, is
whether the recent rapprochement simply represents a tactical ma-
neuver or fundamental strategic change in the nature of relations.  So
far, the thaw has been limited largely to nonstrategic areas such as
trade, the environment, tourism, and a variety of nontraditional se-
curity matters.  However, if it is to be durable, it will need to address
the core issues of the Aegean and Cyprus.
In the Balkans, too, Turkish policy is in flux.  After the collapse of the
Ottoman empire, Turkey effectively withdrew from the Balkans.  But
the end of Cold War has witnessed renewed Turkish interest in the
region.  Turkey’s relations with Albania, Macedonia, and Bulgaria
have visibly improved.  Turkey has actively participated in peace-
keeping and stabilization operations in Bosnia and Kosovo and

--- Sayfa 12 ---
xii
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
would likely contribute to any Western peacekeeping operation in
Macedonia.  But Turkey’s sympathy for the Muslims in Bosnia and
elsewhere worries many Europeans—especially Greeks—who fear
that at some point Turkey might be tempted “to play the Muslim
card.”  So far, Ankara’s approach to the region has been moderate
and multilateral.  But a more nationalist government in Ankara might
not be as restrained.
Finally, Turkey’s relations with the United States have witnessed im-
portant changes.  Turkey’s increasing involvement in the Balkans,
the Caucasus, and the Middle East have increased Turkey’s strategic
importance in Washington’s eyes.  The United States has come to see
Turkey as a key strategic ally and a more capable actor in these re-
gions.  In addition, the war on terrorism, and the U.S. desire to bol-
ster moderate voices in the Muslim world, have reinforced Turkey’s
strategic importance to the United States.
But U.S.-Turkish perspectives differ on many issues, especially in the
Gulf.  Turkey has strong reservations about U.S. policy toward Iraq,
which it fears will lead to the creation of a separate Kurdish state in
Northern Iraq.  A U.S. invasion of Iraq could put new strains on U.S.-
Turkish relations.  Ankara also does not share Washington’s view
about the need to isolate Iran, which is an important trading partner
and a source of natural gas for Turkey.  These differences hinder the
development of a true “strategic partnership” between Turkey and
the United States.
THE TRANSNATIONAL DIMENSION
Turkey’s interests and policy are also shaped by a number of cross-
cutting transnational—and transregional—issues, especially the
spread of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the proliferation
of ballistic missile technology.  Turkey’s increased exposure to WMD
is bound to influence its security perceptions in the future.  At the
same time, this exposure gives Turkey a much stronger interest in
missile defense than many of its European allies, which do not (yet)
face the same degree of vulnerability to these threats.
Terrorism is another transnational issue having a significant effect
on Turkish security perceptions.  The number of assassinations of
prominent Turkish officials and journalists in the last decade, and

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Summary
xiii
the persistence of left-wing and right-wing terrorism inside Turkey,
have heightened Turkish sensitivity to the dangers of international
terrorism and given Ankara a strong interest in combating its spread.
This could become an issue in Turkey’s relations with the United
States, especially if some of Turkey’s neighbors, or groups within
Turkey, were to begin to conduct terrorist attacks against Turkish
bases from which U.S. forces were operating.
Energy has also emerged as an important factor influencing Turkish
policy.  Turkey’s growing energy needs have given Turkey a strong
interest in developing ties to energy-producing states in the Middle
East and the Caspian region.  Turkey’s strong support for the devel-
opment of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline has become a critical element
in its strategy in the Caucasus and Caspian region.  Turkey has also
sought to expand economic cooperation with Iran in the energy field
despite strong U.S. objections.  And it has been eager to revive energy
cooperation with Iraq and see the current sanctions regime against
Baghdad lifted.  With the development of new oil and gas routes to
bring Caspian and Middle Eastern supplies to world markets, Turkey
is also emerging as a key energy entrepôt and transshipment state,
especially for Europe.
Finally, Turkish policy has been affected by the increased emphasis
on human rights in Western policy.  The Kurdish issue, in particular,
has been a source of tension in Turkey’s relations with Europe, es-
pecially Germany.  But human rights concerns have also had an im-
portant effect on relations with the United States.  Concerns in this
area have had a substantial influence on the character of the bilateral
relationship in recent years, including security cooperation and arms
transfers.
INTERNAL CHANGE
These changes are occurring at a time when the Turkish domestic
scene is also experiencing important changes, many of which are
having an effect on Turkey’s foreign and security policy.  In the last
decade, many of the key tenets of Atatürkism—Westernization,
statism, secularism, and nonintervention—have come under in-
creasing assault.  The democratization of Turkish society has created
space for a variety of new groups and forces that have challenged the
power of the Kemalist state.  These challenges, including challenges

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xiv
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
from Turkey’s secular reformists to the traditionally strong state ap-
paratus, will be a key force shaping Turkish society and policy over
the next decades.
In addition, the Islamist movement in Turkey has undergone an im-
portant evolution in the last several years.  The dominant tendency
among Turkey’s religious politicians today—many operating under
legal bans on political activity—is toward what is described as
“Muslim democracy,” loosely patterned on the model of Christian
democratic parties in Europe.  The foreign policy orientation of these
Muslim democrats appears increasingly mainstream but reflects a
degree of wariness regarding globalization and integration and can
be nationalistic in tone.
Indeed, the reassertion of Turkish nationalism is arguably a far more
important influence on foreign policy than religious politics in
Turkey.  Although nationalism has been a key component of Turkish
foreign policy going back to Atatürk, the Gulf War gave it new impe-
tus.  Many Turks felt that Turkey paid too high an economic and po-
litical price for its support of the United States in the Gulf War.
Moreover, these sacrifices did not bring the expected rewards,
namely, membership in the European Union.  The tepid European
response provoked considerable resentment among the Turkish
public and reinforced a sense that Turkey had to look after its own
interests more vigorously.  Events in Bosnia and Chechnya, where
Turkish affinities are engaged, reinforced this nationalist inclination.
In a very different fashion, Turkey’s current economic crisis—and
resentment over the role of international financial institutions—has
also been a spur to nationalist sentiment.
Another important trend has been the growing influence of the inde-
pendent media, especially television.  The media played an impor-
tant role in the crisis over Imia/Kardak, which brought Turkey and
Greece to the brink of war in January 1996, as well as in the first
Chechnya crisis.  Moreover, Islamist and other political groups now
have their own television stations, giving them unprecedented access
to a much broader cross section of the Turkish public.  Public opin-
ion and the media are now far more important factors in Turkish ex-
ternal policy than ever before.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Summary
xv
At the same time, the growth of a dynamic private sector has served
to weaken the role of the “strong state” and strengthen the power of
civil society.  The business community, in particular, has emerged as
an important political force in Turkey.  The Turkish Industrialists’
and Businessmen’s Association and other institutions have emerged
as outspoken advocates for reform and have proposed new policy
initiatives on a broad range of social, economic, and political issues,
including the Kurdish issue.  Turkish entrepreneurs have also played
a leading role in the expansion of economic ties to Russia, Central
Asia, and the Middle East and have been at the forefront of the recent
rapprochement with Greece.  Together with the changing role of the
military in Turkish society, the landscape for debate and policymak-
ing on a range of issues, including foreign and security policy, is
changing rapidly, with new actors operating alongside traditional
elites.
Finally, the role of the Turkish military is evolving.  The military has
traditionally regarded itself as the custodian of the Atatürk legacy
and has directly intervened three times when it felt democracy in
Turkey was threatened.  Each time, however, it has returned to the
barracks after a short period of direct rule.  Today, the military is
much less inclined to intervene directly in Turkish politics.  But it
remains an important political force behind the scenes, as its ouster
of the Erbakan government in a “silent coup” on June 1997 under-
scores.  This political role is regarded by many EU members as in-
consistent with a modern democracy and could pose an obstacle to
Turkey’s membership in the EU over the long term.
In sum, Turkey today is at an important crossroads.  Externally, it
faces new challenges, especially in Europe and the Middle East; in-
ternally, it has reached an impasse that requires important changes
in the way Turkey is governed—and by whom.  Incrementalism and
“muddling through”—approaches that have characterized Turkish
policy in the past—are unlikely to be sufficient in the future.  The
threshold for unrest in Turkey remains high, but a continuing eco-
nomic crisis, with social and political cleavages left unresolved, could
push Turkey toward greater instability, making extreme or more
chaotic outcomes possible.  Although far from inevitable, these out-
comes would have serious implications for Turkey’s external rela-
tions.  In particular, a Turkey in turmoil would result in even more
resistance to the idea of Turkish membership in the EU.  Turkey

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xvi
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
would also become a much less dependable ally for the United
States.  Hence, how Turkey resolves these challenges matters—both
for Turks and for Western policy.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xvii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors have benefited enormously from recent discussions with
public and private sector observers in Turkey, Europe, and the
United States.  We are most grateful to all who contributed views and
comments.  We also wish to thank RAND colleagues Daniel Byman,
Rachel Swanger, Jeff Isaacson, and Nurith Berstein, as well as Bar-
bara Kliszewski, Shirley Birch, and Chrystine Keener, for their assis-
tance in the research for and preparation of the manuscript.  Bülent
Aliriza, Keith Crane, Theodore Couloumbis, Philip Gordon, Fiona
Hill, Olga Oliker, Sabri Sayari, and Thanos Veremis offered valuable
comments and advice on earlier drafts of the book.  Finally, we owe
special thanks to Jerrold Green and RAND’s Center for Middle East
Public Policy, and Stuart Johnson and James Dobbins of RAND’s Na-
tional Security Research Division, for their generous support of this
project.  Of course, any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility
of the authors.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
xix
ACRONYMS
ABM
Antiballistic Missile
ACRS
Arms Control and Regional Security
AKP
Justice and Development Party
ANAP
Motherland Party
AP
Accession Partnership
BLACKSEAFOR
Black Sea Naval Task Force
BSEC
Black Sea Economic Cooperation
CENTO
Central Treaty Organization
CFE
Conventional Forces in Europe
DECA
Defense and Economic Cooperation Agreement
DSP
Democratic Left Party
DYP
True Path Party
EC
European Community
ESDI
European Security and Defense Initiative
ESDP
European Security and Defense Policy
EU
European Union
GDP
Gross Domestic Product

--- Sayfa 20 ---
xx
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
GNP
Gross National Product
ICJ
International Court of Justice
IFOR
Implementation Force (Bosnia)
IISS
International Institute for Strategic Studies
IMF
International Monetary Fund
ISAF
International Security Assistance Force
(Afghanistan)
KFOR
Kosovo Peacekeeping Force
MHP
Nationalist Action Party
MUSIAD
Independent Turkish Businessmen’s Association
NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NSC
National Security Council
OECD
Organization for Economic Development and Co-
operation
OSCE
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Eu-
rope
PASOK
Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement
PERMIS
Permanent International Secretariat
PKK
Kurdistan Workers Party
SEEBRIG
Southeast European Brigade
SFOR
Stabilization Force
TCGP
Trans-Caspian Gas Pipeline
TESEV
Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation
TGS
Turkish General Staff
TIKA
Turkish International Cooperation Agency

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Acronyms
xxi
TRNC
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
TUSIAD
Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s Asso-
ciation
WEU
Western European Union
WMD
Weapons of Mass Destruction
YTP
New Turkey Party

--- Sayfa 23 ---
1
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION:  TURKISH FOREIGN POLICY IN
TRANSITION
Turkey faces a troubled environment, domestically and interna-
tionally.  Uncertainties regarding the country’s future and its external
policies have increased significantly as a result of Turkey’s own eco-
nomic crises and political turmoil, troubling developments in nearby
regions, and challenges further afield.  The opening of the 21st cen-
tury has seen a multiplication of variables influencing Turkey’s for-
eign and security policy.  As a consequence, the task of understand-
ing and assessing Turkey’s international role has become more
complex and far more difficult.
During the Cold War, Turkey was a key part of the Western defense
system.  Ankara acted as a bulwark against the expansion of Soviet
influence into the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East.  It tied
down some 24 Soviet divisions that might otherwise have been de-
ployed on the Central front.  It also supplied important bases and
facilities for the forward deployment of nuclear weapons and the
monitoring of Soviet compliance with arms control agreements.
With the end of the Cold War, many in Turkey and the West assumed
a much reduced role for Turkey as a regional actor and as an ally of
the West.  These assumptions, however, proved unfounded.  Rather
than declining, Turkey’s strategic importance has increased.
At the same time, Ankara’s policy horizons have expanded and
Turkey has become a more assertive and independent actor on the
international stage.  Where once Turkey primarily looked West, today
Turkey is increasingly being pulled East and South as well.  As a re-

--- Sayfa 24 ---
2
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
sult, Turkey has been forced to redefine its foreign and security pol-
icy interests and to rethink its international relationships.
At the same time, Turkey has faced new domestic challenges from
Kurdish separatists and Islamists.  Economic changes, especially the
growth of a dynamic private sector, have eroded the role of the state
and created new political and economic forces that have challenged
the power of the old Kemalist bureaucratic elite.  These forces have
increasingly influenced both the style and substance of Turkish for-
eign and security policy.  Indeed, the debate between state-centered
conservatives and reformers—a debate that cuts across private and
public circles in Turkish society—has been greatly sharpened by the
economic crisis of 2000–2002.  Looking ahead, the crisis and its polit-
ical consequences could have important implications for the compo-
sition and orientation of Turkey’s foreign policy elite.
TURKEY AS A “PIVOT” STATE
If Turkey were a small state located in Antarctica or the South Sea Is-
lands, these changes might matter little.  But Turkey stands at the
nexus of three areas of increasing strategic importance to the United
States and Europe:  the Balkans, the Caspian region, and the Middle
East.  Thus, how Turkey evolves is important both to the United
States and to Europe.
Indeed, in many ways, Turkey is a “pivot” state par excellence.1
Population, location, and economic and military potential are key
requirements for pivot states.  But the defining quality of a pivot state
is, above all, the capacity to affect regional and international stability.
By this measure, Turkey clearly qualifies, along with such states as
Mexico, Brazil, Algeria, Egypt, India, and Indonesia.  This disparate
list of states is tied together by their capacity to promote regional
stability—or disorder.  A prosperous, stable Turkey would be a factor
for stability in a number of different areas:  the Balkans, the Cauca-
sus, the Middle East, and Europe.  But an impoverished, unstable
______________

1On the definition and role of a pivot state, see Robert S. Chace, Emily Hill, and
Paul Kennedy, “Pivotal States and U.S. Strategy,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 75, No. 1,
January/February 1996, pp. 33–51.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
3
Turkey wracked by religious, ethnic, and political turmoil would be a
source of instability and concern in all four regions.
What sets Turkey apart from other developing pivot states is its
membership in the Western strategic club, principally through the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) but also through its
evolving relations with the European Union (EU).  Thus, develop-
ments in Turkey are directly linked to U.S. and Western interests.  A
reorientation of Turkey’s foreign policy or serious threat to its demo-
cratic order would have important political and security conse-
quences for both the United States and Europe.
Turkey’s sheer size, moreover, gives it important geostrategic weight.
Turkey’s population is currently nearly 67.8 million—the second
largest in Europe behind Germany—and may be close to 100 million
by the middle of the 21st century.  This would make Turkey the most
populous country in Europe.  Integrating a country and economy of
this size will place significant burdens on an EU already reeling from
the demands posed by admitting much smaller countries from Cen-
tral and Eastern Europe.  The challenges for Turkey and Europe will
be daunting.  How each side responds to these challenges will have
an important effect not only on Turkey’s evolution but on Europe’s
political and strategic evolution as well.
TURKEY AS A REGIONAL ACTOR
In the past decade, moreover, Turkey has emerged as an increasingly
important regional actor, wielding substantial military as well as
diplomatic weight.  Nowhere has this been more evident than in the
Middle East.  This growing involvement in Middle Eastern affairs rep-
resents an important shift in Turkish policy.  Under Atatürk—and for
several decades after his death—Turkey eschewed involvement in
the Middle East, but in recent years Turkey has been heavily engaged
in the region.  The Gulf War was an important turning point in this
process.  Against the counsel of his security advisors, President Özal
opted squarely to allow the United States to fly sorties against Iraq
from Turkish bases.  Turkey also shut down the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik
oil pipeline as part of the effort to impose economic sanctions
against Iraq.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
4
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Özal’s action was an important departure from Turkey’s traditional
policy of avoiding deep involvement in Middle Eastern affairs.  At the
same time, it opened a new period of greater activism in Turkish
policy toward the Middle East, which has intensified visibly since the
mid-1990s.  This more active policy contrasts markedly with the
more passive approach that characterized Turkish policy before the
Gulf War.
The most dramatic example of this new approach to the Middle East
has been Turkey’s growing relationship with Israel.  The Israeli con-
nection has strengthened Turkey’s diplomatic leverage in the region
and was a factor in Ankara’s decision to force a showdown with Syria
in the Fall of 1998 over Syria’s support for the Kurdistan Workers
Party (PKK).  The renewal of Arab-Israeli tensions, however, could
put new strains on Turkey’s relations with Israel.
Deeper involvement in the Middle East has not been cost free.  The
burgeoning security relationship with Israel has complicated
Turkey’s already mixed relations with its Arab neighbors.  Turkey also
faces new threats, including from weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) deployed on or near its borders.  Turkey is already within
range of ballistic missiles that could be launched from Iran, Iraq, and
Syria and this exposure is likely to grow in the future as more coun-
tries in the region acquire ballistic missile technology and the capa-
bility to deploy weapons of mass destruction.  A nuclear-armed Iran
or Iraq could dramatically change the security equation for Turkey
and could have broader consequences for military balances else-
where on Turkey’s borders.  The renewed confrontation between
Israel and the Palestinians, counterterrorist operations in Afghan-
istan and possibly elsewhere, and the potential for conflict with Iraq
place all these issues in sharper relief.
At the same time, Turkey’s greater involvement in the Middle East
has complicated relations with Europe.  Many Europeans are wary of
Turkish membership in the EU not only because of the political, eco-
nomic, and cultural problems it would present, but because they fear
it will extend Europe’s borders into the Middle East and drag Europe
more deeply into the vortex of Middle Eastern politics.  Thus,
Turkey’s Middle Eastern involvement has raised new dilemmas
about its European or Western identity.  The deeper its involvement

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
5
in the Middle East, the more problems this poses for Turkey’s West-
ern orientation and identity.
The end of the Cold War also opened up new horizons for Turkish
policy in the Caucasus and Central Asia—areas that were previously
closed to Turkish policy.  Although Turkey has been cautious about
exploiting these possibilities, the emergence of the Caucasus and
Central Asia has given a new dimension to Turkish policy.  Turkey
now has interests in the region that it did not have during the Cold
War.  This inevitably affects its security perceptions and relations
with its Western allies.
At the same time, Turkey’s interest and involvement in the Caucasus
and Central Asia have complicated relations with Russia and given
the historical rivalry between the two countries new impetus.  In-
creasingly, Russia has come to see Turkey as a major rival for influ-
ence in the region and has sought to stem Turkey’s efforts to estab-
lish a geostrategic foothold there.  But Russia also remains an
increasingly important trade partner.  This gives Turkey a strong in-
centive to keep relations with Russia on an even keel.  Indeed, the
growing economic interaction between Russia and Turkey is one of
the most important developments in Turkish policy toward Eurasia
and could have a significant effect on Turkey’s relations with
Moscow over the long run.
Turkey’s relations with Europe are also undergoing important and
stressful change.  The EU’s decision at the December 1999 Helsinki
summit to accept Turkey as a candidate for membership, after years
of keeping Turkey at arm’s length, helped to ease strains in Turkey’s
relations with Europe.  But membership would require major
changes in Turkey’s internal policies and practices.  Turkey would
have to cede a degree of sovereignty that many Turks may find
difficult to accept.  Membership could also require Turkey to open
up its internal practices to outside scrutiny to an unprecedented
degree, and the military will have to accept a less prominent role in
Turkish politics.  Several years after Helsinki, Europeans still have
reservations about the pace of Turkish reform, and Turkish opinion
about the EU has become more ambivalent and critical.  Moreover,
the prospects for Turkish progress on EU-related reforms are now
closely tied to the outcome of Turkey’s efforts to emerge from its
economic and political crisis.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
6
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
In short, Turkish membership is by no means assured.  Many Euro-
peans are still not convinced that Turkey should be admitted, both
for cultural as well as economic reasons—reservations that are com-
pounded by the sheer scale of Turkey as a society.  At the same time,
the EU’s decision to create a distinct European Security and Defense
Policy (ESDP) creates new security dilemmas for Turkey.  Turkey is
not a member of the EU and is not likely to be one in the near future.
Thus, it continues to see NATO as the main vehicle for managing its
security and defense problems.  This sets it apart from many of its
European allies who favor a stronger European and defense identity
and complicates its relationship with Europe.  As the EU develops a
stronger security and defense component, the tensions between
Turkey’s strong attachment to NATO and its desire for EU member-
ship could intensify.
Perhaps the area where Turkey’s relations have witnessed the most
dramatic change, however, is with Greece.  After years of hostility,
Greek-Turkish relations have slowly begun to improve, bolstered in
part by “earthquake diplomacy.”  The key question, however, is
whether the recent rapprochement is durable.  Does the thaw repre-
sent a qualitative change in relations that will lead to a lasting
détente or is it just the lull before a new storm?  So far, the thaw has
been limited largely to nonstrategic areas such as trade, the envi-
ronment, tourism, and a variety of nontraditional security matters.
However, if it is to be durable, it will need to address the core issues
of the Aegean and Cyprus.
Cyprus, in particular, remains a major obstacle to a more far-reach-
ing rapprochement.  Indeed, if anything, Turkish views on Cyprus
have hardened in recent years.  Turkey has increasingly come to see
Cyprus as a wider strategic issue, going beyond the protection of
Turkish brethren on the island.  This security dimension is likely to
continue to color Turkish views on Cyprus and make any settlement
of the issue difficult.  With the EU’s decision to admit Green Cyprus
at its Copenhagen summit in December 2002 a near certainty, the
Cyprus problem could become a flashpoint in relations between
Ankara and Brussels.
In the Balkans, too, Turkish policy is in flux.  After the collapse of the
Ottoman empire, Turkey effectively withdrew from the Balkans.  But
the end of Cold War has witnessed renewed Turkish interest in the

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
7
region.  Turkey’s relations with Albania, Macedonia, and Bulgaria
have visibly improved.  Turkey has actively participated in the Im-
plementation Force (IFOR), the Stabilization Force (SFOR), and the
Kosovo Peacekeeping Force (KFOR) and would likely contribute to
any Western peacekeeping operation in Macedonia.  But Turkey’s
sympathy for the Muslims in Bosnia and elsewhere worries many Eu-
ropeans—especially Greeks—who fear that at some point Turkey
might be tempted “to play the Muslim card.”  So far, Ankara’s ap-
proach to the region has been moderate and multilateral.  But a more
nationalist government in Ankara might not be as restrained.
Finally, Turkey’s relations with the United States have witnessed im-
portant changes.  The United States has come to see Turkey as a key
strategic ally and a more capable actor in these regions.  Turkey’s
increasing involvement in the Balkans, the Caucasus, and the Middle
East, in addition to the war on terrorism, and the U.S. desire to bol-
ster moderate voices in the Muslim world, have reinforced Turkey’s
strategic importance in Washington’s eyes.
But U.S.-Turkish perspectives differ on many issues, especially in the
Gulf.  Turkey has strong reservations about U.S. policy toward Iraq,
which it fears will lead to the creation of a separate Kurdish state in
Northern Iraq.  A U.S. invasion of Iraq could put new strains on U.S.-
Turkish relations.  Ankara also does not share Washington’s view
about the need to isolate Iran, which is an important trading partner
and source of natural gas for Turkey.  These differences hinder the
development of a true “strategic partnership” between Turkey and
the United States.
Moreover, in recent years Turkey has become increasingly sensitive
about issues of national sovereignty and has imposed tight restric-
tions on the use of its bases to monitor the no-fly zone over Northern
Iraq.  A more assertive Turkey—especially one more deeply involved
in the Middle East—is likely to be even more sensitive about the use
of its facilities in operations that directly affect its regional interests.
At the same time, Turkey’s strategic environment will be strongly in-
fluenced by the evolution of America’s regional and defense policies
beyond the Gulf—including the new focus on counterterrorism
worldwide.  Washington has supported financial assistance to
Ankara, as Turkey struggles to recover from its economic crisis, but

--- Sayfa 30 ---
8
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tolerance for Turkey’s renewed demands on the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF) may be reaching a limit.  The character of U.S.-
Russian relations will also have important implications for Ankara’s
own planning, and Turkey will have a strong stake in the evolution of
U.S.-led missile defense efforts.  More broadly, the evolution of U.S.-
European relations will influence “where Turkey fits” in Western in-
terests and strategy.
THE TRANSNATIONAL DIMENSION
Turkey’s interests and policy are also shaped by a number of cross-
cutting transnational—and transregional—issues, especially the
spread of WMD and the proliferation of ballistic missile technology.
Turkey’s increased exposure to WMD is bound to influence its se-
curity perceptions in the future.  At the same time, this exposure
gives Turkey a much stronger interest in missile defense than many
of its European allies, which do not (yet) face the same degree of vul-
nerability to these threats.
Terrorism is another transnational issue having a significant effect
on Turkish security perceptions.  The number of assassinations of
prominent Turkish officials and journalists in the last decade, and
the persistence of left-wing and right-wing terrorism inside Turkey,
have heightened Turkish sensitivity to the dangers of international
terrorism and given Ankara a strong interest in combating its spread.
This could become an issue in Turkey’s relations with the United
States, especially if some of Turkey’s neighbors, or groups within
Turkey, were to begin to conduct terrorist attacks against Turkish
bases from which U.S. forces were operating.  Moreover, Turkey has
defined its long struggle against the PKK insurgency in Southeastern
Anatolia as a battle against terrorism, and the United States recog-
nizes the PKK as a terrorist group.  Turkey may also play a significant
longer-term role in Western counterterrorism strategy in the Middle
East and Central Asia.
Energy has also emerged as an important factor influencing Turkish
policy.  Turkey’s growing energy needs have given Turkey a strong
interest in developing ties to energy-producing states in the Middle
East and the Caspian region.  Turkey’s strong support for the devel-
opment of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline has become a critical element
in its strategy in the Caucasus and Caspian region.  Turkey has also

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
9
sought to expand economic cooperation with Iran in the energy field
despite strong U.S. objections.  And it has been eager to revive energy
cooperation with Iraq and see the current sanctions against Baghdad
lifted.  With the development of new oil and gas routes to bring
Caspian and Middle Eastern supplies to world markets, Turkey is
also emerging as a key energy entrepôt and transshipment state, es-
pecially for Europe.
Finally, Turkish policy has been affected by the increased emphasis
on human rights in Western policy.  The Kurdish issue, in particular,
has been a source of tension in Turkey’s relations with Europe, es-
pecially Germany.  But human rights concerns have also had an im-
portant effect on relations with the United States.  Concerns in this
area have had a substantial influence on the character of the bilateral
relationship in recent years, including security cooperation and arms
transfers.  Human rights will undoubtedly remain on the agenda and
will take on added significance as Ankara looks to European integra-
tion and also in light of Turkey’s ambitious defense procurement
plans.  Indeed, one motivation behind Turkey’s efforts to expand de-
fense-industrial cooperation with Israel has been its desire to offset
the human-rights-related constraints it has faced in trying to procure
military equipment from the United States and key European coun-
tries such as Germany.
INTERNAL CHANGE
The Turkish domestic scene is also experiencing important changes,
many of which are having an effect on Turkey’s foreign and security
policy.  In the last decade, many of the key tenets of Atatürkism—
Westernization, statism, secularism, and nonintervention—have
come under increasing assault.  The democratization of Turkish so-
ciety has created space for a variety of new groups and forces that
have challenged the power of the Kemalist state.  These challenges,
including challenges from Turkey’s secular reformists to the tradi-
tionally strong state apparatus, will be a key force shaping Turkish
society and policy over the next decades.
In addition, the Islamist movement in Turkey has undergone an im-
portant evolution in the last several years.  The experience of an
Islamist Refah-led government—forced to resign under pressure by
the military and secular forces in June 1997—raised the specter of a

--- Sayfa 32 ---
10
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
changed foreign policy orientation, with greater attention to Turkey’s
relations with the Islamic world.  In actual fact, there was little
change in Turkish policy during this period, and even the Refah lead-
ership was unwilling or unable to derail Turkey’s expanding relation-
ship with Israel.  Refah’s successor, the Fazilet (Virtue) Party, sup-
ported Turkish membership in NATO and actually championed the
idea of EU membership on the assumption that European integra-
tion would mean more freedom of action for Turkey’s Islamists.  To-
day, with Fazilet banned, there is a tendency toward fragmentation
in religious politics.  The dominant tendency among Turkey’s reli-
gious politicians—many operating under legal bans on political
activity—is now toward what is described as “Muslim democracy,”
loosely patterned on the model of Christian democratic parties in
Europe.  The Justice and Development Party, the leading successor to
the Virtue Party, enjoys widespread support among Turkey’s
electorate.  The foreign policy orientation of these Muslim democrats
appears increasingly mainstream but reflects a degree of wariness
regarding globalization and integration and can be nationalistic in
tone.
Indeed, the reassertion of Turkish nationalism is arguably a far more
important influence on foreign policy than religious politics in
Turkey.  Although nationalism has been a key component of Turkish
foreign policy going back to Atatürk, the Gulf War gave it new impe-
tus.  Many Turks felt that Turkey paid too high an economic and po-
litical price for its support of the United States in the Gulf War.
Moreover, these sacrifices did not bring the expected rewards vis-à-
vis membership in the European Union.  The tepid European re-
sponse provoked considerable resentment among the Turkish public
and reinforced a sense that Turkey had to look after its own interests
more vigorously.  Events in Bosnia and Chechnya, where Turkish
affinities are engaged, reinforced this nationalist inclination.  In a
very different fashion, Turkey’s current economic crisis—and re-
sentment over the role of international financial institutions—has
also been a spur to nationalist sentiment.
The coalition that emerged after the 1999 elections, comprising
Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party (DSP), the cen-
ter-right Motherland Party (ANAP), and the right-wing Nationalist
Action Party (MHP), reflected this growing nationalist orientation.
The DSP and MHP rode to power in 1999 on a tide of rising national-

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
11
ism, fueled in part by the struggle against the PKK as well as Turkey’s
perceived rejection by Europe at the time.  In many ways, their suc-
cess was due to their ability to capture what Alan Makovsky has
termed “Turkey’s nationalist moment.”2
Nationalist sentiment, along with closer measurement of Turkish
national interest, has fueled a more active and assertive Turkish for-
eign policy.  This has been reflected, in particular, in Turkish policy
toward Syria, where in the fall of 1998 Turkey openly threatened to
use military force to compel Damascus to cease its support for the
PKK.  It has also been reflected in the restrictive attitude that Turkey
has taken toward American use of Incirlik air base.  And it could be
seen in the strong Turkish reaction to a proposed Armenian genocide
resolution in the U.S. Congress in the Fall of 2000.
Another important trend has been the growing influence of the inde-
pendent media, especially television.  The media played an impor-
tant role in the crisis over Imia/Kardak, which brought Turkey and
Greece to the brink of war in January 1996, as well as in the first
Chechnya crisis.  Moreover, Islamist and other political groups now
have their own television stations, giving them unprecedented access
to a much broader cross section of the Turkish public.  Public opin-
ion and the media are now far more important factors in Turkish ex-
ternal policy than ever before.
At the same time, the growth of a dynamic private sector has served
to weaken the role of the “strong state” and strengthen the power of
civil society.3  The business community, in particular, has emerged
as an important political force in Turkey.  The Turkish Industrialists’
and Businessmen’s Association (TUSIAD) and other institutions have
emerged as outspoken advocates for reform and have proposed new
policy initiatives on a broad range of social, economic, and political
issues, including the Kurdish issue.  Turkish entrepreneurs have also
played a leading role in the expansion of economic ties to Russia,
Central Asia, and the Middle East and have been at the forefront of
the recent rapprochement with Greece.  Together with the changing
______________

2See Alan Makovsky, “Turkey’s Nationalist Moment,” The Washington Quarterly, Vol.
22, No. 4, Autumn 1999, pp. 159–166.
3See Henri J. Barkey, “The Struggles of a Strong State,” The Journal of International
Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 87–105.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
12
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
role of the military in Turkish society, the landscape for debate and
policymaking on a range of issues, including foreign and security
policy, is changing rapidly, with new actors operating alongside tra-
ditional elites.
Finally, the role of the military as a key actor in Turkish foreign and
security policymaking continues to evolve in important ways, and
more significant changes could lie ahead.  On key issues, from the
Kurdish issue in its regional context, to NATO policy, the military es-
tablishment has exercised a dominant influence.  The military has
also had a subtle, and sometimes not so subtle, role in the evolution
of Turkish politics in recent years, although Turkey’s tradition of di-
rect military coups is probably a thing of the past.  As Turkey faces
stark choices regarding reform and European integration, the posi-
tion of the military in Turkish society and policy has come under
increasing criticism.  Turkey cannot meet the EU’s “Copenhagen
criteria” without a substantial change in the role of the military.
Moreover, it is doubtful that the Turkish military itself is monolithic
in its opinion regarding important issues such as European
integration, détente with Greece, and the path of reform in Turkey
itself.  Changes in the role of the military will be both an influence on
and a product of a changing foreign policy.
WHY THIS BOOK?
In short, many of the traditional paradigms that characterized
Turkey’s international role and international relations over past
decades are no longer valid.  Turkey’s domestic and foreign policies
are evolving in new and important ways.  At the same time, Turkey’s
geopolitical environment is changing, creating new opportunities
but also new risks and vulnerabilities.  Thus, a fresh look at Turkey’s
foreign and security policy is both timely and necessary.
This book explores these changes and their implications for Western
policy.  It expands on previous RAND work on Turkey.4  However, it
______________

4See, for example, Graham E. Fuller and Ian O. Lesser, Turkey’s New Geopolitics:  From
the Balkans to Western China, Boulder, CO:  Westview/RAND, 1993; Ian O. Lesser,
Bridge or Barrier?  Turkey and the West After the Cold War, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND,
1992; and Zalmay Khalilzad, Ian O. Lesser, and F. Stephen Larrabee, The Future of
Turkish-Western Relations, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 2000.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Introduction:  Turkish Foreign Policy in Transition
13
is not a historical survey.  Rather it focuses on key areas where Turk-
ish policy is changing and examines the implications of these
changes.  Special attention is paid to security and defense issues be-
cause these issues are at the forefront of the Turkish debate, and be-
cause Turkish thinking on these matters will have important impli-
cations for where Turkey “fits” in the emerging Euro-Atlantic security
architecture over the coming decades.
Chapter Two of this book examines the effect of domestic changes on
Turkish foreign and security policy, taking into account the country’s
ongoing economic crisis.  In particular, it focuses on the outlook for
Turkey’s traditionally “strong” state; pressures for and obstacles to
modernization and reform; the rise of new policy actors in the pri-
vate sector and elsewhere; the changing role of the military; the
prospects for Islamism and nationalism; and the internal aspects of
Turkish security perceptions.  Finally, the analysis discusses the con-
sequences of internal developments for Turkey’s ability to play an
active international role.
Chapter Three explores Turkey’s relations with Europe in the after-
math of the EU’s Helsinki summit.  How will the decision to accept
Turkey as a candidate for EU membership and subsequent develop-
ments affect Turkey’s relations with Europe and with other key actors
such as the United States and Russia?  What does it mean for
Turkey’s domestic reform agenda?  What problems lie ahead?  How
will the creation of a European Security and Defense Policy within
the EU affect Turkey?
Chapter Four examines Turkey’s relations with Greece and the
Balkans.  It focuses in particular on the prospects for a deepening of
the recent détente between Ankara and Athens.  It also assesses the
broader implications of the rapprochement for relations with the EU,
NATO and the United States.  Finally, it looks at the implications of
the Greek-Turkish relationship for stability in the Balkans and the
Eastern Mediterranean.  How strong is Turkey’s new activism in the
Balkans?  What are the driving forces behind it?  What are the impli-
cations for Turkey’s relations with its key allies?
Chapter Five examines Turkey’s relations in Central Asia and the
Caucasus.  Particular attention is focused on how Turkey’s ties to the
newly independent states in these regions will affect Ankara’s rela-

--- Sayfa 36 ---
14
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tions with Russia and Iran.  The chapter also examines “pipeline
politics” and the prospects for energy cooperation in both regions.
Finally, it analyzes the effect of domestic influences on Turkish pol-
icy toward Central Asia and the Caucasus.
Chapter Six examines Turkey’s involvement in the Middle East.  How
are Turkey’s relations with Iran, Iraq, and Syria likely to evolve?  What
are the implications of Turkey’s deepening defense cooperation with
Israel?  How durable is it?  What effect will uncertainty in the peace
process have on relations with Israel and Turkey’s wider regional in-
terests?  Finally, how are issues such as WMD, missile proliferation,
and energy trends likely to shape Turkish foreign and security policy?
Chapter Seven focuses on Turkey’s relations with the United States
in light of evolving bilateral interests and policy concerns.  In
particular, it examines how new factors—the growing role of the EU,
the Turkish-Israeli relationship, Turkey’s increasing economic
interaction with Russia, and Ankara’s relations with other key
regional actors such as Iran—are likely to affect Turkey’s ties to the
United States.  Finally, it explores how domestic changes and new
strategic concerns in the United States and Turkey may influence the
evolution of bilateral ties.
The final chapter offers overall conclusions and observations and as-
sesses the implications of a changing Turkish foreign and security
policy scene for relations with the West.  What problems are Turkey’s
evolution likely to pose for Western policy?  Can we expect greater
convergence or divergence in policy approaches?  How can policy
differences in areas of shared concern be reduced or eliminated?  Fi-
nally, to what extent is Turkey’s foreign and security policy evolution
amenable to international, including Western, influence, and to what
extent will Turkish external policy be driven by domestic forces?

--- Sayfa 37 ---
15
Chapter Two
THE CHANGING DOMESTIC CONTEXT
Changes in the international environment are placing new pressures
on Turkish policymakers and the Turkish public and are having im-
portant effects on Turkish policy.  This is particularly true given the
magnitude and rapidity of developments in adjacent regions,
whether in the Balkans, the Caucasus, or the Middle East.  These
pressures alone would be stressful for Turkish foreign and security
policymaking, which has a tradition of marked conservatism.
At the same time, Turkey confronts changes on the domestic scene
that are arguably even more significant in their foreign and security
policy implications.  Turkey remains embroiled in a severe economic
crisis that most Turks view as political at its base.  The way Turkey re-
sponds to these economic and political challenges will shape Turkish
society, perhaps for decades to come.  It will also be a leading de-
terminant of Turkey’s freedom of action and the direction of Turkish
policy on the international scene in the coming years.
This chapter explores key issues at the nexus of internal change and
Turkey’s foreign and security policy behavior, against a background
of economic and political turmoil.  These include the future of the
state, the rise of new political and economic actors, the changing role
of public opinion, the primacy of internal security considerations in
Turkish policy, and the future role of Turkey’s Islamists and
nationalists.
AN ECONOMIC—AND POLITICAL—CRISIS
The financial crisis of November 2000, and the much more severe
crisis of February 2001, were precipitated by a liquidity crisis expos-

--- Sayfa 38 ---
16
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ing the fragility of a banking sector plagued by corruption and politi-
cal favoritism.  The proximate cause of the February crisis was a po-
litical clash between Prime Minister Ecevit and President Sezer, but
the underlying causes are deep-seated and structural.  The rescue
package, organized by the IMF and the World Bank in the winter of
2000–2001, amounted to some $16 billion and was tied to a stringent
program of austerity, privatization, and banking sector reform.  By
the fall of 2001, it became clear that further “bailouts” by interna-
tional financial institutions would be required.  The ongoing eco-
nomic crisis has been especially painful for the more modern sectors
and regions, with Istanbul particularly hard hit.  The Turkish lira lost
almost 50 percent of its value, virtually overnight, and nearly 65 per-
cent by October 2001.  Unemployment mounted rapidly in the fi-
nancial sector, affecting many younger, urban Turks.  The collapse of
the commercial credit system had a pronounced effect on small and
medium-sized enterprises across the country.  Turkish and foreign
observers began to openly speculate about the prospects for social
unrest and more violent protest.  The economic reform package,
above all, changes in the banking sector, will have enormous impli-
cations for Turkish politics because the old system of patronage us-
ing state-controlled banks has been the basis for funding and influ-
ence of Turkey’s leading political parties.
The foreign and security policy effects of Turkey’s economic crisis
could be profound and may be assessed at three levels.  First,
Turkey’s near-term reform choices will shape the country’s domestic
development and foreign orientation.  Since the end of the Cold War,
observers have often described Turkey as being at a crossroads.  In
previous crises, Turkey has simply “muddled through” without pro-
nounced changes in course.  By contrast, the events of 2000–2001
have clearly led Turkey to a crossroads, by any definition, and mud-
dling through is unlikely to suffice.
Turkey faces two possible paths.  On the one hand, successful im-
plementation of the IMF-inspired economic reforms will require a
degree of political change that could facilitate more rapid reforms,
greater democratization, and the steps required for closer integration
in Europe and the continued modernization of Turkish society.  This
very positive path would encourage an active but Western-oriented
and multilateral foreign policy—in short, a more moderate and pre-
dictable Turkey.  On the other hand, Turkey’s conservatism and

--- Sayfa 39 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
17
statism (common on the left as well as the right) may impede eco-
nomic and political reform, and a deepening crisis could strengthen
already potent nationalist forces within the country.  The result
would be a more inward-looking Turkey, more sovereignty con-
scious, and more inclined toward a unilateral and less predictable
policy on the international scene.  In the worst case, a more chaotic
and uncontrolled Turkey would have little energy and resources for
foreign policy initiatives.  A more unstable and less secure Turkey, or
a Turkish collapse, would pose substantial dilemmas for both U.S.
and European policy and would leave a series of regional vacuums
from the Balkans to the Caucasus and the Middle East.
Second, the economic crisis has had a “reshuffling” effect on Turkish
politics and society.  Old cleavages between, for example, religion
and secularism, have been replaced by new divides, principally over
the question of political reform—support for the old order and the
established parties, or something new.  The debate over reform ap-
pears to cut across sectors, including business, the bureaucracy, and
even the military, that have often been seen as monolithic.  Reform-
ers and conservatives are to be found at all levels and in all sectors.
Turkey’s secular establishment, long the leading interlocutor for the
West, is being challenged by groups that have existed largely in the
shadows and have traditionally had a less prominent role in the
country’s international engagement.  The result of this struggle over
leadership and reform is likely to have considerable influence on
Turkish foreign policymaking in the future.
Third, the crisis is already having an effect on Turkey’s key interna-
tional relationships and the resources for national security policy.
Notwithstanding its avowed distaste for international bailouts, the
Bush administration has supported the IMF-led package of emer-
gency assistance for Turkey.  This support has not been linked to
policy preferences in Washington, beyond insistence on adherence
to the IMF reform plan.  But requests for further support could well
inspire a more explicit linkage to policy on Iraq, Iran, Cyprus, and
other areas where American and Turkish views have differed.  On the
issue of counterterrorism, where American and Turkish policies are
closely aligned, expanded cooperation is likely to strengthen the case
for continued financial support to Ankara.  Given Turkey’s status as a
candidate for EU membership, Washington might also insist that
Turkey’s EU partners bear a larger burden in any future assistance

--- Sayfa 40 ---
18
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
for Turkey.  Europe, for its part, may see the economic crisis as justi-
fication for a very slow and cautious approach to the entire question
of Turkish membership.
Turkey’s regional position may also be affected.  Economic strin-
gency will undoubtedly complicate the military’s ambitious modern-
ization plans and may indirectly facilitate a reduction in both Turkish
and Greek defense budgets.  It could also slow the pace of defense-
industrial cooperation with Israel, as well as procurement from the
United States and elsewhere.  Energy requirements have been a
leading factor in Turkey’s regional diplomacy.  Access to energy is
likely to remain an important objective in relations with Russia, Cen-
tral Asia, Iran, and Iraq, but the rate of growth in Turkish energy de-
mand may slow in a troubled economy.  In Afghanistan, where
Turkish forces have led international peacekeeping operations,
financial stringency has made it even more imperative that Turkey’s
allies, principally the United States, subsidize the cost of Turkish
participation.
Overall, Turkey’s economic and political travails have interrupted an
increasingly active Turkish debate about foreign and security policy
and a more active set of external policies.  Policymakers and the
public are intensely focused on resolving the country’s internal
problems and on the search for new leadership.  The conservative,
evolutionary nature of Turkish foreign policy could be disturbed by
these developments, with the potential for a more nationalistic or
simply less energetic and more inward-looking approach.
A QUESTION OF VISION
Since the beginning of the Republic, ideology—in the benign sense of
a guiding philosophy—has had a powerful influence over public
policy in virtually all spheres.  Atatürkism as an ideology may have
lost some of its coherence and influence over the last decade, but the
legacy of almost 80 years can still be felt strongly in many areas.  In
politics, Atatürkism has stood, above all, for secularism and the uni-
tary character of the Turkish state.  In economics, Atatürkism has
stood for statism—a legacy that is only now being eroded under
pressure of an economic crisis and the imperatives of reform in a
“globalized” economy.  In foreign policy, the Atatürkist tradition has

--- Sayfa 41 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
19
emphasized nonintervention, a Western orientation, and vigilance
with regard to national sovereignty.
In Atatürk’s own vision, domestic and foreign policymaking were
also closely linked.  He championed the use of “the world power bal-
ance” and Turkish foreign policy to defend “the full independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic.”  In negotiations surround-
ing the Lausanne conference in 1923, Atatürk asserted that the
“foundation of foreign policy is a strong domestic policy, a strong
domestic administration, and domestic organization.  Domestic
policy and foreign policy must always be linked.”1
As Turkey enters the 21st century, these principles are being trans-
formed by new actors and new issues in the Turkish policy debate.
In the period since the Gulf War, in particular, Turkey has become a
much more assertive actor in foreign and security policy.  Ankara
remains a relatively cautious player on the international scene and
retains a strong preference for multilateral action in most areas, but
nonintervention is no longer a meaningful description of Turkish
policy.  The country has at times flirted with more independent op-
tions.  There is also a growing tension between Turkey’s very tradi-
tional and strong sense of national sovereignty and the demands of
integration as Turkey aims at eventual membership in the EU.  Pres-
sures from the IMF and other international institutions have also in-
creased as a result of the country’s economic troubles, and these too
have spurred a nationalist reaction in some quarters.  To the extent
that Turkey progresses in its convergence with Europe, and as its so-
ciety continues to modernize, this tension between sovereignty and
integration is set to increase.
Viewed another way, change or the lack of change inside Turkey will
be a critical determinant of Turkey’s foreign and security policy op-
tions for the future.  Without reform and democratization, not to
mention sustained economic growth, the EU option is likely to be
stressful, if not altogether foreclosed.  The economic crisis of 2000-
2002 has underscored this reality.  Electoral triumphs by Turkey’s Is-
______________

1Quoted in Andrew Mango, “Reflections on the Atatürkist Origins of Turkish Foreign
Policy and Domestic Linkages,” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New
World:  Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Policy, Washington, D.C.:  The Wash-
ington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000, p. 10.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
20
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
lamists, or nationalists, could recast Ankara’s approach to Europe,
Russia, and the United States.  The persistence of Kurdish separatism
would sustain a worldview, especially in Turkey’s security establish-
ment, that places internal security concerns at the top of the strategic
agenda—a distortion of Turkish security planning that is at odds with
the situation elsewhere within NATO.  A focus on security problems
inside Turkey is also likely to delay or impede movement toward
Western patterns of civil-military relations—a potentially critical
constraint on relations with Brussels and Washington.2  The emer-
gence of a much sharper discussion within Turkey over the future of
its society, and whether to take risks with security and stability in
pursuit of a more liberal system, have pushed staunch Kemalists
within the Turkish establishment into a harder-line stance.  As
Cengiz Candar, a prominent journalist, has noted, “Kemalism is now
a kind of state religion in its own right.”3
Images of the Turkish internal scene have always had a pronounced
effect on Western attitudes toward Turkey.  This can be seen clearly
in the European debate over Turkish EU membership, as well as in
discussions in Washington on arms transfers, human rights, and the
bilateral relationship as a whole.  This tradition of analyzing Turkey
and Turkish policy “from the inside out” is a very old one.  In the Ot-
toman period, the nature of Turkey as a society was a key element
shaping European perceptions.  The five-hundred-year competition
between the Ottoman empire and the West was not just a geopoliti-
cal competition but a competition between societies and, above all,
religions.  In the waning years of the empire, Western perceptions fo-
cused on Ottoman “backwardness” and these, in turn, influenced
opinion in support of national independence movements in the
Balkans and assessments of Turkey’s ability to help contain Russian
ambitions in the Eastern Mediterranean.  The potential for develop-
ments inside Turkey to affect surrounding regions and the interests
of extraregional powers is a central tenet of much recent analysis of
______________

2For a highly critical assessment of the role of the Turkish military as an impediment
to Turkish liberalization and as an obstacle to Turkey’s European ambitions, see Eric
Rouleau, “Turkey’s Dream of Democracy,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 79, No. 6, Novem-
ber/December 2000, pp. 100–114.
3Cengiz Candar, “Atatürk’s Ambiguous Legacy,” The Wilson Quarterly, Vol. XXIV, No.
4, Autumn 2000, p. 95.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
21
Turkey as a “pivotal state.”4 It is arguably an important factor in the
Western calculus regarding assistance to Turkey in its economic dif-
ficulties and encourages many Turks to believe that what happens
inside Turkey is simply too important for the West to ignore.
WHITHER THE STRONG STATE?
Turkey is an example of a “strong state,” that is, a society in which
the state is at the center of public policymaking and the notion of
state sovereignty is highly developed and unalloyed.5  The idea of the
strong state does not necessarily imply a powerful or capable state in
practical terms (although, overall, the Turkish state has played this
role in some areas) but rather a pervasive, doctrinal attachment to
the primacy of the state.  Republican Turkey emerged in 1923 at a
time of authoritarian statism in postrevolutionary societies across
Europe and Asia.  Indeed, parallels have often been drawn between
the emergence, in roughly the same period, of strong, centrally di-
rected states bent on modernization in both Turkey and the Soviet
Union.  For almost 80 years, the Turkish state has had a pervasive
role in virtually all aspects of Turkish life.  The model of Turkey as a
secular, Western-oriented society was promoted—very success-
fully—from the top down, from the earliest years of the Republic.
Economic policy was shaped from the center on a statist pattern,
with high levels of government ownership and oversight.
The idea of national sovereignty that guided the formation of the Re-
public and that persisted essentially unchallenged until the 1990s
was based largely on 19th century European ideas.6  In important re-
spects, the orientation of the early Republic was itself a reaction to
threats to Turkish sovereignty and territory at the close of the Ot-
______________

4See Alan Makovsky’s chapter on Turkey in Robert Chace et al., eds., The Pivotal
States, New York:  Norton, 1999, pp. 88–119.
5See Henri J. Barkey, “The Struggles of a Strong State,”  pp. 87–105; and the discussion
of the Turkish case in Ian O. Lesser, Strong States, Difficult Choices:  Mediterranean
Perspectives on Integration and Globalization, Washington:  National Intelligence
Council/RAND, 2001.
6See the discussion of Turkish nationalism in Ernst Gellner, Encounters with Nation-
alism, Oxford:  Blackwell, 1994, pp. 81–91; and Anthony D. Smith, National Identity,
Reno:  University of Nevada Press, 1991.  See also Hugh Poulton, Top Hat, Grey Wolf
and Crescent, New York:  NYU Press, 1997.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
22
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
toman period and shortly thereafter, including the restrictive provi-
sions of the Treaty of Sèvres (1920), the loss of Ottoman territories in
the Balkans and the Middle East, and the Greek military intervention
in Anatolia.  Out of these experiences came a consolidated and
fiercely defended idea of a unitary Turkish state, with state-directed
modernization and Westernization as key elements, and with a very
cautious approach to international affairs.  Atatürk’s famous dictum
“peace at home, peace abroad” captured the spirit of this period in
which Turkey sought to reduce its exposure to further Western inter-
vention (again, there are notable parallels to the Soviet concept of
building “socialism in one country”).  The experience of this period
has left an enduring legacy of suspicion, among the Turkish public
and elites, regarding Western aims in Turkey and its region.  Euro-
pean and American observers may find Turkish fears of a Western-
inspired breakup of the Turkish state unreasonable, but the power of
these images cannot be discounted in Turkey, even today.  Turkish
views on the Kurdish problem and the situation in Northern Iraq, as
well as reactions to American Congressional debate on an Armenian
genocide resolution, point to the enduring nature of these suspi-
cions.7  Not a few Turks will even suggest that Western “condi-
tionality” in support for economic assistance to Turkey is rooted in a
desire to shape and perhaps limit Turkey’s regional role.
Today, the greatest challenges to the traditional role of the Turkish
state are internal, but these challenges are reinforced by pressures
from outside, from the requirements of integration with Europe, re-
gardless of Turkey’s membership prospects, to the effects of global-
ization on Turkey’s society and economy.  Arguably, the future of the
strong state is the central question for Turkey’s evolution in the
coming years.
The primacy of the Turkish state is being challenged from many di-
rections.  First, and most fundamentally, the rapid if sometimes er-
ratic growth of the Turkish economy since the economic liberaliza-
tion of the Özal years has made the task of economic management
______________

7A nonbinding resolution concerning the Armenian genocide was introduced in the
U.S. Congress in October 2000 but later withdrawn.  Introduction of the resolution
touched off a vigorous, nationalist reaction in Turkey.  Many Turks saw the resolution
concerning events in the last years of the Ottoman empire as an affront to modern
Turkey’s national honor.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
23
far more complex, and the central government in Ankara no longer
enjoys a monopoly in economic affairs.8   Business associations, in-
dividual entrepreneurs, unions, and Turkey’s increasingly active
media all want a say on economic matters.  Although successive
Turkish governments have been committed to the idea of privatiza-
tion, progress in this area has been slow and characterized by a lack
of transparency.  It is notable that the Islamist Refah Party, once in
government, was among the most adept at using the privatization
agenda to build a constituency of supporters in the private sector.
The rise of a very dynamic Turkish private sector has, however, cre-
ated an important counterweight to the sluggish and inefficient state
enterprises that still make up a large proportion of the Turkish econ-
omy.  This process has brought to the fore a number of prominent,
family-controlled business empires, but it has also led to the rise of a
large number of small and medium-sized enterprises, many led by
prosperous Anatolian families that had traditionally been involved in
agriculture.  The net result has been the emergence of a very diverse
private sector, with a range of perceptions about politics and foreign
affairs.  These range from the secular, reformist, and internationally
minded members of TUSIAD to MUSIAD (the Independent Turkish
Businessmen’s Association), an active group with a traditional and
religious orientation.  These very diverse elements are nonetheless
generally united on the desire to reduce the role of the state in Turk-
ish society.9
The coexistence of a dynamic private sector alongside a large public
sector also means that many private enterprises, including those in
the financial sector, rely heavily on their relationship to the state.10
This phenomenon is, in part, responsible for the rise of corruption in
Turkey as a growing public policy problem and represents yet an-
______________

8Over the last fifteen years, Turkey has enjoyed some of the highest rates of growth in
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).  Between 1995
and 1998, growth averaged 8.5 percent.  Since that period, growth has been slower,
partly because of the costs of recovery from the 1999 earthquake, estimated at $5.7
billion.  Growth in 1999 was 6.4 percent.  Turkish Economy 1999–2000, Istanbul:
TUSIAD, July 2000.
9See Stephen Kinzer, “Businesses Pressing a Reluctant Turkey on Democracy Issues,”
New York Times, March 23, 1997.
10See Aysa Bugra, State and Business in Modern Turkey:  A Comparative Study, Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1994.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
24
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
other angle of criticism toward the role of the state.  The links be-
tween the state, banks, and large-scale business in Turkey have also
been at the center of allegations of “crony capitalism” as Turkey ex-
periences its worst economic crisis since World War II.  The most
successful political movements in recent years, including the Is-
lamists and National Action Party, have capitalized on public
cynicism about Turkey’s aging political class and have taken a strong
stance against cronyism, corruption, and the lack of transparency.11
Perhaps more serious, over the last decade Turkey has seen a general
expansion of the illegal sector, above all drug trafficking and money
laundering, along with more exotic problems such as the smuggling
of people and even nuclear materials.  These activities exist largely
outside the bounds of the state, but some of the most prominent
scandals of recent years have focused on alleged links between or-
ganized crime, terrorism, and the state.  The unstable situation in
Southeastern Anatolia, with its own war economy surrounding the
battle with the PKK, has been a breeding ground for the Turkish ille-
gal sector.
Second, Turkey’s demographic growth and, more significantly, the
tremendous movement of population from the countryside to the
major cities over the past decades have placed great strains on the
state’s ability to provide essential services and to provide for social
welfare.  In 1945, 25 percent of the Turkish population lived in urban
areas.  By 1997, this figure was 65 percent, and the percentage con-
tinues to increase.12  (There is some anecdotal evidence that the
economic crisis is causing a slight countermovement from Istanbul
back to the countryside as employment prospects in the city have
worsened.)  Turkey’s population stands at roughly 67.8 million today,
and even with recent reductions in the rate of population growth,
Turkey’s population is likely to reach 100 million early in the 21st
century.
______________

11See Ziya Onis, “Neo-Liberal Globalization and the Democracy Paradox:  The Turkish
General Elections of 1999, The Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000,
p. 306.
12Turkey’s Window of Opportunity:  The Demographic Transition Process and Its Con-
sequences, Istanbul:  TUSIAD, 1999, p. 21.  See also Andrew Mango, Turkey:  The
Challenge of a New Role, Westport:  Praeger, 1994, pp. 64–75.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
25
At the same time, the modernization of Turkish society and exposure
to Western patterns have raised public expectations about what the
state should provide.  Turkey’s Islamist movements, Refah (Welfare)
its successor, Fazilet (Virtue)—both legally banned—and newer Is-
lamic groups, such as the Justice and Development Party, have capi-
talized on this growing gap between public expectations and the inef-
fectiveness of state institutions.  This is one explanation for the con-
sistent success of Turkey’s Islamists in municipal elections across the
country.  Dissatisfaction with the role of the state was dramatically
demonstrated in the wake of the major earthquake that struck
Turkey in August 1999.  Under very stressful conditions, the state ap-
peared incapable of effective civil emergency management.  The
earthquake may not have spelled the end of the strong state, as many
predicted at the time, but it has certainly left an enduring legacy of
dissatisfaction.  To a degree, this dissatisfaction with the state, and
the tendency at many levels of society to organize affairs, to the ex-
tent possible, without reference to the state, is a common phe-
nomenon across the Mediterranean.13
A third challenge to the role of the Turkish state arises from external
pressures.  Simply put, the current role of the state as enshrined in
the Turkish Constitution is incompatible with the objective of closer
integration in Europe and an obstacle to meeting the criteria for the
opening of accession negotiations with the EU.  The incompatibility
is clear at the level of economic policy, where convergence would re-
quire a substantial reduction in the role of the state even to meet
European norms.  More fundamentally, integration implies a sub-
stantial diminution in state sovereignty as policy and administration
in key areas are subordinated to European procedures.14  Movement
toward a more dilute and modern notion of sovereignty is at the
heart of much Turkish ambivalence about the implications of mem-
bership, but the pressures for modernization in this sphere are very
strong.  If Turkey’s European aspirations are not frustrated, and the
______________

13This has sometimes been described as the “Italian model,” in which an efficient pri-
vate sector coexists alongside ineffective state institutions, and individuals seek pri-
vate arrangements for the provision of essential services.
14See David Barchard, Building a Partnership:  Turkey and the European Union,
Istanbul:  Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation, 2000.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
26
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
post-Helsinki path remains open, significant changes in the role of
the state can be anticipated, affecting many aspects of Turkish life.
The question of the role of the state is also central to the outlook for
political reform, civil-military relations, and human rights.  Turkey is
a functioning if very imperfect democracy, and the process of de-
mocratization in Turkey is well advanced by the standards of adja-
cent regions.  There is an extremely active public debate in Turkey
over questions of democratization and reform—a debate that has
acquired even more vigor and urgency in the context of pressing
economic problems.   Nonetheless, there are persistent problems
concerning human rights, the status of minorities, and the gover-
nance of regions within Turkey that also turn on the role of the state.
The tradition of strong central authority and concern about threats
to the unitary character of the state (read Kurdish separatism) have
made the discussion of decentralization, and especially forms of re-
gional autonomy, anathema for Ankara.  The question of Kurdish
rights, against the background of a violent insurgency and counterin-
surgency campaign in Southeastern Anatolia, has made this a highly
charged issue for Turks, and for Turkey’s partners in the West.  By
most accounts, the human rights situation in Turkey has improved in
some respects but is not improving rapidly enough to satisfy Western
opinion—or to satisfy many Turks.15  There is now greater trans-
parency with regard to human rights abuses, and the waning of the
PKK insurgency has created a better climate in the towns and cities
of the Southeast.  But abuses persist, and political rights (e.g., the
treatment of “thought crimes”) are limited in ways that continue to
surprise Western observers.
Many Turks are hopeful that the progressive modernization of Turk-
ish society, efforts at constitutional reform, and ever-increasing
transparency will eventually change those aspects of Turkish political
culture that have fostered human rights abuses.  The advent of a re-
form-minded president, Ahmed Necdet Sezer, was widely inter-
preted as a positive sign.  Sezer has, for example, taken the position
(opposed by Turkey’s military as well as by Prime Minister Ecevit)
that state “decrees with the force of law” may not be used in lieu of
______________

15See U.S. Department of State, Turkey:  Country Report on Human Rights Practices for
1998, Washington, D.C., 1999.  This qualified, critical tone has continued through
subsequent yearly reports, including the report for 2001.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
27
parliamentary measures to remove alleged antisecularists and sepa-
ratists from Turkey’s state bureaucracies.  Under pressure from in-
ternational financial institutions, Turkey is now struggling to imple-
ment a series of economic and political reforms that will also require
constitutional changes.  If successful—and the outlook is unclear—
the ground may be paved for more far-reaching changes in democ-
ratization and human rights.
THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY
The role played by the Turkish military has been changing in impor-
tant ways.  Historically the armed forces have occupied a privileged
position both in the Ottoman period and in the Turkish Republic.  In
the late Ottoman period and in the early days of the Turkish Repub-
lic, the military spearheaded the modernization process.  Six out of
ten presidents of the Turkish Republic—including Kemal Atatürk, the
founder of the Turkish Republic—were high-ranking military offi-
cers.  Today many Turks worry that the Turkish military’s doctrinaire
interpretation of Atatürk’s policies is becoming an obstacle to the
democratization and modernization of Turkish society.  But under-
standing military attitudes in Turkey is not an easy task, and opinion
within the military establishment may be more dynamic and less
monolithic than is usually imagined.16  In any event, the military’s
stance on reform, including the reform of civil-military relations, will
be a key factor shaping the future of Turkish society and its interna-
tional relations.
The Turkish military has acted as custodian of the Kemalist legacy,
seeing its mission as not only to defend the territorial integrity of the
Turkish state against external threats but also to protect it against
internal challenges.  The armed forces have intervened in Turkish
politics four times in the postwar period when they felt that the Ke-
malist legacy was under threat.  The most recent instance was in
1997 when the military forced the ouster of Prime Minister Necmet-
______________

16Turkish observers have pointed to the growing differences of view within the mili-
tary.  The respected Turkish journalist Mehmet Ali Birand, for example, has noted;
“We can not speak anymore of a Turkish Armed Forces that has an uniform view,
adopting as its own view the ideas expressed by its commander.  There are different
views within the ranks of the military as well.”  See Mehmet Ali Birand, “Why does the
military keep silent?” Turkish Daily News, July 17, 2002.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
28
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tin Erbakan, head of the Refah Party, in what was widely interpreted
by Turkish and foreign media as a “silent coup.”
The military’s power is institutionalized through a variety of organi-
zations.  The most important of these is the National Security
Council (NSC).  Although technically the NSC makes only “recom-
mendations” to the Council of Ministers, its recommendations can
be tantamount to orders—as Prime Minister Erbakan was reminded
in 1997.  When Erbakan attempted to circumvent the military’s 20
recommendations on curtailing Islamist activity by sending them to
the parliament, rather than carrying them out, the military—backed
by Turkey’s wider secular establishment—forced his eventual resig-
nation.
The relationship between the military and Turkey’s political leader-
ship has often been uncomfortable, even on foreign policy matters.
Özal pressed for active Turkish participation in the Gulf War coali-
tion, against the advice of a more cautious military establishment,
eventually leading to the resignation of Chief of Staff General Torum-
tay.  Özal also took a softer line toward Islamism and favored a more
liberal policy on the Kurdish issue.  Since Özal’s death in 1993, the
military has gradually won back the power lost during his tenure,
bolstered by success in the counterinsurgency campaign against the
PKK and a continuing, central role in opposition to religion in politi-
cal life.
Nonetheless, the post-Helsinki dynamics in Turkey’s international
relations and the ambivalent position of the military on the reforms
necessary for Turkish convergence with Europe, suggest that
Turkey’s military may find it difficult or unappealing to maintain its
traditional role in the coming years.  The military has a clear stake in
overcoming Turkey’s current financial crisis, for the sake of keeping
defense modernization plans on track, and because the military is
also a large investor and participant in the Turkish economy.
The extent of reforms in the area of governance and human rights
will have a profound influence on the character of Turkey’s relations
with the West and above all with the EU.  Indeed, changes in these
areas are an essential prerequisite for progress toward accession ne-
gotiations.  Civil-military relations are an important part of this
equation.  Analyses of the Turkish scene have traditionally empha-

--- Sayfa 51 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
29
sized the role of the military in Turkish governance.  With the experi-
ence of three military coups d’état in the postwar period, and the in-
tervention of the military behind the scenes to engineer the end of an
Islamist-led coalition in 1997, the military remains an influential
actor on the political scene.  In the areas of key concern to the
military—secularism and the unitary character of the state (i.e., sepa-
ratist threats)—their influence has not been exercised in a vacuum.
Many in Turkey’s secular elite, and those members of a much wider
group for whom the military retains high prestige and credibility,
quietly support the traditional model of civil-military relations.  This
may change, however, as those with a stake in more rapid reform and
convergence with Europe acquire greater influence in Turkish poli-
cymaking.
Many Turks today would probably agree that the role of the military
in Turkish society and politics is changing and is likely to change fur-
ther under the pressures of modernization and with the emergence
of competing policy elites (discussed below).  Here, too, the future of
the relationship with Europe is likely to be a strong influence, as the
current pattern of civil-military relations in Turkey would not meet
the EU’s requirements for membership.17  By this measure, it is even
uncertain if Turkey would be considered for NATO membership if it
were applying today.  The survival of what may appear to be an
anachronistic military role in Turkey may be explained by the transi-
tional nature of the Turkish situation, in particular, the special role of
the military as guardians of the secular state and the Atatürkist tradi-
tion.  It may also be explained by the primacy of security issues,
many of which are internal, in Turkish perceptions and policies.  Fi-
nally, and not least, the military has been an effective institution,
perhaps the most effective institution within the Turkish state.  The
military establishment is seen as largely untainted by corruption, de-
spite being a very important economic actor in its own right.  This is
a function of the sheer size of the military establishment—the second
largest in NATO after the United States—its large claim on state
______________

17The role of the Turkish military has become a flashpoint for European criticism of
Ankara and pessimism regarding the country’s EU prospects.  See, for example, the
analysis by Eric Rouleau, “Turkey’s Dream of Democracy,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 79, No.
6, November/December 2000, pp. 102–114.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
30
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
spending, and its pension, foundation, and commercial holdings.18
Retired senior officers are commonplace on the boards of Turkey’s
large holding companies.
It is also worth noting that opinion within the military establishment
is not monolithic, even on controversial questions such as strategy
toward Turkey’s Islamists or policy toward the EU.  Some Turkish ob-
servers are beginning to suggest that there is now a debate within the
military itself about the future role of their institution in Turkish so-
ciety and the likely need for changes in civil-military relations.  The
extent of these changes is sure to be a leading determinant of
Turkey’s integration and reform prospects over the next decade.
NEW ACTORS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
The military as an institution has been important, not only in direct
policy terms but also as a vehicle for upward mobility, education,
and training in Turkish society.  Since the early years of the Republic,
the military has been extraordinarily successful as a vehicle for so-
cialization across the country.  For decades, young Turks in the
provinces aspired to military careers and the military as an institu-
tion enjoyed high prestige among average Turks.19  The military ran
many of the best and most modern educational institutions in the
country.  Although the role of the military, especially the Turkish
General Staff, in Turkey’s domestic politics (e.g., its influence on
Turkey’s coalition arrangements, education policy, and the headscarf
question) has been the most controversial issue from a Western per-
spective, and from the perspective of Turkish liberals, the dominant
position of the military in foreign and security policy is, perhaps,
even more complete.
With few exceptions, Turkey has not had a well-developed cadre of
foreign and security policy experts outside government circles.  Ex-
______________

18Defense spending was 5.2 percent of GDP in 2000.  The involvement of the military
in a variety of non-defense projects suggests that this figure hardly reflects the full ex-
tent of military engagement in the economy.  IISS Military Balance, 2000–2001,
London:  IISS, 2001.
19Turkey’s military culture, as it has evolved over recent decades, was described in
considerable detail in Mehmet Ali Birand’s controversial book, Shirts of Steel:  An
Anatomy of the Turkish Armed Forces, London:  I. B. Tauris, 1991.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
31
ternal and defense policy has traditionally been almost the exclusive
preserve of professional diplomats and, not least, high-level military
officers.  The military’s capacity for analysis of these issues has ac-
tually been bolstered in recent years by the expansion of the staff of
the National Security Council.  One consequence of the military’s
extraordinary role has been a marked asymmetry in Turkey’s dia-
logue with allies on regional and defense matters.  Whereas Western
governments generally view their high civilian officials as the key in-
terlocutors on foreign and security policy, the corresponding civilian
officials in the Turkish Ministry of Defense are, in practical terms,
subordinate to the leadership of the Turkish General Staff.  Thus,
Turkey’s model of civil-military relations not only affects internal
politics, but has shaped the country’s dialogue with Europe and the
U.S. on a range of issues.  This is almost certainly one of the factors
responsible for the continued predominance of security issues in
Turkish-American relations.
Some of the elements pointing toward change in the role of the mili-
tary and civil-military relations have already been suggested.  An-
other element of equal or perhaps greater importance concerns the
rise of other actors and “power centers” outside the military and
outside the state.  The transformation of the Turkish economy and
the dynamism of the Turkish private sector have become a leading
vehicle for change in Turkish society.  Young Turks who might once
have aspired to careers as military officers or as state employees are
now more likely to seek careers in the business world—although this
too could change if the country’s economic problems persist.  More-
over, Turkey’s famous state universities and military schools are now
challenged by a host of private colleges and universities, many with
impressive funding from private entrepreneurs and foundations.  At
the primary and secondary level, the network of religious schools
(the “Imam-Hatip” schools) expanded dramatically in the 1990s, a
trend paralleling the rise of Islamic politics at the local and national
levels.20  Recent legislation has placed limits on the scope of the reli-
gious schools.  But they have played a role in educating a generation
______________

20The Imam-Hatip schools are high-school-level lycées with a religious orientation.
Their graduates may go on to private universities, but not, for example, military
academies.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
32
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
of students who are now to be found in Turkey’s bureaucracies and
elsewhere.
One consequence of this expansion of alternative education and ca-
reer paths has been the emergence of a generation with new views
about Turkey and Turkey’s international role.  The information revo-
lution has clearly played a part, as well.  Even provincial towns in
Central Anatolia now sport Internet cafes, and the wide availability of
satellite television and the proliferation of private stations have en-
couraged a far broader world view.  The net effect of these changes
on Turkish opinion is, however, an open question.  These trends
have certainly contributed to the erosion of the Atatürkist tradition in
its various manifestations.  But they have also sharpened the political
debate, and strengthened support for more extreme views, especially
among the young.  In this context, it is noteworthy that in the 1999
general elections, younger voters formed the basis of National Action
Party success.21
The vigor of the Turkish private sector over the past decade has had
important consequences for public debate and policymaking, with
meaning for the country’s international relationships.  Turkey’s large
holding companies (and a much larger group of small and medium-
sized enterprises) have recognized and have begun to articulate their
policy interests across a range of issues.  The traditional reliance on
personal relationships as a means of access and influence with state
officials has been augmented by the emergence of private sector in-
stitutions devoted to discussion, analysis, and ultimately lobbying on
questions of concern.  Such institutions, including business associa-
tions and a small number of independent “think tanks,” are com-
monplace in the West but are a very recent phenomenon in
Turkey.22  They are beginning to play a role in articulating the policy
______________

21MHP’s youth wing has attracted attention for its extremism and occasional violence,
harkening back to the behavior of MHP in the 1970s and 1980s when the party was
linked to right-wing terrorism in Turkey.
22TUSIAD, in particular, has emerged as a key source of analysis and policy commen-
tary on the Turkish scene and Turkey’s foreign relations.  It has taken controversial, re-
formist positions on a number of issues, including the situation in the Southeast.
TESEV (the Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation) in Istanbul was estab-
lished in 1961 but is now becoming more active and influential, especially on Turkish-
EU relations.  The newly formed Istanbul Policy Center at Sabanci University is an-
other policy-oriented institution to watch.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
33
interests of particular circles, although the longer-term outlook for
these institutions will be heavily dependent on the health of the
Turkish economy and contributions from private sector sponsors.
Notably, these institutions are among the most interested in building
international ties and tend toward a liberal, reformist outlook.  As a
group, they represent an increasingly important set of interlocutors
for Western officials and unofficial observers of the Turkish scene
and encourage a more activist but multilateral approach to Turkey’s
foreign policy interests.
PUBLIC OPINION AND THE MEDIA
In the period since the Gulf War, public opinion has emerged as an
increasingly important factor in Turkish foreign policy, spurred by
the expansion of the private media and its growing role as a shaper of
opinion.  Some aspects of this phenomenon, including the concen-
tration of media assets in the hands of a few large conglomerates, are
controversial and the subject of considerable debate in Turkey (as
they are elsewhere).23  With the concentration of media ownership
and the tendency for media holding companies to diversify their ac-
tivities, including involvement in the financial sector, Turkey’s eco-
nomic crisis has contributed to the turmoil in Turkish journalism.
Organizations such as CNN-Turk and other major stations, as well as
newspapers, have recently seen large-scale layoffs after years of rapid
expansion.  The Dogan group currently dominates Turkish media
ownership, and some Turkish observers point to the possible emer-
gence of a “Turkish Berlusconi” in the country’s tumultuous politics.
At the same time, the proliferation of media outlets, especially tele-
vision, has brought a more diverse set of voices to the Turkish
debate.  In some cases, notably television stations with a religious
orientation, the non-mainstream media have faced official and un-
official pressures over the nature of their programming, including
temporary bans.  But stations such as the religiously inclined
“Channel 7” have nonetheless survived on a profitable basis.  Papers
such as Yeni Safak have attracted a sophisticated secular reader-
______________

23See, for example, the discussion in Andrew Finkel, “Who Guards the Turkish Press?
A Perspective on Press Corruption in Turkey,” The  Journal of International Affairs,
Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 147–166.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
34
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ship—and some respected secular journalists—despite their reli-
gious orientation, because they are seen by many readers as objec-
tive and independent.
A more active and diverse media have been a vehicle for the rise of
public opinion as a factor in the traditionally closed world of Turkish
external policymaking.  Several elements are worth noting in this re-
gard.  First, the engagement of public opinion on foreign policy is-
sues has been encouraged by developments in Turkey’s region over
the past decade.  The Gulf War marked a turning point in this respect,
as the events in Northern Iraq first reinforced and then complicated
Özal’s presentation of his strongly pro-Western stance.  The promise
of more-rapid Turkish progress toward EU candidacy and other
prospective benefits allowed Özal to successfully present the case for
Turkish action, including the use of Turkish bases for the strategic
bombardment of Iraq, and the closure of Iraqi oil exports through
Turkey by road and pipeline.  Public opinion in this case was an
important element in Özal’s ability to pursue an activist policy
against the inclinations of the Turkish military.  In the wake of the
war, however, public opinion became critical of the costs of partici-
pation in the coalition and of Turkey’s failure to receive sufficient
compensation from the West.  Many Turks came to regard, and still
regard, the Gulf War as a catalyst for Kurdish separatism and a con-
tinuing cost to Turkey in the form of lost revenue from trade with
Iraq and pipeline fees.  Public opinion remains a major constraint in
Ankara’s policymaking toward Northern Iraq, including renewal of
Operation Northern Watch.
Events in Bosnia also galvanized Turkish opinion and encouraged a
more active, albeit multilateral, stance from Ankara.  Turks have
sympathized with the plight of the Bosnian Muslims and feel con-
siderable affinity for Muslim communities elsewhere in the Balkans.
Turkish affinities have also been aroused by Azerbaijan’s dispute
with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh, by successive conflicts
in Chechnya, and by the crisis in Kosovo.24  These crises also took
______________

24It is interesting to note that the public reaction to the Kosovo crisis has been notably
less animated than in the case of Bosnia.  This may be explained by mixed attitudes
toward the Muslim Kosovars, who have not always been on good terms with the Turk-
ish minority in the region.  Moreover, Turks, while sympathetic to the plight of the

--- Sayfa 57 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
35
on a strongly nationalistic and at times anti-Western (mainly anti-
European) flavor in the face of perceived Western inaction.  Periodic
violence by Chechen sympathizers, including the April 2001 hostage-
taking at the Swisshotel in Istanbul, seems designed to play to media
attention and, ultimately, public opinion.
Second, the last decade has seen the rise of distinct “lobbies” within
Turkish society.  This was particularly observable in relation to the
Bosnian and Nagorno-Karabakh conflicts and, of course, with regard
to Cyprus.  Crises in the Balkans, the Caucasus and the Eastern
Mediterranean have come at a time when many Turks are rediscover-
ing their regional roots.  Bosnian and Azeri Turks, in particular, are to
be found in some numbers among Turkey’s elite, and their voices
have been influential in shaping attitudes in Ankara.  Similar ethnic
identifications and attempts at policy influence—or at least symbolic
gestures—have occurred on behalf of Bulgarian Turks, Tatars in
Russia and Ukraine, the Gagauz in Romania, and the Uighur Turks in
Western China.  These associations are now very much a part of the
Turkish scene.25  In a very real sense, developments around Turkey’s
borders have stimulated more discussion inside Turkey about what it
means to be a Turk and have encouraged tentative debate about
Turkey as a multicultural society.  This trend has also had an influ-
ence on the definition of Turkey’s international interests, which
clearly extend to include the status and treatment of Turks abroad,
particularly those in Germany.  The growing role of public opinion as
a factor in Turkish policymaking has also been associated with a rise
in nationalist sentiment, especially in circumstances, as in Bosnia,
where Turkey’s Western partners appeared inactive or indifferent.
Third, the public opinion factor complicates Turkish crisis manage-
ment and has produced considerable unease among Ankara’s foreign
and security policy functionaries who are unused to this reality.  In
the Imia/Kardak crisis of 1996 between Greece and Turkey, for ex-
ample, events were driven (on both sides) by aggressive television
journalists and responsive public opinion, to the extent that Turkish
diplomats and officers worried about losing control of the situation.
_____________________________________________________________

Kosovars, are generally opposed to new separatist movements (echoes of the Kurdish
problem) and the alteration of borders in the Balkans.
25See Andrew Mango, “Reflections on the Atatürkist Origins of Turkish Foreign Policy
and Domestic Linkages,”  pp. 9–19.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
36
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Similarly, in the hijacking of a Turkish Black Sea ferry by Chechen ex-
tremists in 1996, negotiations with the hijackers were preempted
with the arrival, by helicopter, of Turkish journalists who assumed
the role of negotiators, with the Turkish public held in rapt attention.
Incidents of this type suggest a very different domestic environment
for crisis management than has traditionally prevailed in Turkey.
SECURITY POLICY THROUGH A DOMESTIC LENS
In common with many other states around the Southern Mediter-
ranean, Turkish debate and policy on security matters are strongly
influenced by internal security concerns.  This outlook is somewhat
outside the NATO mainstream but is not completely alien to the Al-
liance, as attested to by Spain’s preoccupation with Basque
terrorism, Britain’s struggle against terrorism in Northern Ireland,
France’s concern about spillovers of North African extremism, and
the growing interest in “homeland defense” spurred by the recent
experience of disastrous terrorist attacks in the United States.  Yet, in
the Turkish setting, questions of internal security are central to the
political landscape and the worldview of Turkey’s traditional foreign
and security policymakers.  Increasingly, problems of energy supply
and non-traditional challenges in the areas of crime, refugees, and
the environment are also being seen as part of the security agenda,
with strong domestic linkages.
As noted above, Turkey’s military establishment continues to have a
central role in defining and vetting the policy agenda, and this estab-
lishment has been extraordinarily consistent over the past decade in
describing the fight against Kurdish separatism and the fight against
Islamism as the leading security challenges for the Turkish state.  The
struggle against Islamism has, by and large, been carried out through
political and legal means and has resulted in the termination of
Turkey’s experiment with an Islamist-led government, the banning
of Refah and its successor the Virtue Party, and the prosecution of
leading figures in religious politics, including Recip Tayip Erdogan,
the former mayor of Istanbul, and former Prime Minister Necmettin
Erbakan.  The political ban on Erdogan was lifted in July 2001, and he
emerged as a very popular leader of the religious/reformist wing of

--- Sayfa 59 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
37
the now defunct Virtue Party in national politics.26  His political fu-
ture as head of the new Justice and Development Party remains un-
resolved, however, in light of ongoing legal challenges.
For all the effort devoted to the suppression of Islamic politics, a sub-
stantial undercurrent of religion has survived and may be poised to
emerge again in a more reform-minded vein.  Turkey’s extensive
network of religious orders (tarikat) has operated underground since
the time of Atatürk but reportedly retains substantial and influential
memberships. Center-right parties such as True Path (DYP) and
ANAP have always had their religious wings, and with the large
number of deputies who entered parliament under the Virtue Party
banner, the bloc of religious conservatives is very large.  In this
context, the controversy over the wearing of headscarves in
government institutions, including schools, has been a political as
well as a cultural dispute, pitting a more overtly religious public
against the tradition of state involvement in all aspects of Turkish
life.
The struggle against Islamic groups acquired a more direct security
dimension with the crackdown on Turkey’s violent and shadowy
Hizbullah network (unrelated to the Lebanese movement of the
same name).  This network is alleged to be responsible for numerous
assassinations and disappearances over the past decade, including a
number of high-profile terrorist incidents.  Turkish and foreign ob-
servers also link Turkish Hizbullah to organizations tolerated and
perhaps supported by Ankara in the past as part of the counterinsur-
gency campaign against the PKK.  1999 estimates suggested that
Hizbullah may have as many as 25,000 adherents, including 4,000
armed militants.27  Revelations about these groups and the security
operations against them have given a harder edge to the question of
Islamism in Turkey at a time when more mainstream Islamic move-
ments such as Erdogan’s reformists within the Justice and Develop-
ment Party, the Felicity Party and the Fethullah Gülen group are
taking pains to appear centrist.  Against this background, the attitude
______________

26Recent polls suggest that Erdogan is Turkey’s most popular politician.  Douglas
Frantz, “Turkey’s Leaders Uneasily Await a New Party,” New York Times, August 3,
2001, p. 10.
27“Turkey’s Divided Islamists,” IISS Strategic Comments, Vol. 6, Issue 3, April 2000.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
38
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
of the military and secular elites to the Islamist question shows few
signs of weakening.  Although Europe has little sympathy for Is-
lamists, the EU factor could constrain Ankara’s ability to bar Turkey’s
Islamic parties from political life—a fact reflected in support for
Turkish accession among Turkey’s mainstream Islamists.  In the
meantime, there is growing concern that armed Islamic groups on
the margins of Turkish society may take over the mantle of extremist
opposition to the state, filling a vacuum left by the waning of the PKK
challenge.28
The second overarching internal security challenge has been Kurdish
separatism.  Even before the capture of PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan,
Turkish security forces had essentially defeated, but not eliminated,
the PKK insurgency.  The struggle against the PKK has claimed per-
haps 30,000–40,000 lives on all sides since the mid-1980s.  This little-
reported war inside a NATO country imposed immense costs on the
Turkish economy and society and distorted the Turkish political
scene in fundamental ways.  The war with its terrible human rights
abuses—inflicted by both sides—continues to damage Turkey’s in-
ternational standing even as the struggle in the Southeast winds
down.
The defeat of the PKK insurgency can be ascribed to a number of
factors.  The PKK campaign inside Turkey relied heavily on access to
bases in Northern Iraq and Syria (and in Lebanon’s Bekaa Valley) and
practical support from Damascus.  Since the mid-1990s, Ankara has
pursued a cross-border strategy in the fight against the PKK, deploy-
ing its security forces over the Iraqi border to disrupt PKK operations
and to fight the war, to the extent possible, on Iraqi rather than
Turkish territory.  The result has been the establishment of a de facto
Turkish security zone in Northern Iraq, comparable in some re-
spects, although by no means all, to the zone held until 2000 by Israel
in Lebanon.  The capture of PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan and the end
of Syrian support as a result of a credible threat of Turkish interven-
tion severely weakened the PKK’s capacity for operations inside
Turkey.  This, in turn, touched off a struggle over strategy and leader-
ship within the PKK and Kurdish organizations based in Europe,
further weakening the PKK position.  Even before the capture of
______________

28Ibid.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
39
Öcalan, Turkish forces had considerable success in containing PKK
operations, largely as a result of improvements in training, tactics,
and equipment.
The security situation in the Southeast has improved markedly, es-
pecially in cities such as Diyarbakir, and it is unlikely that the PKK
will be able to reconstitute itself to carry out operations on the scale
of the early 1990s.  But perhaps 5,000 to 10,000 PKK militants remain
in Turkey and Northern Iraq and inside Iran’s border with Turkey,
and Ankara is not inclined toward amnesty for these activists.29  With
rare exceptions, the PKK has not been actively involved in urban
terrorism inside Turkey, despite Turkey’s vulnerability to attacks
threatening business and tourism.  The potential for a hard core of
residual PKK militants to move in this direction cannot be ruled out,
although such a campaign would face constraints, including opposi-
tion from moderate Kurds living in Turkey’s larger cities.
With the containment of the PKK challenge, Turkey now faces the
much harder problem of how to resolve its long-standing and trou-
bled relationship with the Kurds by political means.  As many as 15
million Kurds live in Turkey, but after years of conflict and the lure of
better economic opportunities elsewhere, perhaps no more than 50
percent live in the traditionally Kurdish areas of Southeastern Anato-
lia.  Istanbul, Ankara, and Izmir now have large Kurdish populations,
and these populations are highly assimilated—perhaps a quarter of
the deputies in the Turkish parliament are of Kurdish origin.  But
these figures should not be taken to suggest that the pressure for
Kurdish cultural and political rights has abated.  Although most
Kurds, and especially those living in Western Turkey, would not favor
the establishment of a separate Kurdish state, the desire for greater
cultural and linguistic rights, and perhaps greater autonomy in pre-
dominantly Kurdish areas, is strong.  The conflict in the Southeast
has, if anything, heightened the sense of Kurdish identity inside
Turkey, and the Kurdish issue is unlikely to fade even with the de-
cline of the PKK.
Many analysts believe that Öcalan’s capture offered an unprece-
dented opportunity for the development of a new political approach
______________

29“Turkey and the Kurds:  Into a New Era,” IISS Strategic Comments, Vol. 5, Issue 3,
April 1999.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
40
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
toward the Kurds.  To date, Ankara has been unable to seize this op-
portunity, but the broad possibility of a political settlement remains
open, whether through unilateral steps by Ankara or through the
cultivation of new, nonviolent Kurdish interlocutors.30  In the end,
any strategy for resolution will involve some concessions from
Ankara, and a diminution, however modest, of the sovereignty of the
“strong state.”  The prospects may well depend on the extent of other
pressures for modernization and liberalization in Turkey which, if
potent enough, could create a more encouraging climate for resolu-
tion of the Kurdish problem.  In the absence of such a settlement, the
issue is likely to remain a central feature of Turkish politics, as well as
a domestic security problem and will continue to impose costs on
Ankara’s international relationships.
ISLAMISM, NATIONALISM, AND TURKISH IDENTITY
Much Western debate about Turkey’s internal scene and its foreign
policy meaning has focused on the question of Islamism.  This was a
natural product of the striking rise in the electoral fortunes of the Re-
fah Party in the mid-1990s, first at the local and finally at the national
level, leading to the formation of a Refah-led coalition in 1996.  In
that period, secularism in Turkey seemed to be at bay, and Turkish
society was increasingly polarized along religious and secular lines.
If there was a prospect for a fundamental reorientation of Turkish ex-
ternal policy, it appeared to arise from the Islamist phenomenon.  In
retrospect, these concerns proved exaggerated.  The Refah experi-
ment in government was short-lived, and Prime Minister Erbakan’s
forays into foreign policy, including a tour of Islamic capitals (no
Arab states were included) and consultations in Libya, were not
taken seriously in Turkey or the West.  Turkey’s 1999 general elec-
tions resulted in a poor showing by the Islamists at the national level
and a surprisingly strong performance by Turkey’s MHP.  This result
can be ascribed, in part, to the legal measures taken against key Is-
lamist politicians and the closure of Refah.  But it also seems that
Turkey’s nationalists, who also champion the sort of cultural conser-
______________

30See Philip Robins, “Turkey and the Kurds:  Missing Another Opportunity?” in Mor-
ton Abramowitz, ed., Turkey’s Transformation and American Policy, New York:  The
Century Foundation Press, 2000, pp. 61–93.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
41
vatism favored by the Islamists, have inherited the mantle of opposi-
tion to Turkey’s traditional politics.
Indeed, Refah’s appeal in the mid-1990s also went beyond the issue
of religion to include economic populism, anticorruption, and not
least, Turkish nationalism.  Refah was especially adept at articulating
the nationalist message against a background of crises in Bosnia,
Chechnya, and Azerbaijan that suggested Western indifference to
Turkish and Muslim interests.  In the government that emerged after
the 1999 elections, with the right-wing MHP as a key partner in Prime
Minister Ecevit’s coalition, and with MHP’s leader, Devlet Bahçeli as
Deputy Prime Minister—a strange coalition of the left and the right—
the nationalists exerted considerable influence over Turkish policy.
MHP is the leading obstacle in most areas to the implementation of
Turkey’s reform and recovery plans.
Despite MHP’s reputation for radicalism and even violence in previ-
ous decades, Bahçeli has adopted a relatively moderate line.  But
some Turkish observers fear that with its growing influence, MHP
will sooner or later take a more assertive course.  The foreign policy
consequences of this could be significant, although the traditional
foreign and security policy establishment remains wary of MHP.
Under the right conditions, including a new economic shock and the
frustration of Turkey’s European aspirations, MHP’s strongly na-
tionalist line could reinforce tendencies evident elsewhere across the
Turkish political spectrum (e.g., Ecevit himself is well known as a na-
tionalist of the left, and many of Turkey’s Islamists are highly na-
tionalistic, as noted above).
The areas most sensitive to the policy influence of Turkish national-
ism are Cyprus, the nationalist issue par excellence; the Balkans,
where Turkey could opt for a more independent and assertive stance;
and relations with Russia in the Caucasus and Central Asia.  A more
nationalist line would have implications for the overall outlook for
relations with Greece, especially in the context of a deterioration in
relations with the EU.  The nationalist impulse would also compli-
cate security cooperation with Washington.  MHP has been among
the most critical of American use of Incirlik for Operation Northern
Watch over Iraq and would be sensitive to policies that cut against
Turkey’s perceived interests in Iran and Iraq.  The imposition of an
economic reform package dictated, in large measure, by interna-

--- Sayfa 64 ---
42
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tional financial institutions and Turkey’s Western partners has also
fanned nationalist opposition.
Turkey’s EU candidacy is a significant development, but it clearly
does not end the debate over Turkish identity.  In some respects, the
post-Helsinki environment has actually sharpened the questions of
what it means to be a Turk, how Turks view the future of their soci-
ety, and whether closer integration in Western institutions is
compatible with Ankara’s more activist approach to international
policy.  There is a deep reservoir of nationalist sentiment, evident
even in mainstream political discourse.31  Turkey may well continue
to evolve along modernist and liberal lines, with a reduced role for
the state and a multilateral approach to foreign policy.  Under less
favorable conditions of economic stringency, regional tensions, or
political instability, the departure is more than likely to be in a
nationalist direction.
DOMESTIC STABILITY AND TURKEY’S FOREIGN POLICY
POTENTIAL
The close connection in the Kemalist outlook between internal
stability and foreign policy potential is very evident in the current
environment.  The connection is neither unusual nor new, but it
takes on special meaning in the context of Turkey’s expanded exter-
nal policy horizons and great economic uncertainty.  The tour
d’horizon of regional and functional challenges and opportunities
facing Turkey, and discussed in detail in subsequent chapters of this
book, raises fundamental questions about Turkey’s capacity to re-
spond.  Turkey’s potential as a “big emerging market,” as a positive
regional actor, and as an effective partner for Europe and the United
States, as well as the pursuit of Ankara’s own regional objectives, will
depend to a great extent on the energy Turkey can devote to foreign
policy and international perceptions of the country’s stability and di-
rection.  Three issues will be critical in this regard.
______________

31For an interpretation of Turkish nationalism as a pervasive or “hegemonic” ideology
of choice, see Ian Lustick, “Hegemony and the Riddle of Nationalism,” in Leonard
Binder, ed., Ethnic Conflict and International Politics in the Middle East, Gainesville,
FL:  University Press of Florida, 1999.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
The Changing Domestic Context
43
First, there are strong pressures for modernization and liberalization
at work in Turkey, but ultimately their success will be measured in
terms of their corrosive effect on the “strong state,” with its ideologi-
cal and bureaucratic underpinnings.  A modern foreign policy, in-
cluding convergence with European practices, will require
sovereignty compromises and a reduction in the pervasive role of the
state.  In the absence of change in this area, Turkey will be con-
strained in its foreign and security policy options, and opportunities
for expanded economic cooperation may also be limited. Successful
economic and political reform can encourage movement in this di-
rection, but the outlook is far from certain.
Second, many Turkish and foreign observers view the current frag-
mentation of the Turkish political scene, and the rise of movements
on the extremes, as inherently unstable and unhealthy for the coun-
try’s evolution toward a liberal order.  A renewal of the center in
Turkish political life will almost certainly require modernization and
restructuring of the traditional centrist parties, ANAP and DYP, dis-
credited by scandals and political infighting, or the emergence of
credible alternatives.  Above all, it is likely to require the emergence
of a new generation of capable leaders to replace an aging political
class, possibly drawn from other-than-traditional party circles.  In
this context, some observers see the emergence of Mehmet Ali Bayar
as head of the Democratic Turkey Party—an amalgam of centrist,
populist visions in the Demirel vein—as a promising new force in
Turkey’s politics.  In the absence of competent “new faces” at the
center, Turkey’s political scene may remain uncertain, with the po-
tential for radical departures in foreign and security policy, and very
negative consequences for foreign investment and Ankara’s regional
and transatlantic relationships.
Third, Turkey’s considerable economic success of the past decades,
followed by a virtual collapse in 2000–2002, raises important ques-
tions of equity and social cohesion.  Turkey is certainly not alone in
facing this developmental dilemma.  But as a “pivot” state, the stakes
are relatively high for Turkey and its international partners.  With
other states around the Southern Mediterranean, Turkey suffers from
a growing problem of income disparity.  Persistent high rates of in-
flation, and the devaluation of 2001, have had a disproportionate
effect on the country’s large but insecure middle class.  The by-
products of Turkey’s economic growth are all too visible to the vast

--- Sayfa 66 ---
44
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
majority of Turks who do not participate in the country’s financial
markets and have to live with minimal social services.  It is precisely
these conditions that have fueled religious politics, especially at the
local level, and not just among Turkey’s poor but among many
middle class voters.  The problem of corruption is part of this equa-
tion to the extent that it plays a large role in public perceptions about
the Turkish economy and the quality of Turkish governance.
In important respects, Turkey is at a turning point in its evolution as
a state and society.  The direction Turkey takes on key questions such
as the role of the state, civil-military relations, economic reform,
secular versus religious politics, and a nationalist versus interna-
tionalist orientation will have a strong effect on the country’s power
and potential in the coming years.  In an era in which the ability to
hold down Soviet divisions in Thrace and the Caucasus is no longer a
valid measure of international weight, or a basis for alliance relation-
ships, Turkey’s internal evolution matters a great deal and will influ-
ence the character and extent of European and American engage-
ment with Ankara.  Turkey has already emerged as an important
regional and “trans-regional” actor.  Its capacity to sustain and ex-
pand this role will depend on Turkey’s internal development as
much as changes in the external environment.  But to return to
Atatürk’s observation offered at the beginning of this chapter, the
two spheres are interdependent—increasingly so as public opinion
has become more aware of international issues and as the number
and diversity of actors involved in Turkey’s foreign policy debate has
grown.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
45
Chapter Three
TURKEY AND EUROPE
Diplomatically, Turkey has been part of the European state system
since the 19th century when the Ottoman empire was included in the
Concert of Europe.  At the Paris Peace Conference in 1856, Europe’s
great powers decided that the territorial integrity of the Ottoman
empire was essential for European stability.  Indeed, for much of the
last half of the 19th century, European diplomacy was dominated by
the “Eastern Question”—that is, how to manage the decline of the
Ottoman empire, which by the mid-1800s had become, in Czar
Nicholas I’s famous phrase, “the sick man of Europe.”
Yet although the Ottoman empire was part of the European state
system, it was never regarded as an equal member of it.  At its root,
the Concert of Europe was an association of Christian, European,
and “civilized” states governed by certain values and norms.  Most
European statesmen felt that the Ottoman empire did not share
these values and norms.  As Iver Neumann has noted, “Although ‘the
Turk’ was part of the system of interstate relations, the topic of cul-
ture denied it equal status within the community of Europe.”1
Turkey’s relations with Europe changed with the demise of the Ot-
toman empire.  As the Ottoman empire lost its military superiority
and fell behind European states in technological development, the
Ottoman elite began to look to Europe as a model and began to im-
port European ideas, lifestyles, and ways of thinking.  In the words of
one Turkish scholar, Europe became “a mirror through which the Ot-
______________

1See Iver B. Neumann, Uses of the Other:  The “East” in European Identity Formation,
Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press, 1999, p. 59.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
46
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
toman elite perceived its own weaknesses, differences and traits.”2
The “Europeanization” process thus became critical in defining
Turkey’s development and evolution.
This process of modernization and Europeanization was accelerated
in the early 20th century, especially after the formation of the Turkish
Republic by Kemal Atatürk in 1923.  Atatürk sought to modernize
Turkey by eliminating almost all aspects of the Ottoman system,
which he regarded as the main reason for Turkey’s cultural and tech-
nological backwardness.  Beginning with the abolition of the Sul-
tanate in 1923, and the Caliphate a year later, Atatürk introduced a
series of reforms designed to transform Turkey into a modern, secu-
lar European state.3
This process of gradual Europeanization was given new impetus after
World War II by Turkey’s entry into NATO.  Turkey was regarded as
an important bulwark against the expansion of Soviet power and a
critical link in the Western defense system.  In 1963, Turkey con-
cluded an Association Agreement (the Ankara Agreement) with the
European Community (EC), which foresaw the possibility of eventual
membership (Article 28) once the conditions for membership had
been met.
At the same time, there has always been—and continues to be—a
sense among many Europeans that Turkey is not really “European.”
For centuries, “the Turk” was the significant “Other” against which
Europe defined its identity.4  This perception of Turks as “other” in
Europe is deeply embedded in Europeans’ collective memory and
colors European views of Turkey today.  Because of its different cul-
tural and religious traditions, Turkey is seen as not quite really
“European.”  As one former European Union official has put it,
“Turkey has never been fully considered a European country, but
______________

2Meltem Müftüler-Bac, “Through the Looking Glass:  Turkey in Europe,” Turkish
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Spring 2000, p. 28.
3For a detailed discussion, see Bernard Lewis, The Emergence of Modern Turkey,
London:  Oxford University Press, 1961, especially pp. 234–293.
4For a detailed exploration of this theme, see Neumann, Uses of the Other, Chapter
Two.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
Turkey and Europe
47
neither is it considered fully Asian.  It is at the crossroads between
two continents, two cultures and two destinies.”5
This ambiguity about Turkey’s place in Europe—its “European-
ness”—has become more acute since the end of the Cold War.  As
long as the Soviet Union was perceived as a major threat, strategic
considerations tended to dominate Turkey’s relationship to Europe.
Although many Europeans had doubts about whether Turkey could
ever become a member of the European Community—as the EU was
then called—these doubts took a backseat to the overriding strategic
need to bind Turkey close to the West.
The end of the Cold War, however, has raised new doubts about
Turkey’s place in Europe and created new difficulties in Ankara’s re-
lations with Europe.  With the demise of the Soviet Union, military
strategic considerations have become less important in Europe’s
approach to Turkey, whereas economic, political, and cultural fac-
tors have increased in importance.  Today Europe is not primarily
concerned about deterring a Soviet (or Russian) threat but about
creating a cohesive political and economic union and forging an ef-
fective common European foreign and defense policy.  This shift in
priorities has highlighted Turkey’s “distinctiveness” and raised new
questions about where Turkey fits into the “new Europe.”
TURKEY AND EC ENLARGEMENT
Turkey’s problems with Europe—and the European Union in par-
ticular—have been accentuated by the EC’s (and later the EU’s)
changing approach to enlargement.6  The Association Agreements
which the EC signed with Greece in 1961 and Turkey in 1963 pro-
vided important trade benefits and were seen as possible stepping
stones to full membership if and when the two countries fulfilled the
concrete conditions for membership.
______________

5See Eberhard Rhein, “Europe and the Greater Middle East,” in Robert D. Blackwill
and Michael Stürmer, eds., Allies Divided:  Transatlantic Policies for the Greater Middle
East, Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press, 1997, p. 47.
6For good discussion, see Sevilay Elgün Kahraman, “Rethinking Turkey-European
Union Relations in Light of Enlargement,” Turkish Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Spring 2000,
pp. 1–20.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
48
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
At the time of their conclusion, the Association Agreements were es-
sentially limited to trade and financial matters.  However, over the
next several decades the EC’s goals and competence expanded
significantly.  First, Turkey’s economic development, which until the
early 1980s relied heavily on an industrialization strategy based on
import substitution, was in conflict with its commitment to
economic integration with the EC through a customs union.  This
contradiction inhibited the development of Turkey’s relations with
the EC.
In addition, Turkey’s protectionist strategy separated Turkey from
the pattern of economic development in the rest of Europe, espe-
cially Southern Europe (Spain, Portugal, and Greece).  Whereas the
countries of Southern Europe experienced a rapid growth of imports
and revenue from tourism, Turkey experienced no such boom.7
Thus, although Turkey’s relations with the EC in the 1970s were
characterized by increasing tensions over the lack of progress toward
the creation of a customs union, Greece, Spain, and Portugal suc-
ceeded in intensifying their efforts to integrate themselves into the
European core.
The growing integration of the three Southern countries into the Eu-
ropean core also led to an increasing “Europeanization” of their for-
eign policies—a process that gained greater impetus after their entry
into the EC.  This Europeanization process, however, did not occur in
Turkey.  Ankara continued to orient its policy more toward Washing-
ton than Brussels.  Thus, although the economic and political aspects
of Europeanness complemented one another in the case of Southern
Europe, this did not happen in Turkey’s case.  Turkey remained out-
side the process of Europeanization that increasingly characterized
the economic and political evolution of the other South European
countries.
Moreover, the Southern enlargement that resulted in the entry of
Greece (1981), Spain (1986), and Portugal (1986) into the EC reflected
an important shift in the EC’s approach to enlargement.  In opening
up its ranks to the three South European countries, the EC gave
priority to political considerations—particularly the desire to
______________

7Sevilay Elgün Kahraman, “Rethinking Turkey-European Union Relations in Light of
Enlargement,” p. 3.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Turkey and Europe
49
stabilize democracy in these countries—over economic concerns.  It
thus introduced additional criteria for membership for future
members such as adherence to democratic principles, respect for
human rights, and the rule of law.  In effect, as Sevilay Elgün
Kahraman has noted, the Southern enlargement resulted in “a
reformulation of the external identity of the community.”8  Rather
than being primarily an economic club of Northern industrialized
countries, the EC came to represent shared norms, values, and codes
of behavior among its members.
This shift in emphasis in EC policy went largely unnoticed in Turkey.
Instead, Turkey continued to emphasize the economic aspects of
membership, especially after the introduction of free-market reforms
by Prime Minister Turgut Özal in the early 1980s.  In 1987, Turkey
applied for membership, despite being cautioned against doing so by
the EC.  However, unlike Greek Prime Minister Constantine Kara-
manlis, Özal did not carefully prepare the groundwork for Turkey’s
application, either at home or in Brussels.
Moreover, the timing was bad.  The EC had only just begun the diffi-
cult process of digesting the Southern enlargement (Greece, Spain,
and Portugal).  In addition, the EC was on the verge of trying to de-
velop a common internal market by 1992 and streamlining its deci-
sionmaking processes.  Thus, the EC was not ready to begin another
round of enlargement, especially one involving membership of a
large and less economically developed country like Turkey, which
would entail significant financial burdens.
In December 1989 the EC rejected Turkey’s membership, citing a va-
riety of economic, social, and political reasons.9  Instead, the EC pro-
posed an intensification of relations based on the existing Associa-
______________

8Ibid., p. 5.
9See Commission Opinion on Turkey’s Request for Accession to the Community [SEC
(89) 2290 fin./2], Brussels, December 20, 1989.  For a detailed discussion of Turkish
and EC considerations regarding Turkey’s application, see Heinz Kramer, Die Eu-
ropäische Gemeinschaft und die Turkei:  Entwicklung, Probleme und Perspektiven
einer schwierigen Partnerschaft, Baden-Baden:  Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, 1988, pp.
84–111 and 120–150.  See also Heinz Kramer, “Turkey and the European Union:  A
Multi-Dimensional Relationship,” in Vojtech Mastny and R. Craig Nation, eds., Turkey
Between East and West:  New Challenges for a Rising Regional Power, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1996, pp. 203–232.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
50
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tion Agreement.  In line with this, the EC Commission presented a
comprehensive package of economic, trade and political measures—
the so-called Matutes Package—designed to improve EC-Turkish re-
lations.  These measures were designed to relaunch EC-Turkish rela-
tions, which had largely languished after the military coup in Turkey
in 1980.
THE IMPACT OF EASTERN ENLARGEMENT
Turkey’s bid for EC membership was further complicated by the col-
lapse of communism in Eastern Europe in 1989–1990.  This created a
new dilemma for the EC:  how to facilitate the “return to Europe” of
the countries of Eastern Europe which had just emerged from 45
years of communist rule.  Suddenly, Turkey found itself thrust to the
back of the enlargement queue by the emergence of a large new
group of candidates for membership—countries that only a few years
earlier had been on the other side of the East-West divide.  Although
many of the East European countries were less advanced economi-
cally than Turkey, they were considered to be politically and cultur-
ally a part of Europe.  Thus, the EC’s attempt to integrate the East
European countries added a new “cultural dimension” to the EC’s
policy that previously had been absent.
The Copenhagen summit in June 1993 was an important watershed
in the evolution of the EU’s approach to enlargement.10  First, it ac-
knowledged that membership of the East European and Baltic coun-
tries—but not Turkey—was a major objective of EU policy.  Second,
it set out specific economic and political criteria for membership.
Among the latter were the requirement that a candidate achieve a
stable democracy, maintain the rule of law, respect human rights,
and protect the rights of minorities.
The Copenhagen criteria significantly complicated Turkey’s quest for
EU membership.  In effect, they raised the bar for membership by
adding a whole new group of political criteria that had previously not
been explicit criteria for membership.  In so doing, they accentuated
the difference between Turkey and the other aspirants and high-
lighted Turkey’s “distinctiveness.”  Whereas Turkey’s economic
______________

10The European Community changed its name to the European Union in 1993.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
Turkey and Europe
51
qualifications were better than those of many of the Central and East
European states, Turkey fell short on many of the political criteria,
especially those related to human rights.
The EU’s Luxembourg summit (December 1997) essentially ratified
this process of differentiation.  While underlining the gradual and all-
inclusive nature of the enlargement process, it set up a two-tier ac-
cession process with the 11 East European and Baltic countries plus
Cyprus.  Turkey, however, was not accepted as a candidate country.
Instead, a “pre-accession” strategy was set out for Turkey designed to
help it to enhance its candidacy for membership.
In other words, Turkey was included in the enlargement process but
not in the pre-accession strategy along with the other Central and East
European countries (plus Cyprus).  Instead, it was offered a special
strategy to help it prepare for accession, but it was not given official
candidate status nor offered a timetable for accession negotiations.
The EU also linked Turkey’s eligibility as a candidate to progress on
issues not contained in the Copenhagen criteria such as a resolution
of Turkey’s differences with Greece over the Aegean and a Cyprus
settlement.
The EU’s failure to include Turkey on the list of candidate countries
provoked a wave of outrage in Turkey and prompted Turkey to freeze
its political dialogue with the EU.  Many Turks believed—and con-
tinue to believe—that the EU’s rejection of Turkey’s candidacy was
unfair and reflected an inherent bias against Turkey on cultural and
religious grounds because it is a Muslim country.  Although such
concerns are not entirely absent from European thinking, this view
overlooks the EU’s evolution in the last decade and the hardening of
accession criteria, particularly the growing importance of political
criteria for membership.  It is this evolution and greater emphasis on
political criteria more than anything else that has complicated
Turkey’s efforts to achieve EU membership.
THE HELSINKI SUMMIT
The Luxembourg summit represented a nadir in Turkey’s relations
with the EU.  In the aftermath of the summit, Turkish-EU relations
sharply deteriorated and Turkey downgraded its relations with Brus-
sels.  Indeed, in the wake of the summit, it was common to hear

--- Sayfa 74 ---
52
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
voices in Ankara and Istanbul saying that Turkey’s relations with Eu-
rope were not all that important and that Turkey needed to diversify
its ties.  However, at the Helsinki summit (December 1999), the EU
reversed its previous stand and accepted Turkey as a candidate
member “on the basis of the same criteria as applied to the other
candidate states.”11  Turkey was also offered a pre-accession strategy
designed to stimulate and support its reforms.12
The shift in the EU’s position was due to several factors:  (1) a desire
on the part of the EU to halt the deterioration of Turkish-EU relations
after Luxembourg, (2) a more accommodating position by the new
SPD/Green coalition in Germany, (3) a change in Greek policy to-
ward Turkey, and (4) pressure from the United States.  However, the
EU made clear that it was not prepared to open accession negotia-
tions with Turkey until Ankara had fulfilled the Copenhagen criteria.
It also linked Turkey’s eventual membership to a resolution of its
dispute with Greece over the Aegean and a settlement of the Cyprus
issue.13
At its summit in Nice (December 4–6, 2000), the EU Council ap-
proved an Accession Partnership Document for Turkey.  The Acces-
sion Partnership (AP) is the centerpiece of the pre-accession strategy
for Turkey.  It identifies short- and medium-term priorities, inter-
mediate objectives, and aspects on which Turkey’s accession prepa-
rations must concentrate for Turkey to qualify for membership.  It
______________

11For a detailed discussion of developments leading up to the change in the EU posi-
tion, see Ziya Onis, “Luxembourg, Helsinki and Beyond:  Towards an Interpretation of
Recent Turkey-EU Relations,” Government and Opposition, Vol. 35, No. 4, Autumn
2000, pp. 403–483; and William Park, “Turkey’s European Union Candidacy:  From
Luxembourg to Helsinki—to Ankara?” Mediterranean Politics, Vol. 5, No. 3, Autumn
2000, pp. 31–53.
12Presidency Conclusions, Paragraph 12, Helsinki European Council, December 10–11,
1999, available at http://europa.eu.int/council/off/conclu/dec99/dec99_en.htm.
13Some Turkish analysts have suggested that the reason why the EU accepted
Turkey’s candidacy at the Helsinki summit was related to the geopolitical and security
risks that might arise if Turkey were excluded.  (See, in particular, Meltem Müftüler-
Bac, “Turkey’s Role in the EU’s Security and Foreign Policies,” Security Dialogue, Vol.
31, No. 4, December 2000, pp. 489–502.)  However, there is little evidence to support
this view.  On the contrary, the Helsinki decision appears to have been based on a
combination of economic, political, and social considerations.  Security concerns
played practically no role.  For good discussion, see Gareth Jenkins, “Turkey and EU
Security:  Camouflage or Criterion for Candidacy?” Security Dialogue, Vol. 32, No. 2,
June 2001, pp. 269–272.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
Turkey and Europe
53
also sets up monitoring mechanisms to evaluate progress toward
achieving the objectives and priorities set out in the Accession Part-
nership Document.  In effect, the Accession Partnership Document
establishes a “roadmap” for Turkish accession to the EU.  Whether—
or when—Turkey joins the EU depends critically on Turkey’s ability
to realize the objectives set out in the Accession Partnership
Document.
The National Program of Action presented by the Turkish govern-
ment in March 2001 was supposed to spell out how Ankara intended
to meet the objectives laid out in the Accession Partnership Docu-
ment.  The program was an impressive declaration of intentions, but
it was vague and evasive on precisely those issues—the treatment of
minorities, the role of the military, Cyprus, and relations with
Greece—regarded by the EU as the most critical areas where changes
are needed.14
Since then, Turkey has taken a number of steps to address EU con-
cerns.  In October 2001, the Turkish parliament passed a series of
reforms that significantly eased restrictions on human rights.15
These reforms range from reducing police powers of detention to
easing the investigation of legislators suspected of corruption and
other crimes.  The reforms also paved the way for lifting the ban on
Kurdish language broadcasts and increased civilian representation
on the National Security Council.  In addition, in February 2002, the
parliament passed a mini-reform package containing reforms in the
Turkish Penal Code and antiterrorism law that relaxed constraints on
freedom of expression that had been used to jail journalists and
intellectuals who published views considered to undermine the
State.
These reforms have been welcomed by the EU.  However, the
Progress Report released by the EU in October 2002 makes clear that
Turkey still has a way to go to fulfill the Copenhagen criteria,
______________

14See “Program falls short of expectations,” Turkish Daily News, March 20, 2001.  Also
“Harte Kritik an Ankaras EU-Reformprogramm,” Neue Zürcher Zeitung, March 21,
2001; and “EU tells Turkey to do more,” Turkish Daily News, March 27, 2001.
15See Leyla Boulton, “Turkey approves reforms to ease curbs on human rights,” Fi-
nancial Times, September 24, 2001.  Also Rainer Hermann, “Reform in kleinen Schrit-
ten,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, October 30, 2001.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
54
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
especially in the political field.16  In addition, Ankara must overcome
a number of other obstacles—including resolving its differences with
Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus—before membership in the EU
can seriously be considered.
THE ECONOMIC DIMENSION
The most important obstacles to Turkey’s EU membership are politi-
cal, but there are important economic obstacles to membership as
well.  One is simply the huge size of the country.  With a population
of nearly 67.8 million, Turkey is the second largest country in Europe
behind Germany.  If its population continues to grow at the current
rate, Turkey could have the largest population in Europe by the
middle of the 21st century.  Integrating a country the size of Turkey—
especially one that is also characterized by great regional dispari-
ties—will pose an enormous challenge to the EU.
The reforms introduced by Prime Minister Özal in the early 1980s es-
sentially abandoned the import substitution strategy that had previ-
ously been the cornerstone of Turkish economic policy.  Since then,
Turkey’s economy has become more open and the private sector has
expanded significantly.  Currently, more than half of Turkey’s foreign
trade is with the EU.  Moreover, the structure of Turkey’s trade with
the EU has significantly changed.  In the 1970s, Turkey was an ex-
porter of agricultural produce and raw materials.  Today, the bulk of
Turkey’s exports are manufactured goods.
Despite these changes, the Turkish economy is still characterized by
a number of structural weaknesses that inhibit Turkey’s integration
into the EU:
•
Low Per Capita Income.  Income levels in Turkey are signifi-
cantly below those in Western Europe.  Per capita Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) is about $3,000.  This is well below that
of the poorest countries in Europe. Greece and Portugal, for
instance, have per capita incomes of $11,770 and $10,600,
respectively.
______________

16See Regular Report on Turkey’s Progress Toward Accession, Brussels, Commission of
the European Communities, SEC (2002), 1412, October 10, 2002..

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Turkey and Europe
55
•
A Large Agricultural Work Force.  Nearly 40 percent of Turkey’s
population is engaged in agriculture (compared with 2 percent in
Britain).  This rural work force amounts to about 15 million peo-
ple—a number larger than the total population of several current
EU members and five times larger than the population of some
prospective new members such as Slovenia and Estonia.  Shifting
this population out of agriculture into modern forms of eco-
nomic activity will require an enormous and prolonged struc-
tural adjustment.
•
Large Regional Disparities.  Although areas of Istanbul and
Ankara enjoy standards of living and levels of prosperity close to
those of Western Europe, Central and Eastern Anatolia are
largely agricultural and have a much lower standard of living.
With the winding down of the PKK insurgency, however, the
Turkish government has begun to encourage greater private in-
vestment in Southeast Anatolia.
•
High Inflation.  Turkey’s inflation over the last decade has been
nearly 80 percent per annum—much higher than the average in
the EU.  This has had a negative effect on the financial sector and
is one reason for Turkey’s low foreign investment.  Lower infla-
tion would not only increase foreign investment but could also
help to boost Turkey’s growth rates.
•
Low Foreign Investment.  Turkey has a very low rate of foreign
investment.  In the period 1993–1997, foreign investment aver-
aged about 0.5 percent of Gross National Product (GNP).  By
contrast, during the same period Spain, Greece, and Portugal
managed to attract foreign investment of between 1 and 2
percent of GNP.  The low rate of foreign investment is due largely
to macro-economic instability and regulatory deficiencies.  But
other factors such as cumbersome bureaucratic practices and
the persistent high inflation rate have also played a role in
inhibiting foreign investment.
•
A High Public Sector Deficit.  Turkey’s public sector deficit is ex-
tremely high—35–45 percent of the GNP.  This is one factor re-
sponsible for Turkey’s high inflation.  This high inflation rate is
compounded by structural weaknesses in the financial sector
that make it difficult for Turkish banks to compete with their
counterparts in the EU.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
56
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
•
Slow Pace of Privatization.  Turkey has undertaken a major ef-
fort at privatizing state-owned enterprises since the early 1980s.
However, the pace of privatization has been sluggish and ham-
pered by the fact that not all of the necessary legislation has been
passed.  In addition, a lack of transparency in decisionmaking
has resulted in large-scale fraud, bribery, and corruption.
In short, Turkey faces major problems of structural adjustment be-
fore it is ready for membership in the EU.  This is true, above all, in
the agricultural sector, which, as noted above, still accounts for 40
percent of the workforce.  The creation of the customs union, which
came into force at the end of 1995, should help reduce many of these
structured obstacles.  The customs union is designed to abolish tar-
iffs on imports.  It initially resulted in a worsening of Turkey’s bal-
ance of trade with the EU, but over the longer term it will create a
more liberalized economic climate and should help Turkey to inte-
grate into the global market.
At the same time, the economic crisis of 2000–2002 has underscored
the need to proceed more rapidly with a program of structural re-
forms.  Reforms are required in three areas in particular:  agriculture,
energy, and privatization.  Reform in these areas will help to restore
investor confidence—badly shaken by the economic crisis—and help
reduce corruption by increasing transparency.  It will also enhance
Turkey’s prospects for EU membership over the long term.
DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
The main obstacles to Turkey’s EU membership, however, are in the
field of democratization and human rights.  Recent EU evaluations of
Turkey’s prospects for membership have consistently pointed to
shortcomings in Turkey’s human rights record.17  Although Turkey
has taken some steps to address these shortcomings, progress has
been slow and insufficient.  Moreover, many of the changes in legis-
lation have not been implemented.
One of the most sensitive issues is the use of torture in Turkey.  At the
Luxembourg summit in December 1997, Luxembourg Prime Minister
______________

17Ibid.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Turkey and Europe
57
Jean-Claude Juncker called attention to this issue by bluntly stating
that torturers could not sit at the EU table.  Juncker’s remarks caused
uproar in Turkey—in part because of the undiplomatic manner in
which they were expressed.  They nonetheless highlight the need for
Turkey to address the torture issue more adequately if it is to achieve
its goal of EU membership.
Two points, however, need emphasis in this connection.  First, al-
though there continue to be deficiencies in Turkey’s record regarding
the use of torture, these lapses are largely a result of poor implemen-
tation of the laws and regulations on the books, not the result of a
state policy that condones torture.  Second, in the last several years
Turkey has undertaken a number of efforts to tighten the laws
against torture.  However, the fact remains that incidents of torture
continue to occur.18  Thus, Turkey needs to take further steps to en-
sure that the laws and regulations against the use of torture are fully
implemented if it expects to gain membership in the EU.
The EU has also expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of
expression, especially those contained in Articles 159 and 312 of
the Turkish Penal Code and paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Turkish Anti-
Terrorism Law.  In February 2002, after intense debate, the Turkish
parliament passed legislation amending these laws.  However, the
EU has claimed that these changes do not go far enough to meet the
Copenhagen criteria.19
In an effort to further enhance Turkey’s qualifications for EU mem-
bership, in August 2002 the Turkish parliament passed a major
reform package that inter alia abolished the death penalty except in
times of war.  The legislation removed an important obstacle to EU
membership.  However, it is not likely to be enough to persuade the
______________

18The European Committee Against Torture published three reports in 1992, 1996,
and 1999 in which it noted that torture was systematically practiced in Turkey.  The
most recent report, published in February 1999, noted that the situation was improv-
ing but stated that torture still occurs in Turkey and that, despite the improved rules
and regulations forbidding torture, the implementation of the rules and regulations
was not satisfactory, especially in police stations and prisons.  See Toward Calmer Wa-
ters:  A Report on Relations Between Turkey and the European Union, The Hague:  Ad-
visory Council on International Affairs, July 1999, p. 28.
19Selcuk Gültasli, “EU:  312 and 159 amendments not sufficient,” Turkish Daily News,
February 8, 2002.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
58
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
EU to open accession negotiations at the EU Copenhagen summit in
December 2002.
THE KURDISH ISSUE
A related problem is posed by Turkey’s approach to minority rights,
especially for the Kurdish population.  Kurds comprise between 8
and 12 million people out of Turkey’s total population of nearly 67.8
million.  Less than half the Kurdish population is in Southeast Anato-
lia; the majority is in the major Turkish cities, particularly Istanbul
and Ankara.  Another eight million or so Kurds live in the Kurdish
regions of Iraq, Iran and Syria.
Turkey does not recognize a Kurdish minority and views Kurds sim-
ply as citizens of Turkey—in short, Turks.  This is a legacy of the
strong assimilationist policies pursued by Atatürk at the time of the
founding of the Turkish Republic in 1923.  The Ottoman empire was
organized along religious community lines.  Thus, the Kurds—unlike
the Greeks, Jews, and Christian Armenians—were not considered a
minority but were full members of the Muslim majority.  Atatürk was
determined to create a new Turkish nation-state on the basis of a
specifically “Turkish” national identity.  As a result, all existing Mus-
lim minorities, including the Kurds, were “granted a kind of Turkish-
ness.”20  The only minorities that were recognized were those recog-
nized in the Lausanne Treaty (1923)—Jews, Armenians, and Greeks.
Atatürk’s concept of Turkish identity was highly inclusive.  Every per-
son living within the borders of the Turkish Republic and accepting
its basic principles could become a Turkish citizen.  But becoming a
Turk required the suppression of an individual’s ethnic identity.  In
short, Atatürk’s concept was extremely generous in that it allowed
anyone to become a Turkish citizen.  But as Svante Cornell has
pointed out, it did not provide a solution to those who were not pre-
______________

20Dogu Ergil, “Identity Crisis and Political Instability in Turkey,” The Journal of Inter-
national Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, p. 51.  However, by forcing all Muslims into a
Turkish identity, the new regime also closely associated Turkish identity with Islam,
which was contrary to its secularization policy.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Turkey and Europe
59
pared to abandon their previous ethnic identity.21  This was the case
for a large portion of the Kurdish population.
The Turkish approach to the Kurdish issue is also animated by deep-
seated historical memories regarding threats to the integrity of the
Ottoman empire at the end of the 19th century and reflects a long-
standing belief, sparked in particular by the Sèvres Treaty (1920), that
the West favors the dismemberment of the Turkish state and the cre-
ation of an independent Kurdish state.22  As a result, Turkey has
strongly rejected demands by the Kurds for greater regional auton-
omy and cultural rights, such as the right to receive public education
in their own language, fearing that this could spark separatist pres-
sures and threats to the integrity of the Turkish state.
The winding down of the campaign against the PKK has removed an
important point of tension in Turkey’s relations with the EU.  At the
same time, it has focused greater attention on Turkey’s internal
policies and made it harder to justify some of the restrictions on per-
sonal expression and human rights.  These restrictions were justified
in the past on the grounds that Turkey faced a serious terrorist and
separatist threat.  But now that the threat from the PKK has signifi-
cantly diminished, the case for keeping these restrictions in place is
much less compelling.
The diminution of the armed violence by the PKK provides an oppor-
tunity for the Turkish government to press forward with reforms in
the field of democratization and human rights.  The government
has recently undertaken measures to encourage investment in the
Kurdish-populated areas of Southeastern Anatolia, one of the poor-
est regions in Turkey.  In August 2002, in an effort to encourage the
EU to open accession negotiations, the Turkish parliament also
passed legislation legalizing broadcasting and private tutoring in
______________

21See Svante Cornell, “The Kurdish Question in Turkish Politics,” Orbis, Vol. 45, No. 1,
Winter 2000, p. 34.
22Under the Sèvres Treaty, the Western powers decided to dismantle the Ottoman
empire and agreed to the establishment of an independent Kurdistan.  Although the
treaty was never implemented, the memory of the treaty has had a strong effect on
Turkey’s national consciousness and psyche.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
60
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Kurdish.  However, teaching Kurdish in public schools is still forbid-
den.23
These moves remove important obstacles to EU membership.  But
they are unlikely to be enough to persuade the EU to open accession
negotiations at the EU summit in Copenhagen.  The best Turkey can
probably hope for at the summit is a vague reference to the EU’s
willingness to open accession negotiations when Turkey has fulfilled
the Copenhagen criteria.
THE ISLAMIC FACTOR
Turkey’s application for EU membership also raises important cul-
tural and “civilizational” issues.  Although the EU insists that
Turkey’s application for membership will be judged solely on the
Copenhagen criteria, beneath the surface many Europeans question
the degree to which Turkey’s Islamic religious and cultural traditions
are compatible with “European” values.  As former Dutch Foreign
Minister Hans van Mierlo stated in early 1997:  “There is a problem of
a large Muslim state.  Do we want that in Europe?  It is an unspoken
question.”24
Over the past several decades, there has been a visible increase in the
role of Islam in Turkish social and political life.  This has been
reflected, in particular, in the strong support for the Islamic Refah
(Welfare) Party and its successor, the Fazilet (Virtue) Party.  It has
become fashionable lately among Western observers to talk about a
process of “re-Islamization” in Turkey.  However, such a view is
misleading.  Islam was never really eliminated in Turkey.  It was
simply removed from state institutions.  It continued, however, to
exert a strong influence in the countryside.  The result was a sharp
division between the Kemalist secular culture of the military-
bureaucratic elite centered in Ankara and other major cities in
Western Turkey and the traditional Islamic culture that prevailed in
the villages and towns of Eastern Anatolia.
______________

23Karl Vick, “Turkey Passes Rights Reforms in Bid for EU,” The Washington Post, Au-
gust 4, 2002.
24Quoted in Stephen Kinzer, “Turkey Finds European Door Slow to Open,” New York
Times, February 23, 1997.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
Turkey and Europe
61
Beginning in the 1950s and 1960s, Islam gradually began to make a
comeback in Turkey.25  This was in part a product of the democrati-
zation of Turkish political life, which gave new space to all kinds of
political groups, including the Islamists.  Ironically, in the 1980s it
was also promoted by the military, who saw Islam as a bulwark
against the infiltration of Marxist and leftist ideas and made religious
instruction in schools compulsory.  Both General Kenan Evren, who
became president after the return to civilian rule in 1983, and Prime
Minister Turgut Özal repeatedly stressed the importance of religious
values in Turkish nationalism.  Özal even performed the hajj—the
holy pilgrimage to Mecca—during a trip to Saudi Arabia.
Broader economic and social changes, particularly increasing urban-
ization, also contributed to strengthening the role of Islam in Turkish
political and social life.  As more and more Turkish peasants flocked
to the cities, they brought with them their rural values, including
their strong Islamic traditions.  Uprooted from familiar surroundings
and often forced to live in shanty towns (gecekondu) on the outskirts
of major cities, this disaffected and impoverished stratum of Turkish
society has been one of the strongest sources of political support for
the religious parties.  In effect, Islam has become “the oppositional
identity for the excluded sectors of Turkish society.”26
The Islamists have also benefited from the failure of the mainstream
political parties to address Turkey’s growing social and economic
problems.  This has allowed the Islamists to portray themselves as
the party of clean, efficient government, especially at the local
level.27  Indeed, many of those who voted for Refah in the 1995 na-
tional elections—in which Refah won more votes (21 percent) than
any other political party—did so out of disillusionment with the
______________

25For a detailed discussion, see Jeremy Salt, “Nationalism and the Rise of Muslim
Sentiment,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 1995, pp. 13–27, and Sencer
Ayata, “Patronage Party and the State:  The Politicization of Islam in Turkey,” The
Middle East Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1, Winter 1996, pp. 40–56.
26M. Hakan Yavuz, “Cleansing Islam from the Public Sphere,” The Journal of Interna-
tional Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, p. 22.
27Refah’s record for clean, efficient government at the local level was a major factor in
its strong showing in the December 1995 elections.  However, its policies also had a
less-publicized dark side, including mounting debt in many municipalities.  See Ugur
Akinci, “The Welfare Party’s Municipal Track Record:  Evaluating Islamist Activism in
Turkey,” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 53, No. 1, Winter 1999, pp. 75–94.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
62
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
mainstream parties and as a form of protest rather than out of reli-
gious conviction.
At the same time, the Islamist movement has undergone an impor-
tant evolution in recent years.28  All major Islamic groups have be-
come more “pro-European.”  Once firm opponents of Turkey’s
membership in the EU, the Islamists today are one of the strongest
supporters of Turkish membership, which they see as an important
guarantee of their religious and political rights.  In addition, the
crackdown on Islamic influences since the ouster of the Erbakan
government in mid 1997—the so-called “February 28 Process”—has
prompted a rethinking of attitudes toward modernity and democracy
within the Islamic movement and the now banned Virtue (Fazilet)
Party.  In the last few years, a group of younger, pragmatic “modern
Islamists” has increasingly challenged the antimodern, dogmatic
policies of former Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan and tried to
steer the Islamist movement in a more democratic direction.29
The decision by the Constitutional Court in June 2001 to ban the
Virtue Party has accelerated the transformation of the Islamic
movement and resulted in the emergence of a more democratic and
forward-looking Islamist Party—the Justice and Development Party
(AKP)—one that could be easier to integrate into Turkish political
life.30  Polls show that the AKP is likely to get more than 20 percent of
the vote in the November 2002 elections.  Thus, it is quite possible
that the AKP could be part of a government that emerges from the
elections.  Whether the Turkish military would be willing to accept
such an outcome or would initiate a campaign to undermine an AKP-
led government, as it did in the case of the Erbakan government,
remains to be seen.
______________

28However, the conservative wing of the Islamist movement, led by Erbakan, has been
less favorably disposed toward EU membership since the decision by the Turkish Con-
stitutional Court in June 2001 to ban the Virtue Party.
29For a detailed discussion, see Chapter Two.
30On the prospects for a “reconciliation” between Islam and democracy, see Metin
Heper, “Islam and Democracy in Turkey:  Toward a Reconciliation?” The Middle East
Journal, Vol. 51, No. 1, Winter 1997, pp. 32–45.  Also, see Resat Kasaba, “Cohabitation?
Islamist and Secular Groups in Modern Turkey,” in Robert W. Heffner, ed., Democratic
Civility, New Brunswick, NJ:  Transition, 1998, pp. 265–284.  For a useful survey of the
new pro-Islamic parties in Turkey, see Günter Seufert, Neue pro-Islamische Parteien in
der Turkei, SWP-Studie, Berlin:  Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, March 2002.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Turkey and Europe
63
CIVILIAN CONTROL OF THE MILITARY
Turkey’s aspirations for EU membership will also require an impor-
tant change in the role of the military in Turkish political life.   In the
postwar period, the Turkish military has acted as custodian of the
Kemalist legacy.  The military sees its mission as not only to defend
the territorial integrity of the Turkish state against external threats
but also to protect it against internal challenges.
Ironically, as the Islamists have sought to modernize and move fur-
ther away from fundamentalism, the military has become more doc-
trinaire and dogmatic in its interpretation of Kemalism.  Although
outwardly strong supporters of Turkey’s membership in the EU,
many officers fear that the reforms required for EU membership will
weaken the ability of the Turkish state to manage its security prob-
lems—a view shared by the right-wing MHP.31  Initially, the military
opposed any significant relaxation of restrictions on freedom of
expression in the Constitution and Penal Code, including easing the
ban on broadcasts in Kurdish, arguing that the lifting of these
restrictions would pose a threat to the integrity of the Turkish state.32
However, they have recently taken a more flexible approach to
broadcasting in Kurdish and abolition of the death penalty.
The military’s special role is codified through its dominance of the
NSC.  Legally, the NSC has only an advisory function.  In reality,
however, NSC pronouncements are tantamount to official edicts—as
former Prime Minister Erbakan was forced to recognize when he
sought to treat the NSC’s “recommendation” to clamp down on the
rising influence of Islamist forces in Turkey as only “advice.”  His
failure to take forceful action against the Islamists lead to his even-
tual ouster in a “silent coup” in June 1997.
In response to EU pressure, the Turkish parliament passed legisla-
tion in October 2001 calling for an increase in the number of civilians
on the NSC.  However, this is largely a cosmetic measure.  The
______________

31See the article by the Deputy Chairman of the Nationalist Action Party Sevkot Bülent
Yahnici, “EU road might be a trap for ethnic disintegration,” Turkish Daily News, Jan-
uary 3, 2001.  See also Elif Ünal, “Nationalists fear reforms will split Turkey,” ibid.,
January 20, 2001.
32See Leyla Boulton, “Turkish Military Resists EU Demands on Kurds,” Financial
Times, December 12, 2000.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
64
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
influence of the military on many security issues remains strong.
Membership in the EU will require a reduction of the military’s
influence in Turkish politics.  Whether the military will be willing to
accept such a lower profile remains to be seen.
GREECE AND CYPRUS
Turkey’s differences with Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus—
discussed in detail in Chapter Five—also are an important factor
affecting Ankara’s overall relationship with the EU.  Since mid-1999,
relations between Turkey and Greece have improved significantly.
However, this détente has been limited to relatively non-controver-
sial areas.  The core differences over the Aegean and Cyprus have not
been resolved.
At the same time, a resolution of the Aegean and Cyprus issues has
become increasingly linked to Turkey’s quest for EU membership.  In
accepting Turkey as an official candidate for membership at the
Helsinki summit, the EU Council urged candidate states to make ev-
ery effort to resolve their border disputes and other related issues or,
failing that, to bring the dispute to the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) in a “reasonable” time.  The council stated that it would review
the situation at the end of 2004 in relation to the accession process.
Thus, if there is no progress toward resolving the Aegean dispute by
2004, the EU could refuse to open accession negotiations with
Turkey.
At Helsinki, the EU also agreed that a Cyprus settlement would not
be a precondition for Greek Cypriot membership in the EU—a posi-
tion it reaffirmed in its Strategy Paper issued on November 13, 2001.
However, it also noted that in reviewing the situation it would take
into consideration “all relevant factors.”  The EU expects to conclude
accession negotiations with Nicosia in late 2002.  There are few eco-
nomic obstacles to Nicosia’s membership.  Thus, in principle, the
Greek part of the island could become a member of the EU by 2004–
2005.
Greek Cypriot membership would be traumatic for Turkey and
would open up the prospect that Greek Cyprus could veto Turkish
membership in the EU or demand certain concessions regarding
Cyprus as a condition for lifting its veto.  A decision by the EU to ac-

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Turkey and Europe
65
cept Greek Cyprus before a Cyprus settlement could provoke a crisis
in Turkish-EU relations much more profound than the sharp down-
turn in relations with the EU after the Luxembourg summit.  Turkey
could respond by integrating the Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus (TRNC) more closely with the Turkish mainland or by freez-
ing relations with the EU.  However, Turkey is unlikely to abandon
the goal of membership entirely.
THE DEFENSE AND SECURITY DIMENSION
Turkey’s relations with Europe have also been complicated by differ-
ences over defense and security policy.  Unlike other Southern Euro-
pean members of NATO, Turkey has not witnessed a strong
“Europeanization” of its foreign policy.  This has tended to highlight
Turkey’s “distinctiveness” and set it apart from the rest of the south-
ern region in NATO.
The development within the EU of an increasingly important secu-
rity and defense policy (ESDP) has reinforced this distinctiveness and
created a new set of problems.  Although other Southern European
countries have avidly embraced the EU’s development of a stronger
security and defense component, Turkey’s attitude has been much
more ambivalent.  Since Turkey is not a member of the EU—and not
likely to be one for quite a while—Ankara does not want to see any
significant weakening of NATO’s role in European security, since this
would reduce Turkey’s own voice on European security matters.
Turkey is not directly opposed to the expansion of the EU’s role in
security and defense matters, but Ankara has sought assurances that
it will be involved in the planning and decisionmaking in EU crisis
management operations, especially those that touch directly on its
own security interests, and has refused to agree that the EU can draw
“automatically” on NATO assets to manage a crisis in which NATO
decides not to become involved.  Instead, it has insisted that the EU’s
access to these assets be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
Turkey’s demands for closer consultation and involvement in EU
decisionmaking in EU crisis management operations have hindered
the coordination of crisis management planning between NATO and

--- Sayfa 88 ---
66
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
the EU.33  Ankara’s objections have been driven by two main
concerns.  First, Turkey feared that Greece might use its membership
in the EU to push the EU to intervene in areas—particularly
Cyprus—that directly affect Turkey’s security.  Second, most of the
crises that the EU or NATO might face in the future are likely to be on
or near Turkey’s periphery.  Thus, Turkey wanted to assure that it
would be involved in decisions that directly affected its security.
In early December 2001 Turkey accepted an American/British-
sponsored compromise proposal—the “Ankara Document.”  The
Ankara Document provided assurances that the EU’s ESDP would
not be used against other NATO allies (i.e., Turkey).  In addition, it
guaranteed that Turkey would be closely consulted in the case of an
intervention by the EU’s Rapid Reaction Corps in any contingency in
the geographic vicinity of Turkey or that affected Turkish security
interests.34  The Ankara Document thus met Turkey’s two main
concerns.  However, at the EU summit in Laeken, Belgium, a few
days later, Greece raised objections to aspects of the Ankara
compromise and forestalled its implementation, claiming that the
Ankara text would, in effect, give Turkey a veto over Greek national
interests such as Cyprus and the Aegean and leave these areas
outside the competence of the EU’s ESDP.  Such a situation is
regarded as unacceptable by Athens.
Eventually a compromise is likely to be found that will allow NATO
and the EU to coordinate their cooperational plans for crisis man-
agement.  However, the dispute has served to deepen mistrust be-
tween Ankara and Brussels.  Many Turks see the dispute as further
proof of the EU’s desire to exclude Turkey from important decisions
affecting its security while Turkish intransigence and brinkmanship
on this issue have irritated many EU officials and made them less
______________

33For background, see Antonio Missiroli, “EU-NATO Cooperation in Crisis Manage-
ment:  No Turkish Delight for ESDP,” Security Dialogue, Vol. 33, No. 1, March 2002, pp.
9–26.
34See Judy Dempsy and Leyla Boulton, “Turkey lifts objections to EU force,” Financial
Times, December 4, 2001.  See also Horst Bacia, “Widerspruch zwischen Wollen und
Können,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, December 17, 2001.  For a detailed discus-
sion, see Missiroli, “EU-NATO Cooperation in Crisis Management:  No Turkish Delight
for ESDP,” pp. 20–23.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Turkey and Europe
67
inclined to show flexibility on other issues related to Turkey’s EU
membership.
Turkey has taken a rather cautious approach to NATO’s transforma-
tion since the end of the Cold War.  Ankara initially had reservations
about the first round of NATO enlargement, fearing that it would an-
tagonize Russia.  However, it has strongly supported the inclusion of
Bulgaria and Romania in a second round on the grounds that this
would help stabilize the Balkans.  At the same time, because Turkey
faces a serious threat from Iraq and Syria, Ankara is particularly
concerned that NATO’s new emphasis on crisis management does
not lead to a weakening of the Alliance’s commitment to collective
defense.
NATO’s transformation in the wake of the September 11 attacks
could increase Turkey’s strategic weight within the Alliance.  In the
future, NATO is likely to show greater concern for threats beyond
Europe’s borders.  In such a more outward-looking Alliance, Turkey’s
position on the periphery of the Middle East could enhance Turkey’s
strategic importance—but also its exposure.35
At the same time, Turkey’s greater involvement in Middle Eastern
affairs since the end of the Cold War creates new dilemmas for
Ankara.  Many European allies are reluctant to broaden NATO’s
scope of action beyond Europe and might balk at aiding Turkey if it
gets into a conflict with Iraq or Syria, especially if Turkey were per-
ceived to have provoked the conflict.36  However, a failure to come to
Turkey’s aid in such a case would create a crisis in Turkey’s relations
with NATO and might even prompt Turkey to withdraw from the Al-
liance.
______________

35The events of September 11 have provoked a debate in Turkey about the effect of
the terrorist acts on Turkey’s strategic position.  For a skeptical view, see Saban Kar-
das, “The strategic importance of Turkey after September 11,” Turkish Daily News,
May 29, 2002.
36Germany’s hesitant response to Turkey’s request for Allied Mobile Force Rein-
forcements during the Gulf crisis highlights this problem.  To many Germans, deter-
ring a possible attack by Iraq against Turkey was not what NATO was all about.  To
many Turks, on the other hand, Germany’s ambivalent response called into question
the validity of Article V (collective defense) of the Washington treaty and raised
broader doubts about the utility of NATO membership.  See Ian O. Lesser, Bridge or
Barrier:  Turkey and the West After the Cold War, pp. 14–15.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
68
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
This issue could become more acute if the United States launches an
attack against Iraq.  Turkey has expressed reservations about such an
attack, which would increase Ankara’s own exposure, especially if it
allowed the United States to use its facilities to conduct strikes
against Iraq.  However, most Turks believe that Turkey will have little
choice but to support the United States if Washington eventually
decides to attack Iraq.
Turkey’s proximity to the Middle East also gives it a special interest in
counter-proliferation and ballistic missile defense.  Turkey is the only
NATO member that currently faces a threat from ballistic missiles
launched from the Middle East (although the threat to other
Southern European countries will increase over the next decade).37
Thus, as the ballistic missile threat intensifies and the United States
proceeds with the construction of its missile defense system, Turkey
is likely to show increased interest in developing a regional missile
defense architecture in cooperation with the United States and Israel
and possibly even India.
THE AMERICAN FACTOR
The events of September 11 are also likely to have an important effect
on Turkey’s relationship with the United States—and indirectly the
EU.  Turkey has always seen a strong tie to Washington as an impor-
tant component of its security.  The United States, in turn, has been
one of Turkey’s strongest allies and has been more supportive than
many EU members of key Turkish priorities such as the construction
of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline, the campaign against PKK terrorism,
and Turkey’s quest for EU membership.
The United States has strongly supported Turkey’s candidacy for EU
membership, largely for strategic reasons.  In the past, U.S. “lob-
bying” for Turkey’s candidacy often was a source of friction in U.S.-
European relations.38  However, with the Helsinki decision, the
______________

37See Ian O. Lesser and Ashley J. Tellis, Southern Exposure:  Proliferation Around the
Mediterranean, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 1996.
38For details, see F. Stephen Larrabee, “U.S. and European Policy Toward Turkey and
the Caspian Basin,” in Robert D. Blackwill and Michael Stürmer, eds., Allies Divided:
Transatlantic Policies for the Greater Middle East, Cambridge, MA:  The MIT Press,
1997, pp. 143–173.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Turkey and Europe
69
United States essentially achieved its main objective—to ensure that
Turkey was accepted as a genuine candidate for EU membership—
and tensions between the United States and its European allies over
Turkey largely subsided, especially since it was evident that Turkey
still had a long way to go before it would actually be ready to join the
EU.
The events of September 11, however, have served to strengthen the
U.S.-Turkish strategic partnership and could cast the issue of
Turkey’s membership in the EU in a new light.  Washington sees
Ankara as a critical ally in the war against terrorism.  Thus, for
strategic reasons it may be more inclined in the future to side with
Turkey in disputes with the EU.  This, in turn, could lead to the re-
emergence of the tensions that characterized U.S.-EU relations in the
period leading up to Helsinki.
THE DIFFICULT PATH AHEAD
Turkey today stands at a historic crossroads.  The Helsinki summit
has opened the possibility of EU membership.  But membership will
require extensive changes in the Kemalist system that has evolved
over the last 78 years, especially the reduction in the role of the mili-
tary in guiding and directing Turkey’s political evolution.  It will also
require the Turkish elite to accept a greater degree of political and
social pluralism as well as unprecedented limits on state sovereignty.
These changes are bound to provoke resistance from forces that have
a strong vested stake in the maintenance of the current system.  But
they cannot be avoided if Turkey hopes to become a full member of
the EU.
The reform package adopted by the Turkish parliament on August 3,
2002, goes a long way to meeting many of the Copenhagen criteria,
especially regarding the abolition of the death penalty and Kurdish
broadcasting and education.39  The ball is now in the EU’s court.  But
the EU is likely to want to see how well the laws are actually imple-
______________

39For a detailed discussion of the reform package, see Heinz Kramer, “Ein wichtiger
Schritt in Richtung EU,” SWP-Aktuell 29, Ebenhausen:  Stiftung Wissenschaft und
Politik, August 2002.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
70
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
mented before it is willing to set a date for opening accession nego-
tiations.
The victory by the Islamist Justice and Development Party (AKP) in
the November 3, 2002, parliamentary elections is likely to reinforce
this caution.  Although the AKP supports Turkey’s entry into the
EU—in large part because it sees EU membership as a constraint on
any possible crackdown on its existence by the military—the EU is
likely to want to see how the AKP performs in office before setting a
date for opening accession negotiations.
Developments within the EU will also have an effect on Turkey’s as-
pirations for membership.
Developments within the EU will also be important.  A slowdown in
the EU integration process could negatively affect Turkey and dimin-
ish its chances for membership over the long run.  In many parts of
Europe, support for EU enlargement has been declining, as the costs
of enlargement have become clearer.  The strong showing by the far
right in elections in Austria, Italy, France, Denmark, and Holland
could strengthen this trend and complicate Turkish aspirations for
membership.  A failure by the EU to offer Turkey a date for opening
accession negotiations—or at least a clear perspective for opening
negotiations—at its summit in Copenhagen in December 2002 could
also dim Turkish aspirations and provoke a strong domestic backlash
in Turkey similar to the one that occurred in 1997 after the
Luxembourg summit.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
71
Chapter Four
RELATIONS WITH GREECE AND THE BALKANS
Turkey’s relations with Greece form an important part of Turkey’s
broader agenda.  The conflict between the two countries has been a
persistent threat to security in the Eastern Mediterranean since the
mid-1950s.  During the Cold War, the differences between the two
countries threatened to break out into open conflict on several
occasions.1  However, these differences have taken on added
importance since the end of the Cold War for several reasons.
First, the Aegean has been one of Europe’s most dangerous flash-
points.  Turkey and Greece have come close to armed conflict several
times in the last two decades—most recently in January–February
1996 over the islets of Imia/Kardak.  Only last-minute U.S. diplo-
matic intervention prevented an armed confrontation.  Although re-
lations have improved since mid-1999, as long as the issues that gave
rise to the near clash remain unresolved, there is always a danger
that an incident could lead to inadvertent armed conflict.
Second, the Cyprus issue continues to aggravate Greek-Turkish rela-
tions.  Since 1974, the division of the island has hardened, with little
communication and interaction between the Turkish and Greek
Cypriot communities.  In addition, the island has become increas-
ingly militarized.  In recent years, both sides have sought to augment
______________

1For background, see Theodore A. Couloumbis, The United States, Greece and Turkey:
The Troubled Triangle, New York:  Praeger, 1983; Tozun Bahcheli, Greek-Turkish Re-
lations Since 1955, Boulder, CO:  Westview Press, 1990; Monteagle Stearns, Entangled
Allies:  U.S. Policy Toward Greece, Turkey and Cyprus, New York:  The Council on For-
eign Relations, 1992; and James Brown, Delicately Poised Allies:  Greece and Turkey,
London:  Brassey’s, 1991.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
72
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
their military capabilities on the island.  This growing militarization
has increased the dangers of a Turkish-Greek confrontation, as the
crisis over the S-300 missiles in 1997–1998 highlights.
Moreover, the lack of a settlement of the disputes over the Aegean
and Cyprus is an obstacle to Turkey’s relations with the EU.  At the
Helsinki summit in December 1999, the EU accepted Turkey as a
candidate member, but it made a resolution of Turkey’s differences
with Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus a prerequisite for Turkey’s
eventual membership in the EU.  Thus, Turkey’s European aspira-
tions are now directly tied to a resolution of its differences with
Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus.
Moreover, the new détente is fragile and by no means irreversible.
The core differences between the two countries—the Aegean and
Cyprus—have yet to be seriously addressed.  In addition, a number
of issues, particularly the EU’s decision regarding the Greek Cypriot
application for membership, could have a significant effect on
Greek-Turkish relations, undermining the recent improvement in
bilateral ties and possibly even setting the stage for a new period of
confrontation.
THE HISTORICAL LEGACY
The current difficulties in Turkish-Greek relations have deep histori-
cal roots that directly affect how each side perceives and relates to
the other.  These roots touch directly on important issues of national
identity.2  The modern Greek state was born of a struggle against
Ottoman rule and for much of the next 80 years it expanded by lop-
ping off parts of Ottoman territory.  The Megali Idea—the desire to
unite Greeks in a common Greek state—was a driving force behind
Greek policy up until the early 20th century.  Thus, Greece’s own in-
dependence and process of state-building have been closely tied to a
struggle against Turkey.
Similarly, the birth of the modern Turkish state was closely associ-
ated with the War of Independence and the campaign against Greece
______________

2See Heinz Kramer, “Turkey’s Relations with Greece:  Motives and Interests,” in Dim-
itri Constas, ed., The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s, New York:  St. Martin’s Press,
1991, pp. 57–72.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
73
that ended with Atatürk’s expulsion of the Greek forces from Central
and Western Anatolia in 1922 and the subsequent exchange of popu-
lations in 1923–1924.3  Thus, both states link their existence and an
important part of their identity to experiences that are associated
with negative images of the other side.  This has served to reinforce a
sense of mutual mistrust that has complicated the resolution of out-
standing differences.
On rare occasions, however, Turkey and Greece have shown an abil-
ity to put aside their differences and cooperate.  The most important
example of this capacity occurred during the interwar period.  Only
eight years after Greece’s defeat at the hands of Turkey, Atatürk and
Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos signed the Ankara
Agreement, resolving outstanding issues left over from the earlier
confrontation, such as property rights arising out of the exchange of
populations.  This was followed by the conclusion of a formal Friend-
ship and Cooperation Treaty in 1933, which introduced a period of
cordiality and cooperation that lasted into the early postwar period.
The onset of the Cold War and the threat posed by the Soviet Union
initially created strong incentives for both countries to put aside their
differences.  But beginning in the mid-1950s, relations became in-
creasingly strained over the Cyprus issue.  The attempted coup
against President Makarios of Cyprus by the Greek junta in July 1974
and the subsequent Turkish invasion of the island marked an impor-
tant turning point in relations.  Thereafter, relations remained, until
very recently, tense.
In the past two decades, there have been several attempts to over-
come these difficulties and improve relations.  The most important
was the meeting between Turkish Prime Minister Turgut Özal and
Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou in Davos in January
1988.4  The two leaders agreed to establish a hotline, to meet at least
______________

3For a comprehensive discussion, see Harry J. Psomiades, The Eastern Question:  The
Last Phase, New York:  Pella, 2000.
4For a good discussion of the Davos process, see Richard Clogg, “Greek-Turkish Rela-
tions in the Post-1974 Period,” in Dimitri Constas, ed., The Greek-Turkish Conflict in
the 1990s, New York:  St. Martin’s Press, 1991, pp. 12–23, and John Koliopoulos and
Thanos Veremis, Greece, the Modern Sequel, New York: New York University Press,
2002, pp. 307-314.  For a Turkish perspective, see Mehmet Ali Birand, “Turkey and the
Davos Process,” in Constas, The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s, pp. 27–39.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
74
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
once a year, and to visit each other’s country.  They also called for an
intensification of contacts.  In an early gesture of goodwill, Turkey re-
scinded the 1964 decree restricting the property rights of Greek na-
tionals in Turkey.
These moves led to a thaw in bilateral relations (the Davos Process).
But the thaw proved short-lived because it lacked strong domestic
support.  Neither leader sought to build bureaucratic and public
support for the attempt at reconciliation.  Thus, both leaders found it
difficult to “sell” the thaw to a skeptical domestic audience at home,
especially as their own internal positions weakened.  As a result, the
détente gradually lost momentum and eventually collapsed.
THE AEGEAN DISPUTE
There are three main sources of tension between Turkey and Greece.
The most important of these centers around the Aegean.  The Aegean
dispute is not really one dispute but a series of disputes:  These relate
to limits on territorial sea, sovereign rights over the continental shelf
and airspace, management of the military and civil air-traffic control
zone, and the militarization of the Greek islands.5
For Turkey, the most important of these issues is the territorial sea is-
sue.  Under the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention—which Turkey has
not signed—Greece has the right to extend its territorial waters to 12
miles although it has so far refrained from exercising that right.
Greek extension of the territorial waters from six to 12 miles would
make Turkish access to major ports, such as Istanbul and Izmir,
more difficult.  Turkey has repeatedly said that any effort by Greece
to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles would constitute a casus
belli.  This explicit threat to use force if Greece exercised its right to
extend its territorial waters has been a prime source of tension
between the two countries.  Greek officials insist that there can be no
far-reaching rapprochement between Greece and Turkey as long as
Turkey continues to threaten to use force to settle outstanding
______________

5For a detailed discussion of the Aegean dispute, see Andrew Wilson, The Aegean Dis-
pute, London:  International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1980.  Also Heinz-Jürgen
Axt, “Der Ägäis Streit—ein unlösbarer griechisch-türkischer Konflikt?” Südosteuropa
Mitteilungen, Nr. 2, 1999, pp. 137–151.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
75
issues, especially ones in which Greek actions are consistent with
international law.
Turkey and Greece are also at odds over the Aegean airspace.  Turkey
rejects the 10-mile airspace claimed by Greece, arguing that Greece is
entitled to exercise sovereignty only over six miles.  To emphasize
this point, Turkey regularly sends its aircraft up to six miles from the
Greek coast.  Greece responds to what it considers violations of its
airspace by sending aircraft to intercept the Turkish aircraft.  The
mock dogfights and aerial challenges are a source of constant con-
cern to Turkey’s NATO allies, who worry that some incident or mis-
calculation could lead to a major confrontation between the two
countries, as nearly happened during the Imia/Kardak crisis in
January/February 1996.
Turkey has offered to open a bilateral dialogue with Greece to resolve
these issues.  However, Greece has rejected a broad-based bilateral
dialogue, arguing that there is only one issue that needs to be re-
solved—the continental shelf.  This issue, Greece argues, should be
submitted to the ICJ at the Hague for adjudication.  However, Turkey
has refused to submit the issue to the ICJ, preferring instead to re-
solve the issue through bilateral negotiations, where it feels it has
more leverage.
Another issue burdening bilateral relations is Greece’s militarization
of the Eastern Aegean and Dodecanese islands, which Turkey argues
violates the Treaty of Paris (1947).  Greece argues that its militariza-
tion of the islands is a defensive response to the creation by Turkey of
the 100,000-man strong “Fourth Aegean Army,” which was formed
shortly after the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 and which has its
headquarters in Izmir, just a few miles from the Greek islands.  This
army, Greece maintains, poses a serious threat to Greek sovereignty.
So far, Turkey has refused to disband the Aegean army.  However, in
the spring of 2000, Admiral (Ret.) Güven Erkaya, the former com-
mander of the Turkish navy and an advisor to Prime Minister Ecevit,
proposed in a secret memorandum (later leaked to the Turkish press)
that Turkey disband the Aegean army in return for a pledge by

--- Sayfa 98 ---
76
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Greece not to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles.6  Although his
proposal was rejected by the Turkish military,7 who maintained that
Greece had to first agree not to extend its territorial waters to 12
miles, it continues to be seen in some Turkish circles as a possible
avenue that could, if combined with reciprocal measures by Greece,
lead to a de-escalation of the Aegean dispute.
Turkey’s relations with Greece have significantly improved since
mid-1999 (see below), but the dispute over the Aegean continues to
cast clouds over the relationship and could even derail the recent
détente.  In October 2000, for instance, differences over the inclusion
of the islands of Lemnos and Ikaria prompted Greece to withdraw
from NATO exercises in the Aegean, casting a pall over the rap-
prochement between Greece and Turkey.8  Although both sides have
continued to stress their commitment to improving relations, the
incident underscores the degree to which the differences over the
Aegean continue to burden the relationship.
In addition, the EU has made a resolution of Turkey’s differences
with Greece a requirement for Turkish accession to the EU.  The
communiqué issued at the EU’s summit in Helsinki in December
1999 urged candidate states to make every effort to resolve their bor-
der disputes and other related issues or, failing that, to bring the dis-
pute to the ICJ in a reasonable time.  The council stated that it would
review the situation by the end of 2004 in relation to the accession
process.  Thus, Turkey’s application for EU membership could be
held up if there is no resolution of the dispute.
In January 2002, Greece agreed to open a bilateral dialogue with
Turkey on Aegean issues.  Greek diplomats want the dialogue limited
to the issue of the continental shelf.  However, in the course of the
dialogue other issues, such as differences over airspace control and
______________

6Leyla Boulton, “Turkey signals softer line in Greek links,” Financial Times, May 24,
2000.  For the text of the memorandum, see Ali Ekber Ertürk, “Aegean Army Should Be
Abolished,” Sabah, May 22, 2000, translated in FBIS-WEU-2000-0524, May 22, 2000.
7“Dismantling Aegean army not on agenda,” Turkish Daily News, May 24, 2000.  See
also “Turkish officials:  before we dismantle the Aegean army, Greece has to recognize
six mile limit,” ibid., May 23, 2000.
8For background, see John Ward Anderson, “Flap During NATO Drill Upsets Greek-
Turkish Thaw,” The Washington Post, October 26, 2000.  Also, “Aegean Rumpus,” The
Economist, October 28, 2000.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
77
the Ecumenical Patriarch (the spiritual leader of the world’s Ortho-
dox Christians, who resides in Istanbul), may also be discussed.
THE CYPRUS CONFLICT
Cyprus is a second major source of tension between Turkey and
Greece.  During the 1930s and 1940s when Cyprus was under British
rule, the fate of the Turkish Cypriots was not a burning issue for the
Turkish government.  It became a major concern only in the 1950s
when the Greek Cypriots, supported by the Greek government,
intensified their demands for enosis (union with Greece) and the
British government began considering relinquishing control over the
island.  Although Turkey preferred a partition of the island (taksim),
it agreed to independence on the condition that the Turkish Cypriots
would have the status of a community with equal rights with the
Greek community.
From the Turkish point of view, independence was a second-best
solution.  It was accepted because it prevented enosis and provided
important legal guarantees of equality for the Turkish Cypriot com-
munity.9  Under the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee, Turkey became one of
the three guarantor powers (along with Greece and Britain) of the is-
land’s independence.  This ensured Turkey a certain degree of influ-
ence over developments on the island and gave Ankara the right to
intervene, either singularly or collectively, to reestablish the consti-
tutional arrangements on the island if they were violated.  It was un-
der the provisions of the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee that Turkey justi-
fied its invasion of the island in 1974.
The 1960 constitutional arrangements, however, proved unworkable
and collapsed when President Makarios sought to amend the Consti-
tution.10  His changes would have relegated the Turkish Cypriots to
the status of a minority rather than a community with equal political
______________

9See Clement H. Dodd, “A Historical Overview,” in Clement H. Dodd, Cyprus: The
Need for New Perspectives , Huntingdon, England:  The Eothen Press, 1999, pp. 1–15.
See also his The Cyprus Imbroglio, Huntingdon, England:  The Eothen Press, 1998.
10For a detailed discussion, see Dodd, The Cyprus Imbroglio; Nancy Crawshaw, The
Cyprus Revolt:  An Account of the Struggle for Union with Greece, London:  George
Allen & Unwin, 1978; and Polyvios Polyviou, Cyprus:  Conflict and Negotiations, 1960–
1980, London:  Duckworth, 1980.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
78
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
rights with the Greek community.  This was unacceptable to both the
Turkish Cypriots and Turkey.  When anti-Turkish violence broke out
in 1964, Turkey threatened to intervene.  However, Ankara was de-
terred from carrying out the threat by President Johnson’s blunt let-
ter to Turkish Prime Minister Ismet Inönü warning that the United
States and NATO could not guarantee Turkey’s protection if a Turk-
ish invasion provoked Soviet intervention.11
Turkey showed only lukewarm support for the Turkish Cypriots in
the period 1965–1973.  However, Turkish policy hardened after the
election of Bülent Ecevit as prime minister at the end of 1973.  When
the military junta in Athens sought to overthrow Makarios and install
a pro-enosis extremist, Nicos Samson, as president, Ecevit ordered
the invasion of the island.  However, Turkey invaded only after first
requesting that Britain participate in the invasion under the terms of
the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee.  When Britain refused to participate,
Turkey decided to act unilaterally.
The 1974 invasion set the contours for the current conflict.  It led to
the expulsion of 200,000 Greek Cypriots from their homes and the
division of the island into two autonomous administrations, one
Greek Cypriot, the other Turkish Cypriot.  Since then, Turkey has
maintained 30,000 to 35,000 troops on the island.  The Greek Cypri-
ots regard the troops as occupation troops.  Turkey, however, see the
troops as the main guarantee of the rights of the Turkish Cypriots.
From the Turkish perspective, the invasion “solved” the Cyprus
problem.  In 1983, the Turkish Cypriot part of the island declared it-
self an independent state—the TRNC—with Rauf Denktash as its
president.  The TRNC is recognized only by Turkey and is economi-
cally and politically dependent upon Ankara, which heavily subsi-
dizes its economy.  Although this subsidy imposes a substantial eco-
nomic burden on Turkey, Ankara has considered the political and
strategic benefits worth the economic costs.
______________

11For the text of the Johnson letter, see the Middle East Journal, Vol. 20, Summer,
1966, pp. 386–393.  For a detailed discussion of the effect of the letter on U.S.-Turkish
relations, see George H. Harris, Troubled Alliance:  Turkish-American Problems in His-
torical Perspective, Washington, D.C.:  American Enterprise Institute, 1972, pp. 105–
124.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
79
Turkey’s approach to Cyprus has undergone an important shift since
the mid-1990s.  Before 1997, Turkey put primary emphasis in its
Cyprus policy on the protection of the Turkish Cypriot community
on the island.  Since 1997, however, Turkey has increasingly empha-
sized that Cyprus is a security issue for Turkey in its own right.  Prime
Minister Bülent Ecevit in particular is a firm proponent of this view.
For years Ecevit argued that Cyprus should be seen not as a burden
but as an important component of Turkey’s own security.12
Ankara sees Cyprus as a cornerstone of Turkish security and a key el-
ement of the defense of Anatolia.  Cyprus is also increasingly seen as
important for the protection of Caspian oil that is expected to flow
through the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and then be transported on to Eu-
rope.  Thus, Turkey wants to ensure that the island is not controlled
by a hostile power, especially Greece.  Many Turks believe that the
best way to ensure that this does not happen is to keep the island di-
vided and maintain a strong military presence there.
Turkey has reacted harshly to efforts to change the military status
quo such as the Greek Cypriot decision to acquire S-300 missiles
from Russia.  Ankara threatened to use military force, if necessary, to
prevent the deployment of the missiles on Cyprus.13  The crisis was
finally defused when the Greek Cypriot government—under strong
U.S. and EU pressure—agreed to deploy the missiles on Crete rather
than the Cypriot mainland.  However, the bellicose Turkish response
to the initial threat to deploy the missiles on the Cypriot mainland
highlights the importance that Turkey attaches to maintaining the
political and military status quo on the island.
Since the late 1990s, Turkey has taken steps to strengthen its ties with
the TRNC.  In July 1997, Turkey and the TRNC issued a joint state-
ment expressing their determination to strengthen and deepen co-
operation.  The declaration called inter alia for the establishment of
______________

12As he stressed at the celebration of the 25th  anniversary of the Turkish invasion of
Cyprus in July 1999:  “As much as Turkey is the generator of KKTC [TRNC] security, the
KKTC is the guarantee of Turkey’s security.”  See “Turkey and Cyprus Not Moving An
Inch From Cyprus Policy,” Turkish Probe, July 25, 1999.
13For a detailed discussion, see Madeleine Demetriou, “On the Long Road to Europe
and the Short Path to War:  Issue-Linkage Politics and the Arms Build-Up in Cyprus,”
Mediterranean Politics, Vol. 3, No. 3, Winter 1998, pp. 38–51.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
80
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
an Association Council, the creation of an economic and financial
union between the two states, the inclusion of the TRNC in Turkey’s
regional development master plan, and the improvement of trans-
portation links between Turkey and the TRNC.14  Turkey also began
to include Turkish Cypriots in Turkish delegations and missions
abroad.  At the same time, Turkey moved away from the bi-zonal and
bi-communal federation that it supported for nine years, insisting on
the recognition of two separate states as a basis for any solution.
The passage of time, moreover, has led to a hardening of the status
quo.  At present, a whole generation of Turkish and Greek Cypriots
has grown up with virtually no contact with one another.  This situa-
tion is likely to grow worse with time, leading to even greater es-
trangement and isolation between the two communities.  In addi-
tion, the ethnic composition of the TRNC is changing.  As a result of
the massive influx of new settlers from the Turkish mainland and the
emigration of educated Turkish Cypriots, the proportion of Turkish
Cypriots in the TRNC is declining.  Today, Turkish Cypriots make up
only about 60 percent of the TRNC’s population.  If the economic
situation in the TRNC continues to deteriorate, their number is likely
to further decline, as more and more Turkish Cypriots—especially
educated ones—emigrate because they cannot find jobs.15
PROSPECTS FOR A SETTLEMENT
Intercommunal talks between the two Cypriot communities have
been conducted, under UN auspices, since 1974.  However, they
have produced no major breakthrough.  The basic problem is that
the two Cypriot sides have very different visions of the island’s
political future.  The Greek Cypriots want a bi-zonal, bi-communal
federation with broad powers for the central government.  Since
1998, the Turkish Cypriots, by contrast, have pressed for a
______________

14For the text of the Joint Statement, see Dodd, The Cyprus Imbroglio, pp. 190–192
(Appendix 9).
15Since 1974 an estimated 50,000–60,000 Turkish Cypriots—more than one-third of
the Turkish Cypriot population—have emigrated.  See “Ankara’s Zypern–Politik in der
Sackgasse?” Neue Zürcher Zeitung, May 23, 2001.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
81
confederation with weak federal powers, based on the recognition of
two separate and equal states.  These two visions are in direct
conflict with one another and are difficult to reconcile.
Prospects for a settlement before the EU summit in Copenhagen in
December 2002 appear bleak.  On January 16, 2002, the leaders of the
two Cypriot communities, Rauf Denktash and Glafkos Clerides,
agreed to open negotiations, with the goal of achieving an agreement
on the island’s future by the summer of 2002.  However, these talks
have made little progress.  There have been some minor changes in
approach on both sides, but neither side has substantially altered its
fundamental position.
The Greek Cypriot side seems to be playing for time in the belief that
Greek Cyprus will be invited to join the EU, with or without a settle-
ment.  Thus, it has little incentive to make any major concessions.
The Greek Cypriots appear to calculate that their leverage will in-
crease once they are a member of the EU and that EU membership
will make a settlement of the conflict on their own terms easier.
Hence, they seem content to “play out the EU clock.”  At the same
time, the Turkish Cypriot side also appears unwilling to depart from
its insistence on a two-state solution.
Ultimately, the key to a Cyprus settlement lies in Ankara.  However,
there is little likelihood of a shift in Turkish policy—if at all—until
after the national elections in November 2002.  By then, however, it
may be too late.  It seems almost certain that the Greek part of the
island will be invited to join the EU at the EU summit in Copenhagen
in December 2002.
Greek Cyprus membership would be a real trauma for Turkey and
could lead to a serious deterioration of Turkey’s relations with the
EU.  Turkey’s chances of opening accession negotiations with the EU
would be jeopardized and prospects for obtaining EU membership
in the foreseeable future would be seriously set back.  It could also
have a spillover effect on Turkey’s relations with Greece, endangering
the current bilateral détente.  Indeed, a new period of Greek-Turkish
tension might well ensue.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
82
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
THE MINORITY ISSUE
A third irritant in Turkey’s relations with Greece has been the status
and treatment of the Turkish minority in Greece.  There are about
120,000 Muslims in Greece, the majority of whom are ethnic Turks.
The rest are mostly Gypsies (Roma) and Pomaks (Muslims with an
affinity to Bulgarian culture).16  Until recently, Greece has insisted on
using the term “Muslim” for this minority, even though a large part
of the Muslim population is composed of ethnic Turks.  Greece bases
its position on the Lausanne Treaty (1923) which refers to the popu-
lation as “Muslims.”17
The Muslim/Turkish minority in Greece basically enjoys the same
rights as ethnic Greek citizens of Greece.  However, the minority has
been subject to indirect forms of discrimination regarding the pur-
chase of land, obtaining building permits for the construction of pri-
vate buildings and mosques, obtaining driving licenses, and having
their land expropriated for public use.  Until 1998, the minority was
also subject to possible loss of Greek citizenship if members of the
minority left Greece.
The plight of the Turkish minority receives considerable attention in
the Turkish media, which claims that the community faces system-
atic discrimination.  Greece, in turn, accuses the Turkish government
of having systematically forced out the Greek minority in Istanbul.  In
1923, the Greek population in Istanbul numbered about 120,000.
Today it has dropped to less than 3,500.  Most of the Greek minority
left in the 1950s and 1960s when Greek-Turkish relations were tense
as a result of the Cyprus crisis.
Greece denies that it discriminates against the Turkish minority and
in recent years the Greek government has undertaken a number of
steps to improve the lot of the Turkish minority.  In 1998, the govern-
ment revised the controversial provisions of the Greek Nationality
Law that had been used to revoke the citizenship of members of the
______________

16For a detailed discussion, see Hugh Poulton, The Balkans:  Minorities and States in
Conflict, London:  Minority Rights Publications, 1991, pp. 182–188; and Tozun
Bahcheli, Greek-Turkish Relations Since 1955, pp. 169–187.
17However, in the 1940s and 1950s, both terms “Muslim” and “Turk” were used to re-
fer to the population.  Greece reverted to using solely the term “Muslim” only after the
tensions with Turkey increased in the 1960s.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
83
Turkish minority who traveled abroad.  Greece has also taken mea-
sures to develop the economy of Western Thrace, where most of the
Turkish minority lives.
Recently, moreover, Greece has begun to adopt a more open ap-
proach regarding the existence of the Turkish minority.  In July 1999,
Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou suggested in an inter-
view that Muslims who felt themselves to be Turks should be allowed
to call themselves Turks.18  His remarks were welcomed in Turkey as
a sign of Athens’ desire to improve relations with Ankara.  Although
they caused a storm of protest in nationalist circles in Greece, since
then there has been a growing acceptance in Greece of the idea that
there is a Turkish minority.
These changes have helped to defuse the minority issue as a source
of tension in bilateral relations.  However, the leaders of the Turkish
minority and the Turkish government continue to press Greece to
take further measures to improve the minority’s economic status and
educational opportunities.  In particular, they want the minority to
be able to elect its own religious leaders (Muftis) rather than have
them appointed by the Greek government, as is currently the case.
NEW REGIONAL GEOMETRIES
The conflict between Turkey and Greece has also been given sharper
focus by the emergence of new regional alliances.  Just as Turkey has
expanded its relations in the Balkans, Greece has sought to cultivate
new strategic allies in the Caucasus and the Middle East.  Greece’s
effort to forge closer ties to Armenia has aroused particular suspicion
in Ankara.  Ankara regarded the Greek-Armenian defense agreement
signed in 1996 as specifically directed against Turkey.
More upsetting, however, was Greece’s effort to forge closer ties—
especially defense ties—to Syria because of Syria’s support (until
1998) of the separatist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and its leader
Abdullah Öcalan, regarded in Turkey as a terrorist.  Reports that
Greece had signed a substantive “defense agreement” with Syria in
______________

18See “Griechisch-türkischer Dialog mit Begleitmusik,” Neue Zürcher Zeitung, July 31,
1999.  Also “Georges Papandréou s’attaque aux préjugés anti-turcs,” Le Monde, Octo-
ber 13, 1999.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
84
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
1995 appear to be exaggerated.  But the closer cooperation between
Greece and Syria caused considerable concern in Ankara because of
the PKK connection and Turkish complaints that Greece was sup-
porting PKK activities on its soil.19
Turkish suspicions were reinforced by revelations that Öcalan had
been smuggled into Greece and was given sanctuary in the Greek
embassy in Nairobi.  Possibly tipped off by U.S. intelligence, Turkish
authorities managed to capture Öcalan as he was being whisked off
to the Nairobi airport.  The whole affair was a major embarrassment
for the Greek government and led to a sharp deterioration of Greek-
Turkish relations as well as the dismissal of several high-ranking
Greek officials, including then Foreign Minister Theodore Pange-
los.20
EARTHQUAKE DIPLOMACY AND THE NEW DETENTE
Although the Öcalan affair led to a sharp deterioration in Turkish-
Greek relations, paradoxically, it also served as an important stimu-
lus to an eventual thaw in relations.  In the aftermath of the Öcalan
affair, both sides began a quiet dialogue designed to explore ways to
improve relations.  This dialogue was given important momentum by
the devastating earthquake in Turkey in August 1999 and the much
smaller one in Athens several weeks later.  The rapid and generous
support by Greece to the Turkish earthquake victims had an impor-
tant psychological effect on the Turkish public.  In the wake of the
earthquake, each side began to see the other in human terms rather
than as an abstract enemy.  This helped to break down old stereo-
______________

19While the Greek government repeatedly denied Turkish charges regarding support
for the PKK, a number of Greek parliamentarians maintained contacts with the PKK.
In January 2000, for instance, Deputy Parliamentary Chairman Panayiotis Sghouridhis,
PASOK (Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement) deputy from Xanthi in Thrace, revealed
that he had met with Öcalan in Damascus in 1995, as part of a Greek parliamentary
delegation, and again in Rome, in December 1998.  Sghouridhis said that he had sent
memoranda about these meetings and other contacts with the PKK to Foreign
Minister Theodore Pangelos and Parliamentary Chairman Apostolos Kaklamanis.  See
Ionnis Dhiakoyannis, “The Secret Meeting with Öcalan in Rome,” Ta Nea, January 24,
2000, translated in FBIS-WEU-2000-0125, January 24, 2000.
20For a detailed discussion, see in particular Gülistan Gürbey, “Der Fall Öcalan und
die türkisch-griechische Krise:  Alte Drohungen oder neue Eskalation?” Südosteuropa
Mitteilungen, Nr. 2, 1999, pp. 122–136.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
85
types.  At the same time, it provided domestic cover for diplomatic
initiatives on both sides and helped to insulate them from strong
domestic criticism.
Since the EU summit in Helsinki, the thaw has gained new momen-
tum.  In January 2000, Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou
paid a visit to Ankara where he signed five low-level agreements on
issues of environment, terrorism, illegal immigration, etc.  Papan-
dreou was the highest-ranking Greek official to pay a state visit to
Ankara in 38 years.  The following month, Turkish Foreign Minister
Ismael Cem visited Athens—the first visit by a Turkish foreign minis-
ter to Greece in 40 years.  Greece and Turkey have also begun a dia-
logue on confidence-building measures.
These moves have been followed by other important steps to im-
prove relations, including a commitment to remove mines along the
Greek-Turkish border, plans to extend the Ignatia highway from
Western Greece to Istanbul, an agreement on cooperation on trans-
porting Caspian and Egyptian gas through Turkey and Greece and on
to the rest of Europe, joint investment on tourism related to the 2004
Olympic Games in Athens, an agreement on cooperation in dealing
with natural disasters, and an agreement on the repatriation of illegal
immigrants.  The latter agreement is considered to be particularly
important because both countries, especially Greece, have been in-
undated with a large influx of illegal immigrants in recent years.
Important steps have been taken in the defense field as well.  In April
2001, Greece announced changes in its military doctrine, ending the
state of war mobilization with Turkey that had existed since the 1974
Turkish invasion of Cyprus.  In addition, Athens announced plans to
cut arms procurement by $4.4 billion, including postponing the pur-
chase of 60 Euro-fighters until 2004, and to reduce its armed forces
from 140,000 to 80,000–90,000 men.21  In April 2000, Turkey also de-
cided to postpone defense spending by $19.5 billion.  In both cases
these measures were primarily dictated by economic considerations,
but they contributed to improving the overall climate of bilateral re-
lations.
______________

21Andrew Borowiec, “Greek Cutbacks Ease Military Tensions,” The Washington Times,
April 10, 2001.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
86
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Energy has also emerged as an important area of bilateral coopera-
tion.  In March 2002, the two countries signed a $300 million deal to
extend an Iranian natural gas pipeline from Turkey to Greece.  The
pipeline, due to be completed in 2005, could be extended to Italy
with financial assistance from the EU and would help Turkey and
Greece enter the European market both as buyers and sellers.
The key question is whether the current thaw represents a strategic
shift in relations or just a tactical thaw.  There have been a number of
efforts to mend fences before—the most notable being the effort by
Özal and Andreas Papandreou after their meeting in Davos in Jan-
uary 1988.  All were short-lived and ultimately collapsed.  However,
the current effort at détente is likely to prove more enduring than
previous efforts for several reasons.
First, the new détente has strong domestic support.  The thaw follow-
ing the Davos meeting between Papandreou and Özal represented
an attempt to break the logjam in bilateral relations through
“personal diplomacy.”  But, as noted above, it lacked a solid institu-
tional base and strong domestic support.  Thus, it soon collapsed.
The current rapprochement, by contrast, has a much stronger do-
mestic base in each country.  The earthquakes in Turkey (August
1999) and Greece (September 1999) created a kind of “bonding” at
the popular level that was absent at the time of the Papandreou-Özal
dialogue.  There has also been an effort to involve civic groups in the
rapprochement process, especially the business community.
Second, the current rapprochement represents a strategic shift in
Greece’s approach to Turkey.  For years, Greece sought to use its
membership in the EU to isolate Turkey in an effort to force Turkey
to change its approach to the Aegean and Cyprus.  In the past,
Greece, persistently blocked the dispersal of EU financial aid to
Turkey, linking it to Turkey’s policies on the Aegean and Cyprus.  It
also blocked Turkey’s candidacy for EU membership on the same
grounds.
Greece has now abandoned this approach.  Instead, it has adopted a
policy of engagement with Turkey, which is based on the premise
that a more “Europeanized” Turkey is in Greece’s long-term interest.
At the EU’s Helsinki summit in December 1999, Greece lifted its veto
against Turkey’s EU candidacy.  This removed the most important

--- Sayfa 109 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
87
obstacle to the EU’s acceptance of Turkey’s EU candidacy at the
summit (although there is still considerable skepticism in Germany
and elsewhere in Western Europe about putative membership).
Third, the détente has been buttressed by growing economic coop-
eration, especially in the energy field.  This cooperation ties the two
countries together economically and gives the cooperation a strong
economic component.  Each side now has a strong economic stake
in continuing the détente and would suffer adverse economic conse-
quences if the détente were to collapse.  This gives both sides a
strong incentive to keep the current rapprochement on track.
Finally, the EU has shifted its approach to Turkey.  Before the EU
summit in Helsinki, the EU had refused to accept Turkey as a candi-
date for EU membership—a position that had led to serious strains
in Turkey’s relations with the EU.  However, at Helsinki, the EU
Council officially accepted Turkey as a candidate member, opening
up the possibility of Turkish membership over the long run.  At the
same time, the EU made clear that a resolution of Turkey’s differ-
ences with Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus were a precondition
for membership.  Thus, Turkey now has a strong incentive to regu-
late its relations with Greece.
These developments have changed the context of relations and im-
proved the prospects for a far-reaching détente between the two
countries.  However, the current rapprochement remains fragile for
several reasons.
First, most of the changes have come on the Greek side.  Without
some reciprocal gestures on Turkey’s part, it may prove difficult to
maintain domestic support in Greece for the rapprochement over
the long run.  At the moment, most Greeks are willing to give Prime
Minister Costas Simitis and Foreign Minister George Papandreou—
the chief architect of the recent détente—the benefit of the doubt.
But, at some point they may begin to ask what Greece has received in
return.  Thus, some reciprocal gestures by Turkey will be important
to keep the process moving.
Second, so far the rapprochement has been limited mainly to non-
controversial areas such as trade, the environment, and tourism, al-
though new protocols on combating international crime and terror-
ism have brought cooperation to more difficult issues.  But, at some

--- Sayfa 110 ---
88
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
point, the sensitive issues in the Aegean and Cyprus will have to be
addressed if the rapprochement is to prove durable.
Finally, the structure of post-Helsinki rapprochement between
Greece and Turkey is heavily dependent on the course of Turkey’s
relations with the EU.  If Turkey’s candidacy proves hollow
or Turkey’s political evolution makes integration difficult, Greek-
Turkish relations could suffer and the assumptions on which the
détente has rested could be undermined.  This could lead to a new
period of antagonism and confrontation.
THE AMERICAN FACTOR
Turkey’s relations with Greece have been—and will continue to be—
significantly influenced by U.S. policy.  In general, the United States
has tried to avoid taking sides in the dispute between Greece and
Turkey and to act instead as an honest broker.  Its primary concern
has been to prevent an escalation of tensions between two allies that
could weaken NATO’s cohesion and military effectiveness.  These ef-
forts at mediation, however, have often aggravated relations with ei-
ther Greece or Turkey—and in a number of instances with both.
The 1963–1964 Cyprus crisis provides a good example.  President
Johnson’s letter to Prime Minister Inönü—in which he warned that
the United States and NATO might not come to Turkey’s aid if a
Turkish invasion of Cyprus provoked Soviet intervention—suc-
ceeded in preventing a Turkish invasion.  But it created a furor in
Turkey and prompted Turkey to reduce its dependence on the
United States and diversify its foreign policy, including undertaking a
major effort to improve relations with Moscow.
Similarly, U.S. sanctions imposed following the Turkish invasion of
Cyprus in 1974 led to a sharp deterioration of U.S.-Turkish relations.
When the U.S. Congress imposed an arms embargo on Turkey,
Turkey responded by temporarily suspending U.S. access to key fa-
cilities on Turkish soil.  Many Turks regarded the embargo as an un-
fair slap in the face of a loyal ally and its memory still rankles in many
Turkish quarters today.  In addition, Greece temporarily withdrew
from the military wing of NATO to protest the Turkish intervention
and the weak U.S. and NATO reaction to the Turkish invasion.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
89
Although the United States has tried to pursue an even-handed pol-
icy and avoid choosing sides, Turkey has always been regarded as the
strategically more important ally.  During the Cold War, Turkey
served as an important bulwark against the expansion of Soviet
power into the Mediterranean and the Middle East, tying down some
24 Soviet divisions.  It also provided valuable communications and
intelligence assets for monitoring Soviet troop movements and veri-
fying arms control agreements.
With the end of the Cold War, Turkey’s strategic importance in U.S.
eyes has increased.22  Turkey is at the nexus of three areas of increas-
ing geostrategic importance to the United States:  the Caucasus, the
Middle East, and the Balkans.  In each of these areas, Turkey’s coop-
eration is critical for the achievement of U.S. foreign policy objec-
tives.  Moreover, Turkey’s strategic weight has increased in U.S. eyes
as a result of the war on terrorism.  This limits the degree to which
the United States is willing to exert pressure on Turkey over issues
such as Cyprus and the Aegean.
However, the perception in Greece is quite different.  U.S. “even-
handedness” is seen in Athens as an example of Washington’s will-
ingness to overlook Turkey’s violations of international law, espe-
cially Turkey’s occupation of Cyprus.  As Dimitrios Triantaphyllou
has noted, “As long as Greeks perceive the United States to be a bi-
ased interlocutor between Greece and Turkey and over the Cyprus
question, U.S.-Greek relations will continue to be viewed with suspi-
cion in Athens.”23
However, Washington’s ability to influence Turkish policy has signif-
icantly declined in the last decade.  With the end of the Cold War,
Turkey is less in need of U.S. “protection.”  In addition, Turkey today
has foreign policy options—in the Caucasus, Central Asia, the Middle
East, and Balkans—that were not open to it a decade ago.  It is thus
less ready to automatically fall in line behind U.S. policy, especially
when U.S. preferences conflict with its own regional interests.  The
______________

22For a fuller discussion, see F. Stephen Larrabee, “U.S. and European Policy Toward
Turkey and the Caspian Basin,” pp. 143–173.
23Dimitrios Triantaphyllou, “Further Turmoil Ahead?” in Dimitris Keridis and Dim-
itrios Triantaphyllou, Greek-Turkish Relations in an Era of Globalization, Dallas, VA:
Brassey’s, 2001, pp. 73–74.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
90
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ending of U.S. military assistance has also served to reduce U.S.
leverage over Turkish policy.
At the same time, U.S.-Turkish relations have been increasingly af-
fected by U.S. domestic politics, especially the influence of the
Greek-American lobby.  Over the last decade, the lobby has been
successful in mobilizing support in the U.S Congress to halt or delay
arms sales to Turkey on a number of occasions.  These delays have
been a source of increasing irritation in Ankara and have been one of
the reasons behind Turkey’s intensified military cooperation with Is-
rael, which Ankara sees as a means of reducing its dependence on
American (and European) arms.  Ankara has also viewed closer co-
operation with Israel as a way of exploiting the political clout of the
Israeli lobby in the United States for its own political purposes.
Despite these difficulties, the United States has continued to actively
encourage a process of détente and reconciliation between Greece
and Turkey.  U.S. diplomatic intervention was critical in defusing the
crisis over Imia/Kardak in early 1996.  The United States also played
an important behind-the-scene role in promoting the nonaggression
pledge by President Demirel and Prime Minister Simitis at the NATO
summit in Madrid in July 1997 and in defusing the crisis over
the deployment of the S-300 missiles.  More recently, Washington
has actively pushed for a dialogue between Athens and Ankara on
confidence-building measures.
Cyprus, however, remains an irritant in U.S.-Turkish relations, espe-
cially with the U.S. Congress.  Turkey’s human rights record and
continued occupation of Cyprus have prompted the Congress to
hold up a number of arms sales to Turkey, causing difficulties in
U.S.-Turkish defense relations.  In November 2000, for instance,
Senator Joseph Biden, the ranking member of the Senate Foreign Re-
lations Committee, temporarily held up export licenses for the sale of
eight U.S. CH-53E heavy lift helicopters to Turkey because of
Turkey’s policy toward Cyprus.24
The United States, however, has avoided getting too deeply involved
in the Cyprus issue.  Instead Washington has encouraged the UN to
______________

24“Biden Holds Up Export Licenses for CH-53Es for Turkey,” Defense Daily, November
16, 2000.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
91
take the lead on Cyprus, with the United States playing a low-key
“supportive” role behind the scenes.  As Morton Abramowitz has
noted, “the inclination of every administration is to try to push the
Cyprus issue off into the future in the hope that some event—a shift
in EU policy, the departure of Denktash, or a change of government
in Ankara—will change the context and open up new opportunities
for a settlement later.”25
There have been a few notable exceptions to this pattern.  In the
summer of 1991, the first Bush administration tried to invigorate the
intercommunal talks.  But the effort failed to bear fruit and was soon
abandoned.  After the end of the Bosnian conflict, the Clinton
administration seemed about to make a new push for a Cyprus set-
tlement.  However, the administration’s plans were derailed by the
outbreak of the Imia/Kardak crisis and growing domestic instability
in Turkey.
In June 1997, Clinton made another attempt, appointing Richard
Holbrooke, the architect of the Dayton Accord, as special envoy to
Cyprus.  Holbrooke made a number of trips to Cyprus in an effort to
jump-start the intercommunal talks, but his efforts failed to break
the deadlock.  The United States played an important behind-the-
scene role in getting the “proximity talks” started in December 1999,
but since then it has not given the Cyprus issue high priority.
The Bush administration has been too preoccupied with the war on
terrorism—and more recently Iraq—to pay much attention to
Cyprus.  However, this lack of high-level attention is shortsighted.
The failure to achieve a Cyprus settlement could lead to a dangerous
deterioration of Turkey’s relations with the EU and could even
stimulate a broader anti-Western backlash among the Turkish
population.  It could also undermine the recent Greek-Turkish rap-
prochement.
______________

25Morton Abramowitz, “The Complexities of American Policymaking on Turkey,” in
Morton Abramowitz, ed., Turkey’s Transformation and American Policy, New York:
The Century Foundation Press, 2000, p. 164.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
92
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
THE DOMESTIC DIMENSION
Domestic factors have played an important role in influencing Turk-
ish policy toward Greece and Cyprus.  Since the 1990s, Turkey has
had a series of weak governments, most of them coalitions.  This
rapid turnover and lack of a strong government have made the
pursuit of bold initiatives toward Greece difficult.  With the exception
of Turgut Özal, no political leader in Turkey in the last decade has
been in a position to make the type of difficult compromises
necessary to break the deadlock in relations with Greece.  And even
Özal’s initiatives were ultimately undone by the weakening of his
domestic base.
Some important steps toward easing tensions with Greece occurred
during Ecevit’s second prime ministership.  But there was little
progress toward a Cyprus settlement.  Both Ecevit and Deputy Prime
Minister Devlet Bahçeli, the leader of the MHP, opposed any change
in Turkish policy on Cyprus, as did the Turkish military.  Moreover,
the deterioration of Ecevit’s health in the spring of 2002 left Turkey
leaderless at a critical moment when important decisions needed to
be made—especially on Cyprus—and eventually forced Ecevit to call
for new elections.
The victory by the Islamist Justice and Development Party in the
November 3, 2002, elections adds a new element of uncertainty to
Greek-Turkish relations.  In the past, rapprochement with Greece
has not been high on the AKP agenda—or that of its predecessors—
but this may change now that the AKP is in power.  The AKP leader-
ship seems to want good relations with Greece.  Thus, it is likely to
continue the rapprochement with Greece initiated by its predeces-
sors.
Two steps in particular on Turkey’s part could help to give Greek-
Turkish relations new momentum.
The first would be for Turkey to rescind the parliamentary resolution
saying that the extension of Greek territorial waters would be tanta-
mount to a casus belli.  This resolution has particularly vexed Greek
public opinion because Greece has the right under international law
to extend its territorial waters to 12 miles but has chosen for political
reasons not to do so.  A second gesture would be to reopen the theo-

--- Sayfa 115 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
93
logical seminary on the island of Halki which was closed in the early
1970s.
Both moves would give Greek-Turkish détente new momentum and
be an important sign of Turkey’s commitment to further improving
relations with Greece.  They would also make it easier domestically
for the Greek leadership to justify its détente policy and take addi-
tional steps to strengthen it.  Indeed, without some reciprocal ges-
tures on Turkey’s part, public support for Greek-Turkish détente may
be hard to sustain in Greece over the long run.
THE WIDER BALKAN STAGE
The continued differences with Greece over the Aegean and Cyprus
have been accompanied by a more active Turkish policy toward the
Balkans.  Historically, the Balkans have been an area of strong Turk-
ish interest.  Turkey is linked to the area by ties of history, culture,
and religion.  The Balkans were under Ottoman rule for nearly five
centuries.  This rule left an indelible imprint on the culture, political
institutions, and social life of the region.26  Moreover, many mem-
bers of the Turkish elite—including Atatürk himself—trace their an-
cestry back to Ottoman rule in the Balkans.
After the Balkan wars (1912–1913), however, Turkey largely withdrew
from the Balkans.  Following the founding of the Turkish Republic in
1923, Atatürk discouraged any expression of Pan-Turkism and
Turkey carefully refrained from making any irredentist claims over
the Turkish and Muslim territories in the Balkans.  However, Turkey
did participate in the Balkan Pact (1934), which it saw as a hedge
against Bulgarian and Italian revisionism.27  After the end of World
War II, Ankara focused its attention on NATO and relations with the
West.  Although Turkey did make efforts to improve ties with some
______________

26For an excellent discussion of the Ottoman effect on the Balkans, see Maria Todor-
ova, “The Ottoman Legacy in the Balkans,” in L. Carol Brown, ed., Imperial Legacy.
The Ottoman Imprint on the Balkans and the Middle East, New York:  Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1996, pp. 45–77.
27See Mustafa Türkes, “The Balkan Pact and Its Immediate Implications for the
Balkan States, 1930–1934,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 30, No. 1, January 1994, pp.
123–144.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
94
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Balkan countries, in general, the region was not high on Turkey’s
foreign policy agenda.
However, since the end of the Cold War Turkey has “rediscovered”
the Balkans.  To some extent, this rediscovery has been part of a gen-
eral broadening of Turkey’s foreign policy horizons since the fall of
the Berlin Wall.28  But it has also been influenced by the perceived
need to prevent instability in the region from spreading further south
and spilling over into Turkey itself.  Turkey’s policymakers opposed
the breakup of Yugoslavia because they feared the implications of se-
cessionism for Kurdish separatism in Turkey and for Turkey’s terri-
torial integrity.  They oppose Kosovo’s independence for the same
reason.
Feelings of kinship and a shared history have also been important
driving forces behind Turkey’s policy, especially toward Bosnia.
Many of the Turkish elite trace their origins back to ancestors who
fled the Balkans as Ottoman power in the region receded at the end
of the 19th century.  Moreover, Turkey has given preference in its
immigration policies to immigrants from the Balkans.  The Turkish
elite has tended to view these immigrants as “people like them-
selves” and felt that Turkey could trust them more easily than other
minorities, even if they were not ethnically Turkish.29
Since 1990–1991, ties with Albania have been strengthened, espe-
cially in the military sphere.  Under an agreement signed in 1992,
Turkey agreed to help modernize the Albanian army as well as help
train Albanian military officers.  Ankara also helped to rebuild a naval
base at Para Limani on the Adriatic coast, to which it will have access.
Relations with Macedonia have also intensified.  Turkey was the first
country after Bulgaria to recognize the new Macedonian state.
Turkey is also helping to modernize Macedonia’s armed forces.  In
______________

28The broader dimensions of Turkey’s foreign policy “emancipation” are explored in
Ian O. Lesser, “Turkey in a Changing Security Environment,” The Journal of Interna-
tional Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 183–198.  See also F. Stephen Larrabee,
“Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges,” in Zal-
may Khalilzad et al., The Future of Turkish Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan,
pp. 21–51.
29See Kemal Kirisçi, “Disaggregating Turkish Citizenship and Immigration Practices,”
Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 26, No. 3, July 2000, p. 16.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
95
July 1995, the two countries signed a military cooperation agreement
providing for the exchange and training of military experts and joint
military exercises.  In 1998, Turkey also agreed to give Macedonia 20
of its U.S.-made F-5s as part of its effort to assist the Macedonian
armed forces.30
The most far-reaching improvement, however, has occurred in rela-
tions with Bulgaria.  During the Cold War, relations between Ankara
and Sofia were marked by considerable hostility, in particular be-
cause of Bulgaria’s mistreatment of the Turkish minority (about 10
percent of the Bulgarian population).31  Relations deteriorated dra-
matically in 1989 when Bulgaria forced 300,000 ethnic Turks to emi-
grate and confiscated their property.
However, relations improved significantly after the collapse of the
communist regime in Sofia in November 1989.  Since then, the rights
and property of the Turkish minority have been restored and more
than half of the 300,000 ethnic Turks forced to emigrate in 1989, have
returned to Bulgaria.  In addition, several agreements on confidence-
building measures have been signed, which have helped to reduce
threat perceptions and contribute to better mutual understanding.
Today, Turkish-Bulgarian relations are the best they have been since
the end of World War II.
Turkey’s new activism in the Balkans initially aroused concern in
Athens.  Many Greeks saw Turkey’s more active Balkan policy as an
attempt by Turkey to establish a “Muslim arc” on Greece’s northern
border and as part of a larger strategic plan by Turkey to reassert its
former hegemonic role in the Balkans.32  These concerns were rein-
forced by Turkey’s extensive military modernization plans.  With the
precedent of the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus in mind, some
Greeks worried that Turkey might seek to exploit discontent among
Greece’s Turkish minority and use it as a pretext to launch an attack
against Greece and retake Western Thrace.
______________

30Umit Enginsoy, “Turkey to Give F-5s to Macedonia,” Defense News, July 13, 1998.
31For a comprehensive discussion, see Kemal Karpat, ed., The Turks of Bulgaria:  The
History, Culture, and Political Fate of a Minority, Istanbul:  The ISIS Press, 1990.
32See Yannis Valinakis, Greece’s Security in the Post–Cold War Era, Ebenhausen:
Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, S-394, April 1994.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
96
Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
However, Turkey’s policy in the Balkans has actually been quite cau-
tious.  Turkey has not sought to play the “Muslim card,” either in
Greece or elsewhere in the Balkans.  Nor has Turkey shown an incli-
nation to take any unilateral military action in the Balkans.  On the
contrary, all its military actions in the region have been carried out
within a multilateral context, either as part of NATO or United Na-
tions operations.  At the same time, Turkey sought to use the crisis in
the Balkans as an opportunity to demonstrate its value as a strong
NATO ally.  Ankara participated in both IFOR and SFOR in Bosnia
and provided bases and aircraft for Operation Allied Force in Kosovo.
It also contributed 700 troops to the Italian-led Operation Alba in Al-
bania.
Turkey has also taken the lead in the establishment of a multina-
tional peacekeeping force in the Balkans (the Southeast European
Brigade, or SEEBRIG).  SEEBRIG—which is composed of units from
Turkey, Greece, Italy, Romania, Bulgaria, Macedonia, and Albania—
has its headquarters in Plovdiv, Bulgaria.  Although the brigade is still
in its infancy, over the long run it could make an important contri-
bution to promoting greater regional trust and stability.
In short, although Turkey has pursued an active policy in the Balkans
since the early 1990s, its policy has been very much in line with that
of its NATO allies.  Kosovo provides a good example.  Despite the fact
that Kosovo is almost entirely populated by Muslims and also
contains a large Turkish minority (30,000–40,000), Turkey has not
taken up the cause of the Kosovars or sought to act as their advocate
in international fora.  This was in large part because Turkey feared
that support for the Albanian Kosovars could legitimize Kurdish
separatist tendencies within Turkey.
The Balkans, in fact, have become an area of growing cooperation
between Greece and Turkey.  During the Kosovo crisis, both coun-
tries worked together closely to help dampen and prevent the spread
of the conflict.  Indeed, both countries have come increasingly to
recognize that they share many common interests in the Balkans.
This growing convergence of interests has helped to temper the ear-
lier political rivalry in the region and given the recent rapprochement
between the two countries greater momentum.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
Relations with Greece and the Balkans
97
This recent cooperation in the Balkans, however, is highly dependent
on a continuation of the process of bilateral détente and progress
toward the resolution of other outstanding bilateral issues.  If this
progress were to be halted, leading to new tensions in bilateral rela-
tions, the cooperation in the Balkans between Turkey and Greece
could be adversely affected.  The emergence of a more nationalistic
regime in Ankara could also result in a more assertive, less-coopera-
tive Turkish policy in the Balkans.  Finally, a serious deterioration of
Turkey’s relationship with the EU could diminish Turkey’s readiness
to cooperate with Greece in the Balkans.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
99
Chapter Five
TURKEY AND EURASIA
Since the early 1990s, Central Asia and the Caucasus have emerged
as significant focal points of Turkish policy.  This represents an im-
portant shift in Turkish foreign policy.  Under Atatürk, Turkey con-
sciously eschewed efforts to cultivate contacts with the Turkic and
Muslim populations beyond Turkey’s borders.  In addition, the
closed nature of the Soviet political regime and Moscow’s sensitivity
regarding its control over the non-Russian nationalities made any
communication with the peoples of Central Asia and the Caucasus
difficult.  As a result, after the founding of the Turkish Republic
(1923), Turkey had little contact with the peoples of Central Asia and
the Caucasus.
The collapse of the Soviet Union, however, created new opportuni-
ties—and new challenges—for Turkish policy.  With the disintegra-
tion of the USSR, a whole new “Turkic world,” previously closed to
Turkish policy, was opened up.1  Turkish politicians, especially for-
mer President Turgut Özal, saw Central Asia as a new field for ex-
panding Turkish influence and enhancing Turkey’s strategic impor-
tance to the West.  At the same time, the opening to Central Asia and
the Caucasus was seen as a way to offset Turkey’s difficulties with
Europe.
Although Turkey’s initial forays into Eurasia met with mixed
success—for reasons discussed in greater detail below—the events of
______________

1For an early assessment of this reawakening, see Graham E. Fuller, “Turkey’s New
Eastern Orientation,” in Graham E. Fuller and Ian O. Lesser, Turkey’s New Geopolitics:
From the Balkans to Western China, pp. 37–97.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
100 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
September 11 and the U.S.-led war on terrorism are reshaping the
geopolitics of Eurasia.  Central Asia and the Caucasus have taken on
new geostrategic importance, especially for the United States.  At the
same time, Russia’s relations with Turkey have undergone significant
change in recent years—a development that is likely to be acceler-
ated by the events of September 11 and the strategic rapprochement
between Moscow and Washington.
CENTRAL ASIA
In the first few years after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Turkey
embarked on a concerted campaign to expand relations with the
newly independent states of Central Asia and tried to become the
unofficial leader of the Turkic-speaking states in the region.2  Ankara
opened up cultural centers in the Central Asian republics; it estab-
lished extensive scholarship programs to allow Central Asian stu-
dents to study in Turkey; and it expanded its television broadcasts in
an effort to extend its cultural influence in Central Asia.
However, Turkey’s attempt to expand its influence in Central Asia
had only limited success.  As a result, Turkey has been forced to scale
back many of its grandiose plans.  The early euphoria about Central
Asia becoming a Turkish sphere of influence has been replaced by a
more sober and realistic approach.   Central Asia continues to occupy
an important place on Turkey’s foreign policy agenda, but today
there is a greater recognition of the obstacles Turkey faces in trying
to expand its influence in the region.
There were several reasons for Turkey’s limited success in expanding
its influence in Central Asia in the 1990s:  First, Turkey lacked the fi-
nancial means and resources to play a substantial economic and po-
litical role in the region.  It also overemphasized the economic bene-
fits from its involvement in Central Asia.  The countries of the region
are poor.  Most want economic and financial assistance from Turkey.
______________

2For a detailed discussion of these early efforts, see Idris Bal, Turkey’s Relationship
with the West and the Turkic Republics, Burlington, VT:  Ashgate Publishing Company,
2000.  Also see Gareth Winrow, Turkey in Post-Soviet Central Asia, London:  Royal In-
stitute of International Affairs, 1995; and Philip Robins, “Between Sentiment and Self-
Interest:  Turkey’s Policy Toward Azerbaijan and the Central Asian States,” The Middle
East Journal, Vol. 47, No. 4, Autumn 1993, pp. 593–610.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 101
But few have much to offer in return.  As a result, economic coopera-
tion has not expanded as quickly as Ankara had hoped.  Indeed, Cen-
tral Asia is one of the few areas with which Turkey has a trade sur-
plus.
Second, the “Turkish model,” with its emphasis on democracy, secu-
larism, and a viable market economy, has found little enthusiasm
among the rulers in Central Asia, most of whom are Soviet-era auto-
crats more interested in maintaining their own personal power than
expanding political democracy.  In the last decade, the regimes in the
region have increasingly gravitated toward greater authoritarian rule
rather than greater democracy and political pluralism.  The growing
threat from radical Islamic groups has reinforced this trend,
prompting many of the leaders in the region to introduce more re-
pressive domestic policies.
Third, Turkish officials initially tended to take a rather patronizing
approach to relations with the countries of Central Asia, often acting
as the “big brother” who knew best.  This patronizing attitude did not
sit well with many Central Asian officials.  Having just emerged from
70 years of Soviet colonialization, the Central Asian elites did not
want to replace one form of domination by another.  Moreover,
Turkish officials often displayed a poor understanding of the social
and political realities in the Central Asian countries.
Fourth, Turkey’s domestic travails—the Kurdish insurgency, the Is-
lamic challenge, mounting economic problems—limited the amount
of attention and resources Turkey could devote to Central Asia.  At
the same time, Turkey’s economic difficulties tarnished the attrac-
tion of the Turkish model in the eyes of many Central Asian states.
Many Central Asian leaders questioned whether they would truly be
better off adopting the Turkish model and opening up their
economies.
Finally, Russian influence in the region proved to be more durable
than many Turks anticipated.  In the initial period after the collapse
of the Soviet Union, Russia failed to develop a coherent policy to-
ward Central Asia.  This provided Turkey some leeway to make in-
roads in the region.  However, President Putin skillfully exploited the
issue of the struggle against international terrorism to strengthen
Russia’s ties to the states of Central Asia and reassert Russia’s influ-

--- Sayfa 124 ---
102 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ence in the region before the September 11 terrorist attacks on the
United States.3
Moreover, Russia enjoys certain economic, political, and geographic
advantages in Central Asia.
•
Many of the regimes in the region are weak, making them easily
vulnerable to Russian pressure.
•
Many of the countries, especially Kazakhstan, have large Russian
minorities.  This gives Russia an important political and psycho-
logical pressure point.
•
The existence of territorial disputes between a number of states
in the region, particularly Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, has en-
abled Russia to act as a “mediator” and play one Central Asian
state off against the other.
•
The economies of the region are closely linked to the Russian
economy—a legacy of the Soviet era—especially in the energy
sector.  As a result, the Central Asian states are highly dependent
on trade with Moscow.
•
Most of the key energy pipelines run through Russia and are
controlled by Moscow.  Thus, many of the states in the region are
dependent on Russia for the transport of their energy resources
to the outside world.
•
The elites of Central Asia remain highly Russified—a legacy of
more than seventy years of Soviet rule.  At the summit of
“Turkish-speaking states” in Istanbul in April 2001, for example,
most of the heads of state spoke Russian not Turkish.4
______________

3For a comprehensive discussion, see F. Stephen Larrabee, “Russia and Its Neighbors:
Integration or Disintegration,” in Richard L. Kugler and Ellen L. Frost, eds., The Global
Century, Globalization and National Security, Volume II, Washington, D.C.:  National
Defense University Press, 2001, pp. 859–874.  See also John Dunlop, “Russia Under
Putin:  Reintegrating the Post-Soviet Space,” Journal of Democracy, Vol. 11, No. 3,
2000, pp. 39–47.
4The two exceptions were President Aliev of Azerbaijan and Turkish President Necdet
Sezer.  See “Die meisten Staatschefs sprachen russisch,” Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, April 30, 2001.

--- Sayfa 125 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 103
Moreover, Turkey has faced some difficulties of its own.  Ankara’s
ties to Tashkent deteriorated after Islamic terrorist attacks on
Uzbekistan in February 1999.  Uzbek authorities claimed that the ter-
rorists had planned the attacks from Turkish territory and retaliated
by closing down a number of Turkish schools and businesses.
THE CHANGING STRATEGIC CONTEXT
However, the events of September 11 have changed the political
context in Central Asia and opened new opportunities for Turkish
diplomacy, especially in the military field.  In recent years, Turkey
has stepped up its military assistance to the Central Asian states of
the former Soviet Union.  Turkey is providing important military
assistance to train and equip the Uzbek army in the war against
terrorism.5  This assistance has helped ease the tensions evident in
the mid and late 1990s and has given Turkish-Uzbek relations
important new impetus.
Turkey has also increased its military assistance to Kazakhstan.  In
March 2002, Ankara signed a cooperation agreement with Astana
providing for collaboration between the Turkish and Kazakh navies
and air forces and for training Kazakh cadets in Turkish military col-
leges.6  In addition, Turkey has stepped up military assistance to
Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan.
Ankara has seen the U.S.-led war on terrorism as a means of increas-
ing its political influence in Central Asia and was an early contributor
of troops to the Afghan campaign.  The Turkish government agreed
to send troops to Afghanistan despite widespread opposition among
the Turkish public.  This decision was dictated by strategic consid-
erations, above all the desire to influence postconflict policy in Cen-
tral Asia.  Turkey’s readiness to take over the leadership of the Inter-
national Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF) from
Britain—a move strongly supported by the United States—also re-
flects its desire to play an important role in the region in the future.
______________

5In 2001, Turkey provided Uzbekistan with military assistance totaling $1.5 million.
The assistance planned for 2002 is expected to considerably exceed that figure.  See
“Turkey equips, trains Uzbek military,” Turkish Daily News, March 3, 2002.
6RFE/RL Central Asian Report, Vol. 2, No. 11, March 21, 2002.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
104 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Still, Turkey faces important obstacles to playing a broader role in
Central Asia.  Many of the problems that prevented Ankara from es-
tablishing a stronger footprint in the region before September 11
continue to exist—the domestic weakness and illegitimacy of the
regimes in the region, the region’s economic underdevelopment,
widespread graft and corruption; growing popular discontent, the
lack of strong civil societies and rule of law, increasing drug traffick-
ing and organized crime, and weak control of national borders.
These structural problems, together with Turkey’s own financial dif-
ficulties, are likely to limit Turkey’s ability to significantly expand its
influence in Central Asian, despite the close ethnic, religious, and
cultural ties that exist with the states of the region.
GROWING STRATEGIC INTEREST IN THE CAUCASUS
In contrast to Central Asia, where Turkey has had only limited suc-
cess in carving out a larger regional role for itself, Ankara has had
much greater success in increasing its influence in the Caucasus
(Armenia excepted).  Indeed, the Caucasus has emerged as a region
of growing strategic importance for Turkey in recent years.
Relations with Azerbaijan in particular have been strengthened.  The
two countries are linked by strong historical, cultural, and linguistic
ties.  Azerbaijani intellectuals played an important role in the revival
of Turkic national consciousness in the late 19th and 20th centuries.7
After the Bolsheviks put an end to Azerbaijan’s independence, many
Azerbaijani leaders fled to Turkey.  A further influx occurred after
World War II.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Turkey quickly sought
to capitalize on the emergence of an independent Azerbaijan.  Turk-
ish ambitions were given a big boost by the election of Ebülfez
Elchibey as president of Azerbaijan in June 1992.  Elchibey was a
strong advocate of the “Turkish model” for Azerbaijan.  However,
Elchibey’s ouster in a coup in June 1993—widely believed to have
been orchestrated with Moscow’s aid—dashed Ankara’s initial hopes
______________

7On the role of Azerbaijani intellectuals in the rise of Turkic consciousness, see in par-
ticular Audrey Alstadt, The Azerbaijani Turks: Power and Identity Under Russian Rule,
Stanford, CA:  Hoover Institution Press, 1992.  Also see Paul B. Henze, “Turkey and the
Caucasus,” Orbis, Vol. 45, No. 1, Winter 2001, pp. 81–91.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 105
of using Azerbaijan as a springboard for the expansion of its influ-
ence in the Caucasus.8
However, Elchibey’s removal proved to be only a temporary setback.
His replacement, Heidar Aliev, a member of the Soviet Politburo
in the Brezhnev era, has proven to be a shrewder and more indepen-
dent-minded leader than many observers expected.  Despite Russian
pressure, Aliev has increasingly pursued a pro-Western course in re-
cent years and has moved to strengthen ties to Ankara.
The warming of Turkish-Azerbaijani relations has been particularly
visible in the military area.  Since 1996, Turkey has been actively
engaged in the training of Azerbaijan’s military officers; it has also
helped to modernize the Azerbaijani military education system to
bring it in line with NATO standards.  An Azerbaijani peacekeeping
platoon has been participating in the KFOR as part of the Turkish
battalion.
Economic relations have also intensified.  In March 2001, Turkey and
Azerbaijan signed a set of agreements in which Azerbaijan agreed to
supply Turkey with 2 billion cubic meters of natural gas in 2004, in-
creasing to 6.6 billion by 2007 and continuing through 2019.  The
pipeline to transport the gas will cross Georgia to Erzurum in Eastern
Turkey and parallel the Baku-Ceyhan oil pipeline.  The pairing off of
the two pipelines is intended to increase the commercial profitability
of both lines.  It also lends added impetus to the construction of the
Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and could possibly make Turkey an important
transit link in the transport of Azerbaijani gas to Mediterranean and
Balkan countries.
Turkey has also sought to strengthen ties to Georgia.  In March 1997,
Turkey and Georgia signed an agreement on military assistance and
cooperation.  The agreement envisages the construction of military
training centers in Kodori and Gori and a shooting range outside
Tbilisi.9  Turkey has also been helping Georgia with the reconstruc-
______________

8For a detailed discussion of Turkish policy toward Azerbaijan during this period, see
Idris Bal and Cengiz Basak Bal, “Rise and Fall of Elchibey and Turkey’s Central Asian
Policy,” Dis Politika, No. 3-4, 1998, pp. 42–56.
9Jamestown Monitor, Vol. 5, No. 45, March 5, 1999.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
106 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
tion of the Vaziani military base, and Georgian military personnel
have been studying at Turkish military establishments since 1998.
In January 2000, Turkey and Georgia launched a joint initiative to
create a “South Caucasus Stability Pact.”10  The pact is designed to
increase Turkey’s profile in the region as well as enhance Western in-
volvement in the area.  By including other Western powers as well as
Russia, Turkey, in effect, sought to legitimize Western involvement in
the Caucasus as well as to get Russia to view the region as an area of
international cooperation rather than its own self-proclaimed sphere
of influence.  However, the continued dispute between Armenia and
Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as Moscow’s lack of en-
thusiasm for the proposal, have inhibited the implementation of the
plan.
Turkey’s relations with Armenia remain strained by the legacy of the
massacre of Armenians by the Ottoman forces in 1915–1916.11  Re-
cent efforts by the Armenian lobby in the United States and in several
European countries, particularly France, to introduce genocide reso-
lutions condemning Turkey for the massacre of the Armenians in
1915 have exacerbated these strains and angered the Turkish au-
thorities, who have strenuously disputed the charges.  However, re-
cently Turkey has shown a willingness to provide greater access to
the Ottoman Archives—a move long urged by scholars—to help
defuse the dispute.
Armenia’s occupation of Nagorno-Karabakh has not only strained
relations with Azerbaijan but also complicated Turkish-Armenian
relations.  Turkey was one of the first countries to recognize an
independent Armenia after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
However, the intensification of the Nagorno-Karabakh occupation in
the early 1990s resulted in a deterioration of Turkish-Armenian
relations.  Turkey closed its border with Armenia and suspended
efforts to establish diplomatic relations.  Since then, Ankara has
______________

10For an imaginative effort to flesh out the Caucasus Stability Pact, see Sergiu Celac,
Michael Emerson, and Nathalie Focci, A Stability Pact for the Caucasus, Brussels:
Center for European Policy, May 2000.
11For a useful historical overview of Turkish-Armenian relations, see Paul B. Henze,
Turkey and Armenia:  Past Problems and Future Prospects, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND,
1996.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 107
made a settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict a prerequisite
for a normalization of relations with Yerevan.
To a large extent, Turkey’s policy toward Armenia remains hostage to
its relations with Azerbaijan.  Any easing of Ankara’s position on
Nagorno-Karabakh would cause strains in relations with Baku.
However, the events of September 11 have also had a spillover effect
on the Caucasus.  With Russia seeking better ties to the United States
and NATO, Ankara and Yerevan have begun to quietly explore ways
to improve relations.12 However, a major improvement in relations is
likely to occur only after a settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh dis-
pute.
In addition, the success of Turkey’s policy in the Caucasus depends
to a large degree on a continuation of the westward-leaning policies
pursued by President Aliev in Azerbaijan and President She-
vardnadze in Georgia.  Both men, however, are in the twilight of their
political careers. (Shevardnadze is in his mid-70s and Aliev is nearly
80).  Their departure from the political stage could significantly
change the political dynamics in the Caucasus and provide new
opportunities for Russia to reassert its influence in the region.
THE ENERGY DIMENSION
The emergence of the Caspian basin as a significant source of energy
has changed the geopolitics of Eurasia and given Turkish policy to-
ward Central Asia and the Caucasus an important new dimension.
Although initial estimates of Caspian oil reserves were highly exag-
gerated, these reserves are still important and roughly comparable to
those in the North Sea.13  In addition, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan,
and Uzbekistan rank among the world’s 20 countries with the largest
reserves of natural gas.  And if estimates of the gas reserves in Azer-
baijan’s Shah Deniz fields prove correct, Azerbaijan could emerge as
another important source of natural gas in the region.
______________

12See “Secret talks between Turkey and Armenia,” Turkish Daily News, June 10, 2002.
13Mustafa Aydin, “Turkish Foreign Policy Towards Central Asia and the Caucasus:
Continuity and Change,” Private View, No. 9, Autumn 2000, p. 36.  For a comprehen-
sive discussion of the Caspian reserves, see Richard Sokolsky and Tanya Charlick-
Paley, NATO and Caspian Security:  A Mission Too Far?  Santa Monica, CA:  RAND,
1999, Chapter 6.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
108 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
The Caspian resources, however, are landlocked.  To get the energy
to international markets, new pipelines need to be built.  How the oil
is transported—and through which routes—has important geopoliti-
cal implications.  As a result, the issue of Caspian energy pipelines
has assumed increasing importance.  In recent years, a modern ver-
sion of the 19th century “Great Game” has emerged, with pipelines
replacing the railroads as the main means for exerting political influ-
ence.14
Russia has sought to use the pipeline issue as a means of reasserting
its political influence over Central Asia and the Caucasus, insisting
that a northern pipeline route from Baku to the Russian port of
Novorossiisk on the Black Sea should be the main transit route for
the transport of South Caspian oil.  This would allow Moscow to exert
strategic control over the region’s resources and give Russia impor-
tant political leverage over the policies of the producer countries.
Turkey, backed by the United States, has favored the construction of
a pipeline from Baku in Azerbaijan through Georgia to Ceyhan on
Turkey’s Mediterranean coast.  Turkey has pinned its hopes for
playing a larger strategic role in Central Asia and the Caucasus on the
construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline.  Because the route is
more expensive than other routes, many analysts and businessmen
initially expressed skepticism about Baku-Ceyhan’s commercial vi-
ability.  However, the prospects that Baku-Ceyhan will eventually be
built have improved as a result of several developments:
•
The engineering study completed in May 2001 has reduced many
of the concerns of potential investors about the cost of the pro-
ject.  The new cost estimates—$2.8 billion to $2.9 billion—are
higher than the initial $2.4 billion estimate but still within an
economically acceptable range.
______________

14See Ariel Cohen, “The ‘New Great Game’:  Pipeline Politics in Eurasia,” European
Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring 1996, pp. 2–15.  Also M. E. Ahrari, The New Great Game in
Muslim Central Asia, McNair Paper 47, Washington, D.C.:  Institute for National
Strategic Studies, January 1996.  A number of analysts, however, have argued that the
strategic importance of the Caspian region is vastly exaggerated, see Anatole Lieven,
“The (Not So) Great Game,” The National Interest, Winter 1999/2000, pp. 69–80.  See
also Martha Brill Olcott, “The Caspian’s False Promise,” Foreign Policy, No. 111, Sum-
mer 1998, pp. 95–113.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 109
•
In March 2001, Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbaev
pledged that oil from Kazakhstan’s East Kashagan field would be
transported through Baku-Ceyhan.  Kazakh oil is considered
important because it could make up for any shortfalls in Azerbai-
jani oil.  However, industry spokesmen now claim that reserves
in Azerbaijan are sufficient to make Baku-Ceyhan commercially
viable even without Kazakh oil.
•
The discovery of large gas deposits at the Shah Deniz fields in
Azerbaijan in 1999 prompted British Petroleum and the Norwe-
gian company Statoil to change their basic strategy toward Baku-
Ceyhan.  The prospect of exporting gas to Turkey gave these
companies a strong incentive to support Baku-Ceyhan.  If the
Shah Deniz pipeline runs parallel to Baku-Ceyhan, the costs of
Baku-Ceyhan could be reduced.
•
The Bush administration has thrown its full support behind the
construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline.  Moreover, there is
little chance that the administration will lift trade sanctions
against Iran in the near future.  This means that the “Iranian op-
tion” favored by many U.S. oil companies will remain effectively
closed, giving a big boost to Baku-Ceyhan.
•
Russian opposition to the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline has also begun
to soften.  In May 2002, Russia signed an agreement to transport
some of its oil through a pipeline that will connect its main ex-
port port, Novorossiisk, with Baku-Ceyhan.15  This will reduce oil
tanker traffic through the Bosphorus, a key Turkish concern.
Construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline began in September 2002.
However, Baku-Ceyhan could still face problems.  The pipeline con-
struction costs could exceed the projected $2.8 billion to $2.9 billion
costs.  In addition, Russia could lower tariffs to undercut Baku-
Ceyhan’s competitiveness.  Either move could endanger Baku-
Ceyhan’s commercial viability and reduce the willingness of in-
vestors to support the project.
A third problem would arise if the United States were to shift its pol-
icy toward Iran.  A thaw in U.S.-Iranian relations would open up new
______________

15“Russia signs agreement to transport its oil to Ceyhan,” Turkish Daily News, May 28,
2002.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
110 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
prospects for shipping Caspian oil via Iran—a route favored by many
U.S. oil companies because it is cheaper.  This could undercut in-
vestor interest in Baku-Ceyhan.  Such a shift in U.S. policy, however,
seems unlikely in the short term, especially in light of President
Bush’s characterization of Iran (together with Iraq and North Korea)
as part of an “axis of evil.”
One critical issue influencing the construction of the pipeline will be
Kazakhstan’s participation.  In March 2001, Kazakhstan’s President
Nursultan Nazarbaev pledged that Kazakhstan would export oil from
the East Kashagan field through Baku-Ceyhan.  Since then, however,
the Kazakh position has become more ambiguous.16  Baku-Ceyhan
would still be commercially viable without Kazakh oil.  But the ab-
sence of Kazakh oil would affect Baku-Ceyhan’s output and make it
difficult to achieve the goal of exporting one million barrels per day
peak capacity.  Kazakhstan’s participation would also make it easier
to attract investors.
For Turkey, however, the most pressing problem is not oil but access
to new supplies of natural gas.  Despite the recent slowdown caused
by the Turkish economic crisis, Turkey is the fastest-growing gas
market in Europe.  According to BOTAS, the Turkish State Pipeline
Company, Turkey’s demand for natural gas is expected to rise to 53
billion cubic meters per year by 2010 and 82 billion cubic meters by
2020.17  At the moment, Turkey’s use of gas is being constrained by a
shortage of supply.  Thus, Turkey represents a lucrative market for
gas suppliers.
To meet its growing domestic needs, Turkey has signed a number of
agreements with potential suppliers.  The most controversial of these
is the Blue Stream agreement signed with the Russian firm Gazprom
in December 1997.  Under the agreement, Gazprom will supply
Turkey with 16 billion cubic meters of gas per year for 25 years.  The
agreement is strongly favored by Turkey’s Energy Ministry.  But it has
______________

16In a meeting with U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell in December 2001, Nazarbaev
expressed a preference for a pipeline through Iran as the most economical means of
transporting Kazakh oil.  See Patrick Tyler, “Kazakh Leader Urges Iran Pipeline Route,”
New York Times, December 10, 2001.
17Aydin, “Turkish Foreign Policy Towards Central Asia and the Caucasus:  Continuity
and Change,”  p. 42.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 111
been sharply criticized in Turkey because of its costs and the fact that
it will significantly increase Turkey’s dependence on Russian gas.18
Critics of Blue Stream also raised questions about the technical fea-
sibility of the project.  The Black Sea section of the Blue Stream will
be the deepest gas pipeline in the world and will be constructed in
one of the most polluted seas in the world.  This presents dangers of
pipe corrosion from acidity and possible pipe collapse as a result of
hydrostatic pressure.  The Black Sea is also susceptible to earth-
quakes, which could not only result in costly repairs but could pre-
sent environmental hazards.
These considerations led critics to argue that other alternatives
should be sought, such as transporting the gas overland from Izo-
bil’noye in Russia through Georgia to Erzurum or by transporting
Turkmen gas through the Trans-Caspian Gas Pipeline.  However, de-
spite these objections, the Turkish government decided to go
through with the Blue Stream deal.  The first pipeline was completed
in March 2002 and Russia expects to begin delivering gas to Turkey
by the end of 2002.
Turkey also signed a gas agreement with Turkmenistan in May 1999
to ship Turkmen gas to Turkey through the Trans-Caspian Gas
Pipeline (TCGP).  However, there will not likely be enough demand
for gas in Turkey to justify and finance both the Blue Stream and
TCGP projects.  Moreover, the idiosyncratic policies pursued by
Turkmenistan’s President Saparmurat Niyazov have delayed the ini-
tiation of the TCGP and many observers doubt that the pipeline will
ever be built.
Energy, especially access to gas, will continue to be a strong driving
force behind Turkish policy in Eurasia in the coming decade.  Ankara
will retain a strong interest in stability in the Caucasus in particular.
Any shift in Azerbaijan’s or Georgia’s policy could significantly affect
Turkish interests, especially the future of Baku-Ceyhan and gas
supplies from the Shah Deniz fields, and severely undercut Turkish
hopes to play a significant political role in Eurasia over the long run.
______________

18See in particular Ferruh Demirman, “Blue Stream:  a project Turkey could do with-
out,” Turkish Daily News, April 22, 2001.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
112 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
THE RUSSIAN FACTOR
Russia is likely to be an increasingly important factor in Turkey’s
policy toward Eurasia in the coming decade.  Historically, Russia has
been perceived as an adversary and a threat by Turkey.  Russian ex-
pansionism and championship of Slavic nationalism in the Balkans
was the principal cause of the loss of Ottoman territory in the 19th
century.  Russia and Turkey were also rivals for influence in the Cau-
casus.  The onset of the Cold War reinforced this adversarial relation-
ship.  Stalin’s efforts to gain control of the Straits after World War II
and his claims against the Turkish provinces of Kars and Ardahan
prompted Turkey to abandon Atatürk’s policy of neutrality and seek
membership in NATO.19
This historical experience has conditioned Turkish policymakers to
regard Russia with considerable suspicion.  However, the collapse of
the Soviet Union and the emergence of a new post-Soviet space in
Central Asia and the Caucasus have had a profound effect on Tur-
key’s relations with Russia.20  On the one hand, they have sparked
new political rivalries as Turkey has sought to expand its influence in
Central Asia and the Caucasus—areas where Moscow has strong
historical interests.  On the other, they have created important new
economic interdependencies and prospects for cooperation.
In the last decade, economic cooperation with Russia has expanded
significantly.  Russia is Turkey’s second-largest trading partner and
its largest supplier of natural gas.  There is also a vibrant “suitcase
trade” between Russia and Turkey.  Although this trade has declined
somewhat since the mid-1990s, it still forms an important part of the
unofficial Turkish economy, giving Turkey a strong incentive to keep
political relations with Russia on an even keel.  Moreover, parts of the
______________

19For background, see Ferenc A. Vali, Bridge across the Bosporus:  The Foreign Policy of
Turkey, Baltimore, MD:  The Johns Hopkins Press, 1971, pp. 172–173.
20For a detailed discussion of recent developments in Turkish-Russian relations, see
Duygu Bazoglu Sezer, “Turkish-Russian Relations from Adversary to ‘Virtual Rap-
prochement,’” in Makovsky and Sayari, Turkey’s New World:  Changing Dynamics in
Turkish Foreign Policy, pp. 92–115.  See also her “Turkish-Russian Relations a Decade
Later:  From Adversary to Managed Competition,” Perceptions, Vol. VI, No. 1, March–
May 2001, pp. 79–98; and “Turkish-Russian Relations:  The Challenge of Reconciling
Geopolitical Competition and Economic Partnership,” Turkish Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1,
Spring 2000, pp. 59–82.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 113
Turkish business community have developed a strong economic
stake in trade with Russia.  Turkish construction firms such as GAMA,
Tekfen, and ENKA have substantial investments in Russia.  They
constitute an important domestic lobby for trade with Russia and
have been particularly influential in pushing for the construction of
the Blue Stream gas pipeline.
The growing Turkish-Russian economic rapprochement is particu-
larly evident in the energy sphere.  Russia supplies over 60 percent of
Turkey’s natural gas.  This figure will rise to close to 80 percent with
the completion of the Blue Stream pipeline.  This growing economic
interdependence is beginning to temper traditional Russian attitudes
toward Turkey.  Increasingly, Turkey is seen more as an important
economic partner than as a geopolitical rival.  As noted, Moscow has
softened its opposition to the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan
pipeline.  Some Russian companies such as LUKoil and Yukos have
even expressed interest in participating in the consortium.
This growing economic rapprochement has been accompanied by
changes in the political arena as well.  Despite close historic, reli-
gious, and cultural ties with Chechnya, Turkey has regarded Chech-
nya as largely an “internal” Russian problem and has not sought to
stoke the fires of Chechen nationalism.  Although some Turkish non-
governmental groups have sent aid and money to the Chechen
rebels, Turkey has cracked down more forcefully on the activities of
pro-Chechen militant groups since the takeover of the Swisshotel in
Istanbul by pro-Chechen sympathizers in 2001.
One reason for Turkey’s restraint on Chechnya is undoubtedly
Ankara’s concern that Moscow could seek to exploit the Kurdish is-
sue, as it did during the Soviet period.  However, Russia has not
sought to “play the Kurdish card”—in part out of fear that Turkey
could step up support for the Chechen insurgents.  Moscow refused,
for instance, to provide asylum for PKK terrorist leader Abdullah
Öcalan in 1999, a move that contributed to his eventual capture by
Turkish intelligence operatives.  Indeed, Ankara and Moscow appear
to have come to a tacit agreement that they both have much to lose
by supporting separatism.
However, Turkey remains wary about Russia’s geopolitical ambitions
in the Caucasus, especially Moscow’s close military ties to Armenia.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
114 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
In 2000, Russia and Armenia signed a series of defense agreements
that broaden defense cooperation and strengthen Moscow’s military
position in the region.  Of particular concern from the Turkish point
of view has been Russia’s decision to supply Armenia with MIG-29s
and S-300 missiles, which will be deployed at Gyumri, one of Russia’s
two bases in Armenia.  However, the rapprochement between
Moscow and Washington since September 11 could increase Arme-
nia’s room for maneuver and eventually allow Yerevan to reduce its
dependence on Moscow.
Russia’s policy toward Georgia has also been viewed with concern in
Ankara.  Moscow has put pressure on Georgia by dragging its feet re-
garding the withdrawal from its base at Gudauta, which it agreed to
vacate by July 1, 2001, at the November 1999 Organization for
Security and Cooperation (OSCE) summit in Istanbul.  In addition, it
has demanded a 14-year period to withdraw from its bases at Batumi
and Akhalkalaki; introduced a visa regime for Georgians working in
Russia; demanded the creation of a joint police force to patrol areas
of the Georgian border with Chechnya; and periodically cut off gas
supplies to Georgia.21
Russia has also sought to use the separatist tendencies in Abkhazia
and South Ossetia to put pressure on Georgia.22  In June 2002, the
Russian Duma amended the law on Russian citizenship to allow res-
idents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to become Russian citizens—a
move viewed by Georgia as tantamount to indirect and disguised an-
nexation.23  The Duma’s action seemed designed to strengthen the
rationale for a continued Russian military presence in Abkhazia and
keep open the option of possibly detaching the two regions from
Georgia at some point.
______________

21See “Moscou exerce des pressions sur la Géorgie et retarde la fermeture de ses bases
militaires,” Le Monde, August 5, 2001.
22For an excellent discussion of the internal and external dynamics of the conflicts in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, see Ghia Nodia, “Turmoil and Stability in the Caucasus:
Internal Developments and External Influence,” presentation at the conference
“Prospects for Regional and Transregional Cooperation and the Resolution of Con-
flicts,” Yerevan, Armenia, September 27–28, 2000, pp. 85–94.
23See Vladimir Socor, “The Russian Squeeze on Georgia,” Russia and Eurasia Review,
Vol. 1, No. 2, June 18, 2002, pp. 6–8.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 115
Georgia’s independence is critical from the Turkish point of view.  A
serious shift in Georgia’s position back toward Russia could endan-
ger the construction of Baku-Ceyhan.  It would also leave Azerbaijan
more exposed.  As long as President Shevardnadze is in power, there
is little likelihood of such a shift.  Shevardnadze has pursued an in-
creasingly pro-Western policy in recent years.  However, Shevard-
nadze’s term runs out in April 2005 and under the Georgian consti-
tution he can not run again.  His departure could lead to renewed
internal instability and weaken Georgia’s ability to resist Russian
pressure.
U.S.-TURKISH STRATEGIC COOPERATION IN EURASIA
Turkey’s ability to pursue an active policy in Eurasia will be heavily
influenced by the nature and strength of its ties to the United States.
Since the mid-1990s, the United States has increasingly emerged as
an important player in Eurasia.  The United States has given strong
diplomatic support to the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline,
as well as the Trans-Caspian Gas Pipeline.  Support for an East-West
energy corridor has been seen as a way to support Turkish political
ambitions while blocking Iran’s access to Caspian energy and pre-
venting the reassertion of Russian hegemony in the region.
U.S.-Turkish cooperation has been particularly close in the Cauca-
sus.  Washington and Ankara have worked closely to strengthen ties
to Georgia and Azerbaijan and encouraged both countries to adopt a
stronger pro-Western position.  In addition, the United States has
lent strong support to Turkey’s effort to construct the Baku-Ceyhan
pipeline, which it sees as an important means not only to expand
Turkey’s role in the region but also to strengthen the independence
of Georgia and Azerbaijan vis-à-vis Moscow.
The war on terrorism has given this strategic cooperation new mo-
mentum.  The Caucasus has become an important factor in the
struggle against international terrorism.  As a result, the United
States has stepped up its engagement, especially in Georgia.  This in-
creased military engagement, reflected in particular in the dispatch
of special forces units to help train Georgian forces to combat
Chechen rebels in the Pankisi Gorge along the Georgian-Chechen
border, is another example of how the war on terrorism has begun to
affect the balance of political power in Eurasia.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
116 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
In addition, in December 2001, the Bush administration succeeded
in getting Section 907 of the Freedom Support Act—which barred di-
rect U.S. government support to Azerbaijan—repealed.24  The sec-
tion, introduced under pressure from the American-Armenian lobby,
significantly constrained U.S. freedom of action and policy options
vis-à-vis Azerbaijan.  With the lifting of the ban, U.S. relations with
Azerbaijan are likely to receive new impetus.
The removal of the ban could also open up new avenues of coopera-
tion between the United States and Armenia—including in the mili-
tary area—and allow Armenia to gradually reduce its dependence on
Moscow and expand ties to the West.  This in turn could create the
conditions for a gradual improvement in relations between Armenia
and Turkey, although, as noted above, a serious rapprochement is
likely to occur only after a settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh con-
flict.
IRAN’S ROLE
Iran is potentially an important rival to Turkey for influence in Cen-
tral Asia and the Caucasus.  However, to date Iran has maintained a
relatively low profile in Central Asia and the Caucasus and has not
made a serious effort to spread its radical brand of Islam.  Rather
than trying to export revolution, it has concentrated on providing
technical and financial assistance and expanding cultural ties.25
Iran’s policy toward Central Asia and the Caucasus has been mainly
driven by geopolitical considerations.  Ideological goals such as the
promotion of Islam have been of secondary importance.26  Tehran’s
primary concern has been to prevent unrest in Central Asia and the
Caucasus from spilling over and affecting Iran’s own minorities (50
percent of Iran’s population is of non-Persian origin and about 30
______________

24The administration succeeded in getting the ban lifted after the two main Armenian
lobbies split on the issue.  The mainstream Armenian Assembly of America supported
the administration and the Armenian National Committee of America opposed lifting
the ban.
25See Edmund Herzig, Iran and the Former Soviet South, London:  Royal Institute of
International Affairs, 1995.
26See Brenda Shaffer, Partners in Need.  The Strategic Relationship between Russia and
Iran, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 2001.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 117
percent are Azerbaijanis).  This is the main reason why Iran sup-
ported Armenia against Azerbaijan in the Nagorno-Karabakh dis-
pute.  Religious and cultural affinity would have logically suggested
that Iran would side with Azerbaijan.  However, geostrategic consid-
erations drove Tehran to support Armenia to keep Azerbaijan weak
and ensure that Baku would not be in a position to stir up trouble
among Iran’s large Azeri population.
For the near future, Iran’s influence in Central Asia and the Caucasus
is likely to be limited for several reasons.
•
The secularized Muslim elite in Central Asia and the Caucasus
have little sympathy for Iran’s brand of radical Islam.
•
Iran is likely to be preoccupied with its domestic priorities and
with expanding its influence in the Persian Gulf.  This will leave it
little time and energy to pursue an active policy in Central Asia
and the Caucasus.
•
Iran must be sensitive to Russian security interests in Central
Asia and the Caucasus.  Iran’s growing reliance on Russian nu-
clear technology is likely to reinforce this caution.
•
Like Turkey, Iran lacks the resources to be a major regional
player.
•
U.S. efforts to isolate Iran also weaken Iran’s ability to play a
major regional role, especially in the energy field.
These factors are likely to limit Iran’s ability to play a significant role
in Central Asia and the Caucasus in the near to medium term.  This
situation could change, however, if there were a thaw in U.S.-Iranian
relations and the United States were to halt—or at least weaken—its
efforts to exclude Iran from meaningful participation in the Caspian
energy game.  In such a case, Iran could become a much more im-
portant factor in the Caspian region.  However, as noted above, such
a reversal of U.S. policy is unlikely in the near future.
Russia’s effort to intensify ties to Iran in recent years has been viewed
with concern in Ankara.27  Moscow and Tehran share a common in-
______________

27On the broader dimensions of this rapprochement, see Shaffer, Partners in Need:
The Strategic Relationship of Russia and Iran.  Also see Eugene Rumer, Dangerous

--- Sayfa 140 ---
118 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
terest in preventing the expansion of U.S. and Turkish influence in
the Caucasus and Central Asia.  This has been an important impetus
for the growing collaboration between the two countries.  Both have
sought to block the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and
prevent Ankara and Washington from expanding their influence in
the Caspian basin.
Cooperation in the nuclear field has also intensified in recent years.
Russia is helping Iran to build a nuclear reactor at Bushehr and in
July 2002 Moscow signed a 10-year blueprint for expanding coopera-
tion, which included plans to build five more nuclear reactors in
Iran.28  Although Russia has insisted that its cooperation is limited to
civilian development of nuclear energy, the growing nuclear cooper-
ation with Iran has been a source of concern to officials in Washing-
ton, Ankara, and Jerusalem and a major irritant in U.S.-Russian rela-
tions.
At the same time, there are important obstacles to the development
of a broader strategic relationship between Moscow and Tehran.
Russia and Iran are potential competitors as oil producers and
prospective alternative transit routes for the transport of gas and oil
reserves.  The two countries are also at odds over the division of the
Caspian Sea bed.29  In addition, closer ties between Moscow and
Washington, evident since the September 11 terrorist attacks on the
United States, could constrain close collaboration with Iran, particu-
larly in the nuclear field.30
_____________________________________________________________

Drift:  Russia’s Middle East Policy, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for
Near East Policy, October 2000, Chapter 6.
28See Peter Baker, “Russians Assure U.S. on Iran,” The Washington Post, August 3,
2002.
29Russia, Kazakhstan, and Azerbaijan want the seabed to be divided into national sec-
tors, which would give Iran only 13 percent of the seabed, whereas Iran wants the
seabed to be equally divided among the five littoral states, which would give Iran con-
trol over 20 percent of the seabed.  Turkmenistan’s position is less clear but Ashgabat
appears to lean toward the Iranian position.
30Although Russia insists its cooperation with Iran is limited to civilian development
of nuclear energy, there have been some signs that Moscow might be willing to recon-
sider its plans to continue to build nuclear reactors in Iran, which U.S. officials fear
could be used in a covert program to build nuclear weapons.  See Steven Lee Myers,
“Russia Says It May Reconsider Nuclear Deal with Iran,” New York Times, August 3,
2001.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 119
Iran’s tense relations with Azerbaijan also are an obstacle to Tehran’s
ability to play a larger regional role in the Caucasus.  At present there
is little likelihood that Iran and Azerbaijan will actually go to war, but
this possibility cannot be entirely excluded if the idea of reuniting
Azerbaijan with the Azerbaijani part of Iran—an idea advocated by
Elchibey during his short-lived tenure as president of Azerbaijan—
were to gain greater strength.  Such a conflict would put Turkey in a
difficult position and could create strains in Turkish-Azerbaijani re-
lations.
Iran’s threat to use force to expel a British Petroleum–chartered oil
exploration vessel in Azerbaijani waters in July 2001 raises broader
questions about Iran’s longer-term goals in the Caspian region.31
Whether the move signals a shift in Iranian policy toward more co-
ercive diplomacy or was simply designed to appease hard-liners in
the Iranian leadership is not clear.  But as Iran acquires progressively
more capable missile and perhaps nuclear capabilities, its policy may
become less circumspect and restrained.  This could give Tehran’s
policy in the Caspian—and Turkish-Iranian relations—a new, more
assertive dynamic.
THE TURKISH-ISRAELI CONNECTION
One interesting aspect of the Eurasian equation has been the devel-
opment of Israeli policy in the Caucasus and Central Asia and the
role played by the Turkish-Israeli connection.32  In the last few years,
Israel has expanded its role in Eurasia, especially with Azerbaijan.  Is-
rael strongly supported Azerbaijan in the Nagorno-Karabakh war and
relations have warmed considerably since then.  Cooperation in the
intelligence field has intensified and there are some indications that
Israel may have supplied arms to Azerbaijan.33  Israel has also ex-
panded ties to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.
______________

31For background, see “Les luttes d’influence pour le contrôle des resources de la
Caspienne,” Le Monde, August 5–6, 2001.
32See Bülent Aras, “Post Cold War Realities:  Israel’s Strategy in Azerbaijan and
Central Asia,” Middle East Policy, Vol. 5, No. 4, January 1998, pp. 69–70.
33Svante Cornell, “Geopolitics and Strategic Alignments in the Caucasus and Central
Asia,” Perceptions, Vol. IV, No. 2, June–August 1999, p. 119.

--- Sayfa 142 ---
120 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
There are several reasons for the rapprochement between Israel and
the states in Central Asia and the Caucasus.  One of the most impor-
tant has been the fear of Islamic radicalism and a desire to contain
Iranian expansion.  Another has been Israel’s image as a strong, eco-
nomically prosperous secular state.  A third has been the Israeli-
American connection.  Many Central Asian and Caucasian states see
improved ties to Israel as a means of indirectly strengthening ties to
the United States.34  Finally, Israel is seen as an important source of
economic assistance and investment by many countries in Central
Asia.
At the same time, the Israeli connection has been instrumental in
bringing Syria closer to Iran and Russia.  Indeed, two axes have be-
gun to emerge in the Caucasus and Central Asia:  a pro-Western axis
composed of the United States, Turkey, Georgia, Azerbaijan, and
(increasingly) Israel and an anti-Western axis composed of Russia,
Iran, Armenia, and Syria.  These alignments highlight the degree to
which alignments in Eurasia, particularly the Caucasus, are begin-
ning to spill over into the Middle East, creating new political geome-
tries and blurring hard and fast distinctions between the two regions.
Indeed, as Bülent Aras has argued, it is becoming increasingly diffi-
cult to separate the Caspian region from the geopolitics of the Middle
East.35  Issues such as energy, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and the resurgence of Islam are breaking down the
boundaries between the two regions and reinforcing the argument
for considering the regions as a geographic and political whole.
At the same time, the events of September 11 and the war on terror-
ism are weakening old alignments and creating new ones.  President
Putin’s decision to side with the United States in the war on terror-
ism could weaken the Russian-Armenian-Iranian-Syrian axis.  On
one hand, it may increase Armenia’s room for maneuver and lead to
a gradual reduction of Yerevan’s dependence on Moscow.  On the
______________

34The Israeli lobby, for example, has been increasingly supportive of Azerbaijan.  This
has caused a split with the Armenian lobby, with which the Israeli lobby had previ-
ously closely cooperated.  See David B. Ottoway and Dan Morgan, “Jewish-Armenian
Split Spreads on the Hill—Strategic Issues Put Onetime Allies at Odds,” The Washing-
ton Post, February 9, 1999.
35Bülent Aras, “The Caspian Region and Middle East Security,” The Mediterranean
Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 1, Winter 2002, pp. 86–108.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 121
other hand, it could weaken Russian-Iranian cooperation, especially
in the nuclear field.  Both developments would work to Turkey’s ad-
vantage.
BLACK SEA ECONOMIC COOPERATION
As part of its growing interest in Eurasia, Turkey has played an active
role in promoting closer cooperation in the Black Sea region.  This
has been reflected in particular in the high priority given to the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC).  Launched by the late Turkish
President Turgut Özal in 1989, BSEC is designed to promote private
sector activity and stimulate the free movement of goods and ser-
vices among member states.36  It also represented a hedge against
Turkey’s difficulties with the EU at the time.
In June 1992, BSEC’s 11 member states37 formally signed an agree-
ment in Istanbul to promote cooperation in the fields of energy,
transportation, communications, information, and ecology.  Since
then, the group has taken on a stronger institutional identity.  In
1994, a Permanent International Secretariat (PERMIS) was estab-
lished and assumed duties.  In June 1998, the group acquired con-
crete institutional form as the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization, giving it a legal basis and allowing it to establish coop-
eration with other regional and international organizations.  In June
1999, the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank was opened in
Thessaloniki.
In addition, at Turkey’s initiative, a Black Sea Naval Task Force
(BLACKSEAFOR), composed of forces from Turkey, Ukraine, Russia,
Bulgaria, Romania, and Georgia, has been set up.38  The force will fo-
______________

36For a detailed discussion of the origins and evolution of BSEC, see Yannis Valinakis,
“The Black Sea Region:  Challenges and Opportunities for Europe,” Chaillot Papers 36,
Paris:  West European Union Institute for Security Studies, July 1999; also see Ercan
Özer, “Concept and Prospects of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation,” Foreign Policy
Review, Vol. XX, No. 1-2, 1996, pp. 75–106; and Nicolae Micu, “Black Sea Economic
Cooperation (BSEC) as a Confidence-Building Measure,” Perceptions, Vol. 1, No. 4,
December–February 1996/97, pp. 68–75.
37In addition to Turkey, the other members are Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bul-
garia, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania, Russia, and Ukraine.
38For background, see Hason Ulusoy, “A New Formation in the Black Sea:  BLACK-
SEAFOR,” Perceptions, Vol. VI, No. 4, December 2001–February 2002, pp. 97–106.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
122 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
cus on search and rescue operations, humanitarian operations, anti-
mine sweeping, environmental protection operations, and goodwill
visits.  BLACKSEAFOR may also be available for possible employ-
ment in operations mandated by the UN and OSCE.
However, although BSEC has provided a useful forum for discussing
regional issues, it has a number of important weaknesses.
•
Most of the members are poor and are at very difficult stages of
development.  This has inhibited effective economic coopera-
tion.
•
Geographically, the group is extremely heterogeneous.  Some
countries, such as Turkey, Russia, and Ukraine, border on the
Black Sea; others, such as Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Albania, do
not.  Thus, the degree of commonality between members is lim-
ited.
•
Deep-seated antagonisms and ethnic rivalries exist within the
group.  A number of members have long-standing disputes with
their neighbors.  These disputes make the development of any
serious security component difficult.
•
The organization lacks strong procedures for policy coordination.
It also lacks strong and effective leadership.
These weaknesses have limited BSEC’s usefulness as a mechanism
for fostering regional cooperation.  As a result, Turkey’s interest in
BSEC has diminished in recent years.  Ankara continues to actively
participate in the organization, but the initiative no longer has the
same high priority it had during the first half of the 1990s.
DOMESTIC INFLUENCES
Turkey’s policy toward Eurasia also illustrates an important broader
trend in Turkish foreign policy in recent years:  the proliferation of
new actors and institutions into the foreign policy arena.  This has
created a more varied and complex foreign policy environment.  To-
day, foreign policy is no longer solely the prerogative of the Foreign
Ministry and military.  Domestic factors play an increasingly
important role in shaping Turkish foreign policy.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 123
This growing complexity and pluralism have been particularly evi-
dent in Turkish policy toward Central Asia and the Caucasus.  A va-
riety of ministries and nongovernmental agencies—particularly the
Ministries of Culture and Energy—have exerted an important influ-
ence on policy toward Eurasia, as have outside interest groups such
as the construction industry.  Indeed, the Foreign Ministry appears
to have largely lost the initiative in determining policy toward Cen-
tral Asia and the Caucasus.
The Turkish International Cooperation Agency (TIKA), in particular,
plays an important role in Central Asia.  Set up in 1992, TIKA’s prime
purpose is to facilitate the activities of businessmen in the Turkic
states.  TIKA also helps to organize exchanges of youth groups and
other groups from Turkey and the Turkic states.  The Ministry of
Culture and the Office of Religious Affairs have also been active in the
Turkic-speaking states in Central Asia, as have agencies such as the
Atatürk Language, History and High Culture Council.
In addition, ethnic lobbies have begun to exert a growing influence
on policy.  There are an estimated five million Turkish citizens of
North Caucasian background in Turkey.  These groups have col-
lected money and even sent volunteers to fight in Chechnya.  Their
activities are not controlled by the Turkish government, but they
have an important effect on Turkish policy.  In January 1996, for in-
stance, Turkish citizens of North Caucasian origin hijacked a Turkish
ferry to publicize the plight of the Chechens.  Their action received
considerable sympathy among the Turkish public.  Such actions have
complicated relations with Russia and resulted in demands by
Moscow that the Turkish government take stronger action to control
the activities of pro-Chechen groups in Turkey.
Officially, Turkey has eschewed any effort to promote Pan-Turkism.
However, a number of nongovernmental groups advocate a closer
association or cultural union encompassing the Turkic states of
Central Asia and the Caucasus.  The late Alparslan Turkes, the former
head of the MHP, actively promoted a Pan-Turkic agenda.39  Turkes
______________

39Turkes played a particularly important role in Turkish policy toward Azerbaijan in
the period leading up to Elchibey’s election in June 1992 and was often used by the
Turkish government as an unofficial emissary to the Turkic Republics in Central Asia.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
124 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
organized annual meetings of Pan-Turkic groups to which represen-
tatives of the Soviet Republics were invited.  Although these meetings
were unofficial, they were often attended by high-level Turkish
politicians.
Since Turkes’s death in 1997, the MHP has toned down its Pan-
Turkism.  However, the party continues to emphasize the need to
strengthen Turkey’s ties to the Turkic states of Central Asia.  Many
observers worried that the entry of the MHP into the government af-
ter the April 1999 elections might lead to a greater emphasis on Pan-
Turkic ideas.  However, the party has had surprisingly little effect on
Turkish policy toward the Turkic states in Central Asia, which con-
tinues to be characterized by pragmatism and realism rather than
the promotion of Pan-Turkic goals.
The followers of Fethullah Gülen, the Turkish religious leader from
the Nurcu sect, also play an important unofficial role in promoting
Turkish interests in Central Asia.  Gülen’s followers have founded
more than 300 schools around the world, the majority of them in the
newly independent Turkic states of the former Soviet Union.40  These
schools promote a philosophy based on a synthesis of Turko-
Ottoman nationalism rather than Islam.  They have played a major
role in transmitting Turkish cultural values in these countries.
Indeed, their influence may be even greater than that of official
Turkish policy.
The impact of domestic factors has been particularly evident in
Turkey’s Caspian energy policy.  In the contest for control of energy
policy, the Ministry of Energy and the Foreign Ministry have often
been on opposite sides of the policy fence.  The Energy Ministry has
strongly backed the construction of the Blue Stream gas pipeline,
whereas the Foreign Ministry and Turkish military have opposed
Blue Stream, arguing that it will increase Turkey’s dependence on
Russian gas and endanger Turkish security.
_____________________________________________________________

For details, see Bal and Bal, “Rise and Fall of Elchibey and Turkey’s Central Asian
Policy,” pp. 44–45.
40For a detailed discussion of Gülen’s role and influence, see H. Hakan Yavuz,
“Towards an Islamic Liberalism:  The Nurcu Movement and Fethullah Gülen,” The
Middle East Journal, Vol. 53, No. 4, Autumn 1999, pp. 584–605.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
Turkey and Eurasia 125
Indeed, one main weakness of Turkey’s Eurasian policy has been the
lack of overall policy coordination and direction.  A large number of
ministries and quasi-governmental bodies appear to pursue their
own agenda with little overall coordination.  There has been no
clear-cut policy framework providing overall guidance for policy to-
ward the Caucasus and Central Asia.  In the absence of such guid-
ance, Turkey’s policies toward the region have been dominated by
personal whims and personalized connections.41  This has often re-
sulted in various ministries and agencies working at cross-purposes
and hampered the development of a coherent, overarching policy
toward the region.
PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE
Turkey has found it harder to capitalize on the opportunities opened
up by the collapse of the Soviet Union than it had initially antici-
pated.  However, the events of September 11 have added a new dy-
namic to the Eurasian equation.  In Central Asia and the Caucasus,
the deck is being reshuffled, with uncertain consequences for politics
in both regions.  The war on terrorism could lead to a strengthening
of U.S engagement in the region and a corresponding diminution of
Russia’s influence, opening up new opportunities for Turkish diplo-
macy in both regions.
Whether Turkey will be able to exploit these new opportunities will
depend in large part on Turkey’s own domestic evolution, particu-
larly its ability to overcome its internal problems.  A weak Turkey
wracked by internal instability and preoccupied with domestic
problems will have little capacity to pursue a coherent policy toward
Eurasia.  On the other hand, a Turkey that surmounts its internal dif-
ficulties would be in a good position to take advantage of the new
opportunities opened up by the war on terrorism.
American policy in Central Asia will also be important.  If the war on
terrorism leads to deeper U.S. involvement in Central Asia, Turkey
could be an important beneficiary.  But if the United States washes
______________

41See Aydin, “Turkish Foreign Policy Towards Central Asia and the Caucasus:
Continuity and Change,” p. 43.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
126 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
its hands of the region, either as a result of disinterest or a preoccu-
pation with other priorities—as happened in Pakistan and
Afghanistan after 1989—Turkey may find it difficult to make further
inroads in Central Asia and the Caucasus.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
127
Chapter Six
THE MIDDLE EAST AND THE MEDITERRANEAN
Over the last decade, Turkey has become a more important and as-
sertive regional actor, and much of this new activism has been di-
rected toward the Middle East.1   Ankara is focused more heavily than
ever before on events to the south and east, not as an alternative for-
eign policy orientation but rather as a response to perceived security
challenges.  With some exceptions, Turks tend to see the Middle East
more as a sphere of risk than as a sphere of opportunity.2  Leaving
aside Turkish policy toward Cyprus and the Aegean, addressed in
Chapter Four, Ankara also has some emerging challenges and oppor-
tunities in the Mediterranean, including those posed by NATO and
EU initiatives.
THE POLICY SETTING
Many aspects of Turkish foreign policy are linked to the country’s in-
ternal politics.  This linkage is quite close and direct in the case of de-
velopments in the Middle East, which are seen largely through an
internal security lens.  The most obvious example of this continues to
______________

1The new Turkish activism in the Middle East is featured in several recent analyses,
including Alan O. Makovsky, “The New Activism in Turkish Foreign Policy,” SAIS Re-
view, Vol. 19, No. 1, Winter–Spring 1999, pp. 92–113; and Malik Mufti, “Daring and
Caution in Turkish Foreign Policy,” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 52, No. 1, Winter
1998, pp. 32–50.  On recent Turkish policy toward the region generally, see Philip
Robins, Turkey and the Middle East, New York:  Council on Foreign Relations Press,
1991; and Henri J. Barkey, ed., Reluctant Neighbor:  Turkey’s Role in the Middle East,
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Institute of Peace, 1996.
2We are grateful to Alan Makovsky for this formulation.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
128 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
be the linkage between developments in Northern Iraq, Syria, and
Iran and Turkey’s Kurdish problem.3  The waning of the PKK insur-
gency has yet to weaken this linkage, and Turkey’s military and civil-
ian leadership remains focused on the containment of separatism
through legal and security means and through economic develop-
ment programs in the southeast of the country.  The behavior of
Turkey’s Middle Eastern neighbors continues to be seen as a signifi-
cant factor in this struggle.  So, too, are the uncertainties introduced
by American strategy toward Iraq.  There is also a continuing linkage
in the minds of many Turks between the phenomenon of Islamism in
Turkish politics and the activities of “fundamentalists” in Iran, Saudi
Arabia, and elsewhere across the Middle East.
The growth of a dynamic and internationally oriented private sector
has led to more diverse patterns of regional engagement.  Turkey’s
business community tends to be secular (although there is a parallel,
if less influential, Islamic business sector) and highly supportive of
Turkish integration in European and Western institutions.  It is not,
by and large, a community that looks South or East, culturally or po-
litically.  It is nonetheless among the most active proponents of
Turkish economic engagement in Eurasia and the Middle East.  It is
notable that the opening of the Turkish economy and the expansion
of the private sector in the Özal years were accompanied by an im-
portant opening to North Africa and the Middle East.  Özal enhanced
relations with the Gulf states, as well as Libya, Iraq, and Iran, attract-
ing Arab capital to Turkey and encouraging Turkish commercial in-
volvement across the region (Turkey’s large-scale construction con-
tracts in Libya and elsewhere date from this period).4  The activity of
the Turkish private sector, especially its powerful holding companies,
is now a permanently operating factor in Turkey’s Middle Eastern
engagement.
Energy security is another factor driving Turkish attention to the
Middle East.  Access to adequate energy supplies at reasonable prices
______________

3For a critical discussion of the problem and Turkey’s response, see Henri J. Barkey
and Graham E. Fuller, Turkey’s Kurdish Question, Lanham, MD:  Rowman and
Littlefield, 1998.
4Kemal Kirisçi, “Turkey and the Muslim Middle East,” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sa-
yari, eds., Turkey’s New World, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near
East Policy, 2000, p. 40.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 129
is now acknowledged as a key factor in Turkey’s ability to sustain
high growth rates over the coming years—and high growth is seen as
essential if Turkey is to converge with European income levels.  Over
the last decade, Turkey’s energy demand has risen by roughly 10 per-
cent per year.  Even with Turkey’s economic crisis, energy demand is
expected to continue its rise, although perhaps at a more modest
pace in the near term.  Oil accounts for 65 percent and natural gas for
over 20 percent of current consumption.  Access to oil, although im-
portant, is generally seen as less of a concern for Turkey than access
to adequate and predictable gas supplies.  Gas is an increasingly
popular fuel in Turkey, as elsewhere, and supply arrangements are
infrastructure intensive and relatively inflexible.  Russia is now
Turkey’s leading gas supplier, but Central Asian and Middle Eastern
supplies are likely to become more important over the coming
decade.  Turkey has very limited domestic energy supplies—satisfy-
ing only 3 percent of current usage in the case of natural gas.5  As a
result, Turkish perceptions of the Middle East increasingly feature
references to energy security, Turkey’s role in Western access, but
also access to meet the country’s own growing demands.
Western interest in Turkey as a strategic partner is closely bound up
with the question of Turkey’s role on the European periphery, look-
ing toward Eurasia and especially the Middle East.  This is a perspec-
tive that sits uncomfortably with Turkey’s sense of European identity
and policy aspirations.  It is also a perspective that has loomed larger
after the end of the Cold War and the shift of attention from
geostrategic competition in the center of Europe to challenges else-
where, including the Levant and the Persian Gulf.  European and
American perspectives affect the Turkish calculus in the Middle East
in complex ways but may no longer be a strongly limiting element in
Ankara’s policy.  In this context, the growth of a new and explicitly
strategic relationship with Israel offers an important new geometry
in Turkish relations with the Middle East.
Overall, the Middle East is likely to continue as a focus for an external
policy that has become more active and independent.  This, in turn,
will make Turkey a more important but potentially more difficult ally
______________

5William Hale, “Economic Issues in Turkish Foreign Policy,” in Makovsky and Sayari,
Turkey’s New World, p. 26.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
130 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
for the West as it too explores new approaches to regional security
and power projection.  Growing Turkish military capability and will-
ingness to contemplate regional intervention in defense of national
interests will also make Turkey an increasingly significant regional
actor in its own right.
A TRADITION OF AMBIVALENCE
Turkey’s relations with its Middle Eastern neighbors have long been
characterized by mutual ambivalence.  During the Ottoman cen-
turies, Turkey was a Middle Eastern power—at times the preeminent
Middle Eastern power—with an empire stretching from Arabia to
North Africa.  The experience of Ottoman rule has left an enduring
legacy across the region and has also been reflected in the foreign
policy outlook of the modern Turkish republic.6  The legacy in both
cases is an uncomfortable one.
Arab nationalism emerged in large part from the struggle against Ot-
toman rule, a reality that has left its mark on the outlook of secular
nationalists across the region.  Arab opinion, especially in Egypt and
to a lesser extent elsewhere, tends to regard Turkey as a former
colonial power whose regional aspirations should be treated with
suspicion.  At the same time, Islamists around the Middle East tend
to reject the Western orientation of modern Turkey and are under-
standably hostile to the strongly secular character of the Atatürkist
tradition.  Some Arab modernizers, notably Bourghiba in Tunisia,
have found the Turkish model attractive.  But, in general, Turkey and
Turkish regional policy have been regarded with suspicion.  This
tradition has been reinforced by Ankara’s membership in NATO and
its Cold War alignment with Washington at a time when Turkey’s
Arab neighbors were either nonaligned or aligned with the Warsaw
Pact.  The legacy of this modern history can still be felt across a re-
gion in which the Cold War generation of intellectuals and leader-
ships remains largely in place.
______________

6For a discussion of Turkish policy in the Middle East before and after the formation
of the Republic, see William Hale, Turkish Foreign Policy 1774–2000, London:  Frank
Cass, 2000.  For an earlier survey, see Vali, Bridge Across the Bosporus:  The Foreign
Policy of Turkey.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 131
Turkish diplomacy has had periods of greater intimacy with the
country’s Arab neighbors, including a period following the oil crises
of the 1970s.  These periods of rapprochement have not, however,
translated into closer cooperation on issues of importance to Ankara.
A leading example is provided by the Cyprus problem.  In 1964, and
again following the Turkish intervention in 1974, Arab opinion was
uniformly negative, despite Turkey’s role as protector of fellow Mus-
lims on Cyprus.  In the 1960s, Arab support for Greece actually in-
cluded the supply of arms to the Greek Cypriot militia.7   In the years
since 1974, not one Arab (or Muslim) state has recognized the
“Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus,” and states across the Middle
East have consistently supported UN resolutions calling for the with-
drawal of Turkish forces from the north of the island.
Turkish ambivalence toward the region also operates at several lev-
els.  First, the Atatürkist tradition in foreign and security policy was in
large measure a rejection of the conditions of weakness and overex-
tension that characterized the Ottoman empire in its last years.  The
Ottoman presence in Arabia and the Levant was understood as a
source of vulnerability, ultimately incompatible with the construc-
tion of a modern, unitary Turkish state.  The allied defeat of Turkish
forces in the Middle East was the proximate reason for Turkish with-
drawal, but the Turkish position in negotiations with the allied pow-
ers from 1918 onward made clear that the retention of a position in
the Middle East was not a priority for the new nation.  Even the
question of control over Mosul, with its important oil resources, was
not pursued as vigorously as it might have been.  The strategic prior-
ity at the time for the Turkish leadership was the consolidation of
national sovereignty within pre-armistice lines.  To the extent that
territorial and regional issues played a role, Turkey’s position in the
Balkans and the Caucasus loomed larger (a preference strengthened
by the fact that many members of the Ottoman administrative elite
had links to these regions).  One notable exception to this was the ex-
tension of Turkish control over the province of Hatay in the south.8
______________

7Amikam Nachmani, “Turkey and the Middle East,” BESA Security and Policy Studies,
No. 42, 1999, p. 3.
8France formally ceded the sancak of Alexandretta (Hatay) to Turkey in 1939.  Syria
continues to dispute Turkish sovereignty over the province.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
132 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Taken together, this early experience formed the basis for an endur-
ing, arm’s length approach to the Arab Middle East.
Second, the Western orientation of Republican Turkey gave tangible
expression to an existing cultural diffidence toward the Arab world.
Atatürk’s Western outlook has been explained as an attachment to an
ideal rather than a specific geographic orientation.  The civilization
to which Atatürk and his successors have aspired was centered in the
West.9  The Arab Middle East, by contrast, has symbolized Oriental
backwardness for generations of Turkish elites (Persian civilization is
viewed as a case apart by many Turks, and secular modernization in
Iran during the 1930s closely paralleled developments in Atatürk’s
Turkey).  These images of the Arab world have had an enduring in-
fluence on Turkish views.  They have persisted alongside extensive
Turkish commercial activity in the Middle East and are even shared
by Turkey’s Islamists.  When Erbakan made his well-publicized tour
of Muslim states shortly after taking office as prime minister in a
Refah-led government, not one Arab country was included on the
itinerary.
Turkish diffidence regarding the Middle East, especially the Arab
world, also affects Turkish interaction with the West.  Although aware
of the country’s role and interests in the region, any suggestion that
Turkey is a Middle Eastern rather than a Western country is still
greeted with suspicion.  “The researcher who says he is in Turkey be-
cause he is interested in Middle Eastern politics is quickly informed
that he [or she] is in the wrong place.”10  The security policy and
strategic studies approaches developed since 1945 have reinforced
this preference, particularly in the United States where Turkey’s
NATO membership invariably marks the country as “European” in
foreign and defense policy circles.
Third, Cold War imperatives focused Turkish attention westward.
Like NATO’s other southern members, Turkey’s strategic planning
was oriented toward the country’s role in the Central European
competition between the Alliance and the Warsaw Pact.  Turkey had
______________

9Andrew Mango, Atatürk:  The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey, New York:
Overlook Press, 1999, p. 538.
10Fuller, “Turkey’s New Eastern Orientation,” in Fuller and Lesser, Turkey’s New
Geopolitics:  From the Balkans to Western China, p. 51.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 133
security concerns outside this setting, including a number in the
Middle East, but these were marginal to planning in Brussels and
Ankara.  And many Middle Eastern questions, including the problem
of security in the Persian Gulf, were derivative of larger questions
about Soviet intentions and Alliance policy “out-of-area.”  Close ties
between the Soviet Union and Arab neighbors, including Syria, also
argued for a cautious approach to the Middle East.11  In the 1950s,
Ankara adopted a more active approach to security cooperation and
Alliance-building, including participation with Iraq and Pakistan in
the 1955 Baghdad Pact and later with Britain, the United States,
Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan in the Central Treaty Organization
(CENTO).  There were also overtures to Egypt.  But these efforts were
firmly embedded in East-West rather than regional realities.12  The
tradition of restrained policy and minimal engagement in the Middle
East survived multiple Arab-Israeli wars, the Iranian revolution, and
Turkey’s own Cyprus intervention which was, geographically at least,
a Middle Eastern crisis.
THE GULF WAR AND AFTERMATH
The 1990 Gulf War was a watershed in Turkish foreign and security
policy, above all in relation to the Middle East.  Turkey’s approach to
the crisis and its aftermath represented a firm break with the past
and continues to shape Ankara’s regional perceptions.  In the years
leading up to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Turkish planners were al-
ready considering the implications of Turkey’s growing economic
relationship with Iraq and, in particular, Baghdad’s heavy reliance on
Turkish pipelines to the Mediterranean for oil exports.  This route
had acquired greater significance during the Iran-Iraq war in light of
______________

11Sabri Sayari, “Turkish Foreign Policy in the Post-Cold War Era:  The Challenges of
Multi-Regionalism,” The Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, p.
170.
12For a discussion of Turkey’s place in the early Cold War calculus in the Middle East
and elsewhere, see Ekavi Athanassopoulou, Turkey—Anglo-American Security Interests
1945–1952:  The First Enlargement of NATO, London:  Frank Cass, 1999.  See also,
Bruce R. Kuniholm, The Origins of the Cold War in the Near East:  Great Power Conflict
and Diplomacy in Iran, Turkey and Greece, Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press,
1980.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
134 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
constraints on shipping from Iraqi ports in the Northern Gulf.13  At
the same time, Turkey was heavily reliant on pipeline revenues as
well as energy supplies from Iraq.  Indeed, before 1990, Iraq was
Turkey’s largest trading partner.
In the event, Ankara adopted a very active stance as part of the Gulf
War coalition.  Iraqi oil exports through Turkish pipelines were cut
off as part of UN sanctions.  Turkey deployed (with considerable dif-
ficulty) some 100,000 troops on the border with Iraq, and allowed air
strikes against Iraq to be conducted from Turkish bases, including
Incirlik air base near Adana.  Several factors were at play behind this
forward-leaning policy.  The absence of Cold War conditions meant
that Turkey could pursue a more active, pro-Western policy without
fear of a Russian response.  Moreover, the crisis offered an opportu-
nity for Ankara to demonstrate its strategic importance to Europe
and the United States in a post–Cold War environment.  President
Özal himself saw the crisis as offering a window of opportunity to
press Turkey’s interest in EU membership and to construct a new
“strategic relationship” with Washington.
Turkish decisionmaking during the Gulf crisis also reflected changes
in civil-military relations in Ankara.  Elsewhere in Southern Europe,
military establishments adopted an activist stance, arguing for more
substantial contributions to coalition military efforts wherever pos-
sible.  Political leaderships were generally more cautious, preferring
symbolic deployments placing few personnel in harm’s way.  In
Turkey, this situation was reversed.  President Özal and elements of
the civilian political leadership pressed—successfully—for an active
diplomatic and military contribution.  The Turkish military estab-
lishment, including the Turkish General Staff (TGS), pressed for a
more cautious policy, fearing the longer-term consequences for
Turkey’s regional position.  Their approach also reflected some con-
cern about the capability of Turkish forces to wage intensive, mobile
warfare against Iraqi forces (in fact, this experience was instrumental
in spurring Turkey’s subsequent defense modernization program).
At base, however, the military’s attitude reflected a more traditional
and measured approach to questions of intervention and national
______________

13In a conversation with one of the authors in the late 1980s, a senior Turkish officer
underlined Turkey’s growing control over the Iraqi oil spigot.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 135
sovereignty.  Then chief of the TGS, General Torumtay, resigned over
the question of Turkish policy during the crisis.  In all likelihood,
Özal’s ability to champion successfully a more assertive pro-Western
policy may have been supported by a parallel debate within the mili-
tary itself about Gulf policy.
Gulf War developments have left an enduring legacy in Turkish pol-
icy.  Subsequent events have confirmed Turkish perceptions of the
region as a source of risk, but the tendency since 1990, and especially
since the mid-1990s, has been toward continued activism coupled
with greater independence and attention to sovereignty issues.
Many Turks view the Gulf War, in particular the establishment of a
Western protectorate and no-fly zone in the Kurdish areas of North-
ern Iraq, as the catalyst for Turkey’s decade of conflict with the PKK
in Southeastern Anatolia.  In this interpretation, the war spurred
Kurdish nationalism and also provided a logistical and political
opening for the PKK to operate across porous borders with Iraq, Iran,
and Syria.
Incredible as this may seem in a NATO context, even some sophisti-
cated Turkish observers will argue that Turkey’s allies have deliber-
ately facilitated Kurdish aspirations to foster the breakup of the
Turkish state.  The suspicions of Western policy regarding Turkey
and the Middle East are deeply rooted (Turkish analysts often refer to
this as part of the “Sèvres syndrome”—a reference to punitive post–
World War I terms that would have imposed draconian territorial
and sovereignty concessions on Turkey).  The elimination of the Al-
lied ground component in Northern Iraq and the transition from Op-
eration Provide Comfort to the air-only Operation Northern Watch
eased some Turkish concerns.  But the U.S. and British use of Incirlik
air base for the conduct of the operation remains controversial
among the Turkish public and politicians.
Turks are fond of saying that the Gulf War had two losers, Iraq and
Turkey.  By any measure, and despite a good deal of cross-border
smuggling, Turkey has lost billions of dollars in pipeline fees and
trade revenue from the Iraqi sanctions regime, for which Ankara has
never received adequate compensation.14  Moreover, Turkish policy
______________

14It has been estimated that the loss of Iraqi trade, including pipeline fees, has cost
Ankara some $2 billion per year.  Turkey did receive roughly $2.2 billion in compen-

--- Sayfa 158 ---
136 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
during the Gulf War never produced the immediate benefits in Turk-
ish relations with Europe and the United States that Özal had pre-
dicted.  The neuralgic issues, from Cyprus to human rights, remained
as constraints in relations with the West.  Prolonged conflict in
Northern Iraq and in Turkey’s own Kurdish areas hampered eco-
nomic development plans and has even become a factor in discus-
sions of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline.
The experience of the Gulf War clearly reinforced traditional Turkish
sensitivities regarding national sovereignty.  These sensitivities have
been acute in relation to the Kurdish issue and Ankara’s conduct of
counterinsurgency operations within Turkey and in Northern Iraq.
They have also made themselves felt in Turkish policy toward West-
ern intervention in Iraq since 1990.  In contrast to the Gulf War,
Ankara has been unwilling to allow the use of Turkish bases for of-
fensive air operations against Iraq during any of the subsequent
confrontations with Baghdad, including the 1996 crisis over Iraqi op-
erations in the north, and Operation Desert Fox.  The rationale for
this reserved attitude toward renewed coalition operations is that
inconclusive operations against Iraq raise the level of tension with a
neighbor with whom Turkey must ultimately coexist.  As a matter of
public diplomacy, Ankara has been unwilling to participate in the
renewed strategic bombardment of Iraq.  But Turkey also has serious
concerns about the revival of Iraqi military capability, especially
WMD and missile programs, and is a quiet beneficiary of the military
containment of Iraq.  Given fundamental Turkish discomfort with
the regime in Baghdad, and the desire for a “seat at the table” in any
post-Saddam arrangements for the region, Ankara may feel
compelled to support American military intervention in Iraq—but
the political and economic price of future cooperation is likely to be
high.
CONTOURS OF THE NEW ACTIVISM
In the context of a post–Cold War foreign policy that is generally con-
servative and multilateral (Ankara’s approach to the Balkans is ex-
emplary in this regard), Turkish policy toward the Middle East has
_____________________________________________________________

satory payments, mainly from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, in 1991, and a further $900
million in 1992.  Cited in Hale, Turkish Foreign Policy 1774–2000, p. 225.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 137
been less restrained and more unilateral in character.  The contours
of this new activism can be seen in recent Turkish policy toward
Northern Iraq, Syria, and Israel and to a lesser extent toward Iran.
A FORWARD STRATEGY TOWARD NORTHERN IRAQ
From the mid-1990s, Turkey’s strategy toward the Kurdish insur-
gency has emphasized cross-border operations into Northern Iraq.
The aim of these operations has been to deny the PKK sanctuaries in
adjacent areas and to ensure that a large proportion of the fighting is
carried out on Iraqi rather than Turkish territory.15  The result has
been the establishment of a de facto Turkish security zone in North-
ern Iraq, on the pattern of the Israeli arrangement in Southern
Lebanon before the 2000 withdrawal.  Together with the increasing
proficiency of Turkish forces in counterinsurgency operations, the
cross-border strategy contributed to the gradual containment of the
PKK threat in its military dimension (it has not made a similar con-
tribution to the development of a satisfactory political strategy to
address the Kurdish problem).  The frequency of Turkish cross-bor-
der operations since 1994 tends to obscure the fact that this kind of
intervention would have been almost unthinkable in the pre-Gulf
War tradition of Turkish policy toward the region.  The scale of these
operations, involving as many as 35,000 troops, has also been re-
markable.16  Although the operations have taken place under condi-
tions of murky sovereignty in Northern Iraq, they have changed re-
gional perceptions of the threshold for Turkish action.  Indirectly, the
Turkish strategy toward Northern Iraq has probably had the effect of
strengthening the credibility of Turkish threats to intervene across
other Middle Eastern borders in response to internal (i.e., PKK-
related) security challenges.
The combination of the battle against the PKK, and the risk of re-
newed large-scale refugee flows, assures that the situation in North-
______________

15See Mahmut Bali Aykan, “Turkey’s Policy in Northern Iraq 1991–1995,” Middle
Eastern Studies, Vol. 32, No. 4, 1996, pp. 343–366.
16Hale, Turkish Foreign Policy 1774–2000, p. 309.  It was claimed that the cross-border
operations in 1995 were the largest military deployments outside Turkey’s borders
since the foundation of the Republic.  The 1974 intervention in Cyprus may cast doubt
on this, but the scale remains impressive.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
138 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ern Iraq will remain high on the Turkish security agenda.  During and
after the Gulf War, as many as 1.5 million refugees crossed into
Turkey and Iran in response to Saddam’s oppression of the Kurds in
Northern Iraq.  The potential for sudden, renewed refugee move-
ments on Turkey’s borders remains a leading concern for Ankara.
Indeed, Turkey’s support of coalition operations in the Gulf, and
later Operations Provide Comfort and Northern Watch, has been
motivated at least in part by the desire to monitor and control costly
refugee movements.
Strategically, Turkey faces the prospect of continued unpredictability
and potential aggression from the regime in Baghdad. American
preferences aside, Ankara would probably accept the return of full
Iraqi sovereignty in the north as a means of containing residual
threats from the PKK and managing the Kurdish problem.  Turks
have little sympathy for the regime in Baghdad but will continue to
find an effective Iraqi government, of whatever stripe, preferable to a
political vacuum in Northern Iraq, or worse still in Iraq as a whole,
that might foster Kurdish separatism and irredentism.  Turkey has a
clear economic interest in the reintegration of Iraq and the restora-
tion of the large-scale trade relationship that existed before the Gulf
War.
That said, Turkey would clearly prefer to see Iraqi reintegration with-
out a restoration of Iraq’s conventional and unconventional military
capability.  The Turkish military today is in a far better position to
address this risk than in 1990 and will be in an even better deterrent
position in the coming years.  But the reconstitution of Iraqi military
power would place Turkey in an uncomfortable position.  It would
reinforce Ankara’s status as a front-line state in the Western con-
frontation with Baghdad.  It would increase the risk of a renewed
conflict between Iran and Iraq, a conflict that could destabilize the
region and threaten Turkey’s economic interests.17  It would also en-
courage the European tendency to see Turkey as a barrier to Middle
Eastern insecurity, rather than as an integral part of the European se-
curity system.
______________

17For an analysis of Turkish interests and behavior in the Iran-Iraq conflict, see Henri
J. Barkey, “The Silent Victor:  Turkey’s Role in the Gulf War,” in Efraim Karsh, ed., The
Iran-Iraq War:  Impact and Implications, London:  Macmillan, 1989, pp. 133–153.

--- Sayfa 161 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 139
Taken together, Turkish preferences with regard to the future of Iraq
are not very much different than those of Ankara’s American and Eu-
ropean allies.  But proximity and the close link to Turkish internal se-
curity concerns mean that Turkey has a relatively strong interest in
regional stability and less interest in the risks inherent in regime
change.  Again, none of this may stand in the way of Turkish support
for a “serious” American effort to change the regime in Iraq.
Iraqi WMD programs pose a special dilemma for Ankara.  Turks
viewed the Iraqi use of SCUD short-range missiles against Israeli and
Saudi targets with alarm and have reacted with concern to periodic
Iraqi threats to launch missile attacks on Turkish territory in
retaliation for U.S. and British strikes launched from Incirlik as part
of Operation Northern Watch.  With the progressive extension of
ballistic missile ranges across the Middle East, Turkish population
centers are now fully exposed to such attacks.  For the Turkish
military, with its tradition of staunch territorial defense, the inability
to counter or deter such threats to the Turkish homeland is
particularly worrying.  It can be argued that Turkey was exposed to
far more extensive missile and WMD risks from the Soviet Union
during the Cold War.  But that vulnerability was shared with other
members of the Alliance and Turks had little reason to doubt the
solidity of NATO security guarantees, including the threat of nuclear
response.  The deterrent situation vis-à-vis Iraq (as well as Iran and
Syria) is far murkier, especially in light of NATO’s evolving strategy.
The emergence of a nuclear Iraq (or Iran) would place all of these
issues in very sharp relief.  A nuclear breakout on Turkey’s borders
would pose a range of strategic dilemmas for the West.18  Even short
of new nuclear risks, Turkey will have strong incentives to augment
its interest in missile defense with the acquisition of greater deterrent
capabilities of its own, including the development of a national
missile capability.  This, in turn, could affect military balances and
strategic perceptions elsewhere, including the Balkans, the Aegean,
and the Caucasus.
______________

18See Michael Eisenstadt, “Preparing for a Nuclear Breakout in the Middle East,” Poli-
cywatch No. 550  parts I and II, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near
East Policy, August 2001.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
140 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
A Strategic Relationship with Israel
The development of an overt strategic relationship with Israel offers
a different example of Turkish activism in the region.  Ankara has had
a long-standing, low-key, and cooperative relationship with Israel
since the establishment of the Jewish state.  From the early 1990s, the
relationship began to acquire a more overt and substantive charac-
ter.  Developments since the mid-1990s have moved the relationship
into a far more significant realm.  Starting with a military training
and cooperation agreement in 1996, Ankara has pursued a multi-
faceted relationship with Israel, ranging from defense-industrial col-
laboration and intelligence-sharing to economic development and
tourism.19  Plans are also in place for Turkey to export substantial
quantities of Manavgat River water to Israel.20
The new relationship was facilitated by a period of progress in the
Middle East peace process that eased the potentially significant
challenges for public diplomacy, both in Turkey where public opin-
ion remains sensitive to the Palestinian problem and across the
Middle East.  The Turkish-Israeli relationship serves compelling na-
tional interests on both sides.  Yet observers of the relationship have
noted that Ankara is often more open and sweeping than Israel in its
description of bilateral ties.
The Turkish rationale is threefold.  First, the dominance of the Kur-
dish challenge at the top of the security agenda in the mid-1990s, and
the steadily increasing Turkish concern about Syria’s role in support
of PKK operations, led Ankara to consider ways of gaining decisive
leverage over Damascus.  This rationale may have taken on greater
urgency with the potential, as it was then seen, for an Israeli-Syrian
military disengagement as part of a comprehensive Middle East set-
tlement.  This might have left Syria free to concentrate its forces and
planning against the Turkish border.
______________

19For a good survey of the relationship, see Efraim Inbar, “The Strategic Glue in the Is-
raeli-Turkish Alignment,” in Barry Rubin and Kemal Kirisçi, eds., Turkey in World Pol-
itics, Boulder, CO:  Lynne Rienner, 2001, pp. 115–126.  See also Meliha Benli Altunisik,
“Turkish Policy Toward Israel,” in Makovsky and Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New World:
Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Policy, pp. 59–73.
20See Paul Williams, “Turkey’s H2O Diplomacy in the Middle East,” Security Dialogue,
Vol. 32, No. 1, March 2001, pp. 27–40.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 141
Second, despite Turkey’s NATO membership and its participation in
the Gulf War coalition, Ankara continues to face periodic difficulties
in the transfer of arms and military technology from the United
States and Europe.  Although Western governments remain commit-
ted to the support of a strategic ally, European parliaments and the
U.S. Congress have been inclined to measure such transfers against
Turkey’s human rights performance, further complicated by the war
against the PKK and outstanding disputes with Greece.  By the mid-
1990s, Ankara was actively exploring ways to diversify its military
procurement against the background of an ambitious modernization
program.  Russia was an option for unsophisticated systems, and
some Russian equipment was purchased for use in counterinsur-
gency operations where Western scrutiny was greatest.  Israel offered
an altogether more extensive opportunity for diversification, tech-
nology transfer, and training.21  The importance of these benefits to
Turkey is underscored by the Israeli use of Turkish facilities and
airspace for training.  This activity is highly significant given the gen-
eral sensitivity of Turkish officials, and especially the Turkish mili-
tary, to issues of national sovereignty.  Some Western observers have
actually complained (somewhat inaccurately) that Israel now enjoys
better and more predictable access in Turkey than Ankara’s NATO
allies.
Third, a close and explicit relationship with Israel was seen in some
Turkish circles as a way to reinforce the strategic relationship with
Washington.  This argument is made in the context of American in-
terest in the development of a regional alliance of pro-Western
states.  A variant holds that the Turkish-Israeli relationship allows
______________

21The 1996 Military Training and Cooperation Agreement between Turkey and Israel
outlined a range of joint training and information-sharing activities, including Israeli
access to Turkish airspace for training purposes.  Other bilateral agreements provide
for technology transfer, joint research, intelligence-sharing, strategic policy-planning
talks, and bilateral and multilateral military exercises (on the pattern of the two
“Reliant Mermaid” search and rescue exercises held in cooperation with the U.S. Navy
in 1998 and 1999).  Jordan has participated as an observer in these exercises.
Bilateral arms transfer and defense-industrial agreements have included Israeli mod-
ernization of 54 Turkish F-4s for $650 million, a subsequent deal for the upgrade of 48
F-5s, and co-production of the Israeli Popeye II air-to-ground missile.  There have also
been discussions regarding Turkish participation in the Arrow antiballistic missile
(ABM) program, co-production of Merkava tanks, and upgrades to Turkey’s aging M-
60 tanks.  Altunisik, “Turkish Policy Toward Israel,” in Makovsky and Sayari, Turkey’s
New World:  Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Policy, p. 67.

--- Sayfa 164 ---
142 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Turkey to enlist the Israeli “lobby” in support of Turkish interests,
including a more stable arms transfer relationship and other matters.
This may well be the least persuasive element of the Turkish calculus,
reflecting a Turkish preoccupation with the American system of lob-
bies and an underestimation of complexities on the Israeli side and
among Israel’s supporters in Washington.
The Turkish-Israeli relationship also serves some additional and
shared security concerns related to the containment of Islamic ex-
tremism, counterterrorism, and monitoring and countering the pro-
liferation of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction.
Turkish strategists take the regional ballistic missile threat very seri-
ously as Turkish population centers are already within range of sys-
tems deployed in Iran, Iraq, and Syria.  Together with the United
States, Israel is a leading source of missile defense technology, and
Turkey, Israel, Jordan, and possibly Egypt are likely partners in any
U.S.-led theater ballistic missile defense architecture.  Turkey is
looking to participate in the Israeli-led Arrow missile defense system,
although this will require U.S. approval as American-source technol-
ogy is involved.22
How durable is the Turkish-Israeli relationship in light of continuing
crises in Israeli-Palestinian relations?  Ankara has traditionally pur-
sued an arm’s length approach to Arab-Israeli disputes.  But the
Palestinian issue, in particular, does have resonance for the Turkish
public, which remains highly sympathetic to the Palestinian posi-
tion.23  Turkish analysts prefer to describe the Turkish approach as
“balanced,” and this is a reasonable description of Ankara’s policy
given the initiatives under way with Israel.24  A good example of this
balanced posture can be seen in former President Demirel’s partici-
pation in the international commission (the Mitchell Commission)
______________

22Metehan Demir and John D. Morrocco, “Israel, Turkey Eye Joint Missile Shield,”
Aviation Week and Space Technology, July 16, 2001.
23See Bülent Aras, “The Impact of the Palestinian-Israeli Peace Process in Turkish
Foreign Policy,” Journal of South Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 20, No. 2,
1997, pp. 49–72; and Mahmut Bali Aykan, “The Palestinian Question in Turkish For-
eign Policy from the 1950s to the 1990s,” International Journal of Middle East Studies,
Vol. 25, No. 1, 1993, pp. 91–110.
24Huseyin Bagci, “Turkish foreign and security policy in 2000:  a retrospective,” Turk-
ish Daily News, December 25, 2000.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 143
established to investigate the nature and handling of violence in
Palestinian areas of the West Bank and Gaza.
Since the start of the Arab-Israeli conflict, Turkey has, with rare ex-
ceptions, supported Arab resolutions regarding the issue in the UN.25
At the same time, Turkey has played a role in the post-Madrid peace
process, notably through its service as a mentor in Arms Control and
Regional Security (ACRS) talks, part of the multilateral track of the
process.  These negotiations enjoyed considerable success in estab-
lishing a set of regional confidence-building measures related to
conventional forces.  The negotiations, always subject to the vagaries
of relations on the bilateral track, foundered on WMD-related ques-
tions. By all accounts, however, the Turkish role in facilitating dis-
cussion of conventional confidence-building measures (e.g., infor-
mation sharing, pre-notification of exercises, etc.), informed by
Turkey’s own experience with the CFE (Conventional Forces in Eu-
rope) talks, was exemplary.26
The Turkish-Israeli relationship is not immune to the pressure of
public opinion, even outside Islamist circles where opposition has
always been pronounced.  Given the strong interest of the Turkish
security establishment, the business community, and secular na-
tionalists in the continuation of the strategic relationship, little short
of a full-scale Israeli offensive against the Palestinian Authority is
likely to derail current initiatives.  Even in the worst case, the cultural
and tourism aspects of the relationship may wane, but the military
and defense-industrial aspects are almost certain to continue, al-
though perhaps in a lower-key fashion.  The rapid growth in bilateral
trade, from roughly $100 million in 1991, the year of full Turkish
diplomatic recognition, to as much as $2 billion in 2000 (a figure that
______________

25This pattern has held even after the establishment of full diplomatic relations with
Israel in 1991.  Turkey supported 170 of 179 UN General Assembly resolutions on
Arab-Israeli peace process matters between 1992 and 2000.  Alan Makovsky, “Turkish-
Israeli Ties in the Context of Arab-Israeli Tension,” Policywatch, No. 502, Washington,
D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, November 10, 2000, p. 2.
26One of the authors was able to observe Turkey’s skillful mentoring role firsthand in
1994 as a member of the U.S. delegation to the ACRS talks, one of the multilateral
tracks of the post-Madrid peace process.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
144 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
includes defense trade), has also created a strong constituency for
the relationship within both countries.27
Turkey’s increasingly substantive relationship with Israel has pro-
voked strong criticism from Turkey’s Arab neighbors as well as Iran.
Egypt, with its own well-developed sensitivities to the geopolitical
balance, and its own expectations of leadership has been especially
critical.  Periodic Turkish-Israeli and trilateral Turkish-Israeli-U.S.
maritime exercises in the Eastern Mediterranean (Reliant Mermaid)
have been viewed negatively by Cairo and others.  After some initial
interest, Jordan is no longer willing to participate in such exercises as
an observer.  The deepening crisis in Israeli-Palestinian relations has
made the issue of Turkish defense cooperation with Israel even more
contentious in the Arab world.  Yet, as a practical matter, Arab lead-
erships seem to have reached a grudging acceptance of the Turkish-
Israeli relationship as a new strategic factor, and one unlikely to fade
under regional pressure.28
Confrontation and Rapprochement with Syria
The relationship with Israel may have facilitated a third key demon-
stration of Turkey’s new regional policy:  pressure on Syria. Turkish
concerns over Syria are long-standing and encompass a number of
flashpoints.  Syria continues to claim the Turkish province of Hatay
and is engaged in a running disagreement with Ankara over the share
of downstream waters from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.  Friction
over water has been exacerbated in recent years with the completion
of the Atatürk Dam and growing Turkish requirements associated
with the GAP development project in Southeastern Anatolia.29  The
risk of Turkish-Syrian conflict over either of these issues is remote,
although they contribute to a climate of mistrust.  A far more serious
issue has been Syrian support for the PKK.  The PKK leadership, in-
______________

27Inbar, “The Strategic Glue in the Israeli-Turkish Alignment,” in Rubin and Kirisçi,
Turkey in World Politics, pp. 115–116.
28See Ekavi Athanassopoulou, Israeli-Turkish Security Ties: Regional Reactions,
Jerusalem:  Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace, Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, March 2001; and Ofra Bengio and Gencer Ozcan, Arab
Perceptions of Turkey and Its Alignment with Israel, Tel Aviv:  BESA Center for Strategic
Studies, 2001.
29See Williams, “Turkey’s H2O Diplomacy in the Middle East,” pp. 27–40.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 145
cluding Abdullah Öcalan, had long been resident in Damascus.  The
Syrian regime, with an eye on its own Kurdish minority, had also
provided material support to the PKK, including the use of training
bases in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa Valley in Lebanon.30  In the
Turkish view, Syrian support and the infiltration of PKK fighters over
the border was a key factor behind the strength of the insurgency on
Turkish territory.  Ankara lobbied consistently for U.S. and European
pressure on Syria to end its support for PKK “terrorism.”
Following years of veiled threats of retaliation, including suggestions
that Turkey might strike PKK training camps inside Syria and
Lebanon, a full-scale crisis erupted in relations with Damascus in the
fall of 1998.31  Turkish officials openly declared their belief that Syria
was waging “an undeclared war” on Turkey and that this would bring
a Turkish response.  The Turkish military deployed reinforcements to
the border with Syria against a background of rising tension.  The
crisis ended in October 1998 with Syrian agreement (the so-called
Adana Agreement)—under the pressure of imminent Turkish inter-
vention—to end its support for the PKK and the expulsion of PKK
leader Abdullah Öcalan from Damascus.
In addition to providing the first step in the subsequent capture of
Öcalan in Kenya, the Adana Agreement has transformed the relation-
ship with Syria.  Although some fundamental frictions remain, in-
cluding Syrian irredentism, water, and proliferation issues, the direct
link to Turkish internal security perceptions has been broken, at least
for the moment.  Turkish officials remain wary of the durability of
Syrian commitments to abjure support for the PKK.  But Syrian
compliance is closely monitored, and Damascus is unlikely to pro-
voke renewed Turkish pressure in a period of regime consolidation
and against a background of greater international sensitivity to the
sponsorship of terrorist organizations.  Moreover, in the wake of the
Israeli withdrawal from Southern Lebanon, Syria is under increasing
pressure regarding its own presence in that country.  Given Ankara’s
______________

30Ankara had already threatened to strike these PKK bases in Lebanon in the early
1990s, and by the mid-1990s discussion of the risk of a hot-pursuit clash with Syria
were commonplace in Turkey and the West.
31Some Turkish observers, not only Ambassador Sukru Elekdag, had been arguing for
a more explicit and tougher strategy toward Syria for some time before the events of
1998.

--- Sayfa 168 ---
146 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
relationship to Israel, Turkish leverage over Syria has probably never
been greater, and the prospects for renewed Turkish-Syrian tension
are limited under current conditions.  Should the Israeli-Palestinian
confrontation escalate to a regional conflict involving Lebanon and
Syria, Ankara is likely to be a passive rather than an active partici-
pant—but still an unavoidable factor in Syrian calculations.
Looking ahead, Turkey could be a beneficiary of any economic
opening in Syria.  The practical aspects of the current Turkish-Syrian
rapprochement already include steps to facilitate cross-border trade
and transport.  Under conditions of increased trade between Syria
and the EU, as envisaged within the Euro-Mediterranean partnership
process, Turkey would be the key link in overland traffic between
Syria and Europe, although the Syrian market itself is likely to remain
modest.  Much will depend on the prospects for an Israeli-Syrian
peace agreement in the coming years.  Here, too, Ankara has some
specific interests.  As early as 1986, Özal proposed a “peace pipeline”
making Turkish water available in the service of regional peace and
development.  As a water surplus state in a water-short region,
Turkey has much to contribute but also much at stake.  Ankara
would be a leading beneficiary from a comprehensive settlement but
will want reassurance regarding the use of its resources.  In this con-
text, there has always been some concern that the regional parties,
and above all the United States, will pressure Turkey to offer water-
sharing arrangements that might not be in Turkey’s best interest
(e.g., without adequate compensation).
Ankara will have some additional concerns regarding Syrian missile
and WMD programs, as well as the regional military balance in the
event of a Syrian-Israeli disengagement.  Of all the regional prolifera-
tors threatening Turkish territory, Syria has been of the greatest con-
cern for Turkish planners because the Syrian threat has, in Turkish
perception, coupled capabilities with intentions.32  The end of direct
Syrian support for the PKK—if durable—may have fundamentally al-
tered this calculus.  But Turkish strategists will continue to be wary of
chemical and missile developments in Syria.  Finally, Turkey will seek
______________

32It is noteworthy that open briefings on theater missile defense offered by both U.S.
and Turkish officials have featured the hypothetical defense of the Turkish port of Isk-
enderun (a major oil terminus and a key port for NATO reinforcement of Southern
Turkey) against Syrian missile attack.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 147
strong assurances regarding limits on the redeployment of Syrian
forces in the event of a Syrian disengagement with Israel.  In the ab-
sence of such limits, Turkish strategists fear that Damascus would be
free to reposition its substantial if increasingly obsolete forces to face
Turkey.
Friction and Engagement with Iran
To a lesser extent than in relations with Syria, recent Turkish rela-
tions with Iran have also shown a propensity for assertiveness.  Here,
too, there is an important link to Turkish internal security and devel-
opment concerns, notably Islamism, the Kurds, and natural gas.
Since the Iranian revolution, Turkish secularists have been con-
cerned about the prospect for the export of Iranian radicalism.  Iran,
for its part, has complained about the presence of Iranian opposition
groups in Turkey, including elements of the Mujahiddin-I Khalq, and
alleged cross-border operations.  In the 1990s, some prominent ter-
rorist attacks on secular Turkish journalists, intellectuals, and busi-
nessmen were thought to have Iranian connections.
The electoral successes of the Refah Party in the early 1990s fueled a
debate in Turkey and elsewhere over the extent of links between
Turkey’s Islamists and Tehran.  Many Turkish secularists allege a
close connection, including substantial funding.  The Erbakan gov-
ernment clearly had an interest in improved relations with Iran as
part of a general attempt to shift Turkey’s foreign policy gaze east-
ward, a shift strongly and successfully opposed by the Turkish mili-
tary and Turkey’s foreign policy establishment.  Turkey’s Islamists
have certainly been more interested in developing a close relation-
ship with Iran than in closer ties to the Arab world—a reflection of
the preference prevalent in Turkey’s religious and secular circles.
Yet, in terms of substantive backing, links to supporters in the Gulf,
especially Saudi Arabia, have probably been more important in
funding the expansion of Islamic activity in Turkey, including the
construction of religious schools.  Over the past decade, the bulk of
the financial support to the Refah (Welfare) and Fazilet (Virtue) Par-
ties, and Turkey’s looser Muslim political movements has almost
certainly come from traditionally oriented, religious businessmen
inside Turkey.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
148 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
From the mid-1990s, Ankara and Tehran developed a more coopera-
tive relationship, the centerpiece of which was an agreement to
contain the activities of Kurdish insurgents active on both sides of
the border.  These and subsequent agreements over PKK operations
have been tenuous and dependent on the vagaries of PKK deploy-
ments.  Turkish cross-border operations in Northern Iraq and, more
recently, the expulsion of the PKK from Syria have forced the PKK to
operate from sanctuaries in Iran.  This has provoked a tough re-
sponse from Ankara.  As early as 1995, Prime Minister Ciller threat-
ened military strikes against PKK bases in Iran.33  In July 1999, the
Turkish air force reportedly struck PKK camps inside Iranian territory
(Iran claimed that the strikes hit two Iranian villages).  Coming in the
wake of Turkish threats to intervene over Syrian support for the PKK,
the Turkish willingness to threaten and use force against PKK targets
in Iran has been interpreted as further evidence of Ankara’s new as-
sertiveness in the Middle East.
Energy supply and investment is an increasingly important facet of
Turkish-Iranian relations.  Despite periodic frictions over Kurdish is-
sues and Iranian support for terrorism and radical Islam, energy
trade offers a focal point for cooperation, against a backdrop of
growing Turkish concern over the country’s energy supply situation.
The Erbakan government signed an agreement that had already been
negotiated by Erbakan’s predecessor Tansu Ciller for the import of
Iranian and Turkmen natural gas via a pipeline from Tabriz to Erzu-
rum.  With the opening of the Tabriz-Erzurum line in 2002, Iran has
emerged as one of the leading exporters of gas to Turkey, alongside
Russia.
In general, Ankara favors a policy of political and economic engage-
ment toward Tehran and opposes economic sanctions and contain-
ment.  In this respect, Turkish policy is far closer to the European
than the American approach.  Given the potential for economic co-
operation, and the importance of bilateral cooperation in policy to-
ward the Kurdish problem, Ankara has a strong interest in Iranian
openness and political reform.  Under conditions of reform, together
with a relaxation of American policy, Turkey would be well posi-
______________

33Hale, Turkish Foreign Policy 1774–2000, p. 314.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 149
tioned to play an even more active role in the diplomatic and eco-
nomic engagement of Iran.
Over the longer term, however, there are some countervailing con-
siderations that could cloud Turkish-Iranian relations.  Turks take
Iran seriously as a regional actor, and despite points of common in-
terest, Turkey and Iran are essentially geopolitical competitors in the
Middle East and Central Asia, including Afghanistan.  Iran’s nuclear
and ballistic missile ambitions—and the Turkish response—will be a
central part of this equation.  To date, Iranian WMD programs have
been overshadowed in the Turkish calculus by more proximate risks
from Iraq and, above all, Syria, where proliferation has been com-
bined with multiple flashpoints for conflict.  Nonetheless, Iran ar-
guably poses the most serious long-term proliferation risk for Turkey.
A nuclear Iran in possession of missiles capable of reaching all major
Turkish cities, while holding the territory of Ankara’s NATO allies at
risk, would fundamentally alter the geopolitical landscape facing
Turkey.  The need to monitor and counter this threat is almost cer-
tainly an important part of the current Turkish-Israeli intelligence
and defense relationship.  It is a key motivator for Turkish participa-
tion in U.S., NATO, and Israeli missile defense initiatives.  Indeed,
Turkish strategists are already beginning to discuss the utility of a
Turkish deterrent in the form of a national missile capability.  Much
more remote, but not beyond the bounds of credibility, would be the
development of a Turkish nuclear capability—unthinkable under
current circumstances, but not inconceivable over the coming
decades if the NATO nuclear guarantee is uncertain.
THE WESTERN CONTEXT FOR TURKISH REGIONAL POLICY
Turkish-Western cooperation during the Gulf War had an important
effect on Western perceptions of Turkey’s role in security terms.  The
war and subsequent crises have strongly reinforced the notion of
Turkey as a pivotal actor and a strategic partner.  The focus of this in-
terest has been largely Middle Eastern.  Ankara’s role in successive
Balkan crises has redressed this imbalance to some extent.  Yet the
demonstration of Turkey’s Gulf role (reinforced by recent policy to-
ward Israel, Syria, Iran, and Afghanistan) looms behind and may well
complicate the question of where and how Ankara fits in emerging
European security arrangements.  For Turkey, the long-standing fo-

--- Sayfa 172 ---
150 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
cus on the country’s place in the European system may prove diffi-
cult to reconcile with a more active role in the Middle East.
Turks have traditionally portrayed the country’s role as that of a
bridge between east and west, north and south, and between the
Muslim world and Europe.  Europe, for its part, has been more in-
clined to see Turkey as a barrier—a strategic glacis on the European
periphery, holding Middle Eastern risks at bay.34  This image of
Turkey as a barrier in security terms is reinforced by recent descrip-
tions of Turkey as the West’s new “front line” state.  But Turkey’s de-
sire for closer integration within EU defense arrangements—some-
thing the EU has thus far resisted—and Europe’s own concerns
complicate this simple picture.
Even in the wake of the EU extension of candidacy status to Turkey at
the December 1999 Helsinki summit, European governments resist
the idea of allowing Ankara to participate fully in foreign and defense
policy decisionmaking.  Ankara’s tough stance on this issue—dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter Three—attests to the strength of the
Turkish conviction that Europe cannot expect to benefit from
Turkey’s geopolitical position, including its role in relation to Middle
Eastern risks, if it is unwilling to give Turkey a full seat at the Euro-
pean table.
Europe, for its part, is inclined to recognize the substantial contribu-
tion of Turkish diplomacy and military power to security on the
southern periphery.  But it is also concerned about Turkish regional
behavior, as well as Turkey’s own internal problems.  Since the Gulf
War, when some NATO allies questioned the need to deploy even to-
ken reinforcements to Turkey, Ankara has been concerned about the
problem of “selective solidarity” and the growing conditionality of
long-standing security guarantees.  These concerns have had an ef-
fect on Turkey’s own strategy and planning, especially with regard to
the Middle East, where European security commitments are assumed
to be least predictable and where Turkey is increasingly inclined to
______________

34The “bridge versus barrier” debate continues to have a central place in Turkish
strategic discourse.  See Lesser, Bridge or Barrier?  Turkey and the West After the Cold
War.  For a reassessment at the end of the decade, see Ian O. Lesser, “Beyond Bridge or
Barrier:  Turkey’s Evolving Security Relations with the West,” in Makovsky and Sayari,
Turkey’s New World:  Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Policy, pp. 203–221.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 151
go its own, more assertive way.  If Turkey were to become embroiled
in a “hot pursuit” incident with Syria or Iran, some European allies
might balk at a NATO response.
Some European observers and officials are even inclined to see
Turkey as “part of the problem” in the new security environment.
Traditional concerns about the movement and status of Turkish
workers have been compounded by the position of Turkey as a
transit point for illegal migrants seeking entry into Europe from the
Middle East and further afield.35  Turkey is also a major entrepôt for
drug smuggling and a variety of international criminal activities af-
fecting Europe.  In policy terms, these new challenges should make
Turkey a more essential security partner for Europe.  In many circles,
however, they have only deepened European reservations about
Turkey’s place in Europe.
In the Turkish perception, the United States has played a very differ-
ent role as a promoter of the country’s strategic importance, particu-
larly in the Middle East and, more recently, in places such as
Afghanistan, further afield.  As noted above, Ankara does not share
all of Washington’s policy objectives in the region.  Turks are skepti-
cal of the strategy of containment vis-à-vis Iran and are wary of plans
for Iraq that appear to foster Kurdish separatism.  Ultimately,
however, the concentration of hard security challenges on Turkey’s
Middle Eastern borders, and the longer-term problem of reassurance
with regard to Russia, mean that the United States remains the
essential strategic partner for Turkey.  Indeed, the Russian factor is
very much part of the Turkish regional view.  Turks view Russia as a
potentially serious threat to Ankara’s interests from the Balkans to
the Gulf.  Turks share the American concern about Russia’s role in
the spread of missile and WMD technology, as well as conventional
arms transfers, to Iran.  In the event of a sharp deterioration in
Russian relations with the West, Moscow is likely to find more room
for competition in its policy toward peripheral areas, including the
Middle East, than in Europe.  This friction would touch directly on
Turkish interests.
______________

35Roger Cohen, “Illegal Migration Increases Sharply in European Union:  Istanbul a
Transit Point,” New York Times, December 25, 2000.  In 2000 alone, almost 15,000
people were detained trying to enter Greece from Turkey.  Turkiye, January 2, 2001.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
152 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Turkey’s role in energy security could become more central to
Turkish-Western, and especially Turkish-U.S., relations.  Turkey
figures prominently in the American debate with regard to power
projection in the Caspian and the Gulf (Baghdad is closer to
Southeastern Turkey than it is to the lower Persian Gulf), although
the record regarding Turkish-U.S. cooperation in Gulf security since
the early 1990s is quite mixed.  The use of Incirlik air base has been
essential to the maintenance of the no-fly zone in Northern Iraq.  But
Ankara has been very unwilling to facilitate strikes against Iraq
proper since the Gulf War.  On Iran, as noted above, the Turkish
position parallels that of Europe and stresses economic and political
engagement.  So despite the fact that Turkey’s geographic position
makes it a potentially important partner for Gulf security—especially
if U.S. strategy is realigned to reduce military presence in the Gulf
itself—a good deal more, and more effective, joint discussion and
policy planning would be necessary for Ankara to accept such a role.
Turkey is directly affected by the progressive extension of the Euro-
pean security “space” to take account of problems emanating from
the south, from the Mediterranean, and from the Middle East.
NATO’s current strategic concept, as well as the tasks envisioned for
emerging EU defense arrangements, reflect this trend.  Many of the
leading contingencies, and some of the most demanding ones, could
be on or near Turkey’s Middle Eastern borders.  Turkey’s heightened
role in this context was almost certainly a key factor in the EU’s
strategic decision to offer Turkey candidacy status.
TURKEY AND THE MEDITERRANEAN
Turkish interests in and policy toward the Mediterranean are of a
fundamentally different character than in the Middle East.  Ankara’s
contemporary policy toward the region as a whole is conditioned by
three factors:  the place of Cyprus and the Aegean in relations with
Greece, Europe, and the United States; the role of Russia; and the
evolving place of the Mediterranean in Western strategic initiatives.
The changing dynamics in relations with Greece are discussed else-
where in this book (see Chapter Four).  But it is important to note a
fundamental asymmetry—one of several—in Turkish-Greek rela-
tions.  Whereas the Mediterranean and the maritime environment
generally are central to the Greek geostrategic outlook, the Turkish

--- Sayfa 175 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 153
strategic tradition is essentially continental rather than maritime.36
This is not to say that Turkey lacks significant interests in the Aegean
and the Eastern Mediterranean.  Ottoman Turkey was a Mediter-
ranean naval power for hundreds of years, and the Mediterranean it-
self was a leading battleground in the 500-year competition between
the Ottoman empire and the West.  Yet, it can be argued that the
strategic tradition of modern Turkey, strongly reinforced by the for-
eign and security policy inclinations of the Republican state, has
looked primarily to the risks and opportunities on Turkey’s land bor-
ders.  Overall, the Turkish tradition is far closer to that of Germany
and Russia than to the maritime orientation of Britain, the United
States, or even Greece.  The big strategic challenges, as seen from
Ankara, whether in the Balkans, the Caucasus, Central Asia, or the
Middle East, have a strongly continental flavor.  With the exception
of the situation in the Aegean, Turkey’s maritime flank is essentially
secure.
Turkish strategists do, of course, think about the country’s access to
Mediterranean Sea lanes for trade and defense.  Hence, the great
concern over the issue of Greek armaments on “demilitarized” is-
lands in the Aegean.  Similar concerns were evident in the Turkish
view that new air bases and surface-to-air missiles on Cyprus threat-
ened Turkish freedom of action in the Eastern Mediterranean.  As an
increasingly important entrepôt for energy and nonenergy trade,
Turkey must also be concerned about the free movement of shipping
through key choke points in the Eastern Mediterranean—through
the Straits themselves, as well as the Suez Canal and the Aegean
approaches.  In today’s strategic climate, threats to these lines of
communication are perhaps more likely to come as a result of envi-
ronmental accidents or terrorism than through conventional inter-
diction.  Restoration of the former Iraqi oil shipments through Turk-
ish pipelines to the Mediterranean, and the realization of the
Baku-Ceyhan pipeline scheme, would underscore this interest, as
would the expansion of Turkish water shipments from Mediter-
ranean ports.  New gas pipelines in the Eastern Mediterranean will
also be meaningful in the context of Turkey’s own energy interests.
Notable developments here include a stalled Israeli-Egyptian agree-
______________

36See Ian O. Lesser, F. Stephen Larrabee, Michele Zanini, and Katia Vlachos-Dengler,
Greece’s New Geopolitics, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 2001.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
154 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
ment for the shipment of Egyptian gas through a pipeline network
that could also bring gas supplies to Turkey and a proposal to bring
Algerian gas to Greece and Turkey via a pipeline across the Adriatic.
In its historic competition with Russia, Turkey has been concerned
about the extension of Russian sea power and influence beyond the
Black Sea to the Balkans and the Mediterranean.  This concern was at
the heart of 19th century Turkish-Western cooperation over the
“Eastern Question.”  It was similarly a central part of the Turkish
stake in the Western Alliance throughout the Cold War.  Echoes of
this concern about Russian activism in the region persist today.  The
Russian factor was prominent in Turkish perceptions of the S-300
dispute.  Officials in Ankara have also viewed with some alarm the
Russian presence in the Republic of Cyprus—perhaps as many as
30,000, mostly visitors, in recent years.  These elements are some-
times portrayed as part of a wider problem posed by Greek-Cypriot-
Serbian-Russian affinity and cooperation—an “Orthodox Axis”
threatening Turkish interests and with a natural center in the Eastern
Mediterranean.  In the wake of Greek-Turkish rapprochement and
changes in Belgrade, this notion is now far less popular than at the
height of the Balkan crises in the mid-1990s.
Western initiatives in the Mediterranean are another key element in
Turkish policy toward the region.  Both NATO and the EU have
Mediterranean initiatives under way.  These can be useful vehicles
for Turkish diplomatic and military engagement at a multilateral
level in North Africa and the Middle East.37  Turkey, as a nonmember
Mediterranean state, is a participant in the EU’s Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership program, often referred to as the “Barcelona Process.”
This initiative has generally been focused on North Africa and the
Western Mediterranean.  But like other Mediterranean cooperation
initiatives, it has acquired a greater stake in the Eastern Mediter-
ranean in recent years.  The Barcelona Process has faced consider-
able difficulty in its economic, political, and security dimensions,
and the Southern Mediterranean partners have been highly critical of
the process.  The evolution of the EU’s relationship with Turkey
could be viewed as a critical test of the initiative and the future of Eu-
______________

37See Ian O. Lesser, Jerrold D. Green, F. Stephen Larrabee, and Michele Zanini, The
Future of NATO’s Mediterranean Initiative:  Prospects and Next Steps, Santa Monica,
CA:  RAND, 2000.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 155
rope’s overall Mediterranean strategy.  But Turkey’s position in the
Barcelona Process is now greatly overshadowed in both Ankara and
Brussels by Turkey’s post-Helsinki status as a candidate for EU
membership.  Despite some continued opportunities for project
funding, it is therefore very unlikely that Barcelona will feature
prominently in future Turkish policy toward the Mediterranean or
the EU.
NATO’s Mediterranean Dialogue is potentially more significant from
a Turkish perspective.  Like all Mediterranean security dialogues, it
has suffered from an unavoidable linkage to the state of the Middle
East peace process.  Nonetheless, the NATO initiative has moved in
directions that bring it closer to Turkish interests.  The center of
gravity in the initiative has shifted progressively to the Eastern
Mediterranean, with Israel, Egypt, and Jordan emerging as the most
active interlocutors for the Alliance.  Ankara has a natural stake in the
evolution of these relationships, and Turkey’s existing cooperation
activities with Israel and Jordan can provide a basis for other multi-
lateral cooperation.  There is also a growing interest in moving be-
yond dialogue to a more extensive program of cooperative activity in
the defense realm, including exercises in search and rescue and civil
emergency response.38  Turkey has substantial capabilities in these
areas, and could easily host new Alliance programs at its facilities in
the region.  Like other South European members of the Alliance,
Turkey has a broader stake in promoting Mediterranean initiatives as
a means of focusing additional attention to security issues in its own
backyard.  And as a Muslim country, Turkey has a stake in this and
other Mediterranean dialogues aimed at forestalling “civilizational”
frictions.
LOOKING AHEAD
This analysis suggests a number of overall observations regarding
Turkey’s role as a security actor in the Middle East.  The first and
perhaps the most revealing is that Turkey’s foreign and security pol-
______________

38The application of Turkey’s security cooperation with Israel and Jordan to the NATO
initiative, as well as plans to hold computer and search and rescue exercises in Turkey
in 2001, is stressed by TGS officials.  TGS briefing at Turkish War Academy, Istanbul,
January 24, 2001.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
156 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
icy establishment sees the Middle East more as a sphere of risk than
an area of opportunity.  Turkey’s economic engagement in the region
may increase, and Ankara’s diplomatic involvement may wax and
wane, but a wide range of security issues, from conventional threats
to borders to WMD and refugee flows, will remain at the center of
Turkish policy.39  Questions of policy toward the region will also re-
main closely linked to questions of internal security—Islamism and
the Kurdish problem—especially for Turkey’s military leadership.
Second, Turkey’s relations with the Arab world are likely to remain
ambivalent—at best.  Turkish elites, and even Turkey’s Islamists, are
reluctant to see the Arab Middle East as a natural partner for Turkey.
Europe, and the West, will remain the dominant frame of reference
across the political spectrum, even if Turkish relations with the EU
and the United States are troubled.
Third, the Middle East will nonetheless continue to be a leading area
of activism in Turkey’s external policy.  Turkish policy toward the
region will likely be more assertive, less cautious, and less multilat-
eral in character than elsewhere.  Again, this is a product of perceived
risk and sensitivity to national interest, rather than a product of
affinity.  It will include the willingness to contemplate military inter-
vention, especially where there is a perceived link to Turkey’s inter-
nal security.
Fourth, the strategic relationship with Israel is part of this pattern of
regional assertiveness and is proving durable even in the face of
crises in the Middle East peace process.  In the worst case, continued
Israeli-Palestinian conflict could force a return to a lower-key ap-
proach but with far greater substance than in previous decades.
Fifth, Turkish military restructuring and modernization plans will
make Ankara an increasingly important regional security actor in its
own right.  This suggests that Turkey’s future role, coupled with a
more assertive approach to diplomacy and the use of force, will go
well beyond its traditional one as a facilitator of Western access and
______________

39For a somewhat different view emphasizing the parallel growth of Turkey’s eco-
nomic and political engagement in the region, see the excellent discussion in Kemal
Kirisçi, “The Future of Turkish Policy Toward the Middle East,” in Rubin and Kirisçi,
Turkey in World Politics:  An Emerging Multiregional Power, pp. 93–114.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
The Middle East and the Mediterranean 157
power projection.  Indeed, in the absence of a more concerted U.S.
approach to Turkey on strategic planning for contingencies in the
Gulf and elsewhere in the region, access to Turkish facilities cannot
be taken for granted.
Finally, and over the longer term, these observations suggest that
Turkey will be neither a bridge nor a barrier in relation to the Middle
East but rather an increasingly capable and independent actor—a
more significant and possibly more difficult regional ally.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
159
Chapter Seven
TURKEY AND THE UNITED STATES
The relationship with the United States has been a key aspect of
Turkey’s foreign and security policy since 1945.  Despite fears on
both sides that this “strategic relationship” would become less
strategic and less important with the end of the Cold War, the rela-
tionship has retained its significance for both countries.  Indeed, the
relationship has arguably acquired even greater significance in the
post–Cold War strategic environment—a significance underscored
by events since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the
looming confrontation with Iraq.  This sustained importance reflects
the unsettled character of regions surrounding Turkey and the
primacy of these regions in today’s security calculus.  It is also a
reflection of the changes in Turkish society, the influence these
changes have had in the way America sees Turkey, and in Turkey’s
ability to play a larger regional role.  In the broadest sense, Turkey’s
relationship with the United States is also linked to Turkish
perceptions of globalization, a phenomenon closely associated with
America’s political and economic role.
The bilateral relationship remains heavily focused on security mat-
ters, and for good reasons given the character of the environment
facing Turkey and the proximity of areas where American security
interest are engaged.  This is particularly true in relation to places
such as Afghanistan, the Caucasus, and Central Asia—areas at the
nexus of American counterterrorism and regional security strategies.
Nonetheless, the relationship faces pressures for diversification, and
there are substantial, relatively underdeveloped opportunities to ex-
tend bilateral cooperation on investment, trade, and the nonsecurity
or “soft” security aspects of regional policy.  Turkey’s financial woes

--- Sayfa 182 ---
160 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
make the development of this economic dimension of the relation-
ship more urgent and place new demands on both sides.
For Ankara and Washington, the bilateral relationship is increasingly
difficult to assess and conduct in isolation.  Europe and European
institutions are a critical backdrop.  The EU is now a far more impor-
tant factor in both Turkish and American policymaking, and the tri-
angular relationship among Turkey, Europe, and the United States is
in flux at many levels.  Turkish-EU relations are now more ambitious
but highly uncertain.  At the same time, a new debate has emerged
about the nature of the transatlantic relationship, with critical impli-
cations for Ankara.  For many Turks, the evolution of the overall
Turkish relationship with Europe will have a great influence on per-
ceptions of the United States and Washington’s importance as a
counterbalance or even a strategic alternative.
Turkey’s relationship with the United States at the start of the 21st
century is more important, more complex, and less predictable than
in previous decades.  This chapter explores the changing contours of
Turkish and American interests in the relationship, key areas of con-
vergence and divergence, and prospects for the future.
ORIGINS OF A STRATEGIC RELATIONSHIP
The onset of the Cold War was a transforming development in Turk-
ish-U.S. relations, but the bilateral relationship is, of course, much
older.  Relations with the United States played only a peripheral part
in Ottoman engagement—and conflict—with the West in the 19th
century.  The U.S. naval presence in the Mediterranean is some two
hundred years old.1  But the origins of this presence were in the
Western Mediterranean.  By the 1820s, however, contact with the
United States had increased substantially with the growth of Ameri-
can diplomatic and commercial involvement in the Eastern Mediter-
ranean associated with the “Turkey trade.”  In marked contrast to
modern patterns of energy trade, much of this commerce in the mid-
19th century consisted of American exports of petroleum products to
the Ottoman empire.  The relationship also had its military dimen-
______________

1The first American naval visit to Turkey took place in Istanbul in 1800.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
Turkey and the United States 161
sions.  Ottoman Turkey was a leading purchaser of surplus arms and
ammunition from the American Civil War.2
Two factors contributed to an arm’s length relationship between Ot-
toman Turkey and America in the 19th century.  First, the leading
point of American popular and policy interest in the Eastern
Mediterranean was support for Greek independence.  The American
foreign policy establishment, in particular, shared the Philhellenic
inclinations of its counterparts in Britain and elsewhere, and Ameri-
can opinion mirrored Europe’s in its criticism of Ottoman
“backwardness.”  Second, unlike Britain and France, 19th century
America did not give priority to relations with Turkey as a counter-
weight to Russian ambitions around the Black Sea and the Eastern
Mediterranean.  At a time when the “Eastern Question” preoccupied
European governments, Washington remained largely aloof.  Despite
significant commercial interests, and a substantial presence by
Protestant missionaries, the American strategic interest in Turkey
was limited—a striking contrast with the contemporary situation.
Modernizing intellectuals in late Ottoman and early Republican
Turkey looked largely to Europe, and above all to France, for models
of reform.  This inclination was reinforced by wariness of American
federalism as a model for Turkish reform.3  Turkey’s strategic align-
ment in this period was, first and foremost, with Germany.  The gen-
eral thrust of Turkish interest was continental and European, and de-
spite the rapidly growing economic power of the United States,
America was only tangentially engaged in areas of Turkish interest.
The limited Turkish attention to the United States was largely nega-
tive, at least in the early years of the Republic.  The provisions of the
Treaty of Sèvres, if implemented, would have had draconian impli-
cations for Turkish territory and sovereignty.  Sèvres was regarded by
Turks as Wilsonian in inspiration, and American notions of national
______________

2See James A. Field, America and the Mediterranean World 1776–1882, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1969; and Frank Gervasi, Thunder Over the Mediterranean,
New York:  David McKay, 1975.
3See Cengiz Candar, “Some Turkish Perspectives on the United States and American
Policy Toward Turkey,” in Abramowitz, Turkey’s Transformation and American Policy,
pp. 124–125.

--- Sayfa 184 ---
162 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
self-determination were seen as encouraging Balkan, Kurdish, and
Armenian nationalism at Turkey’s expense.4  The legacy of Sèvres—
a phenomenon Turkish analysts often refer to as the “Sèvres
syndrome”—continues to fuel Turkish suspicions of American
strategy toward Turkey and its region.  The lasting effects can be seen
in the contemporary Turkish debate about American policy in
Northern Iraq and the Kurdish issue.
The experience of two world wars heightened American interest in
Turkey, but only within limits.  In neither the First nor the Second
World War was the Eastern Mediterranean a focus of American mili-
tary engagement.  In the Second World War, the Balkans, the Eastern
Mediterranean, and the Middle East, where Turkish neutrality mat-
tered, were principally British spheres of responsibility, and Wash-
ington actively resisted British efforts to make Southeastern Europe a
center of gravity in the conflict.5  Only in the latter stages of the war,
with deepening concern over Soviet ambitions, did relations with
Turkey (and relations with Washington for Ankara) loom larger in the
strategic calculus.
Containment of Soviet power quickly became the organizing princi-
ple for U.S. involvement in and around Turkey.  In a formal sense,
the Cold War began in the Eastern Mediterranean with Soviet terri-
torial demands on Ankara and the promulgation of the Truman Doc-
trine to bolster Greece and Turkey.  The first NATO “enlargement”
embraced Greece and Turkey.6  From Ankara’s perspective, the im-
mediacy of the Soviet threat made the consolidation of Turkey’s
Western links and, above all, the strengthening of the strategic al-
liance with Washington, a leading foreign policy priority.
Throughout the Cold War, Ankara and Washington shared a central
interest in the containment of Soviet power and in the maintenance
of an effective Atlantic Alliance for this purpose.  More broadly, the
______________

4Ibid., pp. 123–124.
5That said, American intelligence services were very active in Turkey throughout the
war.  This story is told in a very engaging manner in Barry Rubin, Istanbul Intrigues,
New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1989.
6See Kuniholm, The Origins of the Cold War in the Near East:  Great Power Conflict and
Diplomacy in Iran, Turkey and Greece; and Athanassopoulou, Turkey—Anglo-
American Security Interests 1945–1952:  The First Enlargement of NATO.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
Turkey and the United States 163
two countries have also shared a similar, if not entirely convergent,
approach to international affairs.  Turkey’s internal and geopolitical
positions, and the influence of the Turkish military, have fostered a
security-conscious approach to policymaking.  Cold War imperatives
fostered a parallel, security-oriented approach to foreign relations as
seen from Washington.  Thus, the dominance of security issues in the
bilateral relationship has intellectual and political as well as
geostrategic roots.
The two countries also share certain additional characteristics in
their strategic cultures.  These characteristics include a pronounced
sensitivity to questions of national sovereignty (far higher than the
modern norm in Europe), a low threshold of tolerance for national
insecurity and threats to the “homeland,” a high threshold for inter-
national intervention—and a willingness to act massively and deci-
sively when this threshold is crossed (e.g., for Turkey in Cyprus in
1974 or, more recently, in Northern Iraq).  Foreign policy debates in
Ankara and Washington are also characterized by a historic tension
between a tradition of nonintervention, even isolation, and demands
for more active regional engagement.
Tensions in the bilateral relationship over the past decade have en-
couraged comparisons with a past golden age of relative stability in
Turkish-American relations.  In reality, such a golden age character-
ized only the early years of the Cold War, perhaps until the early
1960s.  Certainly from the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, in which Wash-
ington traded the withdrawal of nuclear-capable Jupiter missiles
based in Turkey in symbolic exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet
missiles in Cuba, the relationship has experienced periodic and often
severe reverses.  The 1964 and 1974 Cyprus crises were clearly low
points in the bilateral relationship.  In both instances, even the de-
fense ties central to the Cold War relationship were severely affected.
Indeed, both countries have used security cooperation as a lever in
bilateral relations.  During the decades of American security assis-
tance to Turkey, threats to withhold this aid, or the defense equip-
ment associated with it, became a feature of congressional
approaches toward Cyprus and the Aegean, as well as human rights
issues in Turkey.  The end of American security assistance, hailed as
a sign of maturity in the bilateral relationship, has reduced this form
of leverage, although congressional authorization of commercial
arms transfers remains a neuralgic issue.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
164 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Turkey exercised its own leverage over questions of base access and
support for American power projection.  U.S. access to facilities other
than Incirlik air base has been suspended on occasion, most notably
after the imposition of the U.S. arms embargo in 1974.  The Turkish
parliament and public opinion have often seen access to Incirlik as a
lever in bilateral disputes.  For Turks, the Defense and Economic Co-
operation Agreement (DECA), signed in 1969 and periodically re-
vised, established a quid pro quo between access to Turkish defense
facilities and U.S. security assistance, most recently interpreted as
“best efforts” with regard to the transfer of American arms.  In reality,
this linkage has never been easy or predictable and has given rise to
considerable resentment on the Turkish side and frustration in
Washington.  At the start of the Gulf crisis, former President General
Kenan Evren reportedly advised Özal that “unless you have it written
down, you can’t trust the United States.”  Earlier, in a Cold War set-
ting, Evren also reportedly remarked to a German official that “we
only take U.S. aid because we have to.  The U.S. uses aid as an in-
strument of pressure.  If we go against their wishes, they start saying
they will cut it off.  I sometimes ask them, ‘Does the U.S. give aid to
have a strong country on the Southern flank of NATO, or as a tool to
make Turkey do as it wants?’”7
The apparent smoothness of relations, especially military-to-military
relations during the Cold War, was also a reflection of the routine
character of much bilateral interaction from the 1950s through the
end of the 1980s.  Turks in this period were arguably no less sensitive
to the sovereignty issues surrounding base access and other ques-
tions of bilateral and NATO concern.  But the controversial issues
were well known and there were few surprises in the day-to-day re-
lationship.  The key contingencies were, by and large, NATO contin-
gencies concerning the Soviet Union—in short, high consequence
but low probability cases in which Alliance cohesion would be es-
sential.  For decades, there were no day-to-day stresses of the sort
imposed by the American air operations from Incirlik as part of Op-
eration Provide Comfort and its successor, Northern Watch.  The pe-
riodic stresses that did occur—often quite serious—arose from major
political crises in the relationship.
______________

7Quoted in Nicole Pope and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled:  Atatürk and After, London:
Murray, 1997, p. 242.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
Turkey and the United States 165
During the Cold War, but with even greater conviction since the Gulf
War, Turkish policymakers and analysts have observed that
Washington really does not have a policy toward Turkey per se.
Rather, from the Turkish perspective, the American approach to
Turkey is a by-product of other more prominent concerns—policy
toward Russia, Greece, the Balkans, the Caspian, and the Middle
East.  Leaving aside the accuracy of this observation, there can be
little doubt that Turks perceive their relationship with the United
States to be derivative of other American interests.  Turks have been
especially attentive to any signs of a “Russia first” policy in
Washington, whether in relation to CFE negotiations in the 1980s or
in the Caspian pipeline debate of the 1990s.  Arguably, a focus on
Turkey’s strategic importance—a focus most Turks wish to
encourage—makes it inevitable that Washington will often see policy
toward Turkey as largely a function of problems in surrounding
areas.8  It is a dilemma Turkey will find hard to avoid.  One way of
resolving this dilemma would be for U.S. policymakers to view
Turkey as a proxy, a regional power to be promoted with a view to
more active Turkish intervention in adjacent regions (along the lines
of the “Nixon Doctrine,” which had sought to cultivate a series of
regional proxies, including Iran).  Both Americans and Turks, not to
mention Turkey’s neighbors, would be very uncomfortable with such
an approach.
GULF WAR AND AFTERMATH:  AN EXPANDED
PARTNERSHIP?
The Gulf War was a watershed in terms of Turkish and American per-
ceptions of the bilateral relationship.  The crisis in the Gulf unfolded
against a background of post–Cold War uneasiness in Turkey about
the country’s strategic importance in the eyes of the West, and espe-
cially in Washington.  Observers of President Özal’s policy during the
crisis stress that he saw the opportunity for Turkey to play an active
role in the Gulf coalition as a chance to reassert Turkey’s geopolitical
significance in the broadest sense and to reinvigorate the strategic
______________

8Alan Makovsky, “Marching in Step, Mostly!” Private View, Spring 1999, Vol. 3, No. 7,
p. 38.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
166 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
relationship with the United States.9  Many in Turkey were less en-
thusiastic about Turkish participation in the Gulf War, including se-
nior elements of the Turkish military.  Özal and others, however, saw
a chance for Turkey to secure a seat at the table after Baghdad’s de-
feat.  At American urging, Ankara granted access and overflight rights
for American combat and supply aircraft operating from Incirlik,
Batman, and elsewhere.  Iraqi oil exports through Turkish pipelines
were shut down as part of the economic sanctions against Baghdad.
With considerable difficulty, some 100,000 Turkish troops were
eventually redeployed to the border with Iraq, pinning down sub-
stantial Iraqi forces.
The Turkish contribution to the coalition effort in the Gulf was sub-
stantial and achieved at some political cost inside Turkey.  But far
from the new strategic relationship Özal had envisioned, the Gulf
War and its aftermath have left a legacy of complexity and resent-
ment in bilateral relations.  Turks point to the tangible costs of their
support for American aims in the Gulf, including refugee pressures
and a deadly Kurdish insurgency, the loss of revenue from trade with
Iraq, and the sovereignty compromises associated with continued
American (and British) air operations over Northern Iraq conducted
from Incirlik.  Objectively, some of these undoubted “costs” to
Turkey might not have been avoided through Turkish neutrality in
the Gulf War.  And without U.S. intervention and, ultimately, the se-
curity guarantee to Turkey, the costs to Turkey might have been far
higher.
Nonetheless, the Gulf War episode has left many Turks with a sense
of disappointment and suspicion regarding American policy.  With
the end of U.S. security assistance, and with economic sanctions
against Iraq still in place more than a decade after the invasion of
Kuwait, many Turks feel that they have little to show for their coop-
eration with Washington and Europe in the Gulf.  Indeed, the pri-
macy of the threat of Kurdish separatism in Ankara’s strategic per-
ceptions has meant that U.S. policy toward the Kurdish areas of
Northern Iraq is treated with exceptional suspicion—suspicion that
draws on the deeply rooted “Sèvres syndrome” noted above.  In this
______________

9See, for example, the analysis of former U.S. ambassador in Turkey, Morton
Abramowitz, in Pope and Pope, Turkey Unveiled:  Atatürk and After.  Also, Abram-
owitz, “The Complexities of American Policymaking on Turkey,” pp. 3–35.

--- Sayfa 189 ---
Turkey and the United States 167
climate of suspicion, it is not surprising that each parliamentary ex-
tension of the Operation Northern Watch mandate is accompanied
by considerable debate and uncertainty.
The Gulf crisis unfolded at a time when many of the traditional un-
derpinnings of the bilateral relationship had disappeared or were
under strain.  The Cold War context for the American military pres-
ence in Turkey had evaporated.  Security assistance, with the excep-
tion of arms “cascaded” to Turkey by NATO allies under CFE treaty
provisions, was in sharp decline.  The result was a perceived loss of
leverage on both sides and a disinclination to go beyond the rhetoric
of enhanced cooperation.  Efforts to diversify the bilateral relation-
ship, including a Turkish proposal for a free trade agreement with the
United States, were not seriously entertained.
Issues raised during the Gulf War remain sensitive points in the bi-
lateral relationship, with pronounced differences between Washing-
ton and Ankara on the diplomatic and economic engagement of Iraq
and on the use of force against Baghdad.  Ankara has a stake in the
containment of Iraqi military power but has been most reluctant to
support military strikes against Iraq.  In 2001, and over strong
American objections, Turkey reestablished full diplomatic relations
with Baghdad.  At a time when Turkey’s financial problems place a
premium on backing from Washington, Turkey’s stance on Iraq is
likely to be a key measure of the health of the bilateral relationship
from the perspective of the administration in Washington.
If the Gulf experience has been difficult for both sides, other aspects
of the bilateral relationship since 1991 have been more positive.
Turkey has been a strong supporter of American policy in the
Balkans, both in Bosnia and in Kosovo.  Turkey has expressed its
willingness to contribute forces to any NATO peacekeeping deploy-
ment in Macedonia and favors the presence of American forces
alongside those of European allies.  Ankara’s moderate and multilat-
eral approach to the region has allayed American fears of Turkish
friction with Greece over Balkan policy.  In the Aegean, where the
risks of Greek-Turkish brinkmanship have been a special concern for
the United States (it is widely believed that only last minute inter-
vention by Washington prevented a military clash over Imia/Kardak
in 1996), the development of a new détente between Ankara and
Athens has improved the climate on a key bilateral issue.  This im-

--- Sayfa 190 ---
168 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
provement has been slower to affect attitudes in the U.S. Congress,
where the change in mood has lagged behind changes in the region
itself.  Ultimately, however, a durable improvement in Greek-Turkish
relations is likely to influence the climate surrounding arms transfers
and other questions where Aegean balances have been a concern.
Movement on Cyprus, less likely, would be a transforming develop-
ment in this regard and would defuse much of the standing criticism
of Turkey in congressional circles.10
Developments within Turkey are potentially the most important de-
terminant of how the bilateral relationship will evolve.  Here, the
decade of the 1990s saw considerable positive change.  In the after-
math of the Gulf War, Ankara’s counterinsurgency operation in the
Southeast and in Northern Iraq kept American attention focused on
human rights abuses and the lack of progress on political solutions to
the Kurdish problem in Turkey.  Support for Turkish democratization
and human rights has been a consistent theme of American policy,
with successive American officials urging Ankara to “take risks for
reform.”11  Behind this approach has been the valid assumption that
only a more fully democratic and open Turkey will be in a position to
achieve a durable and enhanced strategic partnership with the
United States.  This is a natural reflection of the post–Cold War reali-
ties in American foreign policy.  But it sits uncomfortably with the
more nationalistic mood in Turkish politics since the Gulf War.
This reflexive nationalism was demonstrated very clearly in the Turk-
ish reaction to the near passage of an Armenian genocide resolution
in the U.S. Congress at the end of 2000.  This nonbinding resolution
was withdrawn at the last moment after intense pressure from the
Clinton administration (a similar resolution was adopted by the
French parliament a few months later).  Armenian genocide resolu-
tions had been introduced periodically in the past, but the impend-
ing American elections made this a special case for all sides.  Ankara
clearly viewed the resolution issue as a key test of the bilateral rela-
tionship, with prominent Turkish politicians threatening wide-
______________

10See Ian O. Lesser, Turkey, Greece and the U.S. in a Changing Strategic Environment:
Testimony Before the House International Relations Committee, Subcommittee on Eu-
rope, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, June 2001.
11This theme was articulated with special vigor by Ambassador Marc Grossman in the
mid-1990s.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
Turkey and the United States 169
ranging retaliation, including an end to American use of Incirlik
air base for non-NATO purposes in the event of passage.  The vulner-
ability of the bilateral relationship to such disturbances, despite its
manifestly strategic importance for both sides, is an indication of the
delicately poised mood in Turkey and the weight of suspicion just
below the surface.
TURKISH BILATERAL INTERESTS TODAY
If the bilateral relationship is often characterized as strategic for the
United States, the Turkish stake in the relationship is no less strate-
gic, perhaps even more so.  In this context, Ankara has multiple in-
terests.
First, the need for deterrence and reassurance in relations with Rus-
sia is deeply imbedded in Turkey’s strategic culture and is an ele-
ment of continuity in the country’s geostrategic perceptions and in
relations with the West.  Concern about Russian intentions, as well as
risks flowing from chaos within or around Russia, ranks high on
Turkey’s security agenda.  As a longer-term worry, it is probably at
the top of this agenda.  In many respects, the Turkish view of
Moscow is the most wary and security-oriented in NATO.  Turkey no
longer shares a border with Moscow, but political and security vacu-
ums in the Caucasus and Central Asia offer new flashpoints for com-
petition and conflict.  In the event of a general deterioration in
Russian-Western relations, Turkey would be on the front line in a
competition far more likely to be focused on the periphery, including
Russia’s “near abroad,” the Balkans and the Middle East—that is, in
Turkey’s neighborhood—than in the center of Europe.  Here, Ankara
views the expansion of Russian military sales to Iran and elsewhere
in the Middle East with alarm.  Ankara also sees Washington as hav-
ing the primary responsibility and ability to constrain Moscow’s
arms and technology transfers to the region.
The strategic relationship with the United States and the NATO se-
curity guarantee (the two have traditionally been closely linked in
Turkish perception) remain indispensable in relation to Russian
risks.  The NATO nuclear guarantee is still an essential part of this
equation for Ankara.  Turkish attitudes toward nuclear questions are
among the most conservative in NATO, because these questions are
seen against a backdrop of heightened concern about Russia and

--- Sayfa 192 ---
170 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
WMD and ballistic missile risks emanating from the Middle East.  In
each case, the United States, together with Israel, is Turkey’s key
partner in the management of these problems.
Ankara seeks a more active role in emerging European defense
arrangements (ESDI/ESDP), but until these arrangements solidify
and until the EU accepts Turkey as a full partner in defense deci-
sionmaking—a distant prospect at best—the defense link with the
United States will remain paramount.  A very troubling scenario,
from the Turkish point of view, would be the rise of a more or less
capable EU defense structure, outside of NATO, from which Turkey,
as a non-EU member, is largely excluded.  This would become a
worst-case scenario for Turkey if this development were coupled with
a waning of NATO’s security role and a progressive disengagement of
America from European defense.  At base, Turkish views on ESDP are
similar to those prevailing in both the Clinton and Bush
administrations.  Washington has been supportive of a relatively full
role for Turkey in EU defense decisionmaking, consistent with the
U.S. view that EU defense efforts should not discriminate against al-
lies that are not members of the union.  That said, the tough Turkish
stance on ESDP matters has tested the limits of American support.
A second Turkish stake in the bilateral relationship turns on the piv-
otal role of the United States as a security arbiter in adjacent regions,
that is, beyond the containment of Russian power.  Turks often refer
to their existence in a “dangerous neighborhood,” with chronic in-
stability on their borders.  The containment of diverse security risks,
from the Balkans to the Middle East, benefits considerably from co-
operation with the United States, as in relations with Russia.  Europe,
even a Europe with growing ambitions in the foreign and security
policy spheres, is unlikely to exert the same weight in regional affairs.
To be sure, the American involvement in such areas as the Gulf can
pose dilemmas for Ankara, and policy interests and approaches do
not always coincide.  On balance, however, Turkey benefits from the
continued American military presence in adjacent regions.
In this context, Turkey’s foreign and security policy establishment
views the evolving American debate over overseas engagement with
some anxiety.  Ankara is used to measuring the health of the bilateral
relationship in rather narrow terms, assessing Washington’s interest

--- Sayfa 193 ---
Turkey and the United States 171
in Turkey as a strategic partner and with an eye on questions of arms
sales, textile quotas, and human rights policies.  There is, however, a
growing sense that substantial and continued American engagement
in areas of critical interest to Turkey, whether in the Balkans or the
Eastern Mediterranean, cannot be taken for granted.  In this sense,
Ankara shares the general European concern about preventing a de-
coupling of American and European security, and views the prospect
of a reduced American role in peacekeeping in Bosnia or Kosovo with
alarm.  But Turkish concerns are more complex, because Turkey’s di-
rect security concerns go beyond the Balkans to Eurasia and the
Middle East, and because Ankara sees the U.S. presence as an essen-
tial part of a credible Western security guarantee.  This is particularly
true of ballistic missile risks from Iran, Iraq, and Syria, where the
United States (and Israel) are seen as the only security partners ca-
pable of providing Turkey with at least a minimally effective means
of defense in the coming years.
Stability and reconstruction in the Balkans will, of course, be strongly
affected by EU policies, but Washington still has enormous influence
and has been a consistent advocate for a Turkish role in the region.
In the Middle East, U.S. involvement provides a measure of reassur-
ance against the worst outcomes in Turkey’s relations with its neigh-
bors, even if Ankara disapproves of the economic and political
aspects of containment policies in the Gulf.  Turkish views on the
constructive engagement of Iran are far closer to those prevailing in
Europe.  In the event of a future Syrian-Israeli peace settlement, the
United States would almost certainly play a key role in making sure
Turkey’s interests are protected, whether on water supply or in re-
strictions on Syrian military redeployments along the border with
Turkey.  Under conditions of crisis between Israel and the Palestini-
ans, Ankara favors an active role for the United States in the Middle
East peace process.
A third and long-standing Turkish interest concerns access to Ameri-
can military equipment, training, and defense-industrial coopera-
tion.  Turkey is in the midst of a major military modernization pro-
gram—one that is likely to remain substantial even in the wake of
economic difficulties.  Important aspects of the modernization pro-
gram anticipate the purchase of American equipment or U.S. source

--- Sayfa 194 ---
172 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
technology.12  Throughout the Cold War and to the present day, the
United States has been the leading supplier of defense goods and
services to Turkey, a relationship that has persisted despite the end
of formal security assistance and periodic crises over arms trans-
fers.13  Despite efforts at diversification, Turkey still conducts roughly
80 percent of its defense-industrial activity with the United States.14
Large numbers of Turkish officers have trained in the United States
and military-to-military habits of cooperation are strong, although
Turkish military contacts with other NATO allies—and Israel—are
becoming more frequent and may eventually dilute an outlook that
has been heavily focused on the United States.
The Turkish military has a clear preference for American systems,
but is troubled by the unpredictability of American, and especially
congressional, attitudes toward sales to Turkey.  The experience of
the 1964 “Johnson letter” linking the American security guarantee
vis-à-vis the Soviet Union to Turkey’s policy on Cyprus, and the out-
right arms embargo following the 1974 conflict on the island, have
had an enduring effect on Turkish perceptions.  In recent years, dis-
putes over the transfer of American frigates, attack helicopters, and
other advanced weaponry have arisen against a background of con-
gressional concern over Turkey’s human rights situation and fear of
fueling an arms race in the Aegean.  At the height of bilateral tensions
over these issues in the mid-1990s, many Turks came to believe that
the country faced a de facto American arms embargo, and the coexis-
tence of supportive and punitive policies emanating from Washing-
ton raised the question of whether Ankara was regarded as an ally or
a rogue state.15
______________

12Prominent bilateral defense-industrial projects in the 2000–2002 time frame include
the planned procurement of attack helicopters and early warning aircraft, Turkish
participation in the Joint Strike Fighter program, new naval helicopters, heavy tanks,
and the pedestal-mounted Stinger SAM.  Turkish Undersecretariat for Defense Indus-
tries, Briefing to American-Turkish Council, Washington, March 26, 2001.
13Defense sales and credits to Turkey are now arranged on a commercial basis.
14American-Turkish Council, unpublished paper and discussion, Washington, March
26, 2001.
15We are grateful to our former RAND colleague Zalmay Khalilzad for this formula-
tion.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
Turkey and the United States 173
The waning of the battle against the PKK in Southeastern Turkey and
the mood of rapprochement in Greek-Turkish relations have im-
proved the arms transfer climate.  But concerns persist on both sides.
In response, Turkey has moved to diversify its sources of military
goods and services.  Israel has been the leading beneficiary, with im-
portant new purchases, upgrade contracts, and training arrange-
ments.  Turkey would like to purchase and participate in the produc-
tion of Israel’s Arrow missile defense system, although the existence
of U.S.-source technology in this program makes Turkish access
subject to American approval.  Other defense contracts have gone to
Russia and European vendors in recent years.  Realistically, however,
the bulk of Turkey’s defense modernization over the next decades is
likely to involve cooperation, and especially co-production arrange-
ments, with the United States.  Such arrangements, most notably the
manufacture in Turkey of over 300 F-16 fighter aircraft, have con-
tributed enormously to the country’s military capability, technical
capacity, and international prestige.
Fourth, Turkey continues to look to Washington for support on key
Turkish objectives outside the defense realm.  The United States has,
for example, been a leading proponent of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline
to bring Caspian oil and gas to world markets via a terminal on
Turkey’s Mediterranean coast.  The pipeline scheme remains a
cherished objective for Ankara.  It would bolster Turkey’s regional
influence and limit that of Russia and Iran, leading competitors for
Caspian oil transport.  It would encourage the economic and political
independence of the Central Asian republics and bolster their links
to Turkey.  The environmental risks associated with vastly increased
tanker traffic through the Bosporus would be reduced.  And Turkey
would stand to receive significant economic benefits from pipeline
construction and transit fees.
Washington has been active at the diplomatic level in support of
Baku-Ceyhan.  But the official U.S. policy remains one of support for
“multiple pipelines” (i.e., Turkish and Russian, but not Iranian), and
financial backing and guarantees have not been forthcoming.  More-
over, it is arguable that the Bush administration will be even less in-
terested than its predecessor in providing subsidies to energy
schemes that would normally rise or fall on the basis of commercial

--- Sayfa 196 ---
174 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
viability.  The commercial viability of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline has
been an open question, with many economic and political variables,
including the potential relaxation of sanctions on Iran and the
opening of an Iranian route for Caspian oil.  The discovery of large
new reserves in the Caspian region, and the growing potential for gas
exports alongside oil shipments, have improved the outlook for
Baku-Ceyhan, and the scheme now stands a good chance of moving
ahead to completion.  Turkish officials have argued that the West as a
whole—and the United States as an energy security guarantor in the
Gulf—has an overriding geostrategic stake in diversifying energy
routes and reducing global reliance on oil shipments through the
Strait of Hormuz.  From Ankara’s perspective, more vigorous
American support for the scheme—possibly including subsidies—
will be essential.  In the end, however, Turkey will probably need to
make a substantial financial contribution to the project, and the
prospects for this in the current economic climate are uncertain.
Another critical example of U.S. support for Turkish objectives con-
cerns the EU and Turkey’s role in European affairs.  The United
States has been a consistent advocate of Turkish integration in Eu-
rope, including membership in the EU, and Ankara has looked to
Washington for support at critical junctures.  Washington has made
the argument for closer Turkish integration on strategic grounds, ar-
guing that anchoring Turkey ever more fully in European institutions
is necessary if Turkey’s longer-term Western orientation is to be
guaranteed.  This view parallels that of Turkey’s foreign policy estab-
lishment.  Lobbying by senior American officials played a pivotal role
in the European parliament’s decision to approve the Turkish-EU
Customs Union in 1996.  It was almost certainly a factor in the EU’s
December 1999 decision to offer Turkey candidate status at the
Helsinki summit.
The Helsinki outcome changes the context for American advocacy in
important ways.  Europe has never been comfortable with U.S. lob-
bying on behalf of Turkey, and some European allies have ques-
tioned the American standing in European decisionmaking on en-
largement questions.  With Turkey’s candidacy, Turkish-EU relations
have moved into a more highly structured and legalistic pattern, with
fixed criteria and fewer opportunities for arguments on strategic
grounds.  Moreover, the prospects for Turkey in the EU will now de-
pend far more heavily on reform decisions taken inside Turkey.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
Turkey and the United States 175
Effective American lobbying in this area is now more likely to take
place in Ankara than in Brussels, and Turks may be less comfortable
with this.  If Turkey’s candidacy fails to progress favorably—and
there is every indication that it will be a slow and uncertain process
at best—Ankara may look to Washington to help.  There may be
fewer opportunities to do so with effect.
On the specific issue of Turkey’s place in EU defense arrangements,
Washington has been supportive of the Turkish position—to a point.
The two countries are similarly NATO-centric and share a strong in-
terest in seeing European defense arrangements develop, to the ex-
tent possible, within a NATO framework.  Turkey has looked to the
United States for support in its argument that non-EU NATO mem-
bers should be fully integrated in EU defense decisionmaking, espe-
cially where their interests are directly involved (and since many of
the likely contingencies for a European rapid reaction force are in
Turkey’s neighborhood, Ankara’s takes this question very seriously).
American officials have been strong advocates for the Turkish view in
NATO and other settings.  At the same time, this issue has also been a
point of friction in the bilateral relationship.  Ankara’s hard-line
stance on ESDP, amid threats of a Turkish veto on NATO enlarge-
ment and other matters, has on several occasions threatened to drive
the EU to develop its defense plans outside NATO—a development
that complicates Washington’s European and NATO policies.
The burgeoning Turkish-Israeli relationship has developed without
active or direct U.S. support, but the American element is nonethe-
less present in the Turkish calculus.  Ankara favors the emergence of
more extensive trilateral cooperation, especially in the Eastern
Mediterranean, and sees its already well-developed relationship with
Israel as a basis for more ambitious political, defense, and invest-
ment initiatives.  More important, many Turks have seen their rela-
tionship with Israel as a vehicle for improving Turkey’s image and
political position in Washington and, in particular, in Congress.  To
be sure, there has been some benefit along these lines, although in a
less-direct fashion than many Turks might have wished.  Supporters
of Israel in Washington have been cautious in taking up the Turkish
case, but cooperation among Turkish and Israeli advocacy groups in

--- Sayfa 198 ---
176 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
the United States has expanded.16  The relationship with Israel has
broadened interest in Turkey among those foreign policy experts
whose principal frame of reference has been Middle Eastern affairs.
It has also given government and nongovernment analysts a new
frame for considering the Turkish role and Turkey’s contribution to
Western strategic objectives.
The Turkish private sector has been especially articulate in describ-
ing the opportunities for Turkish-American cooperation in support
of Turkey’s economic development and the country’s role in regional
commerce beyond pipeline issues.  The opening of the Turkish
economy under Özal, and the waning of the statist model that had
shaped the Turkish economy for decades, created the basic condi-
tions for increased bilateral trade and investment.  Both expanded
in the 1990s, although not at the pace seen in Turkish relations
with other partners such as Russia, Israel, or even the EU.17  Given
Turkey’s looming energy deficit, it is noteworthy that some of the
most significant new American ventures in Turkey have been in the
power generation field.  Notwithstanding Turkey’s designation as a
“big emerging market” by the Department of Commerce, the eco-
nomic dimension of the relationship has developed more slowly than
many had anticipated.  Weak intellectual property protection, the
lack of acceptable arbitration procedures (now remedied), the slow
pace of privatization, chronic high inflation and financial instability,
and the perception of political risk have inhibited investment.
Ankara, for its part, remains focused on raising American quotas for
the import of Turkish textiles—a traditional mainstay of Turkish
______________

16A good example is provided by the study visit to Israel and Turkey for American for-
eign policy experts organized jointly by the Assembly of Turkish-American Associa-
tions and the American Jewish Committee in January 2001.
17Between 1991 and 1999, for example, American exports to Turkey increased from
roughly $2.5 billion to $3.2 billion per year (actually slightly higher in 1997).  Turkish
exports to the United States increased from roughly $1 billion to $2.6 billion in the
same period.  U.S. investments in Turkey have varied widely from year to year, a re-
flection of economic and political instability in Turkey, showing only modest increases
over the decade.  Figures cited in Abdullah Akyuz, “U.S.-Turkish Economic Relations
at the Outset of the 21st Century,” Insight Turkey, Vol. 2, No. 4, October–December
2000, p. 74.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
Turkey and the United States 177
trade with the United States, and reducing nontariff barriers to
Turkish agricultural exports.18
The 2000–2002 financial crisis in Turkey is a reflection of
fundamental economic and political problems evident for many
years.  But it has had a disastrous effect on foreign investment and
will doubtless shape the perceptions of American investors and
trading partners for some time to come.  Such perceptions are not
insurmountable given the appropriate remedies, as the Mexican case
illustrates.  Yet the current economic crisis calls into question the
near-term prospects for bolstering economic ties between Turkey
and the United States.  It also makes the issue of American support
for Turkey in international financial institutions even more critical
and raises the question of the U.S. role in possible future bailouts of
the Turkish economy.
After an initial period of hesitation in the early spring of 2001, the
Bush administration threw its support behind a package of IMF and
World Bank support for Turkey totaling some $17 billion.  At the
same time, as a condition for its support, Washington insisted on the
implementation of a sweeping set of economic reforms and austerity
measures.  Having come to power with an avowed distaste for inter-
national economic “bailouts,” and against the background of another
financial crisis in Argentina, the administration’s decision to support
the financial rescue package was greeted with relief in Turkey.
Nonetheless, many Turkish commentators have complained about
the grudging nature of American support as well as accompanying
pressure from Washington over issues as diverse as Cyprus, Iraq, the
handling of Chechen sympathizers in Turkish custody, and
constitutional reform.  Critics in Turkey’s nationalist circles and on
the left have portrayed the financial package as a compromise of
Turkish sovereignty engineered by the IMF under American direc-
tion, a suspicion encouraged by Kemal Dervish’s long residence in
Washington.  These perceptions reflect the close linkage between
Turkey’s economic fate and U.S. policy preferences that exists in the
eyes of many Turks.
______________

18For a good discussion of these trade and investment concerns see Akyuz, “U.S.-
Turkish Economic Relations at the Outset of  the 21st Century,” pp. 71–81.

--- Sayfa 200 ---
178 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
CHANGING BILATERAL IMAGES
Beyond questions of national interest and strategic concerns, the
bilateral relationship is also shaped by questions of affinity and fa-
miliarity.19  In contrast to other transatlantic relationships, this di-
mension of Turkish-U.S. relations is not well developed.  The Turk-
ish-American community is relatively successful and affluent, and
increasingly organized and active, but it is modest in size at perhaps
300,000–350,000.20  The community lacks the weight of its counter-
parts from Greece and Armenia in the American foreign policy de-
bate.  This fact figures heavily in Turkish interpretations of American
policy and goes some way to explain the Turkish focus on lobbies as
a feature of American policymaking.  Turks often assert that their
country has no effective lobby in Washington.  Others assert that
Turkey has historically had a very effective lobby in the form of suc-
cessive administrations with a strategic interest in Turkey.  American
specialists on Turkey, defense analysts, and defense industries have
also been strong advocates for Turkish interests over the past
decades.21  It is perhaps more accurate to describe the Turkish posi-
tion vis-à-vis its traditional lobbying opponents in Congress and
elsewhere as asymmetrical rather than unfavorable per se.
Among those who follow Turkish affairs closely, the debate is often
polarized between those focused on Turkey’s geostrategic impor-
tance and those concerned with Turkey’s problems of democratiza-
tion and human rights.  Given Turkey’s position as a long-standing
ally and member of NATO, it is remarkable that American specialists,
and officials charged with the management of the bilateral relation-
ship, often find Turkish society, and especially civil-military rela-
tions, perplexing.  It is not unusual to hear senior officials describe
their frustration in trying to understand how Turkey “really works.”
Others have described the process of making sense of Turkish poli-
cymaking as an exercise in “Kremlinology.”
______________

19The “familiarity” issue is discussed in Alan Makovsky, “Marching in Step, Mostly!” p.
37.
20Interview with Orhan Kaymakcalan, President of the Assembly of Turkish-American
Associations, “Challenges to Turkish Identity in the U.S.:  An Interview with the ATAA,”
Insight Turkey, Vol. 2, No. 4, October–December 2000, p. 81.
21See Abramowitz, “The Complexities of American Policymaking on Turkey,” pp. 3–
35.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
Turkey and the United States 179
Few Americans are familiar with Turkey, and even well-informed
Americans tend to share a perception of Turkey as culturally and
politically exotic.  Outside foreign policy circles, where Turkey is of-
ten seen through a NATO lens, the image of the country is Middle
Eastern rather than European.  Ironically, Turkey’s active role in the
Gulf coalition reinforced the perception of Turkey as a valuable
Middle Eastern ally.  At the popular level, Turkey’s image has never
fully recovered from the popularity of Midnight Express, a film that
many Turks believe set back the development of American tourism
in Turkey for decades.  The number of American visitors to Turkey
has increased substantially in recent years, reaching some 500,000 in
2000, but it lags far behind tourism from Europe, which is a major
revenue earner for the Turkish economy.22  Tourism to Turkey is also
highly dependent on a perception of regional stability, and crises in
the Balkans or the Middle East, as well as international terrorist inci-
dents, can have a highly damaging effect on American tourism, how-
ever unjustified.  This effect was made clear by the drop in American
tourism following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the
subsequent intervention in Afghanistan.
Overall, the lack of accurate knowledge about Turkey and the relative
paucity of “people-to-people” contacts mean that bilateral affinity is
underdeveloped and is not commensurate with Turkey’s importance
in foreign policy terms.  This reality also contrasts with the increas-
ingly active specialist debate about Turkish affairs in the United
States, and a marked increase in the coverage of Turkish topics in
leading American newspapers in the second half of the 1990s.
Turkish images of the United States are also distinctive—and
changing. Turkish analyses of this question normally point, quite
correctly, to the anti-American instincts of both the nationalist right
and the Turkish left.  The former have tended to see ties to the United
States as a threat to Turkish sovereignty.  The latter have shared the
Cold War tradition of concern about the American model of capital-
ism, American “imperialism,” coupled with nationalist instincts of
their own.  These intellectual strains, common across Europe and the
Middle East during the Cold War, still weigh heavily in the contem-
______________

22In 1991, in a period of regional tension, only 79,000 American tourists visited
Turkey.  The figure was 182,000 in 1992, and reached  290,000 by 1995. Some 500,000
Americans visited Turkey in 2000.

--- Sayfa 202 ---
180 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
porary Turkish debate.  Even among elites, there is often a marked
suspicion of American aims. Turkey’s diplomats chafe at the need to
adjust the country’s foreign policy to meet American expectations.
The military establishment values its strategic and technical collabo-
ration with the United States, and has been a (perhaps the) leading
interlocutor in bilateral relations, but it is especially sensitive to
sovereignty questions, and these are often at the forefront of discus-
sions with Washington on Incirlik and other matters.
Broadly speaking, the Turkish private sector—a relative newcomer to
foreign policy debates in Turkey—is less suspicious and more posi-
tively inclined.  Leading Turkish business groups have devoted con-
siderable energy to promoting trade and investment ties to the
United States, with the goal of augmenting and diversifying Turkey’s
Euro-centric economic relations.  TUSIAD has opened a representa-
tive office in Washington with a public policy as well as a trade pro-
motion mandate.  The phenomenon of globalization—as fashionable
a topic in Turkey as elsewhere—is often closely associated with the
United States in Turkish perceptions.  Here, too, the business com-
munity tends to be more comfortable with the notion of globaliza-
tion than those in political circles, on the right and the left, and more
favorably disposed toward the American role.23  It is notable that in
Turkey’s economic crisis of 2001, lobbying for support in Washington
has been a priority for Turkish business groups.  Overall, the private
sector has emerged as a far more prominent interlocutor in bilateral
relations and now plays a large role in shaping American attitudes
toward the country.  Turkey’s economic troubles, and the focus on
corruption and mismanagement in public-private sector relations in
Turkey, have caused special dismay in Washington, where the
“dynamism” of Turkey’s private sector has been a feature of most
discussions about the Turkish scene in recent years.
The emergence of a more diverse foreign policy debate in Turkey,
with new elites participating, has contributed to a more positive per-
ception of the United States.  Despite some important policy differ-
ences, the general tone of the relationship has arguably never been
better.  In the view of many Turkish observers, President Clinton’s
______________

23See Lesser, Strong States, Difficult Choices: Mediterranean Perspectives on In-
tegration and Globalization.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
Turkey and the United States 181
November 1999 visit to Turkey in the context of the OSCE summit
marked a high point in the relationship.  Turks were impressed by
the substance and tone of key speeches, including a speech to the
“not-so-pro-American” Turkish parliament that was greeted with
great enthusiasm by Islamist deputies, among others.24  Turkey’s Is-
lamists have, as a rule, been more concerned with domestic than
foreign policy, and their perspectives on the United States and the
bilateral relationship are far from uniform.  Although sharing some of
the nationalist concerns of the secular right (e.g., about Cyprus) that
encourage a wary view of the United States, many Islamists also see
themselves as potential beneficiaries of American pressure over hu-
man rights and democratization.  Turkey’s mainstream Islamists, in-
cluding leading members of the now banned Virtue Party, have gen-
erally been eager to engage American policymakers and observers.
Turkey’s Islamist parties have generally expressed shock over the
September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, although they
have been less supportive of the idea of Turkish military con-
tributions to operations in Afghanistan or Iraq.
There can be little doubt that most Turks know more about the
United States than their American counterparts know about Turkey.
The pervasiveness of American culture, business, and media and the
prominence of American actions worldwide assure that this is so.
Nonetheless, even well-informed Turks are often puzzled by the
workings of the policy process in Washington.  Decades of battles
with Greek, Armenian, human rights and other groups in Washing-
ton have encouraged the view that Turkish-American relations are
influenced, above all, by the clash of lobbies. The engagement of
American policymakers on substantive issues and the enhancement
of programs to address the “affinity deficit” at the public level appear
to receive less attention.  This reality is particularly meaningful at a
time of strategic flux in which key international relationships are
being redefined and Turkey, even as an important regional ally, must
compete for the attention of American policymakers.
______________

24Candar, “Some Turkish Perspectives on the United States and American Policy
Toward Turkey,” in Abramowitz, Turkey’s Transformation and American Policy, p. 147.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
182 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
LOOKING AHEAD
After decades in which the contours of Turkey’s relations with the
United States were well established, the bilateral relationship at the
start of the 21st century faces many sources of change.  The progres-
sive transformation and modernization of Turkish society, with all
the associated stresses and strains, may be the most significant ele-
ment in this equation.  Changes on the domestic scene have brought
new issues to the fore and could ultimately reduce or eliminate many
long-standing obstacles to an even closer relationship, including
shortcomings on human rights and political and economic reform.
The political and social dimensions of Turkey’s economic travails
will also be meaningful to Washington.  A chaotic and less-prosper-
ous Turkey will have little energy to play a positive regional role and
little ability to fulfill its promise as a “big emerging market”—themes
that have been central to official visions for the bilateral relationship.
The pace and character of change on the domestic scene will be a de-
terminant of Turkey’s progress in relations with the EU—an essential
backdrop for the future of Turkey’s relations with the United States.
Domestic developments will also shape the way Turks view broader
questions of globalization in which the United States looms large.
Turkey’s internal transformation is likely to be a key, enabling factor
setting the tone and limits of the bilateral relationship as seen from
Washington.  Similarly, for Turks, the American response to Turkey’s
internal challenges, including the country’s economic crisis, will be a
key test of the health of the relationship and the atmosphere for co-
operation on other issues.
At a fundamental level, Turkish and American interests are broadly
convergent.  Both states are inherently status quo powers with re-
spect to the regional and international environment.  Despite in-
creasing activism in key areas such as the Middle East, Turkish for-
eign policy can still be characterized as cautious and conservative in
overall terms.  Both countries are, for different reasons, relatively se-
curity conscious, and the bilateral relationship retains immense
value as seen from Ankara.  This shared security consciousness is
likely to be strongly reinforced by the new primacy of counterterror-
ism in U.S. strategy.  Nonetheless, at the level of policy approaches,
there are some important areas of ongoing and potential divergence.

--- Sayfa 205 ---
Turkey and the United States 183
Looking ahead, several issues stand out as sources of change—both
challenges and opportunities—for the bilateral relationship.25
First, regardless of the outcome of Turkey’s EU candidacy, the Euro-
pean factor is likely to be a leading influence on the bilateral rela-
tionship in the 21st century.  The longer-term implications of a more
European Turkey in policy terms may be significant.  The net result is
likely to be greater normalization and maturity in relations between
Washington and Ankara, as has been the pattern elsewhere across
Southern Europe.  If, by contrast, the Turkish-EU relationship stalls
or deteriorates (e.g., over the question of Cypriot accession, lack of
reform in Turkey, or ESDP), there will be greater reliance—and pres-
sure—on Turkey’s relationship with Washington.  This could prove
an uncomfortable reality for both sides, particularly against a back-
drop of tension in transatlantic relations.
Second, the advent of the Bush administration in Washington places
the question of regional policies in sharper relief.  Turkey and the
United States may seek peace and stability in areas of shared con-
cern, but policies differ.  Iran, and above all Iraq, will be key ques-
tions in this regard.  A tougher American stance in the Gulf, and es-
pecially a renewed military confrontation with Iraq or an effort to
tighten sanctions, would be met with dismay in Ankara.  It could also
prove a test of Turkish solidarity in Washington.  Against this
background, both countries face decisions about tangible matters
such as the use of Incirlik air base after the eventual end of Operation
Northern Watch and the conduct of Turkish-Iraqi trade within and
outside the UN sanctions regime.  From a Turkish perspective, the
best outcome might well be continued military containment of Iraq,
accompanied by a loosening of the sanctions regime—and no
support for opposition movements in Iraq that might spur chaos and
Kurdish separatism in the region.  American policy preferences make
this unlikely.  In other areas such as Central Asia, the Balkans, and
the Aegean, bilateral perspective are more congruent.  Washington
has been a strong supporter of Turkey’s prospective leadership of
peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan (ISAF) and has agreed to
help defray the costs of Turkish participation.  In the Middle East
______________

25For a perspective on some of these issues, see Alan Makovsky, “Turkey and the Bush
Administration:  The Question Marks,” Policywatch No. 527, Washington, D.C.:  The
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, March 30, 2001.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
184 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
peace process, Ankara will likely support an engaged rather than an
arm’s length approach from Washington.  The strong Turkish-Israeli
relationship only increases Ankara’s stake in this area.
Third, a decade after the end of the Cold War, policy toward Russia is
again at the forefront.  A deterioration of U.S.-Russian relations will
increase risks for Turkey in the Caucasus and Black Sea, as well as in
the Middle East and the Balkans where Russian policies are
meaningful.  At the same time, Turkish concerns about Russia mirror
those in the United States, and the American connection will remain
the cornerstone of Turkey’s deterrent posture vis-à-vis Russia.  For
these reasons, dialogue on the management of relations with
Moscow should be a prominent item on the bilateral agenda for the
future.
Fourth, energy policy is likely to become an even more important
part of the relationship.  The elements here include Turkey’s own en-
ergy needs, America’s growing interest in energy security issues, and
Turkey’s role as a conduit for Middle Eastern and Caspian oil and
gas.  Much attention has been focused on the prospects for the Baku-
Ceyhan pipeline.  Many Turks see continued, even enhanced, Ameri-
can support as critical to the outcome.  But the American enthusiasm
for subsidizing the project is very limited.  Even apart from Baku-
Ceyhan, the restoration of full Iraqi oil exports via Turkish pipelines
(the capacity of these existing lines is roughly twice that of the pro-
posed Baku-Ceyhan route) would strongly reinforce Turkey’s role in
the world energy picture.
Fifth, the rationale for a “strategic” relationship will go beyond
Turkey’s geographic position in relation to regions of shared concern.
Many of the most prominent foreign and security policy problems in
the new environment are transregional.  A prominent example is the
challenge of missile proliferation.  Ankara’s perspective on this issue
is perhaps closest to that of the United States, and Turkey’s interest
in missile defenses is correspondingly strong.  Turkish-U.S. dialogue
and cooperation on missile defense could emerge as an important
subset of the increasingly energetic transatlantic debate on this
topic.  If a regionally based or “boost-phase” missile defense ar-
chitecture is pursued, parts of this system might well be based in
Turkey, at which point this will move from a conceptual to a practical
issue in the bilateral relationship.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
Turkey and the United States 185
Finally, policymakers in Ankara and Washington will continue to
seek, with some success, a more diverse relationship featuring in-
creased economic and other forms of cooperation outside the secu-
rity realm.  But the primacy of security issues in Turkish-U.S. rela-
tions is likely to endure for structural reasons.  These reasons include
the flavor of Turkish and American policy concerns, persistent in-
stability in adjacent regions, the impetus of decades of security co-
operation, uncertainties regarding Russia, and, not least, the exis-
tence of other more natural economic partners for Turkish business.
It is notable that in the midst of Turkey’s economic crisis, Turkey’s
advocates—including the Turkish private sector—have made the
case for support in strategic rather than economic terms.
The future bilateral relationship will need to reflect a changing
Turkey, a changing strategic environment, and an evolving foreign
policy debate in the United States.  It must also accommodate the
more rigorous measurement of Turkish national interests that has
accompanied the country’s more active external policy and growing
regional power.  In all likelihood, the relationship will be more di-
verse, within limits, and involve a wider range of interlocutors.  More
than ever before, the character of Turkish-U.S. relations will depend
on external variables, such as Turkey’s relationship with Europe and
the evolution of Russia, outside the bilateral agenda narrowly de-
fined.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
187
Chapter Eight
CONCLUSION
In the last decade Turkey has emerged as a more active and impor-
tant actor on the international stage.  After the collapse of the Soviet
Union, Turkey rediscovered a world of interests and affinities
stretching “from the Balkans to Western China”—areas that had
been largely absent from the mainstream Turkish foreign policy de-
bate, not just since the start of the Cold War but since the foundation
of the Republic.  More recently, analysts have focused on the increas-
ing activism in Turkish external policy.  With few exceptions, this ac-
tivism has been evident largely in traditional areas of interest such as
Europe, as well as areas of perceived risk, above all the Middle East.
Turkey is, at base, a conservative society with a conservative ap-
proach to public policy in most spheres.  Almost 80 years after the
founding of the Turkish Republic this remains true.  However, Turkey
today is in the midst of a period of important political change that
could have a profound effect on its foreign policy evolution.  Looking
ahead, several significant, open questions will shape the Turkish
foreign and security policy debate.  They will also shape to a consid-
erable extent the character of Turkish relations with the West.  These
key questions concern the future shape of Turkey as a society,
Turkey’s international identity, its regional behavior, and its place in
a globalized world.
WHITHER TURKEY?
Turkey’s current economic travails only serve to underscore the im-
portance of the country’s internal evolution in determining what is
possible and what is likely in Turkish external policy.  Turkey is truly

--- Sayfa 210 ---
188 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
at a crossroads. After more than a decade of substantial moderniza-
tion, Turkey faces a crisis of leadership and reform.  Few Turks, out-
side of the most traditional government circles in Ankara, would dis-
agree with the notion that the process of change in Turkey has
reached an impasse that requires some dramatic changes in the way
the country is governed, and by whom.  Visions of what should come
next differ at the level of orientation but not scale.  Incrementalism
and “muddling through”—approaches that have characterized
Turkish policy in the past—are unlikely to be sufficient in the future.
The threshold for social unrest in Turkey remains high, but a con-
tinuing economic crisis, with social and political cleavages left unre-
solved, could push Turkey toward instability, making more extreme
or chaotic outcomes a possibility.  The foreign policy consequences
would be substantial.  In particular, a Turkey in turmoil would likely
find Europe even more resistant to the idea of Turkish membership
in the EU.
The argument about Turkey as a pivotal state turns on the potential
for the country to affect a wider area through its foreign policy
behavior but also through internal developments.  The notion of
Turkey as a regional model reflects the positive side of this potential.
But an impoverished and unstable Turkey would have very different
and very negative consequences for Europe, Eurasia, and the Middle
East.  An unstable hinterland might impede reconstruction and inte-
gration in Southeastern Europe.  It might reinforce an existing ten-
dency toward instability in the Caucasus and Central Asia.  Security
perceptions in Athens and Moscow would be affected.  An unstable
and unpredictable Turkey would contribute to a deteriorating secu-
rity environment in the Middle East and would limit Western options
in the Gulf and elsewhere.  From a NATO and an EU perspective, a
troubled Turkey makes it more likely that Ankara will be a “con-
sumer” rather than a “producer” of security on the European
periphery.
The scenario of a troubled, inward-looking, and more nationalistic
Turkey, with a more limited but also less predictable foreign policy, is
not the most likely case.  But it is a possibility.  More plausibly,
Turkey’s resources and resilience—and the climate of incipient
change—will eventually lead to significant reforms on the political as
well as the economic scenes.  The result in this case is likely to be a
more modern and stable Turkey, better integrated in European insti-

--- Sayfa 211 ---
Conclusion 189
tutions, more comfortable with the challenges of globalization, and
more moderate and multilateral in its foreign policy outlook.  This is
a scenario that would benefit Turks, Turkey’s neighbors, and Tur-
key’s allies.
As a former imperial power, Turks are used to thinking strategically,
and the modern strategist finds no shortage of plausible and im-
plausible theories in the Turkish policy debate.  The economic crisis
and the natural focus on domestic politics have, however, reduced
strategic thinking to a minimum.  For the moment, the country’s in-
tellectual and political energies are focused elsewhere, with an em-
phasis on immediate domestic challenges.  But the resolution of
these internal challenges will have a critical effect on Turkey’s future
geopolitical role.  If Turkey proves unable to overcome its domestic
difficulties, its ability to play an active and constructive role in inter-
national affairs will be sharply reduced.
WHERE DOES TURKEY FIT?
It is arguable that modern Turkey has functioned as part of several
systems—European, Middle Eastern, and Eurasian—while remaining
on the cultural and political periphery of each.  At an important level,
the Turkish foreign policy debate is a constantly renewed argument
about identity.  There is a tendency among many highly Westernized
Turks to regard discussions about Turkish identity with distaste.
Surely Turkey’s EU candidacy means that the question of identity has
been resolved?  But this question of identity has not been resolved
and will in all likelihood remain open for the foreseeable future.
There is nothing pejorative or unnatural about this.  Europe itself is
witnessing an extended debate about its own identity as it contem-
plates enlargement, monetary union, and a more common approach
to foreign policy and defense.  Turks rightly sense that the EU’s ap-
proach to the question of Turkey’s (and other nonmembers’) role in
ESDP is not simply institutional in nature.  It includes an identity
dimension:  Who is “European” and who is not?  Where do Europe’s
frontiers end?  Who and what are we defending?
Helsinki summit decisions notwithstanding, the issue of where
Turkey fits in a changing Europe remains unresolved on both sides.
Turkey’s own internal evolution and convergence with European
norms is a fundamental, enabling condition for the promise of Euro-

--- Sayfa 212 ---
190 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
pean membership to be fulfilled.  An evolving Europe, possibly with
multiple circles and “variable geometry,” could become more com-
fortable with the challenges of scale and identity associated with
Turkish membership.  On the other hand, the elements contributing
to mutual ambivalence about membership are unlikely to be re-
solved easily.  Europe may continue to hold Turkey at arm’s length
even against a background of growing Turkish integration and con-
vergence with Europe in a political, economic, and social context. Or,
the failure to meet key aspects of the EU’s Copenhagen criteria, or
lack of progress on Cyprus and the Aegean, could relegate Turkey to
a hollow candidacy.  In foreign policy terms, the question of Turkey’s
European integration is full of gray areas.  It is perfectly plausible that
Turkey can remain, as it always has, a functioning part of the Euro-
pean system short of full EU membership.  Absent Cold War condi-
tions, however, it may be increasingly difficult for Turkey to play an
effective role in the Euro-Atlantic system without progress on the
domestic reform agenda.
To what extent might alternative Middle Eastern, Muslim, or Turkic
identities augment or replace a European identity that remains un-
consolidated?  The short answer is that this is most unlikely.  Over the
next decade, Turkey might well find itself with more active economic
and political ties to Eurasia and the Middle East.  This could be the
product of a more dynamic Russia or the full reintegration of Iraq
and Iran in the international system.  Turkey is a potential benefi-
ciary of both possibilities.  Or it could be the product of political de-
velopments inside Turkey, including the emergence of a reformist-
religious or a religious-nationalist synthesis, with fewer reservations
about ties to the Muslim and Turkic worlds.  It is nonetheless difficult
to imagine the practical basis for such reinforced ties replacing the
strategic (in the sense of comprehensive political, economic, and
defense interests) relationship with the West.  Europe is likely to re-
main the overwhelmingly important economic partner for Turkey,
and short of a U.S. retreat from engagement in Europe and the Mid-
dle East, Washington will remain Ankara’s key security partner.  As a
matter of identity, one possibility for the future is greater acceptance
of a more balanced orientation between East and West, as the
Kemalist tradition becomes more diffuse.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
Conclusion 191
HOW WILL TURKEY ACT?
The heightened activism and assertiveness in Turkish external policy
in recent years should prove durable.  Immediate economic chal-
lenges may well leave Turkey with less energy and fewer resources to
devote to foreign policy in the short term.  But the bases of a more
active approach, from the rediscovery of regional interests to the ex-
pansion of the public debate on foreign policy questions, are likely to
endure and make themselves felt in the future.  Indeed, one of the
consequences of Turkey’s recent travails may be a heightened sense
of national interest, especially as it relates to trade and economic de-
velopment.  And ultimately, a more prosperous and integrated
Turkey may see new reasons for active engagement in adjacent re-
gions, alongside the country’s international partners.
Turks continue to stress the insecurity of their neighborhood as a ra-
tionale for cautious engagement, and sometimes intervention.  At the
opening of the 21st century, Turkey’s neighborhood remains ex-
traordinarily troubled.  The resulting regional challenges will be diffi-
cult, perhaps impossible, for Ankara to ignore.  In Southeastern Eu-
rope, the process of political and economic reconstruction is likely to
be prolonged, with the potential for further destructive conflict, es-
pecially in the Southern Balkans.  Short of a serious break in Ankara’s
relations with the West, Turkey will remain a conservative, multilat-
eral, and significant actor in the Balkans.  But Ankara’s policy is likely
to remain in step with Western policy, not run counter to it.
With Athens, Ankara shares a strategic stake in the resolution of
Aegean disputes.  Greece and Turkey have shown an ability to act in
concert in the Balkans and have recently moved toward a more flex-
ible and less risk-prone stance in their bilateral relations.  However,
Ankara’s future willingness to consolidate Turkish-Greek détente
and, in particular, to help resolve the Cyprus problem will turn criti-
cally on the overall character of relations between Turkey and Eu-
rope.  A Turkey disillusioned or bitter in its relations with the EU will
have fewer incentives to compromise on the Aegean or Cyprus.  The
result could be a return to brinkmanship in Greek-Turkish relations
and an additional burden on European and American diplomacy in
the Eastern Mediterranean.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
192 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Turkey’s rediscovery of a larger Turkic world in the Caucasus and
Central Asia has had a significant effect on Turkey’s perception of its
national interests.  It has also been a vehicle for more active involve-
ment, officially and by the Turkish private sector.  Initial expectations
about the scope of Turkey’s role have proven to be inflated.  But the
opening of former Soviet areas that had been off-limits, intellectu-
ally, politically, and in practical terms, has had enduring conse-
quences for Turkish foreign policy.  Opportunities in Eurasia have
not replaced more pressing interests in the West, but they have
placed these and other interests in a different perspective.
If Turkey is more central in European, American, and Russian calcu-
lations today, this is so in large part because the field for Turkish ex-
ternal policy is now much broader—and many of the new possibili-
ties lie in Eurasia.  Continued economic growth in Turkey will require
access to new sources of oil and gas, from Russia and the Caspian.  A
more complex web of oil and gas pipelines will make these energy
links a “permanently operating factor” in Turkey’s foreign policy.
With the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline plan, Turkey is a leading competitor
in Caspian geopolitics.  But perhaps more significantly, Turkey is
now part of a complex and highly interdependent system of energy
supply, and shared economic interests, spanning Eurasia.  Even
without Baku-Ceyhan, Turkey is emerging as a key entrepôt and
transit state for energy supplies headed to Europe from Eurasia and
the Southeastern Mediterranean.
Turkey’s ability to play a more active role in the energy field, how-
ever, will be significantly affected by political developments in the
Caucasus.  Since the mid-1990s, Turkey has succeeded in enhancing
its role as an important regional actor in the Caucasus, strengthening
ties to both Azerbaijan and Georgia.  But the political situation in the
Caucasus is extremely fluid.  Both Azerbaijan and Georgia will face
succession issues in the near future.  How these are resolved could
have a significant effect on Turkey’s interests in the Caucasus, espe-
cially the prospects for completion of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline.
These new factors in the Turkish foreign policy calculus will have the
effect of reinforcing a very traditional Turkish foreign and security
policy concern about Russia.  For centuries, Turkey was at the center
of Russian-Western interaction in security terms.  In the post–Cold
War climate, the consequences of alternative paths in Russian-

--- Sayfa 215 ---
Conclusion 193
Western relations are once again likely to be felt most directly on the
European periphery, with direct implications for Turkey.  Ankara will
continue to have a strong stake in cooperative relations with a stable
and satisfied Russia.  A more chaotic Russian state, with turmoil on
its borders, would create political and security vacuums around the
Black Sea and the Caucasus, increasing the likelihood of refugee
movements and violent spillovers affecting Turkey.  Moreover, tur-
moil along Russia’s south could stimulate nationalist sentiment in-
side Turkey and might lead to pressure for a more interventionist
policy in Ankara.  A resurgent and assertive Russia would similarly
find more room for maneuver in peripheral areas, adjacent to
Turkey, from the Balkans to the Caucasus.  In short, the risks in
Turkish-Russian relations are high over the longer term, and the
need for deterrence and reassurance vis-à-vis Moscow will continue
to drive a cautious and Western-oriented approach in Ankara.
Turks will continue to see the Middle East as an area of risk requiring
an active, security-driven set of policies.  The core of this activism
is likely to remain the close connection between internal security
issues—Kurdish separatism and Islamism—and the situation to
Turkey’s south and east.  Developments inside Turkey, such as a
gradual resolution of the Kurdish problem or the emergence of a less
provocative relationship between religion and secularism in Turkish
politics, could reduce the prominence of this connection, but it is
likely to remain a factor of some weight in the Turkish foreign policy
calculus.  Thus, Ankara will prefer a cohesive and reintegrated Iraq
that can be held at arm’s length in security terms.  Roughly the same
approach will apply in relations with Iran—a policy orientation
closer to that of Europe than that of the United States.  If Turkey has
a containment strategy in the Middle East, it will continue to apply,
above all, to Syria, where the sources of bilateral friction are multiple
and pronounced.
The Middle East has been the principal theater of Turkish regional
activism in recent years.  It is also the area where Ankara is willing
and able to pursue a more assertive and unilateral set of policies.
The task of balancing the defense of Turkish interests in the Middle
East, sometimes with the use of force, without becoming embroiled
in costly, strategic confrontations may be more difficult in the future
for several reasons.  Economic stringency is unlikely to derail the
longer-term evolution of Turkey as a modern and highly capable

--- Sayfa 216 ---
194 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
power, capable of the projection of military force at some distance
from its own Middle Eastern borders.  In future Middle Eastern
crises, Turkey will have the potential for significant intervention in its
own right, in addition to facilitating Western power projection.  At
the same time, the spread of weapons of mass destruction and bal-
listic missiles across the Middle East will lead to far more credible
threats of retaliation against Turkish territory.  With the deterioration
in Israeli-Palestinian relations again posing the possibility of a
regional conflict, and with the question of Iraqi and Iranian futures
unresolved, the ingredients for a much more challenging envi-
ronment are in place as seen from Ankara.  Here, as in other regional
settings, the risks to Turkey of an activist stance would probably be
far greater in the absence of a predictable Turkish security relation-
ship with the West.
The new emphasis on combating terrorism in the wake of the
September 11, 2001, attack on the United States is likely to compli-
cate Turkish foreign policy, especially in the Middle East and Central
Asia.  As a Muslim country, Turkey will want to ensure that the war
on terrorism does not become a “civilizational” struggle between Is-
lam and the West.  Ankara will also have to weigh its interest in sup-
porting U.S.-led actions against terrorism with its own national in-
terests in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf.
There is also some uncertainty regarding the effect of these devel-
opments on Europe.  European attitudes toward Turkish member-
ship in the European Union remain ambivalent despite the Helsinki
decision.  The war on terrorism may reinforce this ambivalence as
Europeans become even more reluctant to see a Muslim country en-
ter the EU, fearing the import of “Middle Eastern” conflicts.  This
could further complicate Turkey’s prospects for EU membership,
leaving Turkey increasingly frustrated and disappointed.
In short, Turkey’s ability to play a strong regional role is likely to face
increasing challenges in the coming decade.  Turkey may well be a
more confident and capable foreign and security policy actor in the
21st century, but it will face many new risks if this activism is played
out in a unilateral context.  The need to avoid acting as a “lone wolf”
gives Turkey an interest in maintaining a diverse set of security rela-
tionships—transatlantic, European, Israeli, possibly even Russian

--- Sayfa 217 ---
Conclusion 195
under favorable conditions.  The effectiveness of these ties will be a
key variable in Turkey’s regional influence.
WHAT PLACE IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD?
The diversity of challenges and opportunities on Turkey’s borders
encourages Turks and others to see Turkish policy through a regional
lens or, more accurately, a set of regional lenses.  But as the unre-
solved question of Turkish identity suggests, Turkish policy has al-
ways had a wider systemic context.  As our discussion of domestic
developments suggests, a more liberal, outward-looking Turkey is
one quite likely path, but it is not the only one.  Turkey could well ex-
perience a period of retrenchment in which the country turns inward
and acts with a more nationalistic flavor internationally.
The costs and consequences of a retreat from integration and global-
ization are probably increasing.  By many measures, from tourism
and foreign remittances to telecommunications and Internet usage,
Turkey is already a highly globalized country.  Turkey’s urbanized
elites are relatively comfortable with the phenomenon of globaliza-
tion, and many of Turkey’s most successful businesses have far-flung
international interests.  The prosperity of the last 20 years has been
closely tied to the opening of the economy and the progressive
globalization of Turkish society at many levels.
Nonetheless, Turks are keenly aware of the competitive pressures
and vulnerabilities that integration and globalization imply.  The cur-
rent economic crisis has only served to reinforce a long-standing
sensitivity about globalization in light of Turkey’s long tradition of
state involvement in virtually all aspects of life and a very highly de-
veloped notion of national sovereignty.  It is increasingly clear that
Turkey cannot preserve the traditional prerogatives of the Kemalist
state if it wishes to integrate more closely with Europe and partici-
pate more effectively in a globalized system.  More precisely, Turkey
could hold to traditional ideas of state sovereignty—and many Turks
may favor this—but it will pay a high price to do so.  Moreover, with
political and economic questions becoming more central to Euro-
Atlantic relations, it is likely that a more sovereignty-conscious and
inward-looking Turkey would find its security relationships troubled
as well.  If economic and political reform fails in Turkey, many Turks
may find it convenient to blame international financial institutions

--- Sayfa 218 ---
196 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
and the phenomenon of globalization more generally.  A climate of
resentment would inevitably affect the quality of Turkey’s foreign
and defense policy cooperation with the West.
As Turkish leaders have discovered in previous periods of political
and economic turmoil, internal problems can have an isolating ef-
fect, chilling the climate for foreign investment and diplomatic coop-
eration with allies.  In the absence of Cold War strategic imperatives,
the link between internal stability and international engagement in
and with Turkey may be even closer.  Turkish default on its interna-
tional debt, unlikely but not impossible, would have a devastating
effect on the country’s international standing and would reinforce an
existing tendency in some quarters, especially in Europe, to see
Turkey as “part of the problem.”  Further large-scale financial assis-
tance to forestall a Turkish default would probably imply further dra-
conian conditions and an insistence on fundamental political as well
as economic change.  Ultimately, Turkish policymakers may count
on the idea that their country is simply too important in geopolitical
terms for Europe and the United States to ignore—that the systemic
implications of a Turkish collapse will always compel international
intervention.  They may be right. But Turkish-Western relations will
not benefit from too many such test cases of the country’s pivotal
status.
Some aspects of globalization may imply an end of geography.  For
Turkey, the rise of political, economic, and military issues that cut
across traditional regional lines and span Europe, Eurasia, and the
Middle East will be central to perceptions of the country’s geopoliti-
cal importance.  Geography makes Turkey a key partner in address-
ing transregional risks, from drug smuggling and refugee flows to ter-
rorism and the proliferation of destructive, longer-range weaponry.
It will also make Turkey an essential partner in capturing new diplo-
matic and commercial opportunities, whether through new lines of
communication for energy or in new approaches to the Middle East
peace process.
IMPLICATIONS FOR TURKEY’S WESTERN PARTNERS
These conclusions suggest a number of implications for the United
States and Europe in their relations with Ankara over the next
decade.  First, Turkey’s internal evolution is likely to be the leading

--- Sayfa 219 ---
Conclusion 197
determinant of the country’s foreign policy potential and direction.
The key choices in this regard will be made by Turkey, and the con-
ditions for successful change will emanate largely from Ankara.
Turkey must choose the pace and extent of reform in key areas, in-
cluding the economy, the rules governing political parties, and hu-
man rights.  The outcome will be critical to Turkey’s relations with
Europe and the United States.  However, although the longer-term
direction for Turkish society will be determined largely by domestic
realities, Western assistance, both political and economic, can help
to reduce near-term risks and enable Turkey to manage its internal
problems more successfully.  However, this support should be con-
ditioned on Turkey’s willingness to proceed with a coherent and
sustainable reform program.
Economic and political reforms could well bring previously marginal
political forces into policymaking positions.  As a result, Turkey’s
partners will face the challenge of developing an effective dialogue
with a wider range of forces, including the new breed of Islamists and
Turkish nationalists, in addition to the traditional centrist and secu-
lar elites.  The foreign policy inclinations of these elements are in
flux, and early dialogue could help to ensure more moderate policies
in future years.
Moreover, the Turkish political establishment faces a major genera-
tional turnover.  Many of the dominant political figures of the last
several decades—Ecevit, Demirel, Erbakan—are in their 70s and will
soon depart from the political scene.  They will be replaced by a new
generation of Turkish leaders who may adopt quite different ap-
proaches to many problems than the older generation of leaders.  As
this transition unfolds—and this is likely to happen rather rapidly—
Turkey may go through a difficult period of change.  Thus, the West
should begin now to establish close contacts with the new generation
of leaders who will shape Turkey’s future.
Second, Turkey’s continued integration and convergence with Eu-
rope will be the leading external determinant of Turkish foreign pol-
icy behavior in the coming years.  Helsinki established a path toward
integration, but the outlook for Turkish membership remains highly
uncertain.  Turkish estrangement from Europe—a real risk—would
have very negative consequences for Turkish regional policy in the
Eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans and would render Turkey a

--- Sayfa 220 ---
198 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
far less-predictable security partner in Eurasia and the Middle East.
A difficult relationship with Europe could open the way for a more
nationalistic and unilateral Turkish foreign policy.  By contrast, a
stable, positive evolution of Turkish-EU relations would encourage a
more predictable and multilateral approach across the board.  It
would also simplify and strengthen U.S.-Turkish relations, provided
transatlantic relations as a whole remain cooperative and Washing-
ton remains engaged in European and Middle Eastern affairs.  A sit-
uation in which Turkey is forced to choose between Europe and the
United States, in an unstable strategic environment, would pose
nightmarish dilemmas for Turkish policymakers and could create
serious tensions in U.S.-European relations.
It is important, therefore, that U.S. and European approaches toward
Turkey be in harmony.  EU policy will have a significant effect on
Turkey’s future evolution.  But given Ankara’s strong security ties to
the United States and Washington’s security interests in the Eastern
Mediterranean and Middle East, the United States will continue to be
an important influence on Turkish policy.  Thus, to avoid the emer-
gence of new transatlantic differences over Turkey, U.S. and Euro-
pean policy needs to be closely coordinated.
This is particularly true regarding Cyprus.  If mishandled, the acces-
sion of Cyprus into the EU could lead to a serious deterioration of
Turkey’s relations with the EU—and even stimulate a nationalist
backlash toward the West more broadly.  The current détente be-
tween Greece and Turkey could also be jeopardized, possibly leading
to a new period of confrontation between the two countries.  Both
the EU and the United States have a strong stake in preventing such a
development.  Thus, U.S. and European policymakers need to give
higher priority to achieving a Cyprus settlement.
Third, even under the most favorable conditions and with a multilat-
eral orientation in Ankara, Turkish cooperation in regional affairs,
including Gulf security, cannot be taken for granted.  The trend to-
ward more careful measurement of Turkish interests, and the will-
ingness to act forcefully in defense of security objectives, is unlikely
to weaken.  To the extent that Turkey recovers from its economic and
political difficulties, the coming years are likely to see a new Turkish
debate about foreign and security policy in which traditional as-
sumptions about the rationale for cooperation will be reassessed.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
Conclusion 199
Thus, the use of Turkish assets by the United States and NATO in the
future cannot be automatically taken for granted.
Finally, expectations regarding Turkey’s international role should be
tempered with a degree of realism.  Turkey may well emerge as a
more potent regional power in political, military, and commercial
terms.  But it faces strategic challenges in Eurasia and the Middle
East that cannot be addressed with reference to national means
alone.  Effective Alliance relationships will be essential to an effective
Turkish foreign policy, and these will impose their own constraints,
particularly in an era of more dilute and conditional security ties.
More broadly, Turkey’s long-standing dilemmas regarding identity
and the country’s role in various international “systems” are unlikely
ever to be fully resolved—nor is such resolution necessary.  Key ele-
ments of the Kemalist tradition may fade—or be modified—but
Atatürk’s legacy is likely to continue to exert an important influence
on Turkey’s political evolution and differentiate it in important ways
from that of other European states.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
201
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abramowitz, Morton, ed., Turkey’s Transformation and American
Policy, New York:  The Century Foundation Press, 2000.
__________, “The Complexities of American Policymaking on
Turkey,” Insight Turkey, Vol. 2, No. 4, October–December 2000,
pp. 3–35.
Ahrari, M. E., The New Great Game in Muslim Central Asia, McNair
Paper 47, Washington, D.C.:  Institute for National Strategic Stud-
ies, January 1996.
Akinci, Ugur, “The Welfare Party’s Municipal Track Record:  Evaluat-
ing Islamist Activism in Turkey,” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 53,
No. 1, Winter 1999, pp. 75–94.
Akyuz, Abdullah, “U.S.-Turkish Economic Relations at the Outset
of the 21st Century,” Insight Turkey, Vol. 2, No. 4, October–
December 2000, pp. 71–81.
Alstadt, Audrey, The Azerbaijani Turks:  Power and Identity Under
Russian Rule, Stanford, CA:  Hoover Institution Press, 1992.
Altunisik, Meliha Benli, “Turkish Policy Toward Israel,” in Alan
Makovsky and Sabri Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New World:  Changing
Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Policy, Washington, D.C.: The
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000, pp. 59–73.
Aras, Bülent, “The Impact of the Palestinian-Israeli Peace Process in
Turkish Foreign Policy,” Journal of South Asian and Middle East-
ern Studies, Vol. 20, No. 2, 1997, pp. 49–72.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
202 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
___________, “Post Cold War Realities:  Israel’s Strategy in Azerbaijan
and Central Asia,” Middle East Policy, Vol. 5, No. 4, January 1998,
pp. 69–70.
___________, “The Caspian Region and Middle East Security,” The
Mediterranean Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 1, Winter 2002, pp. 86–108.
Athanassopoulou, Ekavi, Turkey-Anglo-American Security Interests
1945–1952:  The First Enlargement of NATO, London:  Frank Cass,
1999.
__________, Israeli-Turkish Security Ties:  Regional Reactions,
Jerusalem:  Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advance-
ment of Peace, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, March 2001.
Axt, Heinz-Jürgen, “Der Ägäis Streit—ein unlösbarer griechisch
türkischer Konflikt?” Südosteuropa Mitteilungen, Nr. 2, 1999, pp.
137–151.
Ayata, Sencer, “Patronage Party and the State:  The Politicization of
Islam in Turkey,” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1, Winter
1996, pp. 40–56.
Aydin, Mustafa,  “Turkish Foreign Policy Towards Central Asia and
the Caucasus:  Continuity and Change,” Private View, No. 9, Au-
tumn 2000, pp. 36–44.
Aykan, Mahmut Bali, “The Palestinian Question in Turkish Foreign
Policy from the 1950s to the 1990s,” International Journal of Mid-
dle East Studies, Vol. 25, No. 1, 1993, pp. 91–110.
__________,  “Turkey’s Policy in Northern Iraq 1991–1995,” Middle
Eastern Studies, Vol. 32, No. 4, 1996, pp. 343–366.
Baev, Pavel, Russia Refocuses its Policies in the Southern Caucasus,
Working Paper Series No. 1, Caspian Studies Program, Harvard
University, July 2001.
Bahcheli, Tozun, Greek-Turkish Relations Since 1955, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1990.
__________, “Turkey’s Cyprus Challenge,” in Dimitris Keridis and
Dimitrios Triantaphyllou, eds.,  Greek-Turkish Relations in an Era
of Globalization, Dallas, VA:  Brassey’s, 2001, pp. 216–217.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Bibliography 203
Bal, Idris, Turkey’s Relationship with the West and the Turkic Re-
publics, Burlington, VT:  Ashgate Publishing Company, 2000.
Bal, Idris, and Cengiz Basak Bal, “Rise and Fall of Elchibey and
Turkey’s Central Asian Policy,” Dis Politika, No. 3-4, 1998, pp. 42–
56.
Barchard, David, Building a Partnership:  Turkey and the European
Union, Istanbul:  Turkish Economic and Social Studies Founda-
tion, 2000.
Barkey, Henri J., “The Silent Victor:  Turkey’s Role in the Gulf War,” in
Efraim Karsh, ed., The Iran-Iraq War:  Impact and Implications,
London:  Macmillan, 1989, pp. 133–153.
__________, “The Struggles of a Strong State,” The Journal of Interna-
tional Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 87–105.
__________, ed., Reluctant Neighbor:  Turkey’s Role in the Middle East,
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Institute of Peace, 1996.
Barkey, Henri J., and Graham E. Fuller, Turkey’s Kurdish Question,
Lanham, MD:  Rowman and Littlefield, 1998.
Bengio, Ofra, and Gencer Ozcan, Arab Perceptions of Turkey and its
Alignment with Israel, Tel Aviv:  BESA Center for Strategic Studies,
2001.
Binder, Leonard, ed., Ethnic Conflict and International Politics in the
Middle East, Gainsville, FL:  University Press of Florida, 1999.
Birand, Mehmet Ali, Shirts of Steel:  An Anatomy of the Turkish Armed
Forces, London:  I. B. Tauris, 1991.
__________, “Turkey and the Davos Process,” in Dimitri Constas, ed.,
The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s, New York:  St. Martin’s
Press, 1991, pp. 27–39.
Blackwill, Robert D., and Michael Stürmer, eds. Allies Divided:
Transatlantic Policies for the Greater Middle East, Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 1997.
Brewin, Christopher, The European Union and Cyprus, Huntingdon,
England:  The Eothen Press, 2000.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
204 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Brown, James, Delicately Poised Allies: Greece and Turkey, London:
Brassey’s, 1991.
Brown, L. Carol, ed., Imperial Legacy.  The Ottoman Imprint on the
Balkans and the Middle East, New York: Columbia University
Press, 1996,
Bugra, Aysa, State and Business in Modern Turkey:  A Comparative
Study, Albany, NY:  State University of New York Press, 1994.
Candar, Cengiz, “Some Turkish Perspectives on the United States
and American Policy Toward Turkey,” in Morton Abramowitz, ed.,
Turkey’s Transformation and American Policy, New York:  The
Century Foundation Press, 2000, pp. 123–152.
__________, “Atatürk’s Ambiguous Legacy,” The Wilson Quarterly,
Vol. XXIV, No. 4, Autumn 2000, pp. 88–96.
Celac, Sergiu, Michael, Emerson, and Nathalie Focci, A Stability Pact
for the Caucasus, Brussels:  Center for European Policy, May 2000.
Chace, Robert S., Emily Hill, and Paul Kennedy, “Pivotal States and
U.S. Strategy,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 75, No. 1, January/February
1996, pp. 33–51.
Chace, Robert, et al., eds. The Pivotal States, New York:  Norton, 1999.
Clogg, Richard,  “Greek-Turkish Relations in the Post-1974 Period,”
in Dimitri Constas, ed., The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s,
New York:  St. Martin’s Press, 1991, pp. 12–23.
Cohen, Ariel, “The ‘New Great Game’:  Pipeline Politics in Eurasia,”
European Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring 1996, pp. 2–15.
Commission Opinion on Turkey’s Request for Accession to the Com-
munity [SEC (89) 2290 fin./2], Brussels, December 20, 1989.
Constas, Dimitri, ed., The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s, New
York:  St. Martin’s Press, 1991.
Cornell, Svante E., “Iran and the Caucasus,” Middle East Policy, Vol.
5, No. 4, January 1998, pp. 51–67.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
Bibliography 205
__________, “Turkey and the Conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh:  A Deli-
cate Balance,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 34, No. 1, January 1998,
pp. 51–72.
__________, “Geopolitics and Strategic Alignments in the Caucasus
and Central Asia,” Perceptions, Vol. IV, No. 2, June–August 1999,
pp. 100–125.
__________, “Turkey:  Return to Stability?” Middle Eastern Studies,
Vol. 35, No. 4, October 1999, pp. 228–231.
__________, “The Kurdish Question in Turkish Politics,” Orbis, Vol.
45, No. 1, Winter 2000, pp. 31–46.
Couloumbis, Theodore A., The United States, Greece and Turkey:  The
Troubled Triangle, New York:  Praeger, 1983.
Crawshaw, Nancy, The Cyprus Revolt:  An Account of the Struggle for
Union with Greece, London:  George Allen & Unwin, 1978.
Demetriou, Madeleine, “On the Long Road to Europe and the Short
Path to War:  Issue-Linkage Politics and the Arms Build-Up in
Cyprus,” Mediterranean Politics, Vol. 3, No. 3, Winter 1998, pp. 38–
51.
Dodd, Clement H., The Cyprus Imbroglio, Huntingdon, England:  The
Eothen Press, 1998.
__________, Cyprus:  The Need for New Perspectives, Huntingdon,
England:  The Eothen Press, 1999.
__________, “A Historical Overview,” in Clement H. Dodd, Cyprus:
The Need for New Perspectives, Huntingdon, England:  The Eothen
Press, 1999.
__________, ed., Turkish Foreign Policy.  New Prospects, Huntingdon,
England:  The Eothen Press, 1992.
Dunlop, John, “Russia Under Putin:  Reintegrating the Post-Soviet
Space,” Journal of Democracy, Vol. 11, No. 3, 2000, pp. 39–47.
Eisenstadt, Michael, “Preparing for a Nuclear Breakout in the Middle
East,” Policywatch, No. 550, parts I and II, Washington, D.C.:  The
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, August 2001.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
206 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Ergil, Dogu, “Identity Crisis and Political Instability in Turkey,” The
Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 43–62.
Fedorov, Yuri E., “The Putin Factor in the Caspian,” Private View,
Autumn 2000, pp. 54–60.
Field, James A., America and the Mediterranean World 1776–1882,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969.
Finkel, Andrew, “Who Guards the Turkish Press?  A Perspective on
Press Corruption in Turkey,” The Journal of International Affairs,
Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 147–166.
Forsythe, Rosemary, “The Politics of Oil in the Caucasus and Central
Asia,” Adelphi Paper 300, London:  International Institute for
Strategic Studies, 1996.
Frey, Frederick, The Turkish Political Elite, Cambridge, MA:  MIT
Press, 1995.
Fuller, Graham E., “Turkey’s New Eastern Orientation,” in Graham E.
Fuller and Ian O. Lesser, Turkey’s New Geopolitics:  From the
Balkans to Western China, Boulder, CO:  Westview/RAND, 1993.
Fuller, Graham E., and Ian O. Lesser, Turkey’s New Geopolitics:  From
the Balkans to Western China, Boulder, CO:  Westview/RAND,
1993.
Gellner, Ernst, Encounters with Nationalism, Oxford:  Blackwell,
1994, pp. 81–91.
Gervasi, Frank, Thunder over the Mediterranean, New York:  David
McKay, 1975.
Gürbey, Gülistan, “Der Fall Öcalan und die türkisch-griechische
Krise:  Alte Drohungen oder neue Eskalation?” Südosteuropa Mit-
teilungen, Nr. 2, 1999, pp. 122–136.
Hale, William, Turkish Foreign Policy 1774–2000, London:  Frank
Cass, 2000.
__________, “Economic Issues in Turkish Foreign Policy,” in Alan
Makovsky and Sabri Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New World, Washington,

--- Sayfa 229 ---
Bibliography 207
D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000, pp. 20–
38.
Harris, George H., Troubled Alliance:  Turkish-American Problems in
Historical Perspective, Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute, 1972.
Heffner, Robert W., ed., Democratic Civility, New Brunswick, NJ:
Transition, 1998.
Henze, Paul B., Turkey and Armenia:  Past Problems and Future
Prospects, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 1996.
__________, “Turkey and the Caucasus,” Orbis, Vol. 45, No. 1, Winter
2001, pp. 81–91.
Heper, Metin, “Islam and Democracy in Turkey:  Toward a Reconcil-
iation?” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 51, No. 1, Winter 1997, pp.
32–45.
Herzig, Edmund, Iran and the Former Soviet South, London:  Royal
Institute of International Affairs, 1995.
IISS Military Balance, 2000–2001, London:  International Institute for
Strategic Studies, 2000.
Inbar, Efraim, “The Strategic Glue in the Israeli-Turkish Alignment,”
in Barry Rubin and Kemal Kirisçi, eds., Turkey in World Politics,
Boulder, CO:  Lynne Rienner, 2001, pp. 115–126.
Jenkins, Gareth, “Turkey and EU Security:  Camouflage or Criterion
for Candidacy?” Security Dialogue, Vol. 32, No. 2, June 2001, pp.
269–272.
__________, Context and Circumstance: The Turkish Military and
Politics, Adelphi Paper 337, London: International Institute for
Strategic Studies, 2001.
Kahraman, Sevilay Elgün, “Rethinking Turkey–European Union Re-
lations in Light of Enlargement,” Turkish Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1,
Spring 2000, pp. 1–20.
Kalicki, Jan, “Caspian Energy at the Crossroads,” Foreign Affairs, Vol.
80, No. 5, September–October 2001, pp. 120–134.

--- Sayfa 230 ---
208 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Karpat, Kemal, ed., The Turks of Bulgaria:  The History, Culture, and
Political Fate of a Minority, Istanbul:  The ISIS Press, 1990.
Karsh, Efraim, ed., The Iran-Iraq War:  Impact and Implications,
London:  Macmillan, 1989.
Kasaba, Resat, “Cohabitation?  Islamist and Secular Groups in Mod-
ern Turkey,” in Robert W. Heffner ed., Democratic Civility, New
Brunswick, NJ:  Transition 1998.
Keridis, Dimitris, and Dimitrios Triantaphyllou, Greek-Turkish Rela-
tions in an Era of Globalization, Dallas, VA:  Brassey’s 2001.
Khalilzad, Zalmay, Ian O. Lesser, and F. Stephen Larrabee, The Fu-
ture of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan, Santa
Monica, CA:  RAND, 2000.
Kinzer, Stephen, Crescent & Star, New York:  Farrar, Strauss and
Giroux, 2001.
Kirisçi, Kemal, “Turkey and the Muslim Middle East,” in Alan
Makovsky and Sabri Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New World, Washington,
D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000, pp. 39–
58.
__________, “Disaggregating Turkish Citizenship and Immigration
Practices,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 26, No. 3, July 2000, pp. 14–
17.
__________, “The Future of Turkish Policy Toward the Middle East,”
in Barry Rubin and Kemal Kirisçi, eds., Turkey in World Politics:
An Emerging Multiregional Power, London:  Lynne Rienner Pub-
lishers, 2001, pp. 93–114.
Klare, Michael T., Resource Wars, New York:  Henry Holt and Com-
pany, 2001.
Koliopoulos, John, and Thanos Veremis, Greece, the Modern Sequel,
New York:  New York University Press, 2002.
Kramer, Heinz, Die Europäische Gemeinschaft und die Turkei: En-
twicklung, Probleme und Perspektiven einer schwierigen Partner-
schaft, Baden-Baden:  Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, 1988.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
Bibliography 209
__________, “Turkey’s Relations with Greece:  Motives and Interests,”
in Dimitri Constas, ed., The Greek-Turkish Conflict in the 1990s,
New York:  St. Martin’s Press, 1991, pp. 57–72.
__________, “Turkey and the European Union:  A Multi-Dimensional
Relationship,” in Vojtech Mastny and R. Craig Nation, eds., Turkey
Between East and West:  New Challenges for a Rising Regional
Power, Boulder, CO:  Westview Press, 1996, pp. 203–232.
__________, A Changing Turkey:  The Challenges to Europe and the
U.S., Washington, D.C.:  The Brookings Institution, 2000.
Kugler, Richard L., and Ellen L. Frost, eds., The Global Century,
Globalization and National Security, Volume II, Washington, D.C.:
National Defense University Press, 2001.
Kuniholm, Bruce R., The Origins of the Cold War in the Near East:
Great Power Conflict and Diplomacy in Iran, Turkey and Greece,
Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press, 1980.
Larrabee, F. Stephen, “U.S. and European Policy Toward Turkey and
the Caspian Basin,” in Robert D. Blackwill and Michael Stürmer,
eds., Allies Divided:  Transatlantic Policies for the Greater Middle
East, Cambridge, MA:  The MIT Press, 1997, pp. 143–173.
__________, “Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions
and New Challenges,” in Zalmay Khalilzad, Ian O. Lesser, and F.
Stephen Larrabee, The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  To-
ward a Strategic Plan, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 2000, pp. 21–51.
__________, “Russia and Its Neighbors:  Integration or Disintegra-
tion,” in Richard L. Kugler and Ellen L. Frost, eds., The Global
Century, Globalization and National Security, Volume II, Washing-
ton, D.C.:  National Defense University Press, 2001, pp. 859–874.
Lesser, Ian O., Bridge or Barrier?  Turkey and the West After the Cold
War, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 1992.
__________, “Beyond Bridge or Barrier: Turkey’s Evolving Security
Relations with the West,” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sayari, eds.,
Turkey’s New World:  Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign Pol-
icy, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East
Policy, 2000, pp. 203–221.

--- Sayfa 232 ---
210 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
___________, “Turkey in a Changing Security Environment,” The
Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 183–
198.
__________, Strong States, Difficult Choices:  Mediterranean Perspec-
tives on Integration and Globalization, Washington, D.C.:  Na-
tional Intelligence Council/RAND, 2001.
__________, Turkey, Greece and the U.S. in a Changing Strategic Envi-
ronment:  Testimony Before the House International Relations
Committee, Subcommittee on Europe, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND,
June 2001.
Lesser, Ian O., and Ashley J. Tellis, Southern Exposure:  Proliferation
Around the Mediterranean, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 1996.
Lesser, Ian O., Jerrold D. Green, F. Stephen Larrabee, and Michele
Zanini, The Future of NATO’s Mediterranean Initiative:  Prospects
and Next Steps, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, 2000.
Lesser, Ian O., F. Stephen Larrabee, Michele Zanini, and Katia Vla-
chos-Dengler, Greece’s New Geopolitics, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND,
2001.
Lewis, Bernard, The Emergence of Modern Turkey, London:  Oxford
University Press, 1961.
Lieven, Anatole, “The (Not So) Great Game,” The National Interest,
Winter 1999/2000, pp. 69–80.
Lustick, Ian, “Hegemony and the Riddle of Nationalism,” in Leonard
Binder, ed., Ethnic Conflict and International Politics in the Middle
East, Gainesville, FL:  University Press of Florida, 1999.
Makovsky, Alan O., “Marching in Step, Mostly!” Private View, Spring
1999, Vol. 3, No. 7, p. 38.
__________, “The New Activism in Turkish Foreign Policy,” SAIS Re-
view, Vol. 19, No. 1, Winter–Spring 1999, pp. 92–113.
__________, “Turkey’s Nationalist Moment,” The Washington Quar-
terly, Vol. 22, No. 4, Autumn 1999, pp. 159–166.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
Bibliography 211
__________, “Turkish-Israeli Ties in the Context of Arab-Israeli Ten-
sion,” Policywatch, No. 502, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, November 10, 2000.
__________, “Turkey and the Bush Administration:  The Question
Marks,” Policywatch, No. 527, Washington. D.C.:  The Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, March 30, 2001.
Makovsky, Alan, and Sabri Sayari, eds., Turkey’s New World, Wash-
ington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2000.
Mango, Andrew, Turkey:  The Challenge of a New Role, Westport, CT:
Praeger, 1994.
__________, Atatürk:  The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey,
New York:  Overlook Press, 1999.
__________, “Atatürk and the Kurds,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 35,
No. 4, October 1999, pp. 1–25.
__________, “Reflections on the Atatürkist Origins of Turkish Foreign
Policy and Domestic Linkages,” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sa-
yari, eds., Turkey’s New World: Changing Dynamics in Turkish
Foreign Policy, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for
Near East Policy, 2000, pp. 9–19.
Mastny, Vojtech, and R. Craig Nation, eds., Turkey Between East and
West:  New Challenges for a Rising Regional Power, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1996,
Mayall, Simon V., Turkey:  Thwarted Ambition, McNair Paper No. 56,
Washington, D.C.:  National Defense University, 1997.
Micu, Nicolae, “Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) as a Confi-
dence-Building Measure,” Perceptions, Vol. 1, No. 4, December–
February 1996/97, pp. 68–75.
Missiroli, Antonio, “EU-NATO Cooperation in Crisis Management:
No Turkish Delight for ESDP,” Security Dialogue, Vol. 33, No. 1,
March 2002, pp. 9–26.
Mufti, Malik, “Daring and Caution in Turkish Foreign Policy,” The
Middle East Journal, Vol. 52, No. 1, Winter 1998, pp. 32–50.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
212 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Müftüler-Bac, Meltem, “The Never Ending Story:  Turkey and the
European Union,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 34, No. 4, October
1998, pp. 240–258.
__________, “Through the Looking Glass:  Turkey in Europe,” Turkish
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Spring 2000, pp. 21–35.
__________, “Turkey’s Role in the EU’s Security and Foreign Policies,”
Security Dialogue, Vol. 31, No. 4, December 2000, pp. 489–502.
Nachmani, Amikam, “Turkey and the Middle East,” BESA Security
and Policy Studies, No. 42, 1999, p. 3.
Neumann, Iver B., Uses of the Other:  The “East” in European Identity
Formation, Minneapolis, MN:  University of Minnesota Press,
1999.
Nodia, Ghia, “Turmoil and Stability in the Caucasus:  Internal Devel-
opments and External Influence,” presentation at the conference
“Prospects for Regional and Transregional Cooperation and the
Resolution of Conflicts,” Yerevan, Armenia, September 27–28,
2000, pp. 85–94.
Olcott, Martha Brill, “The Caspian’s False Promise,” Foreign Policy,
No. 111, Summer 1998, pp. 95–113.
Olson, Robert, The Emergence of Kurdish Nationalism and the Sheikh
Sa’id Rebellion, 1880–1925, Austin, TX:  University of Texas Press,
1989.
Onis, Ziya, “Neo-Liberal Globalization and the Democracy Paradox:
The Turkish General Elections of 1999,” The Journal of Interna-
tional Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 283–306.
__________, “Luxembourg, Helsinki and Beyond:  Towards an Inter-
pretation of Recent Turkey-EU Relations,” Government and Op-
position, Vol. 35, No. 4, Autumn 2000, pp. 403–483.
Öymen, Onur, The Turkish Challenge, Nicosia (Northern Cyprus):
Rustem, 2000.
Özer, Ercan, “Concept and Prospects of the Black Sea Economic Co-
operation,” Foreign Policy Review, Vol. XX, No. 1-2, 1996, pp. 75–
106.

--- Sayfa 235 ---
Bibliography 213
Park, William, “Turkey’s European Union Candidacy:  From Luxem-
bourg to Helsinki—to Ankara?” Mediterranean Politics, Vol. 5, No.
3, Autumn 2000, pp. 31–53.
Polyviou, Polyvios, Cyprus:  Conflict and Negotiations, 1960–1980,
London:  Duckworth, 1980.
Pope, Nicole, and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled:  Atatürk and After,
London:  Murray, 1997.
Poulton, Hugh, The Balkans:  Minorities and States in Conflict, Lon-
don:  Minority Rights Publications, 1991.
__________, Top Hat, Grey Wolf and Crescent, New York:  NYU Press,
1997.
Psomiades, Harry J., The Eastern Question:  The Last Phase, New York:
Pella, 2000.
Radu, Michael, “The Rise and Fall of the PKK,” Orbis, Vol. 45, No. 1,
Winter 2001, pp. 47–63.
Randal, Jonathan C., After Such Knowledge, What Forgiveness?” Boul-
der, CO:  Westview Press, 1999.
Rhein, Eberhard, “Europe and the Greater Middle East,” in Robert D.
Blackwill and Michael Stürmer, eds., Allies Divided:  Transatlantic
Policies for the Greater Middle East, Cambridge, MA:  The MIT
Press, 1997, pp. 41–59.
Robins, Philip, Turkey and the Middle East, New York:  Council on
Foreign Relations Press, 1991.
__________, “Between Sentiment and Self-Interest: Turkey’s Policy
Toward Azerbaijan and the Central Asian States,” The Middle East
Journal, Vol. 47, No. 4, Autumn 1993, pp. 593–610.
__________, “Turkey and the Kurds:  Missing Another Opportunity?”
in Morton Abramowitz, ed., Turkey’s Transformation and Ameri-
can Policy, New York:  The Century Foundation Press, 2000, pp.
61–93.
Rouleau, Eric, “Turkey’s Dream of Democracy,” Foreign Affairs, Vol.
79, No. 6, November/December 2000, pp. 100–114.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
214 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Rubin, Barry, Istanbul Intrigues, New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1989.
Rubin, Barry, and Kemal Kirisçi, eds., Turkey in World Politics, Boul-
der, CO:  Lynne Rienner, 2001.
Rumer, Eugene, Dangerous Drift:  Russia’s Middle East Policy, Wash-
ington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, Octo-
ber 2000.
Salt, Jeremy, “Nationalism and the Rise of Muslim Sentiment,” Mid-
dle Eastern Studies, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 1995, pp. 13–27.
Sayari, Sabri, “Turkish Foreign Policy in the Post–Cold War Era:  The
Challenges of Multi-Regionalism,” The Journal of International
Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 169–182.
Sezer, Duygu Bazoglu, “Turkish-Russian Relations from Adversary to
‘Virtual Rapprochement,’” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sayari,
eds., Turkey’s New World:  Changing Dynamics in Turkish Foreign
Policy, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for Near East
Policy Studies, 2000, pp. 92–115.
__________, “Turkish-Russian Relations:  The Challenge of Reconcil-
ing Geopolitical Competition and Economic Partnership,” Turkish
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, Spring 2000, pp. 59–82.
__________, “Turkish-Russian Relations a Decade Later:  From Ad-
versary to Managed Competition,” Perceptions, Vol. VI, No. 1,
March–May 2001, pp. 79–98.
Shaffer, Brenda, Partners in Need:  The Strategic Relationship of
Russia and Iran, Washington, D.C.:  The Washington Institute for
Near East Policy, May 2001.
Smith, Anthony D., National Identity, Reno, NV:  University of
Nevada Press, 1991.
Sokolsky, Richard, and Tanya Charlick-Paley, NATO and Caspian Se-
curity:  A Mission Too Far?  Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1999.
A Stability Pact for the Caucasus, Brussels:  Center for European Pol-
icy, May 2000.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
Bibliography 215
Starr, S. Frederick, “Power Failure in the Caspian,” The National In-
terest, No. 47, Spring 1997, pp. 20–31.
Stavrinides, Zenon, “Greek Cypriot Perceptions,” in Clement H.
Dodd, ed., Cyprus: The Need for New Perspectives, Huntingdon,
England:  The Eothen Press, 1999, pp. 54–96.
Stearns, Monteagle, Entangled Allies:  U.S. Policy Toward Greece,
Turkey and Cyprus, New York:  The Council on Foreign Relations,
1992.
Tocci, Natalie, 21st Century Kemalism:  Redefining Turkey-EU Rela-
tions in the Post Helsinki Era, Brussels:  Center for European Policy
(no date).
Todorova, Maria, “The Ottoman Legacy in the Balkans,” in L. Carol
Brown, ed., Imperial Legacy.  The Ottoman Imprint on the Balkans
and the Middle East, New York:  Columbia University Press, 1996,
pp. 45–77.
Toward Calmer Waters:  A Report on Relations Between Turkey and
the European Union, The Hague:  Advisory Council on Interna-
tional Affairs, July 1999.
Triantaphyllou, Dimitrios, “Further Turmoil Ahead?” in Dimitris
Keridis and Dimitrios Triantaphyllou, Greek-Turkish Relations in
an Era of Globalization, Dallas, VA:  Brassey’s, 2001, pp. 73–74.
Türkes, Mustafa, “The Balkan Pact and Its Immediate Implications
for the Balkan States, 1930–1934,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 30,
No. 1, January 1994, pp. 123–144.
“Turkey and the Kurds:  Into a New Era,” IISS Strategic Comments,
Vol. 5, Issue 3, April 1999.
“Turkey’s Divided Islamists,” IISS Strategic Comments, Vol. 6, Issue 3,
April 2000.
Turkey’s Window of Opportunity:  The Demographic Transition Pro-
cess and Its Consequences, Istanbul:  TUSIAD, 1999.
Turkish Economy 1999–2000, Istanbul:  TUSIAD, July 2000.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
216 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
Ulusoy, Hason, “A New Formation in the Black Sea:  BLACK-
SEAFOR,” Perceptions, Vol. VI, No. 4, December 2001–February
2002, pp. 97–106.
U.S. Department of State, Turkey:  Country Report on Human Rights
Practices for 1998, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Vali, Ferenc A., Bridge Across the Bosporus:  The Foreign Policy of
Turkey, Baltimore, MD:  The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971.
Valinakis, Yannis, Greece’s Security in the Post–Cold War Era, Eben-
hausen:  Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, S-394, April 1994.
__________, “The Black Sea Region:  Challenges and Opportunities
for Europe,” Chaillot Papers 36, Paris:  West European Union
Institute for Security Studies, July 1999.
Williams, Paul, “Turkey’s H2O Diplomacy in the Middle East,” Secu-
rity Dialogue, Vol. 32, No. 1, March 2001, pp. 27–40.
Wilson, Andrew, The Aegean Dispute, London:  International
Institute for Strategic Studies, 1980.
Winrow, Gareth, Turkey in Post-Soviet Central Asia, London: Royal
Institute of International Affairs, 1995.
__________, “Turkey and the Newly Independent States of Central
Asia and the Caucasus,” in Barry Rubin and Kemal Kirisçi, eds.,
Turkey in World Politics:  An Emerging Multiregional Power, Lon-
don:  Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2001, pp. 183–184.
Yavuz, H. Hakan, “Towards an Islamic Liberalism:  The Nurcu
Movement and Fethullah Gülen,” The Middle East Journal, Vol. 53,
No. 4, Autumn 1999, pp. 584–605.
__________, “Cleansing Islam from the Public Sphere,” The Journal of
International Affairs, Vol. 54, No. 1, Fall 2000, pp. 21–42.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
217
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
F. Stephen Larrabee is a senior staff member at RAND in
Washington, D.C., and holds the RAND Corporate Chair in European
Security.  He has a Ph.D. in political science from Columbia Univer-
sity and has taught at Columbia University, Cornell University, New
York University, the Paul Nitze School of Advanced International
Studies (SAIS), Georgetown University, and the University of South-
ern California.  Before joining RAND, he served as Vice President and
Director of Studies of the Institute of East-West Security Studies
in New York from 1983 to 1989 and was a distinguished Scholar in
Residence at the institute from 1989 to 1990.  From 1978–1981, Dr.
Larrabee served on the U.S. National Security Council staff in the
White House as a specialist on Soviet–East European affairs and East-
West political-military relations.  He is coeditor (with Zalmay
Khalilzad and Ian O. Lesser) of The Future of Turkish-Western Rela-
tions; coeditor (with David Gompert) of America and Europe:  A
Partnership for a New Era (1997); author of East European Security
After the Cold War (1994); editor of The Volatile Powder Keg:  Balkan
Security After the Cold War (1994); coeditor (with Robert Blackwill) of
Conventional Arms Control and East-West Security (1989); and editor
of The Two German States and European Security (1989).
Ian O. Lesser is Vice President, Director of Studies, at the Pacific
Council on International Policy in Los Angeles.  He came to the
Council from RAND, where he was a senior political scientist special-
izing in strategic studies and international policy.  In 1994–1995, he
was a member of the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff, where
his responsibilities included southern Europe, Turkey, North Africa,
and the Middle East peace process.  Earlier in his career, he was
deputy director of the Political-Military Studies Program at the Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies, senior fellow at the At-

--- Sayfa 240 ---
218 Turkish Foreign Policy in an Age of Uncertainty
lantic Council, and staff consultant at International Energy Associ-
ates.  His recent publications include NATO Looks South (2000);
Countering the New Terrorism (1999); and Sources of Conflict in the
21st Century (1998); and he is a frequent commentator for television,
radio, and print media.  Dr. Lesser is a graduate of the University of
Pennsylvania, the London School of Economics, and The Fletcher
School of Law and Diplomacy.  He received his D. Phil in interna-
tional politics from Oxford University.  He is a member of the
Council on Foreign Relations and the International Institute for
Strategic Studies.