--- Sayfa 1 ---
Cheryl Benard
Supported by the Smith Richardson Foundation
R
National Security Research Division
Partners, Resources,
and Strategies

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit research organization providing
objective analysis and effective solutions that address the challenges facing
the public and private sectors around the world. RAND’s publications do
not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
R® is a registered trademark.
© Copyright 2003 RAND Corporation
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from RAND.
Published 2003 by the RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street, P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1200 South Hayes Street, Arlington, VA 22202-5050
201 North Craig Street, Suite 202, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-1516
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org/
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information, contact
Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Email: order@rand.org
Cover design by Eileen Delson La Russo
The research described in this report was sponsored by the Smith
Richardson Foundation.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Benard, Cheryl, 1953-
Civil democratic Islam, partners, resources, and strategies / Cheryl Benard.
p. cm.
“MR-1716.”
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-8330-3438-3 (pbk.)
1. Islam and civil society. 2. Islamic modernism. 3. Democracy—Religious
aspects—Islam. 4. Islam—University. 5. Islam—21st century.  I.Title.
BP173.63 .B46 2003
320.5'5'0917671—dc21
2003012442

--- Sayfa 3 ---
iii
PREFACE
The Islamic world is involved in a struggle to determine its own nature and val-
ues, with serious implications for the future. What role can the rest of the world,
threatened and affected as it is by this struggle, play in bringing about a more
peaceful and positive outcome?
Devising a judicious approach requires a finely grained understanding of the
ongoing ideological struggle within Islam, to identify appropriate partners and
set realistic goals and means to encourage its evolution in a positive way.
The United States has three goals in regard to politicized Islam. First, it wants to
prevent the spread of extremism and violence. Second, in doing so, it needs to
avoid the impression that the United States is “opposed to Islam.” And third, in
the longer run, it must find ways to help address the deeper economic, social,
and political causes feeding Islamic radicalism and to encourage a move toward
development and democratization.
The debates and conflicts that mark the current Islamic world can make the
picture seem confusing. It becomes easier to sort the actors if one thinks of
them not as belonging to distinct categories but as falling along a spectrum.
Their views on certain critical marker issues help to locate them correctly on
this spectrum.
It is then possible to see which part of the spectrum is generally compatible
with our values, and which is fundamentally inimical. On this basis, this report
identifies components of a specific strategy.
This report should be of interest to scholars, policymakers, students, and all
others interested in the Middle East, Islam, and political Islam.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
v
CONTENTS
Preface ..................................................

iii
Tables...................................................

vii
Summary ................................................

ix
Acknowledgments..........................................

xiii
Glossary .................................................

xv
Chapter One
MAPPING THE ISSUES: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE RANGE
OF THOUGHT IN CONTEMPORARY ISLAM ...................

1
The Setting: Shared Problems, Different Answers ................

3
Positions on Key Issues ...................................

14
Democracy and Human Rights............................

14
Polygamy............................................

15
Criminal Punishments, Islamic Justice ......................

17
Minorities ...........................................

20
Women’s Dress .......................................

21
Husbands Allowed to Beat Wives ..........................

22
Chapter Two
FINDING PARTNERS FOR THE PROMOTION OF
DEMOCRATIC ISLAM: OPTIONS............................

25
The Secularists .........................................

25
The Fundamentalists.....................................

27
The Traditionalists ......................................

29
Distinguishing Between Traditionalists and Fundamentalists .....

30
Potentially Useful Democratic Elements.....................

33
The Danger of Domestic Backlash .........................

34
The Potential for Weakening Credibility and Moral
Persuasiveness......................................

36
The Possibility of Undermining Reforms ....................

37

--- Sayfa 6 ---
vi
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
The Modernists.........................................

37
Modernism Has Respected Intellectuals and Leaders ...........

38
Weaknesses of the Modernists ............................

39
Two Special Cases of Modernism ..........................

40
Sufis ...............................................

46
Chapter Three
A PROPOSED STRATEGY .................................

47
Appendix A
THE HADITH WARS .....................................

49
Appendix B
HIJAB AS A CASE STUDY..................................

57
Appendix C
STRATEGY IN DEPTH ....................................

61
Appendix D
CORRESPONDENCE ABOUT THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE’S PORTRAYAL OF ISLAM ............................

65
Bibliography ..............................................

67

--- Sayfa 7 ---
vii
TABLE
1.
“Marker Issues” and the Major Ideological Positions in
Islam .............................................

8

--- Sayfa 9 ---
ix
SUMMARY
There is no question that contemporary Islam is in a volatile state, engaged in
an internal and external struggle over its values, its identity, and its place in the
world. Rival versions are contending for spiritual and political dominance. This
conflict has serious costs and economic, social, political, and security implica-
tions for the rest of the world. Consequently, the West is making an increased
effort to come to terms with, to understand, and to influence the outcome of
this struggle.
Clearly, the United States, the modern industrialized world, and indeed the
international community as a whole would prefer an Islamic world that is com-
patible with the rest of the system: democratic, economically viable, politically
stable, socially progressive, and follows the rules and norms of international
conduct. They also want to prevent a “clash of civilizations” in all of its possible
variants—from increased domestic unrest caused by conflicts between Muslim
minorities and “native” populations in the West to increased militancy across
the Muslim world and its consequences, instability and terrorism.
It therefore seems judicious to encourage the elements within the Islamic mix
that are most compatible with global peace and the international community
and that are friendly to democracy and modernity. However, correctly identify-
ing these elements and finding the most suitable way to cooperate with them is
not always easy.
Islam’s current crisis has two main components: a failure to thrive and a loss of
connection to the global mainstream. The Islamic world has been marked by a
long period of backwardness and comparative powerlessness; many different
solutions, such as nationalism, pan-Arabism, Arab socialism, and Islamic revo-
lution, have been attempted without success, and this has led to frustration and
anger. At the same time, the Islamic world has fallen out of step with contempo-
rary global culture, an uncomfortable situation for both sides.
Muslims disagree on what to do about this, and they disagree on what their
society ultimately should look like. We can distinguish four essential positions:

--- Sayfa 10 ---
x
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
•
Fundamentalists reject democratic values and contemporary Western cul-
ture. They want an authoritarian, puritanical state that will implement their
extreme view of Islamic law and morality. They are willing to use innovation
and modern technology to achieve that goal.
•
Traditionalists want a conservative society. They are suspicious of
modernity, innovation, and change.
•
Modernists want the Islamic world to become part of global modernity.
They want to modernize and reform Islam to bring it into line with the age.
•
Secularists want the Islamic world to accept a division of church and state
in the manner of Western industrial democracies, with religion relegated to
the private sphere.
These groups hold distinctly different positions on essential issues that have
become contentious in the Islamic world today, including political and individ-
ual freedom, education, the status of women, criminal justice, the legitimacy of
reform and change, and attitudes toward the West.
The fundamentalists are hostile to the West and to the United States in particu-
lar and are intent, to varying degrees, on damaging and destroying democratic
modernity. Supporting them is not an option, except for transitory tactical
considerations. The traditionalists generally hold more moderate views, but
there are significant differences between different groups of traditionalists.
Some are close to the fundamentalists. None wholeheartedly embraces modern
democracy and the culture and values of modernity and, at best, can only make
an uneasy peace with them.
The modernists and secularists are closest to the West in terms of values and
policies. However, they are generally in a weaker position than the other
groups, lacking powerful backing, financial resources, an effective infrastruc-
ture, and a public platform. The secularists, besides sometimes being unac-
ceptable as allies on the basis of their broader ideological affiliation, also have
trouble addressing the traditional sector of an Islamic audience.
Traditional orthodox Islam contains democratic elements that can be used to
counter the repressive, authoritarian Islam of the fundamentalists, but it is not
suited to be the primary vehicle of democratic Islam. That role falls to the
Islamic modernists, whose effectiveness, however, has been limited by a num-
ber of constraints, which this report will explore.
To encourage positive change in the Islamic world toward greater democracy,
modernity, and compatibility with the contemporary international world order,
the United States and the West need to consider very carefully which elements,
trends, and forces within Islam they intend to strengthen; what the goals and

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Summary
xi
values of their various potential allies and protégés really are; and what the
broader consequences of advancing their respective agendas are likely to be. A
mixed approach composed of the following elements is likely to be the most
effective:
•
Support the modernists first:
—
Publish and distribute their works at subsidized cost.
—
Encourage them to write for mass audiences and for youth.
—
Introduce their views into the curriculum of Islamic education.
—
Give them a public platform.
—
Make their opinions and judgments on fundamental questions of reli-
gious interpretation available to a mass audience in competition with
those of the fundamentalists and traditionalists, who have Web sites,
publishing houses, schools, institutes, and many other vehicles for dis-
seminating their views.
— Position secularism and modernism as a “counterculture” option for
disaffected Islamic youth.
—
Facilitate and encourage an awareness of their pre- and non-Islamic
history and culture, in the media and the curricula of relevant coun-
tries.
— Assist in the development of independent civic organizations, to pro-
mote civic culture and provide a space for ordinary citizens to educate
themselves about the political process and to articulate their views.
•
Support the traditionalists against the fundamentalists:
— Publicize traditionalist criticism of fundamentalist violence and ex-
tremism; encourage disagreements between traditionalists and funda-
mentalists.
—
Discourage alliances between traditionalists and fundamentalists.
— Encourage cooperation between modernists and the traditionalists who
are closer to the modernist end of the spectrum.
—
Where appropriate, educate the traditionalists to equip them better for
debates against fundamentalists. Fundamentalists are often rhetorically
superior, while traditionalists practice a politically inarticulate “folk
Islam.” In such places as Central Asia, they may need to be educated
and trained in orthodox Islam to be able to stand their ground.
— Increase the presence and profile of modernists in traditionalist insti-
tutions.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
xii
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
— Discriminate between different sectors of traditionalism. Encourage
those with a greater affinity to modernism, such as the Hanafi law
school, versus others. Encourage them to issue religious opinions and
popularize these to weaken the authority of backward Wahhabi-
inspired religious rulings. This relates to funding: Wahhabi money goes
to the support of the conservative Hanbali school. It also relates to
knowledge: More-backward parts of the Muslim world are not aware of
advances in the application and interpretation of Islamic law.
—
Encourage the popularity and acceptance of Sufism.
•
Confront and oppose the fundamentalists:
—
Challenge their interpretation of Islam and expose inaccuracies.
—
Reveal their linkages to illegal groups and activities.
—
Publicize the consequences of their violent acts.
—
Demonstrate their inability to rule, to achieve positive development of
their countries and communities.
—
Address these messages especially to young people, to pious tradition-
alist populations, to Muslim minorities in the West, and to women.
—
Avoid showing respect or admiration for the violent feats of fundamen-
talist extremists and terrorists. Cast them as disturbed and cowardly,
not as evil heroes.
— Encourage journalists to investigate issues of corruption, hypocrisy, and
immorality in fundamentalist and terrorist circles.
—
Encourage divisions among fundamentalists.
•
Selectively support secularists:
— Encourage recognition of fundamentalism as a shared enemy, discour-
age secularist alliance with anti-U.S. forces on such grounds as
nationalism and leftist ideology.
— Support the idea that religion and the state can be separate in Islam too
and that this does not endanger the faith but, in fact, may strengthen it.
Whichever approach or mix of approaches is chosen, we recommend that it be
done with careful deliberation, in knowledge of the symbolic weight of certain
issues; the meaning likely to be assigned to the alignment of U.S. policymakers
with particular positions on these issues; the consequences of these alignments
for other Islamic actors, including the risk of endangering or discrediting the
very groups and people we are seeking to help; and the opportunity costs and
possible unintended consequences of affiliations and postures that may seem
appropriate in the short term.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xiii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Zalmay Khalilzad, Jerrold Green, Theodore Karasik, Angel
Rabasa, Phyllis Gilmore, Luetta Pope, Joanna Alberdeston, and Robin Cole for
their comments, suggestions, and assistance with this report.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
xv
GLOSSARY
burqa
The voluminous, all-covering outer garment worn by Afghan
women
fatwa
A formal pronouncement on a doctrinal or legal matter by an
Islamic scholar or scholarly body
hadith
A narrated story relating to the actions or sayings of the
prophet Muhammad and his closest followers, presumed to
reflect the correct way of doing things and to supplement
the guidance given in the Quran. An exacting science has
been created around the need to substantiate and verify
hadith, but the very hugeness of the body of hadith makes it
subject to accidental or intentional misuse.
Hanafi
One of the schools of Islamic law; more liberal on most mat-
ters
Hanbali
One of the schools of Islamic law; more conservative on most
matters
hijab
Literally, the Islamic “dress code” for women; the term can
be used to refer to the simple headscarf or to more
elaborate coverings
hudud
Specific Islamic criminal punishments
ijma
Community consensus as a tool of modifying and interpret-
ing Islamic law
ijtihad
The practice of informed interpretation, another tool for
establishing and modifying correct Islamic practice
Khilafa
Another spelling for Caliphate
kufr
Non-Islamic disbelief

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xvi
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
madrassa
Generic term for an Islamic religious school, whether of the
traditional nonpolitical variety or as a politicized source of
radical fundamentalist indoctrination
mullah
An Islamic preacher, regardless of the level of training and
education
Quran
The Islamic holy book
sharia
Also commonly spelled shariah or shariat; the entire body of
Islamic law and guidance, based on the Quran, hadith, and
scholarly judgments and open to selective use and interpre-
tation
Shi’a Islam
Literally, faction or party; a dissident version of Islam that
began with a dispute over the leadership succession shortly
after the death of Muhammad and then developed further
doctrinal and political differences vis-à-vis orthodox, Sunni
Islam
Sufisim
Islamic mysticism, either in its variant as a populist folk reli-
gion or organized in Sufi religious orders
Sunni Islam
The orthodox version of Islam adhered to by the overwhelm-
ing majority, although Shi’a Islam is dominant in some
countries and regions
sunnah
The body of tradition complementing the Quran
sura
A section or verse of the Quran and the organizing principle
structuring the revelations
Ulama
Body of scholars, scholarly community
ummah
The community of believers
Wahhabi
An extremist, puritanical, and aggressive form of Islamic fun-
damentalism founded in the 18th century and adopted by
the house of Saud; disrespecting other versions of Islam,
including Sufi Islam, Shi’a Islam, and moderate Islam in
general as incorrect aberrations of the true religion. Its
expansionist ambitions are heavily funded by the Saudi
government.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
1
Chapter One
MAPPING THE ISSUES: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE
RANGE OF THOUGHT IN CONTEMPORARY ISLAM
The notion that the outside world should try to encourage a moderate, demo-
cratic interpretation and presentation of Islam has been in circulation for some
decades but gained great urgency after September 11, 2001.
There is broad agreement that this is a constructive approach. Islam is an
important religion with enormous political and societal influence; it inspires a
variety of ideologies and political actions, some of which are dangerous to
global stability; and it therefore seems sensible to foster the strains within it that
call for a more moderate, democratic, peaceful, and tolerant social order. The
question is how best to do this. This report identifies a direction.
We begin by setting the scene for the main ideological fissures in the discussion
over Islam and society. The second chapter analyzes the pros and cons of sup-
porting different elements within Islam. The final chapter proposes a strategy.
Immediately following September 11, 2001, political leaders and policymakers
in the West began to issue statements affirming their conviction that Islam was
not to blame for what had happened, that Islam was a positive force in the
world, a religion of peace and tolerance. They spoke in mosques, held widely
publicized meetings with Muslim clerics, invited mullahs to open public events,
and inserted Quranic suras into their own speeches.
In a typical formulation, for example, President Bush asserted that “Islam is a
faith that brings comfort to a billion people around the world” and that “has
made brothers and sisters of every race. It’s a faith based upon love, not hate”
(Bush, 2002).
This approach has not been unique to the United States but is also prevalent in
Europe, where it led some commentators to note sarcastically that the political
leadership “collectively appears to have acquired an instant postgraduate
degree in Islamic studies, enabling them to lecture the population concerning
the true nature of Islam” (Heitmeyer, 2001).
In part, this demonstrative public embracing of Islam by opinion leaders and
politicians had a domestic rationale: Western leaders were attempting to pre-

--- Sayfa 18 ---
2
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
vent a backlash that might have inspired acts of violence and hostility aimed at
their respective Muslim minorities. In addition, there were at least two foreign
policy motivations, one short term and the other longer term. In the short run,
the goal was to make it politically possible for Muslim governments to support
the effort against terrorism by detaching the issue of terrorism from the issue of
Islam. In the longer run, the Western leaders were attempting to create an
image, a vision, that would facilitate the better integration of Islamic political
actors and states into the modern international system.
The academic community quickly joined in, trying to make the case that Islam
was at a minimum compatible with, if indeed it did not demand, moderation,
tolerance, diversity, and democracy. In his introduction to Abdulaziz Sachedi-
na’s The Islamic Roots of Democratic Pluralism, Joseph Montville expresses the
purpose of such studies and the motivation of the Center for Strategic and
International Studies in funding this one,
We knew that, like every great world religion, Islam embraced certain universal
human values that could be recognized and accepted as the basis of community
by non-Muslims . . . Prof. Sachedina . . . knew he could highlight those parts of
the Koran . . . that emphasized the dignity of the individual, freedom of con-
science, and God’s love for all creatures, People of the Book and even people
without a book. (Sachedina, 2001, p. 1)
And the author himself explains,
This work undertakes to map some of the most important political concepts in
Islam that advance better human relationships, both within and between
nations. It aims at uncovering normative aspects of Muslim religious formula-
tions and specifying their application in diverse cultures to suggest their critical
relevance to the pluralistic world order of the 21st century. . . . The goal here is
not to glorify the Muslim past but to remember it, retrace its path, interpret it,
reconstruct it and make it relevant to the present. (Sachedina, 2001, p. 1;
emphasis added)
However, even as one group of authors was seeking to “highlight” one set of
values to be found in the Quran and tradition, other authors were successfully
finding and energetically publicizing quite another set of values.
Even as liberal scholars within and outside the Muslim world were gathering
intellectual arguments that supported liberal, tolerant Islam, the terrorists were
making equal reference to Islam, asserting that their mission and methods were
mandated directly by their religion. The celebratory tone taken in some Islamic
communities following the attacks soberingly showed that this view was shared
by a certain—and not a small—segment of the Muslim public. Even a year after
the event, radical clerics meeting in London to celebrate the September 11
attacks averred in their press conference that these had been an exercise in
“just retribution” and thus a proper Islamic act (Bowcott, 2002).

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Mapping the Issues
3
Western leaders and supportive governments in the Muslim world have tried
hard to detach the terrorists’ goals from Islam; the radicals are equally deter-
mined to keep the issues joined.1
For many Western opinion leaders, the goal of opposing terrorists, of prevent-
ing the conflict from turning into a “clash of religions,” and of discrediting the
radicals’ interpretation of Islam, made it seem all the more advisable to support
the more benign strains within Islam—but which ones, exactly, and with what
concrete goal in mind? Identifying the elements that should be supported,
choosing appropriate methods, and defining the goals of such support is diffi-
cult.
It is no easy matter to transform a major world religion. If “nation-building” is a
daunting task, “religion-building” is immeasurably more perilous and complex.
Islam is neither a homogeneous entity nor a simple system. Many extraneous
issues and problems have become entangled with religion, and many of the
political actors in the region deliberately seek to “Islamize” the debate in a way
that they think will further their goals.
THE SETTING: SHARED PROBLEMS, DIFFERENT ANSWERS
Islam’s current crisis has two main components: The Islamic world has been
marked by a long period of backwardness and comparative powerlessness;
many different solutions, such as nationalism, pan-Arabism, Arab socialism,
and Islamic revolution, have been attempted without success;2 and this has led
to frustration and anger. At the same time, the Islamic world has fallen out of
step with contemporary global culture, as well as moving increasingly to the
margins of the global economy.
Muslims disagree on what to do about this, on what has caused it, and on what
their societies ultimately should look like. We can distinguish four essential
positions, as the following paragraphs describe.
The fundamentalists3 put forth an aggressive, expansionist version of Islam
that does not shy away from violence. They want to gain political power and
then to impose strict public observance of Islam, as they themselves define it,
forcibly on as broad a population worldwide as possible. Their unit of reference
______________

1For example, in a speech on September 21, 2002, the head of Pakistan’s fundamentalist Jamaat-e-
Islami party, Qazi Hussain Ahmed, reiterated that the United States was the “worst enemy of Islam”
and considered “Islam as the main hurdle in the way of achieving its ulterior motives in the world.”
The so-called alliance against terrorism was in reality an anti-Islamic struggle aimed at “eliminating
Muslim countries from the globe.”
2See, especially, Roy (1994); Tibi (1988); Ajami (1981); and Rejwan (1998).
3The term Islamist is being variously used by different authors to describe either the fundamental-
ists or the traditionalists. To avoid confusion, it will not be used in this report .

--- Sayfa 20 ---
4
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
is not the nation-state or the ethnic group, but the Muslim community, the
ummah; gaining control of particular Islamic countries can be a step on this
path but is not the main goal.
We can distinguish two strands within fundamentalism. One, which is
grounded in theology and tends to have some roots in one or another kind of
religious establishment, we will refer to as the scriptural fundamentalists. On
the Shi’a side, this group includes most of the Iranian revolutionaries and, as
one Sunni manifestation, the Saudi-based Wahhabis. The Kaplan congregation,
active among Western diaspora Turks and in Turkey, is another example.
The radical fundamentalists, the second strand, are much less concerned with
the literal substance of Islam, with which they take considerable liberties either
deliberately or because of ignorance of orthodox Islamic doctrine. They usually
do not have any “institutional” religious affiliations but tend to be eclectic and
autodidactic in their knowledge of Islam. Al Qaeda, the Afghan Taliban, Hizb-
ut-Tahrir, and a large number of other Islamic radical movements and diffuse
groups worldwide belong to this category.
The fundamentalists do not merely approve of the Islamic practices of the past.
More significantly, they expand on them, applying some of the more stringent
rules more rigorously than the original Islamic community ever did, exercising
an arbitrary selectivity that allows them to ignore or drop more egalitarian, pro-
gressive, tolerant aspects of the Quran and the sunnah, and inventing some
new rules of their own. This is particularly true of the radical fundamentalists.
Not all fundamentalists embrace or even endorse terrorism, at least not the
indiscriminate type of terrorism that targets civilians and often kills Muslims
along with the “enemy,” but fundamentalism as a whole is incompatible with
the values of civil society and the Western vision of civilization, political order,
and society.
The traditionalists are also divided into two distinct groups: conservative tradi-
tionalists and reformist traditionalists. The distinction is significant.
Conservative traditionalists believe that Islamic law and tradition ought to be
rigorously and literally followed, and they see a role for the state and for the
political authorities in encouraging or at least facilitating this. However, they do
not generally favor violence and terrorism.
Historically, they have grown accustomed to operating under changing political
circumstances, and this has led them to concentrate their efforts on the daily
life of the society, where they try to have as much influence and control as they
can, even when the government is not Islamic. In the social realm, their goal is
to preserve orthodox norms and values and conservative behavior to the fullest
extent possible. The temptations and the pace of modern life are seen as posing
a major threat to this. Their posture is one of resistance to change.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Mapping the Issues
5
Additionally, there are often important differences between conservative tradi-
tionalists who live in the Islamic world or in the Third World generally and
those who live in the West. Being an essentially moderate position, traditional-
ism tends to be adaptive to its environment. Thus, conservative traditionalists
who live in traditional societies are likely to accept practices that are prevalent
in such societies, such as child marriage, and to be less educated and less able
to distinguish local traditions and customs from actual Islamic doctrine. Those
who live in the West have absorbed more-modern views on these issues and
tend to be better educated and more linked to the transnational discourse on
issues of orthodoxy.
Reformist traditionalists think that, to remain viable and attractive throughout
the ages, Islam has to be prepared to make some concessions in the literal
application of orthodoxy. They are prepared to discuss reforms and reinterpre-
tations. Their posture is one of cautious adaptation to change, being flexible on
the letter of the law to conserve the spirit of the law.
The modernists actively seek far-reaching changes to the current orthodox
understanding and practice of Islam. They want to eliminate the harmful ballast
of local and regional tradition that has, over the centuries, intertwined itself
with Islam. They further believe in the historicity of Islam, i.e., that Islam as it
was practiced in the days of the Prophet reflected eternal truths as well as his-
torical circumstances that were appropriate to that time but are no longer valid.
They think it is possible to identify an “essential core” of Islamic belief; further,
they believe that this core will not only remain undamaged but in fact will be
strengthened by changes, even very substantial changes, that reflect changing
times, social conditions, and historical circumstances.
The things that modernists value and admire most about Islam tend to be quite
different and more abstract than the things the fundamentalists and the tradi-
tionalists value. Their core values—the primacy of the individual conscience
and a community based on social responsibility, equality, and freedom—are
easily compatible with modern democratic norms.
The secularists believe that religion should be a private matter separate from
politics and the state and that the main challenge lies in preventing transgres-
sions in either direction. The state should not interfere in the individual exer-
cise of religion, but equally, religious customs must be in conformity with the
law of the land and with human rights. The Turkish Kemalists, who placed reli-
gion under the firm control of the state, represent the laicist model in Islam.
These positions should be thought of as representing segments on a contin-
uum, rather than distinct categories. There are no clear boundaries between
them, so that some traditionalists overlap with the fundamentalists; the most
modernist of the traditionalists are almost modernists; and the most extreme
modernists are similar to secularists.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
6
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Each of these outlined positions takes a characteristic stance on key issues of
controversy in the contemporary Islamic debate. And their “rules of evidence”
for defending these positions are also distinct, as sketched in Table 1 (starting
on page 8).
In the contemporary Islamic struggle, “lifestyle” issues are the field on which
the contending positions try to stake their claims and that they use to signal
their control. Doctrine is territory and is being fought over. This explains the
prominence of such issues in an ideological and political contest.
The utility of “mapping” the views of the various Islamic positions is that, on
issues of doctrine and lifestyle, they adhere to fairly distinct and reliable plat-
forms, which define their identity and serve as identifiers toward like-minded
others—a kind of “passport.”
Thus, while it is possible for groups to dissimulate concerning their attitude to
violence, to avoid prosecution and sanctions, it is not really possible for them to
distort or deny their views on key value and lifestyle issues. These are what
define them and attract new members.
Conservative traditionalists accept the correctness of past practices, even when
they conflict with today’s norms and values, on the principle that the original
Islamic community represents the absolute and eternal ideal, but they no
longer necessarily attempt to reinstate all of the practices. Often, however, their
reason for this is not that they would not like to do it, but that they assess it to
be temporarily or permanently unrealistic to do so. Reformist traditionalists
reinterpret, rebut, or evade practices that seem problematic in today’s world.
Modernists see the same practices as part of a changing and changeable histor-
ical context; they do not regard the original Islamic community or the early
years of Islam as something that one would necessarily wish to reproduce
today. Secularists prohibit the practices that conflict with modern norms and
laws and ignore the others as belonging to the private sphere of individuals.
Secularists do not concern themselves with what Islam might or might not
require. Moderate secularists want the state to guarantee people’s right to
practice their faith, while ensuring that religion remains a private matter and
does not violate any standards of human rights or civil law. Radical secularists,
including communists and laicists, oppose religion altogether.
Conservative traditionalists seek guidance from conventional Islamic sources:
the Quran, the sunnah, Islamic law, fatwas, and the religious opinions of
respected scholars. Reformist traditionalists use the same sources but tend to
be more inventive and more aggressive in exploring alternative interpretations.
They are aware of the conflicts between modernity and Islam and want to
reduce them to keep Islam viable into the future. They seek to reinterpret tradi-

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Mapping the Issues
7
tional content, to find ways around the restrictions or rulings that trouble them
or stand in the way of desired changes or that harm the image of Islam in the
eyes of the rest of the world.
There are ironic similarities in the way radical fundamentalists and modernists
approach the issue of change. In keeping with convention, they both refer to the
Quran, sunnah, law, fatwas, and authorities (of course, choosing different selec-
tions from each). But ultimately, both positions are guided by their respective
visions of the ideal Islamic society. Each feels authorized to define and interpret
the individual rules and laws in keeping with that vision. Obviously, this gives
them a lot more freedom to maneuver than the traditionalists have.
Fundamentalists have as their goal an ascetic, highly regimented, hierarchical
society in which all members follow the requirements of Islamic ritual strictly,
in which immorality is prevented by separating the sexes, which in turn is
achieved by banishing women from the public domain, and in which life is vis-
ibly and constantly infused by religion. It is totalitarian in its negation of a pri-
vate sphere, instead believing that it is the task of state authorities to compel the
individual to adhere to proper Islamic behavior anywhere and everywhere. And
ideally, it wants this system—which it believes to be the only rightful one—to
expand until it controls the entire world and everyone is a Muslim.
Modernists envision a society in which individuals express their piety in a way
each finds personally meaningful, decide most moral matters and lifestyle
issues on the basis of their own consciences, seek to lead ethical lives out of
inner conviction rather than external compulsion, and base their political sys-
tem on principles of justice and equality. This system should coexist peacefully
with other orders and religions. The modernists find concepts within Islamic
orthodoxy that support the right of Muslims, as individuals and as communi-
ties, to make changes and revisions even to basic laws and texts.
When a question arises that is not covered in Islamic orthodox texts, or when it
is but they do not like the answer, fundamentalists and modernists both refer
instead to their ideal vision and then innovate a solution. Since innovation is
not generally accepted in Islam, they both define it as something else.
Modernists speak of “faith-based objections” to specific aspects of Islam, of the
“good of the community” as a value that overrides even the Quran, of “com-
munity consensus” (ijma) that legitimizes even radical change.4
Radical fundamentalists reclaim ijtihad, the controversial practice of interpre-
tation, or refer mysteriously to “higher criteria.” No traditionalist would ever
argue that orthodox content of the Quran or the hadith can be “technically
______________

4See, for example, El Fadl (2001).

--- Sayfa 24 ---
8
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Table 1
“Marker Issues” and the Major Ideological Positions in Islam
Radical
Fundamentalists
Scriptural
Fundamentalists
Conservative
Traditionalists
Democracy
A wrongful creed.
Sovereignty and the
right to legislate belong
to God alone.
Islam is a form of
democracy. The West
has no right to define
what democracy
should look like, and
the Islamic form is su-
perior because it rests
on the only correct and
perfect religion.
There is some room for
democratic instru-
ments in the interpre-
tation of Islamic prac-
tice, in community life
and in certain sectors
of public life.
Human rights,
individual liber-
ties
Erroneous decadent
concepts that lead to
corruption. The full
imposition of shari’a
creates a good and just
society.
Humans need guidance
and control, but these
must be reasonable
and fair, as set down in
sunnah and the Quran.
Islam, properly lived,
provides the optimum
setting for humans.
Equality and freedom
are wrong concepts;
Islam instead gives ev-
eryone their due in ac-
cord with their station
and nature.
Polygamy
Is permitted and there
is nothing wrong with
it. Superior to Western
immorality and serial
divorce.
Permitted as a way to
enhance public and
individual morality,
but not for self-
indulgence.
Permitted under certain
circumstances, includ-
ing when all wives are
treated equally, as the
Quran requires, and
only if local law per-
mits it. But monogamy
is superior.
Islamic criminal
penalties, includ-
ing flogging, am-
putations, ston-
ing for adultery
An excellent way to
provide swift, deterrent
justice.
Just and correct, but
may have to be imple-
mented with discretion
as it is no longer quite
in line with world pub-
lic opinion and can
thus be detrimental to
the image of Islamic
states.
Should be used if the
country follows shari’a
law, which Muslim
countries ought to do.
Severe shari’a punish-
ment has good deter-
rent effect but was in-
tended to be mitigated
by mercy, forgiveness,
rehabilitation efforts,
and strict rules of evi-
dence.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Mapping the Issues
9
Table 1—Continued
Reformist
Traditionalists
Modernists
Mainstream
Secularists
Radical
Secularists
Islam has at heart been
democratic from its in-
ception; the commu-
nity of believers is
sovereign, and even the
earliest leaders were
chosen by democratic
means.
Islam contains demo-
cratic concepts that
need to be brought to
the forefront.
Democracy is primary;
Islam must (and can)
bring itself into line
with it and with the
separation of church
and state.
Social justice is
more important
than democracy.
Properly interpreted
and applied, Islam
guarantees human
rights and such liber-
ties as are actually
good for a person, not
false ones that lead the
person on a wrongful
path.
Islam contains the basic
concepts of human
rights and individual
freedom, including the
freedom to do wrong.
Islam can attempt to
guide the behavior of
those who adhere to it,
in their private lives,
where they can give up
some of their freedoms
if they choose. How-
ever, in overall social
and political life, hu-
man rights are para-
mount and universal.
Equality and jus-
tice are more im-
portant than indi-
vidual liberties.
Permitted in societies
that legally allow it, but
it should be the excep-
tion, and the agree-
ment of the first wife
should be obtained. In
general, monogamy is
thought better, but a
defensive traditionalist
position shares the
fundamentalist argu-
ment that polygamy is
better than Western
sexual anarchy.
Not permitted. An ar-
chaic practice, such as
those found in other
religions, that was con-
sidered less than ideal
even at the time, and
there is evidence that
Muhammad was trying
to abolish it.
Against modern laws
and accepted practice;
therefore ,not permit-
ted.
Not permitted, al-
though some
would also con-
sider monogamy
to be a hypocriti-
cal bourgeois con-
cept.
Should not be used. The
most severe punish-
ments were never in-
tended to be imple-
mented except in very
rare cases; they have
been misapplied and
misunderstood and of-
ten have no real
Quranic basis.
Should not be used.
These punishments are
either archaic, in line
with the common prac-
tice of their era but no
longer appropriate, or
they were wrongfully
interpreted in the first
place.
Not legal in most
countries and not in
keeping with interna-
tional human rights or
contemporary norms;
therefore ,cannot be
applied.
Religion is a fal-
lacy; therefore, re-
ligious laws can
never be legiti-
mate.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
10
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Table 1—Continued
Radical
Fundamentalists
Scriptural
Fundamentalists
Conservative
Traditionalists
Hijab
Women must wear
Islamic garments, usu-
ally to cover all but the
face and hands but, in
some places, also to
conceal the face and
hands. In the diaspora,
a headscarf is the ac-
ceptable minimum. It
is society’s job to make
sure women adhere to
this rule through per-
suasion, pressure, edu-
cation, and coercion.
Men must also con-
form visually, usually
by wearing a beard and
short hair.
Islamic covering is re-
quired for women and
should be coercively
enforced.
Hijab is preferable. It
can be enforced by
family, peer, and com-
munity pressure. Not
all traditionalists agree
that real coercion is
also acceptable. Both
genders should dress
modestly. Traditional-
ists in conservative so-
cieties: Women should
cover everything but
the hands and face.
Traditionalists in the
West and in modern
societies: The scarf and
long clothing is
enough.
Beating of wives
Allowed and useful to
control behavior of
women and to main-
tain hierarchy in the
family.
The Quran allows it, but
it is permissible only as
a well-intentioned
pedagogical interven-
tion to correct the be-
havior of an errant wife
for her own good and
that of the family and
society.
Same as scriptural fun-
damentalists.
Status of minori-
ties
Tolerated, but they
cannot practice their
own religion or culture
in any visible way. They
are inferior, and thus it
is acceptable to dis-
criminate against
them. It is best if they
convert.
Tolerated, as long as
they do not engage in
missionary activities.
Tolerated and should
be treated decently and
allowed to practice
their religions and
cultures, unless they
are contrary to Islamic
morality and law.
Islamic state
An Islamic state should
be global and suprana-
tional. It should guide
all conduct, policing
such things as prayer
attendance, beard
length, clothing. Any
matter not explicitly
covered by a rule re-
quires the advice of a
religious authority.
Islam is possible on the
basis of individual
states, although a
supranational ummah
remains the ideal.
An Islamic state is best,
because people can
then most fully exercise
their religion. Next best
is to live immersed in
an Islamic community,
doing as told by your
elders, family, and the
community’s religious
leaders.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Mapping the Issues
11
Table 1—Continued
Reformist
Traditionalists
Modernists
Mainstream
Secularists
Radical
Secularists
Women should dress
modestly; the defini-
tion of that depends on
where the traditionalist
lives and ranges from
all-but-face-and-hands
to the scarf to no scarf,
as long as the body is
not provocatively dis-
played.
Islam does not require
women to wear any
sort of veil or head cov-
ering. There is no tex-
tual substantiation for
such rules. It is up to
the individual to decide
what to wear. Women
should not be held re-
sponsible for men’s
possible licentious
thoughts, since the
Quran clearly instructs
men to “lower their
gaze,” i.e., not to stare
salaciously at women,
and vice versa.
Muslims can wear
whatever they want,
but public schools and
professions where it
would impinge on per-
formance or the rights
of others can, if they
see fit, prohibit the
wearing of hijab,
scarves, etc.
Hijab is a symbol
of backwardness,
and women
should not want to
wear it, let alone
be pressured or
forced into doing
so.
No longer allowed, and
the religious basis for it
is questionable any-
way. The Quranic pas-
sage permitting it has
been challenged, and
many hadiths reflect
Muhammad’s disap-
proval of it.
Not allowed, based on
incorrect religious in-
terpretation, and
clearly against the
spirit of Islamic
concept of marriage
and gender relations.
Not allowed, because it
is illegal, and against
contemporary norms
and human rights.
Reflects archaic
notion of wives as
property, and so is
not allowed.
Tolerated, and they
should be well treated,
encouraged to practice
their religions and
cultures if possible,
and should be engaged
in dialogue.
Should be treated on
equal footing.
Assimilation into secu-
lar society is best.
Most of these affil-
iations represent
false conscious-
ness.
An Islamic state is best.
Barring that, individual
religious studies are
important, backed by
support of a like-
minded community
and religious experts to
give guidance.
Islam was not meant to
be a state but a code
and guiding philoso-
phy for life. The indi-
vidual holds ultimate
responsibility for his or
her behavior and deci-
sions, in the context of
an ever-changing, vi-
brant community of
thinking and question-
ing rational individu-
als.
Islam is a religion and
thus a private matter;
the state has the obli-
gation to allow it, but
Muslims have the obli-
gation to obey civil law
and local custom and
to adapt to the age in
which they live.
Religion is a retro-
grade force in so-
ciety and should
be abolished.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
12
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Table 1—Continued
Radical
Fundamentalists
Scriptural
Fundamentalists
Conservative
Traditionalists
Public participa-
tion of women
There must be maxi-
mum separation of
women from men.
Women should be ex-
cluded from the public
domain to the fullest
extent possible.
Iranian style Shi’a fun-
damentalism: Women
should play an active
role in society and po-
litical life, but there
must be strict segrega-
tion, and the highest
offices in justice and
government are re-
served for men. Sunni:
Governance is the do-
main of men. Women
can be active in fields
related to children and
social matters.
Women are responsible
for the family; if that is
completely taken care
of, they can be active in
certain professions and
in community and
public life but in a
subsidiary function.
Jihad
There are different lev-
els of jihad, but armed
struggle for the estab-
lishment of a universal
and worldwide Islamic
order is incumbent
upon anyone physi-
cally capable of partic-
ipating. This can take
the form of classical
warfare or of terrorism
and insurgency.
The definition of jihad
varies from person to
person. For women,
childbirth is a form of
jihad. Jihad includes
the struggle for per-
sonal spiritual better-
ment. For some groups
under some circum-
stances, it includes
armed struggle, includ-
ing terrorism.
Jihad is primarily the
struggle for personal
moral betterment, but
it encompasses war on
behalf of Islam when
necessary and appro-
priate.
Sources
The Quran, sunnah,
charismatic leaders,
radical authors, with all
details subordinated to
the broad vision of a
rigorously pious,
Islamic society.
The Quran, sunnah,
Islamic philosophy,
science, scholarly
interpretation, and
charismatic leaders.
The Quran, sunnah, lo-
cal custom and tradi-
tion, and the opinions
of local mullahs

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Mapping the Issues
13
Table 1—Continued
Reformist
Traditionalists
Modernists
Mainstream
Secularists
Radical
Secularists
Women are responsible
first for the family,
which is a very impor-
tant role, but they can
also take part in eco-
nomic and public and
political life, where
they bring an added
,female, perspective.
They can hold high of-
fice as women did
during Muhammad’s
time. In the view of
some, this excludes the
position of head of
state.
Family and community
are important in Islam,
and both genders
should take responsi-
bility there. All profes-
sions and all types of
public and political of-
fices are open to
women. This was the
case in Muhammad’s
time, when women
even fought in his
army, were appointed
by him to be judges,
and even led men in
prayer ,and is certainly
the case today.
Discrimination is ille-
gal; equal rights and
opportunities are the
desirable norm.
All forms of in-
equality should be
eliminated.
Jihad is a struggle for
personal moral bet-
terment. Only in very
exceptional circum-
stances, such as a life
or death struggle for
the survival of the faith
when attacked, does it
include the obligation
to engage in “holy
war.”
Jihad is a symbolic term
referring to personal
spiritual development.
Jihad as holy war is a
historical reference. In
the contemporary
world, it refers to spiri-
tual development, but
since it is liable to be
misunderstood, it is
better not to use the
term.
Fighting wars on
the grounds of re-
ligion and reli-
gious differences
is completely ar-
chaic and wrong.
The Quran, sunnah, the
guidance of a wide as-
sortment of scholars
(including secular
philosophers), modern
laws and ethical codes,
and community con-
sensus.
The Quran, sunnah,
historical and contem-
porary philosophy, and
modern laws and ethi-
cal codes, in an effort
to understand the es-
sential spirit of Islam in
the context of the pre-
sent age.
Civil law, international
human rights, and the
philosophical under-
pinnings of secularism.
Specific ideology of
the group or
movement.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
14
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
defensible” but still be contrary to the “spirit of the Prophet’s tradition” and
therefore may be abandoned.
The next section illustrates how the positions define their views on the key
issues we have identified.
In terms of its public manifestation, the division between the contemporary
positions in Islam plays itself out in regard to issues of lifestyle and values. In
some ways, this is what marks it most clearly as a religion-based dispute: Dis-
tinctions that may appear relatively minor in the grand scheme of things take
on enormous importance because they signify allegiance or nonallegiance, vic-
tory or stalemate. The obvious example is the “head scarf.” It is important for
outside actors to keep this in mind.
When U.S. government agencies appear to endorse the head scarf, for example,
considering this to be a minor matter of preference in dress code that cheaply
enables them to signal tolerance, they are in fact unwittingly taking a major
stand on a central, wildly contested symbolic issue. They are aligning them-
selves with the extreme end of the spectrum, with the fundamentalists and the
conservative traditionalists, against the reformist traditionalists, the mod-
ernists, and the secularists.
POSITIONS ON KEY ISSUES
Democracy and Human Rights
Illustrations of the radical fundamentalist position on issues of political doc-
trine can readily be found in print and online in the publications of Hezbi-
Islami and Hizb-ut-Tahrir, to name only two sources:
According to Hezbi-Islami, parliaments and other democratic institutions are
clear and obvious forms of disbelief, and of shirk, or setting up rivals to Allah
(by ascribing legislative power to people) and an unforgivable sin, and a con-
tradiction of the purpose of creation.5
The goal is to impose the correct order, that of Islam, over all others. According
to Green (1994),
This is not a confrontation of civilizations, nor is it a clash of cultures. Islam
does not oppose the West, or anyone else, because of revenge over past hostili-
ties, out of a desire to restore injured pride or because of the desire to amass
their wealth and lands. The fight is for one purpose only and that is to establish
______________

5Note that all our quotations from and citations of online materials reflect the content as it existed
between January and September 2002. Some of these texts have been changed or modified since
then, though not substantially.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Mapping the Issues
15
the religion of Islam in its totality . . . .  Jihad has three characteristics. The first
stage is to acquire the correct creed and to remove from one’s self all doubts
and misconceptions . . . The second stage is . . . releasing the lands of the Mus-
lims from the control of their enemies . . . The final stage is that of fighting in
order to open the path for establishing Allah’s rule in the land of the unbeliev-
ers.
Similarly, Hizb-ut-Tahrir describes itself as “a political party whose ideology is
Islam, so politics is its work and Islam is its ideology . . . to restore the Khilafah
[the Caliphate]” As concerns governance, “the constitution and canons must be
Islamic,” and it cannot be
republican. The republican system is based on the democratic system, which is
a system of Kufr (disbelief) . . .  In [the Islamic system] the sovereignty is for the
Shari’a and not for the Ummah. The legislator is Allah. The Khaleefa only pos-
sesses the right to adopt rules for the constitution and canons from the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger. Therefore, it is not permitted to say
that the system of Islam is a republican system or to talk of an Islamic republic
. . . . 6
Polygamy
Fundamentalists accept polygamy. The Taliban reintroduced the practice in
Afghanistan, where it had mostly fallen into disuse. Child marriage is often a
corollary of polygamy, and it is prevalent in societies that fundamentalists con-
trol but also in some places conservative traditionalists control. The Taliban
and Afghanistan-based al Qaeda also practiced forced marriages, which the
Quran accepts in the context of war.
Reformist traditionalists and conservative traditionalists who live in the West
or in countries that do not endorse this practice do not support the active
practice of polygamy. Some of them disavow it only because they believe that
Muslims must respect the laws of whatever country they live in. They have no
objection to Muslim men who, although they already have a wife at home, wish
to marry a second one in the foreign country they have come to for work or
study, and Islamic expatriate Web sites offer advice to prospective brides who
find themselves having second thoughts.7 Traditionalists who are closer to the
modernist end of the spectrum, and those who believe this issue not to be
worth the scorn and disapproval it inspires in outsiders, genuinely oppose
polygamy. However, there is no doubt that the Quran allows it and that
Muhammad and the early leaders of Islam practiced it. Therefore, being tradi-
______________

6“Definition” and “Party Culture,” on Hizb-ut-Tahrir’s official Web site.
7Note that all our citations of online publications and Web sites reflect the content as it existed
between January and September 2002. Some of these texts have been changed or modified since
then, though not substantially.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
16
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
tionalists, they are unable to disavow it and, in fact, feel obliged to defend it. To
this purpose, they generally put forward one or more of the following argu-
ments to make it more palatable to modern audiences:
They point out that Muhammad was monogamous during the lifetime of his
first wife, Khadija, during which Islam was first revealed to him. This, they say,
should therefore be taken as the ideal condition for Muslims to emulate.
They say that Muhammad’s multiple marriages were largely made for alliances
and were either political or charitable rather than being personal. These tradi-
tionalists point out that some were probably marriages in name only, designed
to cement a political alliance or care for a friend’s widow.8 In fact, they argue,
polygamy in the early Muslim community was a kind of welfare project, a
response to the shortage of men that war had caused, which led to a surplus of
women, including many widows in need of protectors and breadwinners.
It replaced, others assert, the much worse misuse of women in pre-Islamic
society, in contrast to which a regulated polygamy limited to only four wives
who had to be treated equally and whose economic and legal status was guar-
anteed was an improvement.
Reformist traditionalists (like fundamentalists) sometimes argue that polygamy
can be seen as a convenience for women, who can share child-raising and
domestic chores and thereby free their time for jobs and other interests. Also,
they assert, the practice is superior to what has emerged in the West. The high
divorce rate in Western industrial society, after all, is really just a form of serial
polygamy. Since it includes abandonment, it is especially hurtful to the women
and children involved, while the Islamic approach entitles the displaced wife to
a lifetime of equal financial, emotional, and (theoretically) sexual disburse-
ments.
Women who find the practice personally offensive are legally entitled to add a
stipulation to their marriage contract that will prevent their husband from tak-
ing additional wives, these traditionalists note.
A somewhat laborious argument that traditionalists frequently use is that the
injunction to treat all wives equally was really just a kind of divine sleight-of-
hand. Since it is impossible to do this, as the Quran itself elsewhere observes,
the injunction in fact nullifies polygamy.
A typical text might argue as follows (Maqsood, 1994b, pp. 182–183):
The Prophet remained monogamous throughout the 24 years of his marriage to
Khadijah; after her death he married the widow Sawdah and was engaged to his
friend’s daughter, Aisha; and after the deaths of so many Muslims in battle the
______________

8For one of many refutations of this version, see Calislar (1999).

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Mapping the Issues
17
permission to marry up to four wives was given to Muslim men. The Prophet
himself had special dispensation and married 13 women in total, all except
Aisha being widows or divorcees needing care . . .
Polygamy is also allowed if a man’s wife becomes so physically ill that she is no
longer able to look after him or the family, or if she becomes mentally ill. Should
a man be expected to live for the rest of his life without any sexual comfort, or
should he divorce the unfortunate wife, or should he marry another?
(The author—a woman—does not explain why the reverse occurrence should
not therefore authorize the woman to take more than one husband.)
Similarly, in his book Islam Today, which received the Los Angeles. Times award
for best nonfiction book of the year, U.S. reformist traditionalist Akbar Ahmed
(2001, p. 152) writes,
There is another idea about family life that is difficult to lay to rest in the West.
It is of Islam as a man’s paradise with every man possessing at least four wives
. . . . The Quran has clearly given permission for men to marry more than once,
and in certain circumstances this is a social necessity: . . . “marry such women
as seem good to you, two, three or four” (4:3). But in the next line the Quran lays
down a clause: “If you think you will not act justly, then one.” This is a stringent
condition making it difficult for a person to marry more than once. Indeed the
Quran itself says that polygamy is not possible: “You will never manage to deal
equitably with women no matter how hard you try” (4:129). The true spirit of
the Quran thus appears to be monogamy . . . . None the less Muslims are not
apologetic or defensive about polygamy  . . . .
Modernists do not need to engage in such elaborations. They simply point to
the fact that “changing times” bring changing customs and moralities. What
was acceptable hundreds of years ago is no longer considered acceptable
today—and of course the Quran was ambivalent about it even then. Instead of
focusing on specifics that are no longer relevant in the entirely different setting
of a modern urban world, one should concentrate on the essence of the
Prophet’s teachings and his example. One will then find that he strove toward
ever greater equality, justice, and harmony as the guiding principles of social
interaction, that he was a social reformer. Therefore, introducing reforms into
society is in keeping with the spirit of Islam.
Criminal Punishments, Islamic Justice
Fundamentalists and many conservative traditionalists argue for the deterrent
value of Islam’s severe criminal penalties. This is usually not true of reformist
traditionalists, however. As traditionalists, they do not feel able to criticize or
deny the rules. Instead, they look for ways around them.
In the case of theft, for example, some do this by arguing that most instances of
that crime fall outside the strict legal definition of the circumstances that would

--- Sayfa 34 ---
18
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
warrant amputation. If poverty, material need, hunger, or the desire to provide
for one’s family are present as a motive, they claim, the thief is exonerated—
society is to be blamed for the crime, not the person who was forced by adverse
circumstances to commit it. If, on the other hand, the theft is completely
frivolous, it clearly constitutes a mental disturbance, which again is a mitigating
circumstance that excuses the perpetrator from such a severe punishment.
(See, for example, Maqsood, 1994b, p. 137.)
How Muslim countries resolve such dilemmas mirrors the forces active within
them. Pakistan, for example, is home to a vocal and politically potent funda-
mentalist segment; it also has a significant traditionalist population; and politi-
cally, it wishes to affiliate itself with the modern international community. How
can the country reconcile these goals on the issue of Islamic criminal justice?
Abandoning shari’a law would alienate the fundamentalists and portions of the
traditionalists, but amputating hands and stoning adulterers would lead to
international condemnation and alienate domestic modernists and some tradi-
tionalists. The solution: Impose shari’a sentences but do not carry them out.
(See, for example, Reuters, 2002.)
We can also apply the reverse approach, deducing a country’s goals from the
policy it chooses on shari’a law. If a country not only pays lip service to shari’a
law but actually imposes the consequent sentences, we can conclude that it is
interested only in the audience of fundamentalists and conservative traditional-
ists and has no desire to align itself with the modern democratic world.
Besides amputations of the hands and, in the cases of repeat offenders, also the
feet of thieves, shari’a law imposes the death sentence for adultery and flogging
for fornication. This is not controversial among fundamentalists or the conser-
vative traditionalists closest to them—but it should be, because there is signifi-
cant ambiguity in the Quran on this issue. Concerning the treatment of adulter-
ous women, the text says to “call in four witnesses from among yourselves
against them; if they testify to their guilt confine them to their houses till death
overtakes them or till Allah finds another way for them.”
This can be interpreted to mean that the woman should be immured or walled
in until she dies of suffocation, or starvation, but equally, it can be taken to
require her solitary lifelong confinement until her natural death. There is no
reported instance of this punishment in either interpretation being imple-
mented in any Muslim country, even though the Quran is unequivocal in order-
ing it. Instead, women (and men) deemed guilty of adultery have variously been
beheaded, stoned, or shot, with stoning the most common method.
The more commonly seized-upon escape clause for reformist traditionalists
and conservative traditionalists refers to the rules of evidence. An adultery
charge requires four Muslim witnesses. The text itself, as we saw, does not

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Mapping the Issues
19
specify what exactly these witnesses ought to have seen. Orthodox scholars
generally say that they must have seen the actual act of adultery, not just cir-
cumstantial evidence leading them to believe that it had likely taken place. This
clearly stacks the deck significantly in favor of the defendant.
Fundamentalists are not usually constrained by that rule, which shows that
they are well outside the bounds of orthodoxy. There were, for example, no wit-
nesses at all in the case of the Nigerian woman recently sentenced to death for
adultery. In her case, the fact that she had given birth to a child, although she
was not married, sufficed as evidence. Neither the Quran nor any of the thou-
sands of hadiths mentions such a conclusion, although surely such a circum-
stance must also have occurred at some point during those years. If anything,
this judgment contradicts the Quranic injunction that a woman should “never
be made to suffer on account of her child.” It is not difficult to extend that
injunction to mean that a woman probably should not be executed on account
of her child.
But fundamentalists, as noted earlier, do not feel constrained by the literal
substance of Islam. Nowhere was this more evident than with the Taliban. They
executed women by shooting them—a penalty certainly not in keeping with the
literal law of Islam, which originated before the age of guns. The Taliban also
executed homosexuals, inventing in that case both the death penalty and the
means of executing it: tying them to a wall and running a bulldozer over them
to crush them to death (see Ahmad Rashid, 2000, and Amnesty International,
1999). The Quran says: “If two men among you commit indecency punish them
both. If they repent and mend their ways, let them be” (4:13). It does not men-
tion the nature of the punishment, but bulldozers cannot have been involved,
and it does not seem likely that, given the alternative, the Taliban’s victims were
given the option of “repenting” and refused it.
Shari’a law prescribes flogging as a penalty for various offenses, such as the
consumption of alcohol. International public opinion no longer considers this
to be a civilized form of punishment. Again, traditionalists cannot override the
fact that Islamic law clearly calls for this punishment. They can only seek argu-
ments to make it somehow more palatable.
The case reformist traditionalist author Ruqaiyyah Maqsood (1994a, p. 138)
makes is typical:
There are numerous rules governing the administration of Islamic flogging; it is
not just a savage beating inflicted capriciously . . . .  It has to be done with con-
trol, in accord with justice, and in the kindest possible way in the circum-
stances, following a long list of stipulations, including deferment when some-
one is sick, not to touch face, head or private parts, women to be fully clothed
and allowed to sit, not to be done on days of extreme heat or cold, and so forth.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
20
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
As with adultery, one can also minimize the chances that the undesirable
penalty will be applied by adding to the burden of proof. For instance, a num-
ber of hadiths discourage believers from spying on each other, denouncing oth-
ers or trying to find fault with them. These can be used to argue that drinking in
the privacy of one’s own home should not be punished, since it would not have
been discovered in the first place if someone had not first violated the injunc-
tion against meddling and spying.
Minorities
The picture that study of the text yields about other monotheistic religions is
mixed. The Quran contains many hostile, incendiary passages about Jews and
Christians, but it also contains some conciliatory ones. This has been explained
in reference to historic circumstances—the original Islamic community was at
war with these groups.
In general, non-Muslims living under Muslim control are supposed to be
permitted to practice their religions without obstacles. Muslim men are even
instructed to allow their Jewish or Christian wives to practice their faiths freely.
Minorities should be able to have their own courts and apply their own laws in
civil matters. Historically, minority communities have often fared relatively well
under Islamic empires.
Fundamentalists do not continue this tradition, instead tending to act repres-
sively toward non-Muslims living under their control. Fundamentalist terrorist
groups have attacked churches in Pakistan, killing the worshipers. In Saudi
Arabia, Christians and Jews may not establish churches or synagogues and may
not observe their own religious holidays.
The Taliban imposed its rules on everyone.9 When the Taliban adopted the
Wahhabi religious interpretation that women should not be permitted to drive
cars, it also applied to foreign women working with nongovernmental organi-
zations (NGOs). Hindus were excused from the forcibly imposed public prayers
but at the expense of stigmatization: They were supposed to wear yellow identi-
fying patches.
Traditionalists tend to be ecumenical, although their goals are to establish an
Islamic society and encourage conversion. In theory, this should be accom-
plished by setting a good example and by persuasion, not by compulsion.
______________

9The Taliban Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and Suppression of Vice appears to have not
only been copied from but also trained and funded by the Saudi religious police, or mutaween (Fisk,
1998).

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Mapping the Issues
21
Women’s Dress
On purely objective grounds, it is surprising that the issue of hijab has managed
to attain such vast importance, because the Quran very manifestly does not
support it. The Quran requires modest dress and modest conduct for both men
and women. It does not specify what that means in terms of clothing but cites
two guidelines: local custom and the person’s station in life, i.e., his or her work.
Only a very specific group of women, namely the Prophet’s wives, were
instructed to cover themselves in the hijab sense of the term. This provision is
contained in a late section of the Quran that specifically addresses the ways in
which their situation differs from that of other women. They are asked to con-
sider their unusual circumstances and to accept exceptional restrictions—not
to remarry after the Prophet dies and to wear special concealing garments—and
in return they are promised “double the reward” of ordinary mortals.
Modernists and the more progressive among reformist traditionalists point this
out. They also note the explanation given in the Quran and hadith for the rules
of dress: Modest people are supposed to avoid attracting special notice. Where
it is not the majority dress, hijab accomplishes the opposite. It draws special
attention to a woman and causes people to stare at her, the very effect she
should be trying to avoid, were she truly modest. Finally, they refer to two basic
messages in the Quran: that there should be “no compulsion in religion” and
that “God does not desire hardship, but desires ease” for his followers. Pressur-
ing women to wear a certain mode of dress they have not freely chosen, con-
straining their ability to work, singling them out for hostility or discrimination,
causing a negative impact on their comfort and health—none of these are in
harmony with that injunction.
Scriptural fundamentalists and traditionalists engage in lengthy debates over
the issue of women’s dress, weighing the pros and cons of various arguments
before coming to some sort of judgment. Web sites in which people narrate the
years-long soul-searching they have personally engaged in over this issue are
very popular, as are narratives of girls describing why they have decided to wear
or not to wear hijab, and pronouncements by numerous religious experts.
Radical fundamentalists ignore the debate; for them, the issue is settled, and
hijab is mandatory. One hallmark of radical fundamentalist doctrinal practice is
their selectivity. Typically, their publications on this subject will quote the sura
urging “believing women to lower their gaze” but will leave out the rest of the
sentence, which identically requires “believing men to lower their gaze.” How-
ever, while the largest part of the burden of maintaining “public morality” falls
on women, who must accept restrictive dress and banishment from public
space, fundamentalist men are not entirely exempt. As the Australian funda-
mentalist Web site Nida’ul Islam recommends, all children should be taught to

--- Sayfa 38 ---
22
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
feel uncomfortable in the presence of the opposite sex and embarrassed about
their bodies (Islam, 1998):
We should use the Prophet as an example: Abu Said Al Khudri reported that the
Prophet was more shy than a virgin in her own room. (Bukhari) If we instill this
into [children] at an early age then, inshallah, whenever they are near the vicin-
ity of the opposite sex, they will feel shy and, therefore, will not act inappropri-
ately.10
This premise—that a person who is socialized to feel inhibited and neurotic
about sexuality is more likely to act “appropriately” in this sphere is an adult—
clearly depends on one’s definition of what constitutes appropriate conduct.
In any event, the issue of hijab has become highly politicized. As one expert
notes,11
Hijab . . .  has become a symbol of traditionalism and fundamentalism. As such
it is politicized and used by anti-Western groups from Turkey to Malaysia and
throughout the Arab world. Western governments, especially the U.S., should
refrain from making any references to “the right of women to wear the hijab” as
being a simple democratic right. It is more than this, and the hidden message
behind hijab is very dangerous.
Husbands Allowed to Beat Wives
Fundamentalists have no problem with this. In the case of radical fundamental-
ists, it fits their hierarchical view of society and their ideal of female subordina-
tion. Scriptural fundamentalists find it to be in accord with their overall disci-
plinary approach to human conduct, which includes such institutions as a
religious police armed with whips and sticks, patrolling the streets to monitor
the length of men’s hair, the observance of prayers, the absence of polish on
women’s fingernails, and the like.
Conservative traditionalists also accept the practice12 but try to make a distinc-
tion between a “benevolent” didactic intervention, employed rarely and
______________

10Note that the title of the article in which this appears uses G-B as a discreet abbreviation for
Girlfriend-Boyfriend, a relationship apparently too horrible even to spell out. Let it be noted that, on
the basis of hadith, one rather gains the impression that Muhammad was relaxed and informal in
the presence of women. He liked to socialize with Aisha’s friends, stayed in the room when they
visited her to play music, joked with women in the neighborhood, and gave advice to women on a
variety of quite intimate matters.
11Birol Yesilada, personal communication, March 2003.
12For example, see Abdur Rahman Doi (2001):
A refractory wife has no legal right to object to her husband exercising his disciplinary authority.
Islamic law, in keeping with most other systems of law (which ones might those be? He does not spec-
ify), recognizes the husband’s right to discipline his wife for disobedience.
Doi is Director of the Center for Islamic Legal Studies, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaira, Nigeria.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Mapping the Issues
23
intended to correct the wife’s wrongful behavior “for her own good,” which is
acceptable, and an abusive exercise of domestic violence, which is not.
Reformist traditionalists usually do not support the practice but search for
justifications and alternative interpretations.
This is the text:
As for those [women] from whom you fear disobedience, admonish them and
send them to beds apart and beat them. Then if they obey you, take no further
action against them. (4:34)
This Quranic passage offers potential ambiguity in two places: in the term
specifying what kind of cause might justify such a response and in the term
describing the response itself. Some latch onto the first ambiguity and argue
that this passage applies only to very major offenses. While they remain
unspecified in the text, Muhammad’s contemporaries undoubtedly knew what
was meant. They argue that the Arabic term used to describe the wife’s offense
is closer to “rebellion” than to “disobedience” and suggest that it perhaps was
meant to refer to apostasy or to subversive political activity on the part of the
wife.
Some authors focus on the second ambiguous term. Traditionalist authorities
can spend many paragraphs discussing the exact terminology and concluding
that the text does not really mean to “beat” or even to “strike,” but should be
interpreted as meaning to “lightly tap” (Rauf, 2002). Qaradawi instructs that
wives may be hit, but not on the face. The American Muslim publication Islamic
Horizons, in a special issue dedicated to the topic of domestic violence,
proposes in all seriousness that the correct application of this Quranic verse is
for the husband to give an errant wife “a few taps” with a “siwak,” a kind of
toothbrush. This, the author concludes, is “reasonable, dignified, and fairly
flawless, for each spouse’s human dignity is respected” (Abusulayman, 2003, p.
22). We would be hard-pressed to invent a better illustration for the inability of
Islamic traditionalists, even reformist traditionalists, to manage the challenges
of modernity than a text like the one above, which earnestly proposes the
spectacle of a man resolving disputes by hitting his wife with a toothbrush as an
example of a dignified relationship.
For modernists, again, this issue is not a problem. Like the Old Testament, the
Quran includes content no longer relevant today, and there is no need to
struggle with it. Further, they doubt the authenticity of that sura altogether,
since it contradicts what one knows about the Prophet’s attitudes and behavior,
other passages in the Quran, and the bulk of hadiths concerning marital rela-
tions and the appropriate conduct of a husband toward a wife. Numerous
hadiths disapprove of marital violence, but these do not make their way to fun-

--- Sayfa 40 ---
24
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
damentalist or to conservative traditionalist Web sites. In one such hadith, the
Prophet makes the point that it is inappropriate and primitive to hit a person
with whom one intends in the future again to be intimate. Famously, the
Prophet’s final deathbed comment warned men to “fear God in your treatment
of women.” And finally, due to the intense scrutiny paid to the Prophet’s private
life by his contemporaries, we have a large number of anecdotes related to dis-
putes he had with his wives. From these stories we know that when he became
angry he made sarcastic remarks, sulked, complained to his father-in-law, and
at least once withdrew to a different floor of the house for an entire month.
The Quran was not recorded in writing until well after the Prophet’s death. It
was then assembled by collecting various scraps of bark or bone upon which
witnesses to the revelations had recorded them and by locating individuals who
had memorized certain suras and having them dictate the text as best they
recalled it. This project eventually resulted in the production of several versions
of the Quran, which differed from each other. Eventually, to prevent discord, all
versions but one were destroyed (see Parwez, 2002). It is widely accepted that at
least two suras were lost in that process. Modernists point out that some may
also have been falsely or inaccurately recorded. To traditionalists, however, who
revere as infallible and divine each letter of the Quran and even the paper it is
printed on, that notion is anathema.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
25
Chapter Two
FINDING PARTNERS FOR THE PROMOTION
OF DEMOCRATIC ISLAM: OPTIONS
Promoting democracy in the Islamic world and assisting constructively in
Islam’s process of evolution look to be long-term undertakings. Each of the
groups described above presents different challenges and prospects when we
examine their potential as partners. “Weighing in” on an ongoing dialogue over
values requires us to consider our purpose carefully, to avoid unintended con-
sequences.
THE SECULARISTS
Although there are some ambiguities, Western democracies are premised on
the separation of church and state. It follows that the secularists should be our
most natural allies in the Muslim world.1
The problem has been, and continues to be, that many important secularists in
the Islamic world are unfriendly or even extremely hostile to us on other
grounds. Leftist ideologies, anti-Americanism, aggressive nationalism, and
authoritarian structures with only quasi-democratic trappings have been some
of the manifestations of Islamic secularism to date.
Another obstacle has been the assumptions Western theorists and policymakers
have made that the Islamic world does not accommodate secularism in the
same way that other cultures do, seeing that religion as fundamentally political
and “this worldly” and that secularism is such a minority position in the Islamic
world that it does not make sense to link oneself to its prospects.
This is factually incorrect. Secular regimes have managed to hold power, legiti-
macy, and even popularity, and secular movements have gained huge follow-
______________

1And, by the way, that very terminology illustrates the point. We do not speak of the Buddhist world
or the Christian world—and the term Christendom, which at times had a geographic dimension, has
been archaic for some time. Yet modern international political terminology commonly refers to the
Islamic world or the Muslim states.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
26
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
ings.2 One of the Islamic world’s most successful states, Turkey, achieved its
progress through a policy of aggressive secularism. Turkey also provides a dra-
matic instance of an Islamic polity transforming itself, in a very short time, from
being a deeply Muslim Ottoman state to a laicist system. In this sense, the
Turkish case is quite key, perhaps more so than Western policy reflects.
One irony of the post–September 11 situation is that our “hostility threshold”
has risen markedly. We are today prepared to accept postures that include a
level of hostility to the West, the United States, and Western values, aggressive
language and assertive postures that go significantly beyond levels we found
unacceptable when they were manifested by nationalists and quasi-socialists in
that same part of the world. We can only speculate what different path history
might have taken if we had shown some of the socialist Arab nationalists as
much indulgence as we are prepared to show some of the fundamentalist
extremists today.
There are indications that radical fundamentalism, when it is no longer in an
oppositional role but holds power, tends to alienate large segments of the
population with the oppressiveness and rigidity of its approach. We should
position ourselves to enhance that alienation and utilize the backlash effect.
Populations that are exposed to particularly repressive fundamentalism can
respond by finding modernism and secularism attractive. By many accounts,
this is happening in Iran, especially among students and the young.
In Afghanistan, pious traditional segments of the population, who felt insulted
by “foreign” fundamentalists policing and commanding them, and urban mid-
dle class and younger segments of the population, who were interested in more
freedom and progress, were united in their rejection of Taliban Islam. This
backlash encouraged both traditionalism (in the case of older and rural
segments) and incipient secularism (in some younger, urban segments).
Fundamentalists and traditionalists commonly allege that secular Western val-
ues are the root cause of most social problems, while an Islamic order would
ensure morality, strong families, and low crime. Iran is a striking counterargu-
ment to these assertions. After decades of strict Islamic governance, Iran is at
least as plagued by the problems of the age as any “decadent” Western country.
Drug addiction has skyrocketed. Prostitution is a huge problem, so much so
that the government seriously contemplated the installation of state-run
brothels, officiated over by mullahs,3 as a way to get some sort of control over
______________

2See the interesting case Kramer (2001) makes in this regard.
3Temporary marriages, allowed in Shi’a Islam, would have been pronounced for the duration of the
transaction, lending a note of respectability, as well as providing income to the officiating clergy.
The plan unleashed a great deal of controversy. See “Drugs and Prostitution Soar in Iran” (2000),
Muir (2000), Muir (2002), and Saba (2000).

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
27
the situation. Teenage runaways, alcoholism, escalating crime rates—the
imposition of shari’a punishments has not deterred and the vigilant state
enforcement of Islamic conduct has not prevented such problems from spiral-
ing out of control.
The example of Iran provides a simple, empirical way to invalidate the claim
that the freedom of Western democracy is the problem and that a coercively
applied Islam is the answer. The failures of Islamic governance in Iran should
be publicized widely, as these facts are not generally known to Islamic audi-
ences, who are thus inclined to believe the simple assertion that shari’a law
deters crime and that a more strict application of Islam and Islamic law will
solve the problems of society.
THE FUNDAMENTALISTS
We know that the radical fundamentalists are hostile to modern democracy, to
Western values in general, and to the United States in particular; that their
overall goals and visions are incompatible with ours; and that they oppose us
and we oppose them. In the past, some experts have felt that it may be possible
to work even with the radical fundamentalists in the hopes of engaging and
gradually reforming them. In places not central to Western policy—Afghani-
stan, for example—some even suggested that the usual standards should be
suspended and that one should merely attempt to reach a minimal accommo-
dation with those who held power and otherwise turn a blind eye to their con-
duct.
Post–September 11 thinking has not been hospitable to that view, and such an
approach is no longer being seriously proposed as a means of dealing with the
current massive threat of fundamentalist extremism. There are two obvious
reasons: We have realized that ignoring remote areas makes them suitable as
bases for our enemies, and we have realized that views we had thought were
marginal and eccentric in fact have more adherents, who are more dangerous
than we expected. Thus, accommodation with radical fundamentalists is not
currently thought to be a viable choice.
However, as concerns the scriptural fundamentalists, hostilities continue to be
suspended and tactical alliances continue in specific cases dictated by tactical
or strategic considerations. The obvious example is Saudi Arabia. The possibil-
ity of some sort of rapprochement and renegotiated political relationship with
Iran remains under consideration.
Clearly, our strategy toward Saudi Arabia is based on geopolitical, tactical, and
economic considerations and does not represent an endorsement of that
regime or its lifestyle and ideology. However, such tactical alliances have their
hazards. They can weaken our credibility and can make us seem lacking in forti-

--- Sayfa 44 ---
28
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
tude and principles. For example, as the United States was gearing up to attack
the Taliban and al Qaeda in Afghanistan and was accompanying this with a
public relations effort to explain why such a backward, oppressive regime
needed to be removed from power and prevented from further tyrannizing its
people, speeches citing examples of Taliban human rights abuses had to be
carefully screened to make sure that the practices one was condemning were
not identical to those engaged in by our “friends,” the Saudis.4 Since it is obvi-
ous to any observer that this friendship is sustained only by tactical and eco-
nomic considerations, this clearly weakens our moral authority.
A number of authors believe that fundamentalist hostility to the United States
and to the West primarily reflects anger over some aspects of our foreign policy
or discomfort over the more-liberal aspects of Western culture. It is important
to be aware that, while such concerns play a part, fundamentalism represents a
basic and total rejection of democracy and of the core values of modern civil
society. It wants, in the words of Algerian Islamic Salvation Front (FIS)
spokesperson Ali Benhadj, to “break the neck of democracy” (Kepel, 1998).
The issue is not democracy’s imperfect application, its ethnocentrism or exces-
sive pragmatism, or any such flaw, but democracy itself. As stated in the plat-
form of the organization Hizb-ut-Tahrir: “The republican system is based on
the democratic system, which is a system of Kufr [unbelief] . . .” (Hizb-ut-Tahrir
Web site, undated).
Similarly, Dangerous Concepts (Hizb-ut-Tahrir, 1997), a volume widely dissemi-
nated in print and on the web by United Kingdom–based Al-Khilafah Publica-
tions, lists “nationalism, socialism, democracy, pluralism, human rights, free-
dom and free-market policies” (p. 6) as the “danger[s] and falla[cies]” (p. 7) by
which unbelievers are seeking to “finish off Islam” (p. 7); a later chapter
describes terrorism as “a form of prayer” (p. 12).
The above-cited sources can be assigned to the extreme end of the spectrum
with relative ease. Such Web sites as IslamOnline present a greater challenge.
Whereas the other sources are often characterized by poor English and the use
of slogans, the texts on IslamOnline reflect a much higher degree of education
and English proficiency, as well as greater sophistication in the presentation of
material. For outward reasons alone—because it looks so modern—we might
be tempted to consider this a “modernist” discussion forum. In fact, however,
this site takes a profoundly antidemocratic stand. The following paragraph,
which attacks the efforts to reinterpret Islam in the light of a new historical age,
______________

4That the Saudis’ destruction of historic treasures did not receive as much attention as the Taliban’s
is also striking. The Saudis systematically annihilated the historic Islamic architecture of the
Balkans, which offended their austere Wahhabi aesthetics (Ford, 2001).

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
29
also helps explain the centrality of lifestyle issues within the current Islamic
debate (Kamal Sultan, 2002):
The vast majority of those who advocate the historicity of the Qur’an have fully
assimilated the Western epistemological and philosophical assumptions. Direct
confrontation and military conquest are now secondary tools to dominate cul-
tures and markets. Habits and lifestyles are primary targets of change in order
to guarantee an open market based on a free consumer who has an open mind.
Interpretation only has a role when existing Islamic orthodoxy has left a gap of
detail and when it becomes necessary to “cross the t’s and dot the i’s.” In illus-
tration, the author cites as legitimate the discussion over whether the Quran,
when it instructs believers to wash before prayer and says that they should
“wash your feet to the ankles,” meant that “the ankles were included” or not. In
Western terminology, an “open mind” is a positive thing; in this article, it is the
epitome of what should be avoided.
THE TRADITIONALISTS
The traditionalists at first glance have several features that make them seem
attractive as potential partners:
•
They are a useful counterweight to the fundamentalists, because they enjoy
widespread public legitimacy in the eyes of Muslim populations.
•
They tend to be more middle-of-the-road, more moderate, a calming influ-
ence.
•
They are open to, and in fact often proactively seek, interfaith dialogue.
•
They do not usually advocate violence, although some of them sympathize
with fundamentalists who have chosen that path, to the point of sheltering
them, providing them with resources, and abetting their activities.
While fundamentalist groups often consist mostly of young men, traditionalists
represent a more normal slice of society: families, older people, women, school
children. They are organized; they have institutional structures and leaders and
the essential components of public self-presentation: books, speeches, public
events, conferences, associations. They are visible and easy to find.
Orthodox Islam contains elements that support democratic, participatory,
egalitarian values. These can be filtered out and used to justify reforms.
For all these reasons, it is tempting to choose the traditionalists as the primary
agents for fostering democratic Islam, and indeed this appears to be the course
that the West is inclined to take. However, some very serious problems argue
against making the traditionalists the main agents of modern democratic Islam,
as the following subsections will discuss.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
30
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Distinguishing Between Traditionalists and Fundamentalists
It is often difficult to distinguish traditionalists from fundamentalists. The diffi-
culty exists on two levels. It is easy to make a mistake and to classify some
leader or some group as traditionalist that is in fact a front for more-radical
affiliations. But even without a deliberate attempt to mislead, the views and
values of the two positions are often so close that only a very fine line divides
them. Traditionalists and fundamentalists share views on a large number of
subjects, and fundamentalists use the traditionalist infrastructure (mosques,
associations, charitable societies, etc.) as cover and as a support system.
There are critical issues on which the traditionalists are closer to the fundamen-
talists than to any other segment. These issues include shari’a implementation,
attitudes toward the West and the United States, gender relations and the status
of women, and the nature of the ideal political order, as well as a number of
other basic social and judicial issues.
Even the reformist traditionalists, whose views on social and lifestyle issues are
more compatible with international modernity, are often much closer to the
fundamentalists than to the West on issues of international politics. For exam-
ple, traditionalists in general widely denounced the September 11 attacks. But
this did not translate into blanket condemnation of terrorism and political vio-
lence. Sheikh Tantawi, rector of Al Azhar University and a conservative tradi-
tionalist, went on record to condemn the killing of civilians and innocent
victims in Israel. But he was challenged on this by Yussuf al-Qaradawi, the influ-
ential Qatar-based reformist traditionalist, who takes a relatively progressive
stance on many social issues but is aggressive on the issue of an “Islamic” for-
eign policy.5 He writes (al-Qaradawi, n.d.):
The Islamic movement should consider itself at the beck and call of every
Islamic cause, responding to every cry for help wherever that cry may come
from. It should stand with Eritrea in its jihad against the unjust Marxist Chris-
tian regime . . . .
It should stand by Sudan against the treacherous Christian racist rebellion . . . .
It should support the Muslims of the Philippines against the biased Christian
regime that seeks to annihilate them . . . .
It should help the Muslims of Kashmir in their struggle . . . .
Palestine is the first and foremost Islamic cause . . . for this is a serious stage of
the Palestinian cause, a stage where there are plans to . . . realize the old dream
______________

5Yussuf al-Qaradawi was born in Egypt in 1926 and studied at Al Azhar. His membership in the
Muslim Brotherhood brought him several periods of detention in prison. In 1962, Al Azhar sent him
to Qatar to organize the country’s religious studies system, and he became dean of the law faculty at
the University of Qatar. His numerous published books, his active Web site, his NGO (International
Association of Islamic Relief), and other activities have made him an influential voice in the current
Islamic debate over values. See Hashmi (2002).

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
31
of Great Israel that extends from the Nile to the Euphrates and then to the land
of Hijaz, Medina and Khaybar.
The overlap between fundamentalists and traditionalists has an important and
worrisome infrastructure component. As became increasingly and alarmingly
clear in the months following September 11, there is significant blurring
between these two groups on the level of mosques, Islamic conferences, and
Muslim charitable organizations. Radical fundamentalists are often able to
move comfortably within, and to utilize, traditionalist Islamic networks, struc-
tures, and support systems.
A basic strain of distrust, resentment, and hostility flavors the attitude of tradi-
tionalists toward the modern West and the United States especially. This makes
it difficult to distinguish them from the fundamentalists.
For example, consider the paper Muhammad Al-Asi wrote when he was Imam
of the Islamic Center in Washington, D.C. (Al-Asi, 2000). “The Western defini-
tion of politics,” he alleged therein, “is sullied and corrupt, the Islamic defini-
tion of politics is clean and healthy.” Muslims must “overturn the system of
kufr” and avoid “joining the ‘modern and developed’ world,” where “economic
exploitation is given a good name under the title of free-market operations and
capitalism.”
Al-Asi purports to be a traditionalist, but his affiliations and his style of reason-
ing make that seem questionable. He is a fellow at the Institute of Contempo-
rary Islamic Thought in London, which describes itself as “an intellectual center
of the global Islamic movement.” The cited paper was written for a conference
in Karachi. It challenges Western politics, culture, and economics and shows a
disregard for orthodoxy. These are hallmarks of fundamentalism.
When American traditionalists get together for conferences, they often express
great alienation and hostility to the West and the United States and usually
share the platform with those who articulate fundamentalist views. In Septem-
ber 2002, the organizer of a conference entitled “Islam in America: Rights and
Citizenship in a Post 9/11 World,” held at the University of California at Berke-
ley, observed that “fear and oppression” were the main features of the life of
Muslims in America, which seems a bit of an overstatement. University of South
Florida Professor Sami Al-Arian—who at the time had already been suspended
from his teaching position for suspected links to terrorists, for a speech he had
given advocating “death to Israel,” and for being a close associate of the head of
the Palestinian Islamic Jihad—was the conference’s featured speaker on “civil
rights” (Locke, 2002). In February 2003, he would become one of a group of
individuals indicted on terrorism charges.
While only solid intelligence work can uncover the concrete linkages between
Islamic organizations and extremist movements, connections between tradi-

--- Sayfa 48 ---
32
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
tionalist platforms and fundamentalist sponsors can often be found even
through superficial effort.
For example, traditionalists host a number of Web sites geared to pious Mus-
lims who find themselves in some sort of a lifestyle quandary and want guid-
ance.
One popular site of this kind is ourdialogue.com, consulted by thousands of
Muslims worldwide, especially immigrants and migrant workers displaced from
their communities and facing unfamiliar issues. Here are some of the worries
that prompt people to email their requests for guidance:
1. Can a Muslim be a vegetarian, or does one have to eat meat because the
Prophet did?
2. For the ritual washing before prayers, is it necessary for women to unbraid
their hair?
3. If you happen upon your husband just as he is writing out the ritual formula
to divorce you three times on a piece of paper, with your name clearly cited
in the text, but he claims that he was just absentmindedly doodling and did
not really mean it, are you divorced or not?
(By the way, the answers are: Yes, you can be a vegetarian; not everything the
Prophet did is obligatory for all other Muslims. No, you do not have to unbraid
your hair, as long as water touches your scalp. Yes, the divorce counts, but the
couple can remarry if they want to.)
Who exactly is issuing these judgments? That question does not seem to be too
important to those who seek guidance in this fashion, which in itself is reveal-
ing, since it points to a mentality willing to accept authority with few questions.
Such Web sites usually do not provide anything like a “bio” listing the names
and qualifications of those who review the questions and formulate a reply. The
“Our Dialogue” site merely notes that “answers to questions are provided by
more than one scholar.”
That site is hosted by a Pakistani group, apkar pk, based in Karachi, and many
of the questions come from Pakistanis living abroad. But look just a little more
carefully, and you learn that the answers come from Saudi Arabia. The Saudi
agency “Arab News” sponsors this service for “Muslims in the Subcontinent
who cannot get convincing answers from their own nearby Ulama.”
A second site, IslamForToday.com, initially makes a very different impression.
Glossy, and American in tone, it prominently features progressive, even
“uppity” views by Western converts. Its mission statement, right under the logo,
is to “improve the image of Islam,” and U.S. visitors to the site are clearly the
main intended audience. But the positions on key issues are overwhelmingly
traditionalist, even fundamentalist.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
33
Tracking this site back by following its list of sponsors and recommended
sources, we are sent to the Al Haramein Foundation. But there, of course, the
trail ends, because that site will not open, the foundation having been blocked
after September 11 as an organization linked to terrorists.6
Potentially Useful Democratic Elements
The traditionalist belief set does include democratic elements. It can be made
to justify reforms, but not without significant effort. Traditionalists have pro-
duced a large number of publications sketching a “kinder, gentler” vision of
Islam, in rebuttal of the religion’s negative image and of the public statements
by radicals, whom they do not wish to be tainted by. These books typically
praise the socially positive aspects of Islam, find rationalizations and softened
interpretations for practices that are today considered oppressive, and argue
that Islam is not only compatible with the principles of the modern age
(democracy, equality, social welfare, education) but indeed pioneered them.7
Besides their tone, which to various degrees combines defensiveness with
apologetics, these writings usually contain positions and philosophies that are
fundamentally at odds with modern civil society.
The underlying problem is that the philosophical underpinnings of the two are
incompatible. Modern democracy rests on the values of the Enlightenment;
traditionalism opposes these values and sees them as a source of corruption
and evil. Traditionalism is antithetical to the basic requirements of a modern
democratic mind-set: critical thinking, creative problem solving, individual lib-
erty, secularism. One can gloss over these differences for a time, but they will
not go away, and sooner or later one will arrive at points of conflict.
Modern democratic civil society will not support shari’a law; traditionalism
requires it. Modernity does not go along with the death sentence for adultery or
flogging and amputation as acceptable criminal punishments; it will not
accommodate enforced gender segregation or extreme and overt discrimina-
tion against women in family law, criminal justice, and public and political life.
Not all traditionalists seek to implement all these things, but they all defend
some of them and are at best ambivalent about the rest.8 Reformist traditional-
______________

6The organization has been linked with terrorist groups in a number of countries, including Pak-
istan, Afghanistan, and Bosnia, as well as Chechnya.
7To cite only a few, there are Hofmann (1997), Al-Mamun (1990), Wadud (1999), Ibn Lulu Ibn Al-
Naqib (1997), Khalid Arshed (1999), Ali (1992), Kurzman (1998), and Abdessalam (2000).
8For example, Qaradawi, in his publication “Issues Concerning Freedom of Belief, the Unity of
Islamic Nations and the Backwardness of Some Islamic Nations” takes a liberal position on the
practice of other religions and even on apostasy, arguing that as long as a Muslim who renounces
his religion does so “without spreading his views among the people and without shaking the

--- Sayfa 50 ---
34
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
ists do not necessarily want to reinstate all of these practices, but they too
accept the underlying principles. Traditionalists by definition believe that the
Quran and the shari’a should be followed literally and completely. They can
never be negated. At best, they can be circumvented, typically through an elab-
orate and at times tortured procedure of finding exceptions and clauses and
searching out ambiguities and possible alternative interpretations.
Further, traditionalism is causally linked with backwardness and underdevel-
opment, which in turn are the breeding ground for social and political prob-
lems of all sorts. Traditionalism was, throughout much of modern history, the
dominant version of Islam, determining the way in which Muslim society was
structured. It may look comparatively better today when we contrast it with
fundamentalism, but the fact remains that it produced, maintained, and was
unable to discover a way out of poverty, backwardness, and underdevelopment.
A major recent study, the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP’s)
Arab Human Development Report, identified the absence of democracy, the
inequitable status of women, and neglect of education as the three key causes
of backwardness in the Arab world (UNDP, 2002). Traditionalism is more hier-
archical and authority-bound than democratic; is highly leery of women’s social
and economic integration and participation and places many restrictions on it;
and is wary of modern, secular education. The three problems identified in the
UNDP report will not be fixed if the traditionalists are in charge—indeed, the
traditionalists have presided over societies marked by these persistent prob-
lems. And until headway is made on these problems, the region will remain
highly unstable and vulnerable to extremist movements.
The Danger of Domestic Backlash
There is the danger of domestic backlash in the West. Islamic traditionalism is
highly critical of, and often insulting toward, Western culture. So, it would take
considerable forbearance for secular Western publics to seem to accept the
criticism that the West is depraved and shallow, that its history has been
peoples’ belief,” he should not be killed, as is the usual penalty. He finds a way around the issue of
adultery by theoretically affirming the death penalty—he must do this because he has found it in
the hadith—but claiming that the preconditions for that penalty are so stringent as to make the
implementation nearly impossible. Not only must there be four witnesses to the actual act of
adultery, the guilty parties must also confess. This refers to two somewhat odd hadiths in which the
Prophet is related to have been approached voluntarily by adulterers, to have urged them to rescind
their confessions, but in the face of their refusal, to have reluctantly been obliged to order their
deaths. Qaradawi claims that these are the only two incidents in history when adultery was
punished by death. This is a peculiar claim, as it happened repeatedly in Taliban Afghanistan and
has been practiced in Iran since the Islamic Republic was instituted. Perhaps he considers these
instances to be illegal and hence un-Islamic. On amputation as a punishment for theft, however,
Qaradawi holds to the orthodox view. Except in extreme situations—the family is starving—he con-
firms amputation as a way to avoid theft from becoming a problem in communities due to
“excessive leniency.”

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
35
oppressive, and that it is to blame for many of the problems the rest of the
world experiences, while going to great lengths to show admiration for Islam
and to accommodate its religiously based demands in a secular world.
In the United States, where the general shock over the September 11 attacks
and the ongoing state of emergency, war, and terror preparedness have
prompted sustained solidarity and support for a wide range of government
measures intended to ensure security, a backlash may be slower in coming.
But in Europe, voters and intellectuals alike are already showing an incipient
negative reaction to what they perceive as an excessively naïve embracing of
Islamic traditionalism on the part of some Western political leaders.
It used to be the right wing of the European political spectrum that tended to be
wary of the alternative values and lifestyle of immigrants, especially Muslim
immigrants, and to argue that minorities from very different cultural milieus, if
they did not want to assimilate, posed a threat to Western identity and core
Western values. As the 2002 elections in France and Holland demonstrated,
these worries have already spread to wider segments of the population. In some
countries, they are reflected in new legislative policies requiring higher mea-
sures of assimilation, such as participation in language classes.
European intellectuals and liberals have also begun to articulate related con-
cerns. In one typical volume, 11 prominent authors, including some noted lib-
eral intellectuals, opinion leaders, and experts on Islam, argued that tolerance
was being misapplied (Schwarzer, 2002). Because of fear; ignorance; unwilling-
ness to face facts; concern about strengthening right-wing tendencies and
feeding social intolerance; and, in the case of the Germans, a dread of appear-
ing racist, European governments and intellectual leaders had allowed Europe
to become the operating base and a safe haven for Muslim extremists and ter-
rorists. Incorrect policies had also inadvertently elevated a backward strain of
Islam over its more secular, moderate expression by allowing a small but vocal
and aggressive minority of extremists and conservatives to become the self-
styled leaders of that community. A deliberate blind eye had been turned to
their incendiary activities. They were allowed to run a network of mosques and
cultural centers that became autonomous operating cells for terrorists and
radicals and to disproportionately influence legislation and public debate.
While U.S. officialdom appears to be seeking a symbolic rapprochement with
Islam on the level of outward lifestyle issues, European leaders seem more
inclined to try for a rapprochement on political issues they believe to be impor-
tant to Muslims. The split between the United States and Europe over Iraq is in
part attributable to this difference. The United States appears to believe that the
“Arab street” will be appeased if the United States seems to accept and honor
Islam as a religion and a way of life. Europeans seem more inclined to play to

--- Sayfa 52 ---
36
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
the sector of the Islamic public, both inside Europe and in the Muslim world,
that is concerned with foreign policy issues.
The Potential for Weakening Credibility and Moral Persuasiveness
Accommodating traditionalists to an excessive degree can weaken our credibil-
ity and moral persuasiveness. An uncritical alliance with traditionalists can be
misunderstood as appeasement and fear.
Bernard Lewis (2001) warns that the “anxious, propitiatory posture adopted by
(American) spokesmen” leads Muslim audiences to conclude that the United
States is in retreat and has gone soft.
Instead, some critics argue, we should be holding firm to our values.
“Ecumenicism,” when applied unilaterally, risks eroding our own moral posi-
tion while strengthening that of an unconciliatory opponent. Such gestures are
not interpreted as friendship, but as weakness.
That, for example, is precisely the conclusion Shaikh Abdur-Raheem Green
(1994) reached when he wrote that
It is obvious to many Muslims that the West itself does not really believe in
“democracy,” or indeed any of those ideals, such as “freedom of speech,”
“human rights” and so on, which it claims to cherish so dearly—except when it
suits their self-interest.
Already, some warn, aggressive voices from the Islamic camp are challenging
concepts basic to our civilization, such as the universality of human rights. They
are declaring them to be a Western invention, not general but culture-specific,
and they are seeking to subordinate them to shari’a (Littman, 1999).
In recent years, representatives of some Muslim states have demanded, and
often received, special treatment . . . . As a result, non-diplomatic terms such as
“blasphemy” . . . have seeped into the United Nations system, leading to a sit-
uation in which non-Muslim governments accept certain rules of conduct in
conformity with Islamic law and acquiesce to a self-imposed silence regarding
topics touching on Islam . . . . The new rules of conduct being imposed by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and acceded to by other states,
give those who claim to represent Islam an exceptional status at the United
Nations that has no legal basis and no precedent; it therefore gives ample rea-
son for apprehension.
Suspending basic modern values in the hopes of inviting a reciprocal tolerance
is a risky approach that may merely embolden the opponent. Given the fact that
core values are under attack, it is instead important to affirm the values of
Western civilization. (See, for example, Lewis, 1990.)

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
37
The Possibility of Undermining Reforms
Accommodation can undermine reform trends. Overendorsing the traditional-
ists is interference in the ongoing internal reform effort within Islam. De facto,
our stance further disadvantages those whose values are genuinely compatible
with ours, the modernists.
THE MODERNISTS
The modernist vision matches our own. Of all the groups, this one is most con-
genial to the values and the spirit of modern democratic society.
Modernism, not traditionalism, is what worked for the West. This included the
necessity to depart from, modify, and selectively ignore elements of the original
religious doctrine. The Old Testament is not different from the Quran in
endorsing conduct and containing a number of rules and values that are liter-
ally unthinkable, not to mention illegal, in today’s society.9 This does not pose a
problem because few people would today insist that we should all be living in
the exact literal manner of the Biblical patriarchs. Instead, we allow our vision
of Judaism’s or Christianity’s true message to dominate over the literal text,
which we regard as history and legend. That is exactly the approach that Islamic
modernists also propose.10
______________

9See Alan Dershowitz’s take on this issue in his debate with Alan Keyes:
When I burn a bull on the altar as a sacrifice, I know it creates a “pleasing odor for the Lord” (Leviticus
1:9). The problem is my neighbors. They claim the odor is not pleasing to them. How should I deal with
this? I would like to sell my daughter into slavery as suggested by Exodus 21:7. What do you think a fair
price would be? . . . I have a neighbor who insists on working on the Sabbath. Exodus 35:2 clearly states
he should be put to death. Am I obliged morally to kill him myself, or may I hire a hit man? (Dershowitz
and Keyes, 2000, p. 5)
A later sentence in this same debate today sounds eerily prescient (p. 7):
When you give religiously inspired zealots weapons of mass destruction and you promise them that if
they kill innocent people they will go to heaven, imagine what the consequences will be.
10Khaled Abou El Fadl (2001, p. 94) proposes the following resolution for situations where the literal
text conflicts with contemporary values:
One cannot exclude the possibility that the conviction which has been formulated (concerning the
nature and normativities of the Divine) might come into friction with certain determinations of the
text. A person can read a text that seems to go against everything that he or she believes about God and
will feel a sense of incredulous disbelief, and might even exclaim, “This cannot be from God, the God
that I know!” . . .
It is also possible that an adequate resolution would not be found, and that the individual conscience
and the textual determination continue to be pitted in an irresolvable conflict. I argue that . . .  in the
final analysis, Islamic theology requires that a person abide by the dictates of his or her conscience. A
faith-based objection to the determination might be necessary. Faith-based objections are founded on
one’s sense of iman (conviction and belief in and about God) . . . .
There are other solutions, too. Modernism also applies the principle of maslaha, or public good,
which goes back to reformist Muslim jurists of the 13th century, as something that was thought to
override even the Quran itself.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
38
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
There are definite indications that change can be effected in Islam. In fact,
some explicit and quite major departures from Quranic norms have historically
already taken place. Significantly, these did not occur as a result of exhaustive
scholarly debate in which one side managed to “out-hadith” the other. Instead,
these practices were dropped silently, without any debate at all. The most
impressive example is the institution of slavery. The Quran unmistakably and
explicitly allows the owning of slaves, but not even the most staunch tradi-
tionalist authority would today defend that institution, and radical fundamen-
talists who cling to the most extreme interpretation of jihad to justify terrorism
never make the argument that slavery, since the original Islamic community
engaged in it and the Quran permits it, is good and should be reinstituted.
Slavery has left Islamic orthodoxy, apparently for good. Yet the issue was never
debated on the basis of hadith. An unspoken consensus removed it from ortho-
doxy. This shows that Islam is no more immune than other major world reli-
gions to a changing civilizational consensus on values.
Modernism Has Respected Intellectuals and Leaders
Modernist Islam has many potential leaders and voices, individuals who com-
bine unimpeachable scholarly credentials and thorough knowledge of Islamic
doctrine and theology with a modern education and value set. Some are promi-
nent in their local communities or in academic circles. Some “borderline” indi-
viduals between modernizing traditionalism and modernism also fit this
potential role, such as Mustafa Ceric, the Grand Mufti of Bosnia.
An individual whose writings are better known in the United States is Khaled
Abou El Fadl, Professor of Islamic Law at UCLA. A well-regarded modernist
scholar and author, his writings criticize the “rampant apologetics” of tradi-
tionalists and the “authoritarian, puritanical” approach of the fundamentalists
alike. The dire situation of the contemporary Muslim world, he believes, calls
for introspection, critical insight, and abandoning the notion that one ought to
be involved in a civilizational war with the West.
Muhammad Shahrur, author of the “Proposal for an Islamic Covenant,” stresses
the need for Arabs to “have a plan to deal with the twenty-first century” that
includes political freedom, pluralism, democracy, and equality (Shahrur, 2000).
Serif Mardin attempts to bring the concept of civil society into alignment with
Islam and Islamic history (Mardin, 1996). Fethullah Gulen puts forward a ver-
sion of Islamic modernity that is strongly influenced by Sufism and stresses
diversity, tolerance, and nonviolence (Gulen, 1999). His writings have inspired a
strong multinational following and have proven attractive to young people.11
______________

11Numerous Web sites have been dedicated to his teachings and to making his sayings and articles
available; for example, see http://www.mfgulen.com.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
39
Bassam Tibi is an example of a European Muslim modernist. He advocates the
deliberate intellectual creation of a reformist Islam, one that is subordinated to
the values of modern secular society and international human rights. In the
case of diaspora communities, it should additionally incorporate the values and
laws of the democratic host country (Tibi, 2002).
Contemporary Iran has produced a number of dissidents who could be put for-
ward as role models, even as inspiring civil rights heroes. Through their public
defense of reason and of the right of individuals to make their own moral judg-
ments they have exposed themselves to persecution and become heroes to the
Iranian student movement.12 Their views, experiences, and confrontations with
the repressive state authorities should receive much greater publicity.
Weaknesses of the Modernists
On ideological grounds, the modernists are the most credible vehicle for devel-
oping and transmitting democratic Islam, but in the current reality, they oper-
ate under a number of handicaps that significantly reduce their effectiveness.
Their most basic handicap, which underlies most of the others, is financial.
Powerful forces stand behind the fundamentalists and provide them with
enormous resources: money, infrastructure, weapons, media and access to
other popular platforms, control over educational and welfare institutions, etc.
Traditionalists also have a well-established power base that can include access
to significant resources. They collect taxes; receive subsidies and donations;
and have independent sources of revenue, such as businesses and foundations.
They have a “captive audience” through mosques, schools, and social and wel-
fare programs, supplemented by modern media. Both fundamentalists and
traditionalists have their own publishing houses, radio and TV stations, schools,
newspapers, etc. Modernists have nothing comparable.
The second handicap is political. Modernists living in a fundamentalist or a
traditionalist environment and are politically active are far from having sup-
port, and their posture exposes them to danger. They can be accused of apos-
tasy, taken to court, prevented from writing and working, harassed in various
ways, and even sentenced to death.13
______________

12The case of Professor Aghajari, sentenced to death by an Iranian court for saying that Muslims
were not “monkeys” who should blindly follow the interpretations of senior religious clerics, is par-
ticularly noteworthy. His sentence is under review following ongoing major student protests (Iran
Expert, 2002).
13Egyptian modernist author and medical doctor Nawal as-Saadawi has faced repeated harassment
in court on various religious charges. Several Pakistani modernists have been sentenced to death,
although the sentences have not been carried out. (Gompu, 1995; Asian Human Rights Commis-
sion, 2001; Wiseman, 2002.)

--- Sayfa 56 ---
40
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
As long as they are operating as isolated individuals, this is a weakness. But in
connection with support and a movement, it becomes an asset, in the sense
that—like other liberation and civil rights movements—some individuals are
prepared to risk jail, to serve as heroes, role models, and leaders.
In the West or in other modern settings, modernists have a different handicap:
They tend to be well educated and well integrated. They do not hold sensa-
tionalist views that provide interesting sound bites, and they do not proselytize.
They tend to write academic texts or editorials, not mass-market propaganda.
This makes their work relatively inaccessible to the bulk of the population,
especially the restless young. One of the authors cited above, Khaled Abou El-
Fadl, writes long, complicated volumes critiquing the different schools and
philosophies of Islamic jurisprudence. His analysis of the Saudi religious
establishment’s more absurd religious fatwas is highly readable and
entertaining, but it is buried in an expensive, 361-page-long theoretical volume
about the significance and evolution of religious authority in Islam. Bassam Tibi
publishes academic books in the field of political science.
Modernists become professors at universities, not teachers in madrassas or at
mosque Sunday school. They dress like everyone else, which reduces their
attractiveness to journalists who are writing a piece about “Muslims in Amer-
ica,” and they do not segregate themselves socially, which makes them harder
to find—you cannot just call an Islamic cultural center and find them there.
Since Islam is not their overriding personal identity, they are not prone to
establishing Islamic organizations or clubs. This gives them poor visibility.
Two Special Cases of Modernism
Two specific variants of modernism need to be considered separately: Islam as
practiced by Muslims in the West, and global youth culture.
Western Islam. Millions of Muslims live outside the historic Islamic heartland
and have been socialized and educated in the West, where they have either
formed their own communities and subculture or assimilated into the domi-
nant society. What influence has this had on their interpretation and practice of
Islam? Could they be a resource in developing a modern democratic Islam?
European Islam. In Eastern Europe, Balkan Muslims have developed and now
practice an orthodox yet assimilated, secularized, modernist variant of Islam
(Schwartz, 2002). Eastern Europe also provides dramatic instances of Western-
Islamic friendship and cooperation, such as the (albeit belated) intervention of
the West on behalf of persecuted Bosnian and Albanian Muslims. Non-Muslim
European civil society rallied impressive support and displayed a high amount
of solidarity and initiative. A Catholic organization, Caritas, raised a million
dollars in one day just by asking Austrian supermarket shoppers to add a dona-

--- Sayfa 57 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
41
tion to their bill. Interestingly, the campaign played on the notion that the
beleaguered Bosnians should be helped because they were “neighbors”—reli-
gion was not mentioned.14 This chapter of recent history deserves more promi-
nence. Hundreds of thousands of Bosnian refugees were warmly taken in by
Western European communities and individual families during that conflict.
International criminal courts are applying the principles of secular human
rights in an effort to punish those who perpetrated ethnic cleansing against
Muslims in the Balkans, seeking justice for them on secular grounds. Balkan
Muslims enjoy a higher level of development than most of the Muslim world.
This can demonstrate that friendship with the West is possible and that
embracing democratic values leads to desirable outcomes and a better quality
of life.
At least 9 million Muslims live in Western Europe. The embeddedness of
extremist and terrorist organizations within that community has become
increasingly and alarmingly known as a consequence of the investigative effort
that followed September 11.
However, the data also show that the clear majority of European Muslims is
modernist or secularist. One of the intellectual leaders of that community,
Bassam Tibi, recommends the active development of “Euro-Islam” as a bulwark
against destructive Islamic extremism. This would require gaining better
knowledge of what modernist European Muslims believe and how they prac-
tice, encouraging this amalgamation of Islam with modernity, and finding ways
to codify and disseminate this position, instead of letting traditionalists and
fundamentalists—a minority—represent and define European Islam.
European governments have also tended to favor the traditionalist segment, for
logistical convenience. France, in particular, has long wanted some sort of an
Islamic “church,” for the sake of convenience and as a control mechanism. The
thought was that the state could then have a single counterpart in its dealings
with its Islamic minority. After September 11, the wish to gain a better overview
and to create an orthodox, official voice for French Islam increased yet more.
This is, however, a strong intervention in the internal power balance of Islam.
While the intention was to weaken the extremists, it likewise cut out the mod-
ernists and secularists. There is no indication that the ramifications of this
move were considered or that alternatives were explored.
American Islam. The same holds true for American Islam. Its “public face” is
traditionalist. This is partly by default and partly a consequence of the U.S. gov-
ernment’s public diplomacy efforts—a question we will return to later. For now,
______________

14This project, which ran under the slogan “Nachbar in Not” [neighbor in need], was the most suc-
cessful postwar fund-raising effort ever conducted in Europe. Such instances have not received due
coverage.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
42
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
suffice it to say that letting traditionalism represent American Islam does not
reflect sociological reality (Haddad and Lummis, 1987).15
European and U.S. studies alike indicate that fundamentalists and traditional-
ists are in the minority (Smith, 1999).16 Their ability to speak for Islam and to
define its public perception greatly exceeds their numbers and real significance.
One way to correct this image while fostering the development of democracy
would be to give greater support to civic and cultural associations arising from
within the immigrant and ethnic communities. The artificial over-Islamizing of
Western Muslims can be corrected if attention and support are given to the
other ways in which they express their identity: music, culture, lectures about
history, etc.
The traditionalists have some comparative advantages. They are outspoken and
visible. They have an infrastructure of organizations, mosques, and commit-
tees. They can draw on external funding. Fundamentalist and traditionalist
sources internationally provide them with cheap literature to distribute.
“U.S. mosques, Islamic centers and groceries prominently feature the writings
of Maudoodi” (Smith, 1999, p. 46), courtesy of Pakistani fundamentalists, who
flood international markets with mass publications of his writings in the form of
inexpensive brochures.
Fundamentalists and traditionalists thus currently dominate the discourse.
Most books addressed to mass audiences are written by them or reflect their
version of Islam. As a small illustration, Maryland public libraries stock a few
introductory texts on Islam that are intended to introduce young readers to that
______________

15Haddad and Lummis focused on immigrants and found that most adapted rapidly to the values
and norms of modernity, even when they contradicted the customary beliefs of the place and
community of origin.
Another pertinent study distinguished five types of American Muslims (as reported in Kaufman,
2002):
The liberals are the most Westernized. Their religious observance concentrates mostly on ceremo-
nial occasions, such as weddings, funerals, and the observation of major holidays.
The conservatives are also well integrated. They tend to define the nature of their religious obser-
vance for themselves on a family or an individual basis. That observance tends to be somewhat
more extensive than that of liberals and includes diet, prayer, and other aspects of personal piety.
Their religion is an important, though subsidiary, part of their daily lives.
The Sufis follow a more philosophical, mystical interpretation of Islam.
The evangelicals seek to visibly orient their entire conduct along Islamic principles. They are less
integrated into the broader society, preferring to associate with the like-minded.
The neonormatives want to achieve a situation in which everyone lives as observantly as they do
and feel that ideally, the entire society or at least their segment of it should be run on strict Islamic
principles.
16We know that nearly three-fifths of American Muslims are college graduates. Half make more
than $50,000 a year, generally in such professions as medicine, management and business, the
technology sector, and teaching. Only 20 percent regularly attend mosques.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
43
religion. All of them are written from a conservative traditionalist—verging on a
fundamentalist—perspective.
I Am a Muslim (Aggarwal, 1985) is part of a series describing the major religions.
It features the 11-year-old son of an extremely conservative and very poor
lower-middle-class Pakistani family that recently immigrated to England—not,
as we have already noted, an accurate reflection of the relevant demographics.
The text asserts as Islamic truth a number of statements that are in fact highly
controversial. For example,
Women are not allowed to pray with men.
A woman should cover herself from the head to the feet except for her hands
and face.
Children must obey their parents in all things even when they are grown up.
A girl may be married to someone she has not met before.
In special cases a Muslim man may have more than one wife.
With the exception of the last statement—which is irrelevant for Muslims in
England, where polygamy is illegal—none of these statements is correct. Obedi-
ence to parents is a value of traditional society, unrelated to Islam. The Quran
and the hadith strongly stress the woman’s informed consent to marriage, and
the Prophet repeatedly offered to dissolve the marriages of girls and women
who had not been granted a free choice. Mixed prayer was the norm in the
original Islamic community, and Muhammad repeatedly reprimanded men
who tried to discourage them from doing so; the debate over this issue remains
open today. In this picture book, the female members of Nazir’s family, includ-
ing his three-year-old sister, are completely wrapped in giant shawls. None of
the men in the book, though the setting is England, wear Western dress, and
most have beards.
The next book on the Montgomery County Library shelf, published in 2002 in
the “World of Beliefs” series and lavishly decorated with many illustrations,
similarly describes only the fundamentalist and traditionalist versions of the
religion. Not one of the dozens of women portrayed in the book is without a
head covering, and the majority are heavily veiled. “Muslims believe that
women should always be modestly dressed,” the text states in major under-
statement.17 “In some countries this involves wearing a headscarf, but in others
it means being covered from head to foot.”
What about the millions of Muslims who do neither? What about the other half
of the sura, requiring men to dress modestly as well? In an impressive bit of
______________

17Already a biased formulation; what the Quran says is that everyone, men and women, should be
modestly dressed.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
44
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
understatement, a picture of three Afghan women in burqas—attractively ren-
dered in watercolors and of multicolored fabric that Taliban religious police
would have beaten them for—carries the remark, “These women from
Afghanistan are wearing a very conservative style of dress” (Morris, 2002).
Some aspects of U.S. culture also reinforce the traditionalist advantage. Since
this is the group most likely to wear Islamic dress, they present a better photo-
op, so the media tend to choose them when they need a pictorial illustration for
a story about American Muslims. Politicians favor them for the same reason—it
is then immediately obvious that they are “reaching out” to Muslims. This
approach presents a distorted view of demographic and political realities.
The Department of State’s official Muslim Life in America Web site, produced
under the auspices of International Information Programs, is exclusively dedi-
cated to traditionalist content,18 in word and image. The women and girls—
even toddlers—wear hijab. A supermarket scene shows two women with even
their faces covered. Under the heading “a California family,” we see a wife
garbed in some self-styled indeterminate dress that has no ethnic or national
meaning but looks like it comes from a Bible reenactment. Children participat-
ing in a fair, in school sports, and in a youth conference all are shown wearing
the most extreme variant of Islamic dress. These pictures do not reflect the
mainstream of American Islam but show a marginal segment of the U.S. Islamic
community. And the content follows the same approach. There are stories
lamenting the fact that the ready assimilation of pupils and students who come
to the United States from Islamic countries makes them no longer identifiable
as Muslims among their classmates and describing how donning complete
hijab, including a floor-length loose dress, makes Muslim high school girls feel
like “precious jewels.”
This text asserts that “shari’a and its specific provisions are to be scrupulously
observed” and speaks of “western influences which may corrupt or subvert
basic Islamic values.” There is no hint that there might be a range of views on
these issues within the U.S. Muslim community. Neither is there any discussion
of how the “scrupulous observance of shari’a”—which includes hudud, crimi-
nal punishments—is going to fit into the U.S judicial system.
Youth Culture, Counterculture. Radical fundamentalism has been very suc-
cessful in mobilizing youth. The Revolutionary Guards, the Taliban, Hamas,
Islamic Jihad, and al Qaeda all have relied on the mass support of the young,
especially young men.
______________

18The URL is http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/muslimlife/. See Appendix B for additional
discussion. Note that our observations here were particularly true from the winter of 2001 through
the first half of 2002. The Web site has undergone some modifications since then, probably in
response to multiple complaints and inquiries from Congress and others, but the basic thrust
remains the same.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
Finding Partners for the Promotion of Democratic Islam: Options
45
Fundamentalism has a number of qualities that make it appealing to discon-
tented young people, but it also has important weaknesses that could cause
young people to turn against it. This major flaw in fundamentalist political
strategy has not so far been exploited.
Fundamentalism’s attractiveness to youth is based on the fact that it is
provocative and radical and seems to stand for justice and for the downtrodden
(especially as symbolized by the Palestinians).
In the Middle Eastern context, Islamic radicalism provides a means of challeng-
ing corrupt, foreign-connected, or merely unsuccessful regimes and a way to
express one’s sentiments on the Palestinian issue. In the West, aggressive Islam
is disconcerting to the majority of society, making it an easy and attractive
medium for expressing disaffection.
The ideological fuzziness of fundamentalism makes it possible to append any
number of individual political agendas and grievances to the message. The pro-
gram is broad but vague: to end corruption, achieve social justice, obtain a
higher moral standard, and make the rest of the world respect Islam. Funda-
mentalism provides an umbrella for eclectic, effect-driven political radicalism.
It offers a quick fix of pride, identity, belonging, and purpose. Membership
operates on a shallow, easily acquired level. Most of the instructional materials
are tracts rather than books, quickly read. For young people, fundamentalism
can function like a sect. Emphasis is on prohibitions, rigid injunctions, and rit-
ual; on the outer form of Islam; and on provocative gestures and signals of
intent and solidarity, such as beards and headscarves. The psychological value
is obvious: It lends the appearance of structure and discipline, a sense of
togetherness and purpose. In more-modern environments, or when the family
one wishes to rebel against is more modern or in the West, even something as
simple as donning a headscarf is a way to achieve high impact with low effort. It
serves as a low-risk “test of courage” and a way to achieve approbation from the
“in group.” The annoyance and confusion it generates in the secular or more-
modern environment gives instant gratification.
However, radical fundamentalism has many features that should turn young
people against it. Their support of it is counterlogical, since it is against their
objective interests on important counts.
It does not value their lives very highly. By appealing to youthful idealism, and
to their sense of drama and heroics, radical Islam turns young people into can-
non fodder and suicide bombers. Madrassas specifically educate boys to die
young, to become martyrs. If Muslim youth ever begin to look at things through
a generational lens, as Western youth did in the 1960s, they may begin to ask
why most suicide bombers and martyrs are under the age of 30. You don’t have
to be young to strap explosives on yourself. If it’s such a wonderful thing to do,
why aren’t more adults doing it?

--- Sayfa 62 ---
46
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Fundamentalism operates against the natural impulses and the biology of
youth and adolescence. Romantic and sexual impulses are a normal part of that
age group. Fundamentalism demands that these be suppressed or rigorously
sublimated. It thus violates a significant number of the psychological needs, as
well as the economic and other objective interests of young people.
Fundamentalism is playing a demographically very risky game. So far, it has
managed to conceal from the vast majority of the population—women and the
young—that they are being dominated to their detriment by a small minority.
The demographics of Arab and Muslim societies are hugely weighted toward
youth. Fundamentalism has managed to get a demographically powerful
younger generation to let itself be manipulated and dominated by a minority of
authoritarian older men. If the young people came to realize this, a backlash
youth movement could result.
Fundamentalist Islam is inimical to women, half the population. As with youth,
the ideology has thus far managed to either incapacitate women as political
actors or to delude them into supporting conditions that oppose their objective
best interest.
Traditionalism, which is a low-key, moderate ideology associated with what
one’s parents and grandparents stand for, is at a disadvantage relative to fun-
damentalism as a way of inspiring youth. Modernism, on the other hand, being
bolder and more unconventional, could be a competitor. It also has the advan-
tage of being in the objective better interest of young people and women.
Sufis
Sufis are not a ready match for any of the categories, but we will here include
them in modernism. Sufism represents an open, intellectual interpretation of
Islam. Sufi influence over school curricula, norms, and cultural life should be
strongly encouraged in countries that have a Sufi tradition, such as Afghanistan
or Iraq. Through its poetry, music, and philosophy, Sufism has a strong bridge
role outside of religious affiliations.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
47
Chapter Three
A PROPOSED STRATEGY
The problem of Islamic radicalism—its manifestations, its underlying causes,
and its propensity to meld with other social and political conflicts—makes this
an extremely complex issue. There is no one correct approach or response, and
there certainly is not one identifiable “fix.” Instead, what is called for is a mixed
approach that rests on firm and decisive commitment to our own fundamental
values and understands that tactical and interest-driven cooperation is simply
not possible with some of the actors and positions along the spectrum of
political Islam but that possesses a sequence of flexible postures suitable to
different contexts, populations, and countries.
This approach seeks to strengthen and foster the development of civil, demo-
cratic Islam and of modernization and development. It provides the necessary
flexibility to deal with different settings appropriately, and it reduces the danger
of unintended negative effects. The following outline describes what such a
strategy might look like:
•
Support the modernists first, enhancing their vision of Islam over that of the
traditionalists by providing them with a broad platform to articulate and
disseminate their views. They, not the traditionalists, should be cultivated
and publicly presented as the face of contemporary Islam.
•
Support the secularists on a case-by-case basis.
•
Encourage secular civic and cultural institutions and programs.
•
Back the traditionalists enough to keep them viable against the fundamen-
talists (if and wherever those are our choices) and to prevent a closer
alliance between these two groups. Within the traditionalists, we should
selectively encourage those who are the relatively better match for modern
civil society. For example, some Islamic law schools are far more amenable
to our view of justice and human rights than are others.
•
Finally, oppose the fundamentalists energetically by striking at vulnerabili-
ties in their Islamic and ideological postures, exposing things that neither

--- Sayfa 64 ---
48
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
the youthful idealists in their target audience nor the pious traditionalists
can approve of: their corruption, their brutality, their ignorance, the bias
and manifest errors in their application of Islam, and their inability to lead
and govern.
Some additional, more-direct activities will be necessary to support this overall
approach, such as the following:
•
Help break the fundamentalist and traditionalist monopoly on defining,
explaining, and interpreting Islam.
•
Identify appropriate modernist scholars to manage a Web site that answers
questions related to daily conduct and offers modernist Islamic legal opin-
ions.
•
Encourage modernist scholars to write textbooks and develop curricula.
•
Publish introductory books at subsidized rates to make them as available as
the tractates of fundamentalist authors.
•
Use popular regional media, such as radio, to introduce the thoughts and
practices of modernist Muslims to broaden the international view of what
Islam means and can mean.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
49
Appendix A
THE HADITH WARS
Much of the current effort to reform Islam centers on debates over specific rules
and practices in orthodox Islam that outsiders to that religion criticize and that
no longer seem in step with the current age. The Quran, as the holy book, is
generally (though not universally) considered to be beyond critique. However,
there are many topics that it does not cover at all or to which it refers only
ambiguously. Almost since the inception of Islam, proponents of opposing
views have put their own visions and interpretations forward on the basis, pri-
marily, of hadith. We can refer to this form of ideological conflict as the “hadith
wars.”
The values of civil society and democracy can be defended on the grounds of
hadith, and this was the approach we originally investigated during the
research phase of this report. However, in the end, hadith can never be more
than a secondary, tactical tool, for a number of reasons. In any case, hadith
does not provide a way to decide an issue. It always allows room for diametri-
cally opposed views to claim equal legitimacy.
Some argue that one should not engage with fundamentalists and traditional-
ists on the level of hadith. For example, Ibn Warraq (1995, p. 293) believes that
to do battle with the orthodox, the fanatics, and the mullahs in the interpreta-
tion of these texts is to do battle on their terms, on their ground. Every text that
you produce they will adduce a dozen others contradicting yours. The
reformists cannot win on these terms—whatever mental gymnastics they per-
form . . . 1
However, while the hadith wars can perhaps not be won, they can conceivably
be lost or at least forfeited, which—at a time when such a large proportion of
the Muslim population is illiterate, uneducated, submissive to local authorities,
______________

1However, in my interview with him, Mr. Warraq conceded that a frontal critique of Islam was not
realistic at this time, and that efforts to promote a kinder, gentler, “defanged” Islam were likely to
achieve better results. (Warraq interview, February 22, 2002, via email.)

--- Sayfa 66 ---
50
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
and bound by tradition—would be unwise. Progressive elements that are
obliged to operate in Islamic settings need enough ammunition to achieve at
least a stalemate. It is not desirable for fundamentalist Islam to become the
default version.
In theory, the study of hadith is a science and, indeed, a highly complex one.
But in practice, the rigorous standards are meaningless, and politics reign
supreme.
Hadith is supposed to be judged by multiple complicated variables, the first of
which is the context and reliability of the hadith:
•
Who is the original source?
•
How long was he or she a Muslim?
•
How close was he or she to the Prophet?
•
How directly involved was he or she in the event that is being narrated?
•
Is there any independent corroboration?
•
Which other narrations stem from this person?
•
How reliable are they judged to be?
•
How intelligent and educated was the person?
•
Did the person remember the event or rely on notes?
•
Did the person have a vested interest or were they a neutral observer?
•
How was this narration passed along?
•
Are there gaps in the transmission?
•
How reliable are the transmitters?
A separate chain of analysis deals with the substance of the narration:
•
Is it a saying of the Prophet that is being reported, or an action he per-
formed, or both?
•
If he did a particular thing, one can deduce that this thing is allowed?
•
If something was done in his presence by others, and he refrained from
reprimanding them, is it likewise allowed?
•
What was the context? For example, might he have been joking?
Finally, there are considerations of principle that allow hadith to be placed in a
hierarchy:
•
Does the application of a particular hadith benefit the common good, or
just the interests of an individual?

--- Sayfa 67 ---
The Hadith Wars
51
•
Does it make community life easier or harder?
•
Do jurists and community practice agree on the issue, or are they at odds?
When scholars list just “some of the rules” that apply to the evaluation and
application of hadith, they need seven densely written pages.2
But in practice, no such effort is made to weigh and assess, to consider the cir-
cumstances and origins of a hadith or the credibility of its narrator. In reality,
hadith operates on the level of folk sayings, gaining credibility and popularity
through repetition and pithiness. The Islamic Web sites referred to earlier fre-
quently mention hadith, but very rarely do they bother even to cite a source or
to say which collection they have drawn a particular hadith from or which ver-
sion they used. They simply “allege” a hadith.
Even if that were not the case, objectively speaking, there is little doubt that
hadith is at best a dubious, flawed instrument. Consider that Al-Bukhari is the
compiler of what is generally considered to be the most authoritative and reli-
able collections of hadith. He collected 600,000 hadith, examined them for their
authenticity, eliminated all but 7,600 of them, deleted some for redundancy,
and was left with a collection of about 4,000. Mabrook Ismaeel (2003) remarks,
Let us look at the parameters of Al Bukhari’s claim. If we allow one single hour
to process each hadith he would have had to work non-stop for about seventy
years. Each hadith would have had to be traced back to the Prophet through a
long transmission chain each link of which had to be closely examined, with
each chain consisting of six or seven individuals of successive generations, all
but one of whom were dead. Yet he is said to have completed this work in six-
teen years. Was it physically possible for Al-Bukhari to have examined that
many hadith? The answer is no.
What hadith cannot do is to decide any issue substantively and authoritatively.
Essentially, the “hadith wars” are wars of attrition. The issues that can be
debated are endless, branching out into ever more minutiae. The process is, to
borrow a term from another religion, Talmudic. This is not the road to change.
The excellence of the argument on any particular issue does not persuade peo-
ple to change their worldview; rather, their worldview determines which expert
they consult, which interpretation they will lean toward, which hadith they will
pluck out of the vast store.
______________

2These rules include such things as the following: A saying corroborated by a deed outweighs a
mere saying. A text that signifies both a rule and the occasioning factor behind it outweighs a text
with only a rule. An explicit saying of the Prophet outweighs a deed of the Prophet. A positive com-
mand (do such-and-such) outweighs a negative command (do not do such-and-such). An analogy
involving an operative cause that has been ascertained through the method of elimination of alter-
natives outweighs an analogy involving an operative cause that has been ascertained through the
test of suitability. El Fadl (2001), p. 40 ff.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
52
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
For example, fundamentalists might say that music is forbidden. When the
Taliban took power in Afghanistan, they immediately banned all music with the
exception of religious recitation. But we have evidence that the Prophet liked
secular music. On one occasion, he reproached his wife for forgetting to hire
singers for a wedding she was organizing. He then sang for her a stanza of the
traditional wedding song he thought ought to have been performed during that
event. On another occasion, when a troop of entertainers was passing through,
he not only allowed them to perform, he even let them use his mosque as the
venue. And he brought his wife Aisha to see them. From those two small inci-
dents, more liberal-minded scholars derive multiple conclusions: Singing is
acceptable, indeed it must be a good thing, if the Prophet himself personally
engaged in it. And secular singing is OK—this was a wedding song, nothing
religious. It is all right for popular entertainment to be enjoyed by a mixed
audience—the Prophet encouraged his own wife to attend a performance with
him. Lighthearted entertainment has value, otherwise the Prophet would not
have permitted it in the mosque.
But that does not mean the issue is closed. What about women singing on
television—does the hadith extend so far as to allow that, too? The Supreme
Justice of Afghanistan thinks not and has banned it. What if the lyrics, while
harmless, are totally nonsensical, therefore untrue? The Quran says that if
something is not a truth, then it is an error. Does that not mean the song is
spreading error? Or does it depend on the intent, so that if you are listening to
music to relax virtuously, it is permissible, but if you are listening to put yourself
into a party mood during which you then might feel like going to a night club
and drinking, it is bad? Obviously, we now need to discuss the issue of inten-
tions, which is the subject of several Quranic passages and many, many hadiths
and subsequent interpretations.3 The debate over music alone can extend into
infinity.
Let us consider a graver issue, the question of whether an Islamic government
should police and punish departures from the religious code. Liberals say no:
Faith is a matter of individual conscience; each person is accountable only to
God, who can know their true intentions, and it is actually an act of un-Islamic
impiety to think that you can spy on, judge, and punish your fellow Muslims.
Liberals have hadiths to back that up:
Remind the people, for you are nothing but a reminder to them. You do not
control them. (Quran 88:21)
Will you then compel mankind, against their will, to believe? (Quran 99)
______________

3These are only a few of the considerations reviewed by al-Qaradawi when he formulated his own
reformist traditionalist position on singing. See “The Forbidden and the Allowed in Islam (at
http://www.qaradawi.net; note that the site is in Arabic).

--- Sayfa 69 ---
The Hadith Wars
53
Let there be no compulsion in religion. (Quran 256)
He who seeks out the faults of his fellows will have his own faults sought out by
Allah, and he whose faults are sought out by Allah will be exposed by Him, even
though he may hide in the interior of his house. (al-Tirmidhi)
Abu Huraira reported that Allah’s Messenger said, “Avoid suspiciousness, for
suspiciousness is a grave error. And do not be distrustful about one another and
do not spy upon one another, and do not feel envy towards each other, and
nurse no malice, and entertain no aversion or hostility towards one another.
But be like members of a family and servants of Allah.” (Muslim)
But supporters of a religious police have their own set of hadiths and suras:
We sent all these prophets, bringing good news and delivering warnings, so that
men might have no further excuse before Allah. (Quran 4:165)
Let there be of you a community who enforce the things which are commanded
and interdict the things which are forbidden; and it is they, they who are effec-
tive. (Quran 3:104)
You must decidedly see that the commanded things are done, and the forbid-
den things are prevented, or else Allah in due time will visit you with penalties,
and you will call on him but he will no longer answer your call. (al-Tirmidhi)4
Hadith is susceptible to misuse. Islam is not necessarily a very “accessible” reli-
gion. The Quran is difficult to read, even if we disregard the fact that huge seg-
ments of the Muslim population cannot read it because they are illiterate, or
cannot understand it because they do not understand Arabic. There are transla-
tions, but many Muslims feel the text is only valid in the original revelation.
Of additional great importance are the legal opinions that say how Quranic
injunctions should be interpreted and applied. There are four orthodox Sunni
schools of law that determine this (plus the Shi’a Jaafari school). Although their
rulings vary—differing, for example, over whether and under what circum-
stances you can remarry someone from whom you have been divorced or when
thieves should have their hands amputated—they are considered equally cor-
rect. Countries or at least regions usually are affiliated with one or the other
school of law, but the study is arcane and the application complicated.
Many fascinating examples of how hadith translates into social policy can be
found in Khaled Abou El Fadl’s authoritative study, Speaking in God’s Name (El
Fadl, 2001). He reviews the often fantastic leaps of logic that have enabled ultra-
conservative Saudi jurists to issue religious decisions or fatwas on such topics as
high heels, the Wonderbra, and air travel by women. Fatwas can manipulate
theological content in a variety of ways. The scholar can draw on a hadith with-
______________

4Assembled by Muhammad Al-Asi (2000).

--- Sayfa 70 ---
54
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
out mentioning the fact that most scholars consider that particular hadith
shaky. He can take a hadith out of context. Or he can draw questionable analo-
gies to apply ancient hadiths to contemporary issues. Obviously, there are no
existing hadiths for many of the troubling issues that come up day to day in the
third millennium. In deciding which general principle to apply, the scholar has
great leeway, especially if he is part of a movement such as Wahhabism, where
other scholars share his worldview and will back his interpretation.
To cite only one example, the Saudi religious institute was consulted by a
woman whose habit it had been to visit the grave of her deceased husband but
who had now been warned by some neighbors that pious women should not be
visiting cemeteries. The Saudi jurists studied the matter and forbade her any
further visits. Their reason, however, was not that they had found in the Quran
or in the religious tradition any direct mention of such a prohibition. Rather,
their reasoning was that her example might inspire other women to also begin
visiting the cemetery to pray for departed loved ones. Next thing you knew,
cemeteries would become infamous as places where females congregated,
which would draw men who wanted to ogle and possibly molest these women,
which would lead to immorality. Immorality was un-Islamic, therefore, so was
the visiting of their relatives’ graves by women.
The effort to foster democratic Islam requires three parallel lines of action in
relation to hadith and its impact on the law.
The public in general should be better informed and educated about the pro-
cess of interpreting their religion, so as not to be at the mercy of unscrupulous
or uneducated self-appointed authorities. Rather than accepting that, if some
statement claims to base itself on a hadith, they need to understand the com-
plexity of what hadith really means and how interpretations are supposed to be
developed. There are innumerable Islamic scholars who can easily explain this,
but they are not the ones who are running the religious education programs—
formal and informal, legal and illegal—in the Islamic world. They need to make
an effort to raise the standard of religious knowledge, to turn Muslims into
“educated consumers” of hadith and fatwas and interpretations.
At the same time, until that can be accomplished, a body of “counterhadith”
should be made available to those who want more-tolerant, egalitarian, demo-
cratic societies but are being persuaded that the changes they seek are “un-
Islamic.” It is quite easy to assemble the necessary evidence that will support
reform and liberalism. There are not that many contentious topics. They could
be covered by half a dozen handbooks or pamphlets.
Finally, in recent years, some movement has occurred in the areas of Islamic
law, Islamic constitutions, and the like. The more interesting work of Muslim
jurists has occurred where they took an eclectic approach, not restricting them-

--- Sayfa 71 ---
The Hadith Wars
55
selves to just one of the law schools but blending Islamic laws and interpreta-
tions from a variety of countries and sources with civil law, international norms,
and new looks at orthodox Islamic concepts. This work has taken place in scat-
tered locations. It should be centrally collected and made available to jurists
and other interested audiences across the Islamic world.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
57
Appendix B
HIJAB AS A CASE STUDY
The current Islamic debate is so contentious that smaller issues easily become
freighted with vast ideological and symbolic significance. Non-Muslim political
actors can easily misjudge the significance of an issue and end up endorsing a
position that they think “does not matter,” without sufficiently realizing its
actual ramifications.
For example, showing active approval of the wearing of hijab by Muslim women
in the United States can be intended, on the part of U.S. opinion leaders, to
convey the message that Muslims are completely free to practice their faith in
the United States; that members of other religions can dress differently from the
mainstream yet still be accepted; that the United States is a society tolerant of
diversity. However, a Muslim woman’s head covering is not analogous to the
Sikh turban or the Jewish man’s yarmulke or even to a sari or other kind of eth-
nic dress. Unlike hijab, these garments are not the subject of bitterly con-
tentious debates within their communities, and people are nowhere being
forced to wear them on pain of beatings, mutilation by acid, or even death. One
can cast “hijab” as an issue of freedom of expression and of pluralism, but that
ignores the larger context. And the larger context is that “hijab” is neither a
neutral lifestyle issue nor a religious requirement. It has become a political
statement.1
Throughout the Islamic world, the debate over what Islam does and does not
require in terms of women’s dress and their freedom to participate in society is
under intense debate. Governments have taken various positions on the issue,
allowing, forbidding, or requiring Islamic dress and headscarves in public
______________

1In Afghanistan, women who have removed the burqa report being threatened with death, and
there have been several incidents of acid being thrown on women who were not wearing it. In Iran,
the slogan of enforcers was “cover your head or be beaten on the head.” Saudi Arabia’s Wahhabi
establishment has even forced hijab on U.S. servicewomen stationed there, a situation which is
currently the subject of a lawsuit against the military. (“Female Fighter Pilot Sues Over Required
Muslim Dress,” 2001.)

--- Sayfa 74 ---
58
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
schools by law. Each of these stances has caused protests, demonstrations, law-
suits, and even riots.
Refusing to engage on this topic in an attempt to avoid its becoming a bigger
issue might be a clever way to take the wind out of the sails of the fundamental-
ists and traditionalists.2 But equally, it might strengthen them and harm the
modernist forces. In the U.S. context, wearing hijab is “seen as winning a battle
against American culture” (Hasan, 2002, p. 37).
In the United States, hijab is typically worn by the following groups: recent
immigrants from rural, traditional parts of the Muslim world; fundamentalists;
unassimilated traditionalists belonging to the strongly observant minority; the
elderly; and young women who want to get attention and make a provocative
statement in their schools, colleges, or workplaces. Even added together, they
amount only to a small fraction of U.S. Muslims. Even among new immigrants,
only a minority supports hijab.3
In the United States, hijab is becoming politicized in some troubling ways. U.S.
Muslim women who attend any sort of Islamic events, or who come into con-
tact with Muslim student groups, complain about being aggressively con-
fronted by traditionalists and fundamentalists who lecture them about not
dressing properly. Hijab is associated with female subordination. Among fun-
damentalist and traditionalist men, “having a wife who wears hijab, stays home
and doesn’t question his decisions is a status symbol.” At Islamic conferences in
the United States, “women not wearing the scarf are booed when they try to
speak” (Hasan, 2002).
In short, far from being a placid “lifestyle” issue suitable for demonstrating the
U.S. propensity toward pluralism and tolerance, hijab is a minefield. Concerned
American Muslims describe the hijab question as being “out of control,” as
having become an oppressive “litmus test for a woman’s Islamic credentials,”
as exposing women to job discrimination and harassment by making them the
most overtly visible symbols of Muslim nonassimilation, and as “exacerbating
the problems of American Muslims, not solving them” (Marquand, 1996).
The U.S. mainstream seems unaware of these complexities. A typical article in
the Washington Post reviewed hijab uncritically, almost gushingly, as a
“meaningful expression of identity,” something that requires the wearer to
______________

2This has worked, for example, in Austria, where the government’s policy of allowing scarves in
public schools has resulted in those scarves being a nonissue, and of gradually decreasing. How-
ever, the Muslim minority in Austria is different from the one in France or in Germany, and the
political groupings that want to politicize the matter are not present. One approach does not work
universally.
3In the survey in Haddad and Lummis (1987), less than half of immigrant Muslims thought hijab
was a requirement of Islam.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
Hijab as a Case Study
59
“build herself intellectually.” A University of Maryland professor ventured the
judgment that the scarf was a “healthy way for the women to express their feel-
ings and blend their American culture with Muslim pride” (Wax, 2002).4 There
was no mention in the article of a contrary or dissenting view, no hint that
many Muslim women oppose and resent hijab and that its religious validity is
the subject of a major ongoing dispute, and no effort to evaluate the trend
sociologically.
The flavor of the debate is different in Europe. Liberal intellectuals there warn
that the headscarf
symbolizes the militant intentions of holy warriors. You can recognize the
Islamists and their naïve supporters by this issue. Consider the case of Fereshta
Ludin, who wanted to wear her “little personal scarf” as a teacher in the German
public school system. From the taz to the Süddeutsche Zeitung and even Die
Zeit, her defeat in court over this issue was greeted by a wave of dismay. But
who was this Fereshta Ludin? An Afghan married to a German convert, edu-
cated in Saudi Arabia, she and her husband were frequent guests of the Taliban.
Ever since 1979, when Iranian women were punished by the Revolutionary
Guards if their headcovering slipped out of place, it should have been obvious
that this headcovering was not a “religious custom” or a “little personal matter”
but a highly political issue, that indeed the scarf serves as the flag of the Islamic
crusade.5
It is correct that the hijab issue mirrors the broader debate. The fundamental-
ists determined its signal value—just as a junta takes over the radio station as its
first symbolic act, fundamentalists signal their advances by immediately impos-
ing the head covering on women wherever they gain in strength and influence.
In spring 2003, the U.S. State Department Web site “Muslim Life in America”
contained 32 images of women and girls and even female toddlers below the
age that veiling would be considered appropriate in strict Islamic countries,
wearing hijab. By contrast, it contains only 13 pictures of women and girls with
their heads not covered. This is a serious visual misrepresentation of how the
U.S. Muslim community lives, and an apparent U.S. government endorsement
of hijab.6
______________

4It is also noteworthy that the article appears in the Metro section, not on the religion page.
5Taz is a nickname for the Tages Anzeiger newspaper.
6This was particularly true in the winter of 2001 through the first half of 2002. The Web site has
undergone some modifications since then, probably in response to multiple complaints and
inquiries from Congress (one example is reproduced in this report as Appendix D) and others, but
the basic thrust remains the same.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
61
Appendix C
STRATEGY IN DEPTH
The following describes, in somewhat more detail, how the recommendations
in Chapter Three could be implemented.
BASIC POINTS OF THE STRATEGY
Build Up a Modernist Leadership
Create role models and leaders. Modernists who risk persecution should be
built up as courageous civil rights leaders, which indeed they are. There are
precedents showing that this can work. Nawal Al-Sadaawi achieved interna-
tional renown for enduring persecution, harassment, and attempts to prosecute
her in court on account of her principled modernist stand on issues related to
freedom of speech, public health, and the status of women in Egypt. Afghan
interim minister of women’s affairs Sima Samar inspired many with her out-
spoken stance on human rights, women’s rights, civil law, and democracy, for
which she faced death threats by fundamentalists. There are many others
throughout the Islamic world whose leadership can similarly be featured.
Include modern, mainstream Muslims in political “outreach” events, to reflect
demographic reality. Avoid artificially “over-Islamizing the Muslims”; instead,
accustom them to the idea that Islam can be just one part of their identity.1
Support civil society in the Islamic world. This is particularly important in situ-
ations of crisis, refugee situations, and postconflict situations, in which a demo-
cratic leadership can emerge and gain practical experience through local NGOs
and other civic associations. On the rural and neighborhood levels, as well, civic
associations are an infrastructure that can lead to political education and a
moderate, modernist leadership.
______________

1This idea is more extensively developed in Al-Azmah (1993). Al-Azmah is himself a “Euro-Muslim.”

--- Sayfa 78 ---
62
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Develop Western Islam: German Islam, U.S. Islam, etc. This requires gaining a
better understanding of the composition, as well as the evolving practice and
thought, in these communities. Assist in eliciting, expressing, and “codifying”
their views.
Go on the Offensive Against Fundamentalists
Delegitimize individuals and positions associated with extremist Islam. Make
public the immoral and hypocritical deeds and statements of self-styled fun-
damentalist authorities. Allegations of Western immorality and shallowness are
a cherished part of the fundamentalist arsenal, but they are themselves highly
vulnerable on these fronts.
Encourage Arab journalists in popular media to do investigative reporting on
the lives and personal habits and corruption of fundamentalist leaders. Pub-
licize incidents that highlight their brutality—such as the recent deaths of Saudi
schoolgirls in a fire when religious police physically prevented Saudi firefighters
from evacuating the girls from their burning school building because they were
not veiled—and their hypocrisy, illustrated by the Saudi religious establish-
ment, which forbids migrant workers from receiving photographs of their new-
born children on the grounds that Islam forbids human images, while their own
offices are decorated by huge portraits of King Faisal, etc. The role of “charitable
organizations” in financing terror and extremism has begun to be more clearly
understood since September 11 but also deserves ongoing and public investi-
gation.
Assertively Promote the Values of Western Democratic Modernity
Create and propagate a model for prosperous, moderate Islam by identifying
and actively aiding countries or regions or groups with the appropriate views.
Publicize their successes. For example, the 1999 Beirut Declaration for Justice
and the National Action Charter of Bahrain broke new ground in the applica-
tion of Islamic law and should be made more widely known.
Criticize the flaws of traditionalism. Show the causal relationship between
traditionalism and underdevelopment, as well as the causal relationship
between modernity, democracy, progress, and prosperity. Do fundamentalism
and traditionalism offer Islamic society a healthy, prosperous future? Are they
successfully meeting the challenges of the day? Do they compare well with
other social orders? The UNDP social development report (UNDP, 2002) points
clearly to the linkage between a stagnant social order, oppression of women,
poor educational quality, and backwardness. This message should be energeti-
cally taken to Muslim populations.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Strategy in Depth
63
Build up the stature of Sufism. Encourage countries with strong Sufi traditions
to focus on that part of their history and to include it in their school curricula.
Pay more attention to Sufi Islam.
Focus on Education and Youth
Committed adult adherents of radical Islamic movements are unlikely to be
easily influenced into changing their views. The next generation, however, can
conceivably be influenced if the message of democratic Islam can be inserted
into school curricula and public media in the pertinent countries. Radical fun-
damentalists have established massive efforts to gain influence over education
and are unlikely to give up established footholds without a struggle. An equally
energetic effort will be required to wrest this terrain from them.
SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGY
Thus, to accomplish the overall strategy, it will be necessary to
•
Support the modernists and mainstream secularists first, by
—
publishing and distribute their works
—
encouraging them to write for mass audiences and youth
—
introducing their views into the curriculum of Islamic education
—
giving them a public platform
—
making their opinions and judgments on fundamental questions of
religious interpretation available to a mass audience, in competition
with those of the fundamentalists and traditionalists, who already have
Web sites, publishing houses, schools, institutes, and many other vehi-
cles for disseminating their views
—
positioning modernism as a “counterculture” option for disaffected
Islamic youth
— facilitating and encouraging awareness of pre- and non-Islamic history
and culture, in the media and in the curricula of relevant countries
—
encouraging and supporting secular civic and cultural institutions and
programs.
•
Support the traditionalists against the fundamentalists, by
— publicizing traditionalist criticism of fundamentalist violence and
extremism and encouraging disagreements between traditionalists and
fundamentalists
—
preventing alliances between traditionalists and fundamentalists

--- Sayfa 80 ---
64
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
— encouraging cooperation between modernists and traditionalists who
are closer to that end of the spectrum, increase the presence and profile
of modernists in traditionalist institutions
—
discriminating between different sectors of traditionalism
— encouraging those with a greater affinity to modernism—such as the
Hanafi law school as opposed to others to issue religious opinions that,
by becoming popularized, can weaken the authority of backward
Wahhabi religious rulings
—
encouraging the popularity and acceptance of Sufism.
•
Confront and oppose the fundamentalists, by
—
challenging and exposing the inaccuracies in their views on questions
of Islamic interpretation
—
exposing their relationships with illegal groups and activities
—
publicizing the consequences of their violent acts
— demonstrating their inability to rule to the benefit and positive devel-
opment of their communities
—
targeting these messages especially to young people, to pious tradi-
tionalist populations, to Muslim minorities in the West, and to women
—
avoiding showing respect or admiration for the violent feats of funda-
mentalist extremists and terrorists, instead casting them as disturbed
and cowardly rather than evil heroes
— encouraging journalists to investigate issues of corruption, hypocrisy,
and immorality in fundamentalist and terrorist circles.
•
Selectively support secularists, by
—
encouraging recognition of fundamentalism as a shared enemy, dis-
couraging secularist alliances with anti-U.S. forces on such grounds as
nationalism and leftist ideology
— supporting the idea that religion and the state can be separate in Islam,
too, and that this does not endanger the faith.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
65
Appendix D
CORRESPONDENCE ABOUT THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE’S PORTRAYAL OF ISLAM
Congressman Tom Lantos (D-Calif.) sent the following letter to Secretary of
State Colin Powell in 2002.1
Mr. Secretary,
As you know, I have long taken a special interest in America’s public diplomacy,
which I view as a vital element of our overall foreign policy. Battling for “hearts
and minds” around the world—providing the educational tools, informational
programs, and human exchanges that give people the opportunity to judge for
themselves the logic of our policies and the attraction of our values—is an
essential component of the “war on terrorism.” I am delighted that, under your
leadership, this long-neglected aspect of U.S. diplomatic engagement has received
heightened attention.
In this context, I write to express my disappointment and dismay with some of the
Public Diplomacy material I have seen produced by the State Department and
transmitted abroad. I would especially draw your attention to the following:
•
The State Department’s widely disseminated booklet “Network of Terrorism.”
This handsome, glossy brochure is designed to make the case for the U.S.-led
international campaign against terrorism by laying out the factual material in a
dispassionate, lawyerly fashion. In doing so, it highlights condemnations of the
September 11 attacks by prominent Muslim clerics. This is a fine idea, but I do
not understand why the Department chooses to honor in an official publication
clerics who have otherwise sanctioned suicide bombings (like Yusuf al-
Qaradawi) or have uttered some of the most vile anti-Semitic epithets (like
Abdul Rahman Sudais)? In the war on terrorism, these people are our
adversaries, not our friends, regardless of what they may or may not have said
about September 11. And in the larger fight for “hearts and minds,” lending any
imprimatur to any of their views is misguided, as well as misleading of U.S.
policy and values.
•
The State Department’s “Islam in the U.S.—Overview: Background Materials”
website (http://usinfo.state.gov/usa/islam/overview.htm). Evidently, this
______________

1Transcript provided to the author by congressional staff member Alan Makovsky in an email dated
September 30, 2002. Reproduced with permission.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
66
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
website is designed to provide a one-stop research guide to Islam and American
Muslim life. I seriously question, however, the appropriateness of some of the
material presented on this website. In particular, the website features an e-book
published by The Middle East Institute called Introduction to Islam. I cannot
understand why the U.S. government would promote such a work. Do we
promote equivalent books for Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, or Buddhism?
We do not, and we should not. And Islam should be treated no differently than
other American religions. Interpretation of religions is the purview of scholars
and practitioners of religion. Whatever the views of given U.S. officials, the U.S.
government institutionally should not be seen as promoting one interpretation,
as embodied in one book. Separately, given the prohibition on public
diplomacy activities targeting domestic audiences, whom exactly do we intend
to influence with this publication?  Presumably, the Islamic world audiences for
which this website seems intended do not need an introduction to Islam. And I
doubt other foreign audiences will seek background information on Islam from
an official U.S. government source.  For these reasons, I doubt both the
appropriateness and utility of this publication.
•
The State Department’s “Muslim Life in America” website (http://usinfo.
state.gov/products/pubs/muslimlife/). This website is evidently designed to
highlight to Muslims abroad the diversity of Muslim life in the United States.
But in a well-meaning effort gone askew, this website focuses almost exclusively
on very religious Muslims. It offers an image of America as the land where
virtually every Muslim woman (and almost all Muslim girls) wears a veil or a
headscarf. This is both factually wrong and politically counter-productive. As
one scholar has noted, “Is this the message that we wish to send to the women
of Afghanistan, now free to choose not to wear the burka? Is this the message we
wish to send to Iranian women, battling for the right to choose their attire? Is
this the message we wish to send to Turkish women, who have been at the
vanguard of building a vibrant, secular democracy in an overwhelmingly
Muslim state?” I think not—and I hope you agree that it is precisely the wrong
message to broadcast to our allies and our enemies alike.
Mr. Secretary, I recognize that with a looming confrontation with Iraq and the
ongoing effort to build international support for the war on terrorism, these
matters may seem trivial. But they are not. Ideas matter. A forceful combination of
advocating American interests and projecting American values was a major factor
in undermining Soviet Communism from within, and the same combination can
help win the long-term battle for “hearts and minds” in the global war on
terrorism. In our search for allies and supporters abroad, we should never resort to
sycophancy or pandering, as some of these outreach materials clearly do.
I hope, therefore, you will take urgent steps to correct these materials and ensure
that America’s public diplomacy remains on message, keeping faith with the
interests and values that animate our great nation.
Cordially,
Tom Lantos

--- Sayfa 83 ---
67
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abdessalam, Yassine, Winning the Modern World for Islam, London: Justice and
Spirituality Publishing, 2000.
Abusulayman, Abdulhamid, “Chastising Women: Domestic Violence—An
Islamic Response,” Islamic Horizons, Vol. 32, No. 2, March/April 2003, p. 22.
Aggarwal, Manju, I Am a Muslim, New York: Franklin Watts, 1985.
Ahmed, Akbar, Islam Today, New York: Tauris Publications, 2001.
Ahmed, Qazi Hussain, speech at a press conference at his residence, Indo-Asian
News Service, September 21, 2002. Online at http://www.eians.com.
Ali, Maulana Muhammad, A Manual of Hadith, Lahore, Pakistan: Ahamadiyya,
1992.
Ajami, Fouad, The Arab Predicament, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press, 1981.
Amnesty International, “Afghanistan: Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment,” ASA 11/015/1999, November 1, 1999. Online at http://
web.amnesty.org/library/index/ENGASA110151999?oper&of-ENG-AFG (as
of September 3, 2003).
Ansari, Ali, Iran, Islam and Democracy: The Politics of Managing Change, Lon-
don: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2000.
Al-Asi, Muhammad, “The Unknown Prophet,” paper presented at the Interna-
tional Seerah Conference, Karachi, Pakistan, June 25, 2000. Online at
http://www.islamicthought.org/pp-ma-unknown.html (as of June 3, 2003).
Asian Human Rights Commission, “Pakistan,” August 2, 2001. Online at
http://ahrchk.net/va (circa 2002).
Al-Azmah, Islam and Modernities, London: Verso Publications, 1993.
Azzam, Salem, ed., Islam and Contemporary Society, London: Longman Pub-
lishing, 1982.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
68
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
Bowcott, Owen, “Radicals Meet at North London Mosque to Mark ‘Towering
Day,’” The Guardian, September 12, 2002.
Brown, Daniel, Rethinking Tradition in Modern Islamic Thought, Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Bush, George W., address at the Afghan embassy, Washington, D.C., September
11, 2002.
Calislar, Oral, Islam’da Kadin ve Cinslik, Istanbul, Turkey: Cumhuriyet Press,
1999.
Cooper, John, Ronald Nettler, and Mohamed Mahmoud, eds., Islam and
Modernity: Muslim Intellectuals Respond, London: Tauris Publishers, 2000.
Dershowitz, Alan, and Alan Keyes, “Does Organized Religion Hold Answers to
the Problems of the 21st Century?” debate, Lancaster, Pa.: Franklin and Mar-
shall College, September 27, 2000. Online at http://www.renewamerica.us/
archives/speeches/00_09_27debate.htm (as of September 8, 2003.
Doi, Abdur Rahman, “Women in Society,” Zaira, Nigeria: Ahmadu Bello
University, Center for Islamic Legal Studies, 2001. Online at http://www.usc.
edu/dept/MSA/humanrelations/womeninislam/womeninsociety.html (as of
September 8, 2003).
“Drugs and Prostitution ‘Soar’ in Iran,” BBC News, July 6, 2000. Online at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/822312.stm (as of June 3, 2003).
El Fadl, Khaled Abou, Speaking in God’s Name, Oxford: One World Publishing,
2001.
“Female Fighter Pilot Sues over Required Muslim Dress,” The Washington
Times, December 4, 2001.
Fisk, Robert, “Saudis Secretly Funding Taliban,” The Independent, September 2,
1998.
Ford, Peter, “Historic Architectural Sites Becoming Second Casualty of War in
Kosovo,” Christian Science Monitor, July 25, 2001.
Al-Ghannouchi, Rachid, “Palestine as a Global Agenda,” MSANews, November
1999.
Gompu, Samya, “Nawal Al Saadawi Returns to the Lion’s Den,” Middle East
Times, No. 22, 1995.
Green, Shaikh Abdur-Raheem, “Authenticity of the Quran,” Islamic Knowledge
Bank, Hezb-e-Islami Afghanistan, 1994. Online at http://www.hezb-e-
islami.org/quran.html (as of June 3, 2003).

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Bibliography
69
Gulen, Fethullah, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufisim, Rochester, Mich.:
Fountain Publishing, 1999.
Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck, and Adair Lummis, Islamic Values in the United
States, New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Hasan, Asma Gull, American Muslims: The New Generation, New York: Contin-
uum Press, 2002.
Hashmi, Sohail, “Not What the Prophet Would Want,” The Washington Post,
June 9, 2002.
Heitmeyer, Wilhelm, interview, Tageszeitung, September 24, 2001.
Hizb-ut-Tahrir, Dangerous Concepts to Attack Islam and Consolidate the West-
ern Culture, London: Al Khilafah Publications, 1997. Online at http://
www.hizb-ut-tahrir.org/english/books/pdfs/dangerous_concepts.pdf (as of
September 9, 2003).
_____, Hizb-ut-Tahrir Official Web Site, 2003. Online at http://www.hizb-ut-
tahrir.org/english/ as of October 1, 2003.
Hofmann, Murad, Islam 2000, Beltsville, Md.: Amana Publications, 1997.
Ibn Lulu Ibn Al-Naqib, Ahmad, The Reliance of the Traveler, Beltsville, Md.:
Amana Publications, 1997.
Iran Expert, “Hashem Aghajari: Chronology of a Crisis,” November 17, 2002.
Online at www.iranexpert.com/2002/chronologyofcrisis17november.htm (as
of September 3, 2003).
Islam, Amatullah, “Preventing the G-B Relationship,” Nida’ul Islam Magazine,
Vol. V, No. 22, February–March 1998. Online at http://islam.org.au/articles/
22/index.htm (as of June 3, 2003).
Ismaeel, Mabrook, “‘Hadeeth’: A Critical Evaluation with Argument and
Counter-Argument,” April 26, 2003. Online at http://www.submission.org/
hadith/hadith2.html (as of September 3, 2003).
Islam for Today, Web site, last updated May 5, 2003. Online at http://
islamfortoday.com/ (as of June 3, 2003).
Kamal Sultan, Ahmed, “Rethinking Islam, Dotting the I’s and Crossing the T’s,”
October 21, 2002. Online at http://www.islamonline.net/English/
contemporary/2002/10/Article01.shtml (as of June 3, 2003).
Kaufman, Jonathan, “Islamerican,” The Wall Street Journal, February 15, 2002,
p. 1.
Kepel, Gilles, “Rechte für die Gläubigen im Gottlosen Europa: Islamistische
Aktivisten umwerben junge Muslime,” Neue Zürcher Zeitung, Dossiers, April

--- Sayfa 86 ---
70
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
22, 1998. Online at http://www.nzz.ch/dossiers/islamismus/islam_kepel.
html (as of June 3, 2003).
Khalid Arshed, Aneela, The Bounty of Allah: Daily Reflections from the Quran
and Islamic Tradition, New York: Crossroad Publishing, 1999.
Kramer, Martin, “Misstating the State,” Ivory Towers on Sand, Washington,
D.C.: The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, October 2001.
Kurzman, Charles, ed., Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook, New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1998.
Lewis, Bernard, “The Roots of Muslim Rage,” The Atlantic Monthly, September
1990.
_____, What Went Wrong, New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2000.
_____, “We Must Be Clear,” The Washington Post, September 16, 2001.
Littman, David, “Islamism Grows Stronger at the United Nations,” Middle East
Forum, September 1999.
Locke, Michelle, “Islamic Scholars Gather in California,” AP World Politics,
September 18, 2002.
Al-Mamun, Allama, The Sayings of Muhammad, Sacramento, Calif.: Citadel
Press, 1990.
Maqsood, Ruqaiyyah, Islam: Contemporary Books, Chicago: McGraw-Hill,
1994a.
_____, World Faiths: Islam, Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 1994b.
Mardin, Serif, “Society and Islam,” in John Hall, ed., Civil Society, Cambridge,
U.K.: Polity Press, 1996.
Marquand, Robert, “The Hurricane That Swirls Over the Head Scarf,” Christian
Science Monitor, February 12, 1996.
Morris, Neil, Islam, New York: McGraw-Hill Children’s Publishing, 2002.
Muir, Jim, “Iran’s Girl Runaways,” BBC News, December 14, 2000.
_____, “Iran ‘Brothel’ Plan Rejected,” BBC News, July 28, 2002.
Our Dialogue (Islam in Perspective), Web site, online at http://ourdialogue.
com/ (as of July 3, 2003).
Parwez, G. A., “Holy Quran According to Our Traditions,” in G. A. Parwez, The
Status of Hadith . . . The Actual Status of Hadith, Aboo B. Rana, tr., 2002.
Online at http://www.toluislam.com/pub_online/position/hadith11.htm (as
of September 8, 2003).

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Bibliography
71
Al-Qaradawi, Yussef, The Islamic Movement at Political and World Levels,
(chapter 4), n.d. Online at http://www.qaradawi.net (Arabic site).
Al-Rahman Al-Raheem, Bismillahi, “The System of Ruling in Islam Is Not
Republican,” in the From the Party Culture section, 2002. Online at
http://www.hizb-ut-tahrir.org (as of June 3, 2003).
Rashid, Ahmad, The Taliban, New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2000.
Rauf, Abdul, “Marriage in Islam,” 2002. Online at http://www.jannah.org.
Rejwan, Nissim, Arabs Face the Modern World, Gainesville, Fla.: University Press
of Florida, 1998.
Reuters, “Pakistan Man Sentenced to Death for Blasphemy,” Lahore, Pakistan,
July 27, 2002.
Roy, Olivier, The Failure of Political Islam, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1994.
Saba, Sadeq, “Rape and Murder on Rise in Tehran,” BBC News, October 17,
2000.
Sachedina, Abdulaziz, The Islamic Roots of Democratic Pluralism, New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001.
Schwartz, Stephen, “The Arab Betrayal of Balkan Islam,” Middle East Quarterly,
Spring 2002.
Schwarzer, Alice, ed., Die Gotteskrieger und die falsche Toleranz [On Holy War-
riors and Misplaced Tolerance], Cologne, Germany: Kiepenheuer & Witsch,
2002.
Shahrur, Muhammad, “Proposal for an Islamic Covenant,” Damascus 2000,
2000. Online at http://www.islam21.net/pages/charter/may-1.htm (as of
September 9, 2003).
Smith, Jane, Islam in America, New York: Columbia University Press, 1999.
Tibi, Bassam, The Crisis of Modern Islam, Salt Lake City, Utah: University of
Utah Press, 1988.
_____, “Die Deutsche Verordnete Fremdenliebe,” in Schwarzer (2002), pp. 105–
120.
Toward Tomorrow (Web site on Fethullah Gulen), last updated August 28, 2003.
Online at http://www.mfgulen.com (as of September 8, 2003).
UNDP—see United Nations Development Programme.
United Nations Development Programme, Arab Human Development Report
2002, New York: United Nations, 2002.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
72
Civil Democratic Islam: Partners, Resources, and Strategies
U.S. Department of State, Muslim Life in America, http://usinfo.state.gov/
products/pubs/muslimlife/ (as of September 9, 2003).
Wadud, Amina, Quran and Woman: Rereading the Sacred Text from a Woman’s
Perspective, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Warraq, Ibn, Why I Am Not a Muslim, New York: Prometheus, 1995.
Wax, Emily, “The Fabric of Their Faith,” The Washington Post, May 19, 2002.
Wiseman, Paul, “Words Can Bring Death Sentence in Pakistan,” USA Today,
March 25, 2002.