--- Sayfa 1 ---
The Future of
Turkish-Western
Relations
Toward a Strategic Plan
R
Center for Middle East Public Policy  •  National Security Research Division
Prepared for the Smith Richardson Foundation
Zalmay Khalilzad
Ian O. Lesser
F. Stephen Larrabee

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The research described in this report was sponsored by the Smith
Richardson Foundation and RAND’s Center for Middle East Public
Policy (CMEPP). The research was conducted within the Inter-
national Security and Defense Policy Center of RAND’s National
Security Research Division.
RAND is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and
decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND® is a
registered trademark. RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect
the opinions or policies of its research sponsors.
© Copyright 2000 RAND
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including
photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from RAND.
Published 2000 by RAND
1700 Main Street, P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1200 South Hayes Street, Arlington, VA 22202-5050
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org/
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information,
contact Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Internet: order@rand.org
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Khalilzad, Zalmay.
The future of Turkish-Western relations : toward a strategic plan / Zalmay
Khalilzad, Ian Lesser, F. Stephen Larrabee.
p. cm.
“MR-1241-SRF.”
ISBN 0-8330-2875-8
1. Turkey—Foreign relations—Europe. 2. Europe—Foreign relations—Turkey.
3. Turkey—Foreign relations—United States. 4. United States—Foreign
relations—Turkey.  I. Lesser, Ian O., 1957– II. Larrabee, F. Stephen. III. Title.
DR479.E85 K47 2000
327.5610171'3—dc21
00-059051

--- Sayfa 3 ---
iii
PREFACE
At the dawn of a new century, Turkish-Western relations have also
entered a new era.  Recent years have seen enormous changes within
Turkish society.  Turkish foreign policy horizons have expanded, and
the country has developed a more active and sovereignty-conscious
approach to nearby regions and relations with allies.  Europe too has
changed.  With the Helsinki Summit decisions, the European Union
(EU) has moved from a decidedly ambivalent stance to a more inte-
grationist approach in its relations with Turkey.  NATO—a key insti-
tutional link for Turkey in the West—is changing in ways that
heighten Turkey’s value to the Alliance.  At the same time, the EU is
developing foreign and defense policy initiatives in which Ankara’s
role remains uncertain.  For the United States, Turkey’s geopolitical
importance is clear, but a predictable strategic relationship remains
elusive, largely because Ankara and Washington have yet to develop
a truly common agenda for relations in the post–Cold War world.
Against this background, this report explores the changing parame-
ters of Turkish-Western relations and offers an agenda for closer
strategic cooperation in the U.S.-Turkish-European triangle.
This study was undertaken with the generous support of the Smith
Richardson Foundation, together with research funds provided by
RAND’s Center for Middle East Public Policy (CMEPP), and was car-
ried out within the International Security and Defense Policy Center
of RAND’s National Security Research Division.  CMEPP analyzes
political, social, economic, and technological developments in the
Middle East and assesses their implications for the region and
beyond.  RAND’s National Security Research Division conducts

--- Sayfa 4 ---
iv
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
research for the U.S. Department of Defense, for other U.S.
government agencies, and other institutions.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
v
CONTENTS
Preface .........................................

iii
Figures .........................................

vii
Summary .......................................

ix
Acknowledgments.................................

xiii
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION ..............................

1
New Stakes, New Opportunities ....................

1
Structure of the Report ..........................

4
Chapter Two
CHANGES ON THE TURKISH DOMESTIC SCENE AND
THEIR FOREIGN POLICY IMPLICATIONS ............

5
Rising Nationalism and Its Counterweights ...........

5
Traditional Versus Modern Worldviews ..............

14
Emergence of a Dynamic Private Sector ..............

16
A More Stable Internal Environment?................

19
Chapter Three
TURKISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY:  NEW
DIMENSIONS AND NEW CHALLENGES .............

21
The Russian Factor .............................

22
Cyprus.....................................

23
The Kurdish Issue ............................

23
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) ..............

23
Chechnya ..................................

24
Central Asia and the Caucasus .....................

25
The Caucasus .................................

28

--- Sayfa 6 ---
vi
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
The Middle East ...............................

31
The Balkans ..................................

36
Relations with Europe ...........................

39
NATO and ESDI ...............................

41
Greece and Cyprus .............................

43
The American Connection ........................

45
Conclusion:  Turkey’s Strategic Options ..............

48
Chapter Four
WESTERN INTERESTS IN A CHANGING TURKEY ......

53
Transregional Issues and Opportunities ..............

53
Changing Definition of European Security ............

54
New Security Geometries.........................

56
A Pivotal State? ................................

57
Thinking Through U.S. Stakes .....................

61
Stability and Democracy .......................

61
A Positive Regional Actor .......................

65
Enhancing U.S. Freedom of Action ................

71
Elements of Continuity and Change .................

75
Policy Implications .............................

77
Chapter Five
A STRATEGIC PLAN FOR WESTERN-TURKISH
RELATIONS ..................................

79
The Impact of the End of the Cold War ...............

79
Elements of a New Strategic Partnership Between the
United States, Western Europe, and Turkey .......

82
Energy Security ..............................

82
Countering the Threat of Weapons of Mass Destruction
and Missiles...............................

86
“Congage” Russia.............................

89
Deepening Turkish Integration in the West ..........

93
Conclusion ...................................

95

--- Sayfa 7 ---
vii
FIGURES
1.
Turkey-Persian Gulf and Caspian Basin ...........

86

--- Sayfa 9 ---
ix
SUMMARY
Turkish society, politics, and economy have evolved substantially
over the past decades.  The pace of this change has increased in re-
cent years, and has included the rise of a much wider and more ac-
tive debate on foreign and security policy—with new dimensions and
new actors.  These changes have important implications for Turkish
policy, and the future of relations with the West.  In this context,
three developments have special meaning:  (1) the rise of Turkish
nationalism and greater sensitivity to sovereignty issues; (2) the po-
larization of traditional and modern elements in Turkish society; and
(3) the emergence of a dynamic private sector, offering a new con-
stellation of interlocutors in relations with the United States and Eu-
rope.
Turkey’s external policy is also undergoing revision and redefinition
in response to regional challenges and opportunities.  Turkey will
have a number of options in terms of foreign policy focus—Euro-
pean, Eurasian, Middle Eastern—as well as the possibility of concen-
tration on the bilateral relationship with the United States  The most
likely outcome is a more multidimensional approach based strongly
on Turkish national interests.  Relations with the West will remain
the core orientation, but with a more capable and assertive engage-
ment elsewhere—generally, but not always, pursued in a multilateral
frame.
Western stakes in Turkey continue to evolve in the post–Cold War
era.  As both European and U.S. strategy shifts to focus on the pe-
riphery of Europe, Turkey looms larger as a “pivotal state.”  The
United States and Europe will have a strong stake in Turkish stability

--- Sayfa 10 ---
x
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
and democracy—crucial elements if Ankara is to play a more capable
and positive regional role.  In an era of power projection, the United
States in particular will wish to see Turkey foster U.S. freedom of ac-
tion in adjacent regions.  To the extent that the European Union (EU)
develops a more independent and concerted foreign and security
policy, Turkey can also play this role in support of European inter-
ests—if the character of Turkish-European relations encourages this.
The future outlook will turn critically on a shared sense of strategic
purpose between Turkey and the West.  During the Cold War, Turkey
played a critical role in the containment of Soviet power.  There was
agreement between the United States and West Germany, in particu-
lar, on the central importance of Turkey in Western strategy.  A simi-
lar recognition of the Turkish role generated support and assistance
for Turkey on Capitol Hill.  As a result, although there were episodic
problems in U.S.-Turkish relations, for much of the Cold War, Turkey
was a major recipient of U.S. economic and military assistance.
With the end of the Cold War, the geopolitical environment and
strategic priorities changed.  For much of the past decade it has been
unclear what Turks, Americans, and Europeans, as one, have been
for and against.  Security debates in the United States and Europe
acknowledge Turkey’s geopolitical significance and the need to
reinvigorate relations with Turkey.  But there has been relatively little
progress in defining what a new agenda for strategic cooperation be-
tween Turkey and the West should include.
This report suggests that a new strategic agenda for Turkish-Western
relations should focus on four key areas.  These hardly exhaust the
list of important areas for cooperation, but each in its way illustrates
regions and issues where stakes are shared; where successful man-
agement will be important to the security and prosperity of Turkey,
Europe, and the United States, and where Ankara has a natural and
significant role to play.
The first item on the agenda concerns energy security.  Turkey oc-
cupies a unique position adjacent to globally important oil and gas
resources in the Persian Gulf, the Caucasus, and Central Asia, and
astride alternative routes for bringing these resources to world mar-
kets.  Access to adequate energy supplies at acceptable prices will
also be essential to Turkey’s own development over the longer term.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Summary
xi
Second, Turkey and the West have a special stake in countering the
proliferation of ballistic missiles of increasing range, as well as
weapons of mass destruction.  Since the Gulf War, Ankara and Wash-
ington have been at the forefront among the Western allies in focus-
ing on this troubling trend.  For the moment, Turkey is the NATO ally
most clearly exposed to missile systems based in the Middle East, but
this is rapidly emerging as a more widely shared vulnerability for
Europe as a whole.  Addressing these risks, through common poli-
cies, and by integrating Turkey in a future ballistic missile defense
architecture, should be high on a new agenda, tailored to new chal-
lenges.
Third, Turkey is also most exposed to the security consequences of
alternative Russian futures.  Ankara would be on the front line in any
renewed competition between Russia and the West, and today’s po-
tential areas for regional friction involving Moscow—from the
Balkans and the eastern Mediterranean to the Caucasus, Central
Asia, and the Gulf—are close to Turkey.  Of more immediate concern,
Turkey is exposed to the spillover effects of turmoil in Russia and the
former Soviet Union, including refugee movements, transnational
crime, and ethnic conflict around the Black Sea.  Ankara seeks reas-
surance from the West in dealing with a potentially more difficult
Russia.  As a leading economic partner, Turkey can also be part of a
more active and positive engagement with a reforming, cooperative
Russia.  In either case, a concerted strategy toward Russia must be
part of a future triangular agenda.
Finally, the United States, as well as Europe, actively needs to ensure
that the path toward closer Turkish integration in Europe remains
open and anchors Turkey irreversibly to the West.  The United States
will have a strong stake in this process, and its interests will be un-
dermined along with Ankara’s if the EU’s Helsinki decisions provide
only a “hollow candidacy” for Turkey.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xiii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study benefited from discussions with numerous official and
unofficial observers in Turkey, Europe, and the United States.  We
also wish to thank RAND colleagues who contributed to our analysis
and helped facilitate our research:  in particular Jerrold Green,
Rachel Swanger, and Barbara Kliszewski.  We are especially grateful
to Marin Strmecki, Nadia Schadlow, and Samantha Ravich of the
Smith Richardson Foundation for their interest and support, and to
Philip Gordon at the Brookings Institution and Sabri Sayari at
Georgetown University for their thoughtful comments on an earlier
version of this report.  Any errors or omissions are, of course, the re-
sponsibility of the authors.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
1
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION
NEW STAKES, NEW OPPORTUNITIES
At the start of the 21st century, Western attention to Turkey is at a
high point.  Developments in Turkey, and in adjacent regions, com-
pel attention.  This reality contrasts with the fear of post–Cold War
neglect widely expressed by Turkish observers after the fall of the
Soviet Union and the collapse of the communist states in the East.
The Gulf War refocused Western attention on Turkey, but like the
previous context of the containment of Soviet power, it did so in a
derivative way. Turkey was important as a result of its position on the
map rather than its potential as a regional actor and partner in its
own right.  For many Turks, the Gulf War experience and the coun-
try’s subsequent role in the containment of Iraq have reinforced the
perception that Western policy (especially U.S. policy) toward Turkey
is actually a product of other more important policies—Russia policy,
Caspian policy, Balkan policy, Middle East policy, and so on.  Recent
changes within Turkey increasingly compel analysts and policymak-
ers to see Turkey as a pivotal international actor in its own right.1
It is sometimes remarked that Turkey suffers from the lack of an ef-
fective lobby in Washington.  The nature of U.S.-Turkish relations
since 1945 suggests that this observation misses the mark.  Turkey
has indeed had a potent “lobby” in the form of the U.S. government:
______________

1Some of these changes were anticipated in Graham E. Fuller, Ian O. Lesser, et al.,
Turkey’s New Geopolitics: from the Balkans to Western China, Boulder, CO: West-
view/RAND, 1993.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
2
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
in particular, foreign and security policy decisionmakers who have
consistently acknowledged the country’s strategic importance, re-
gardless of the state of bilateral relations.  Turkey has consistently
been portrayed as a country “too important to neglect.”  Given the
frequent turmoil in Turkish politics, stability and instability in Turkey
have been seen as having wider implications for the future of soci-
eties elsewhere.  Thus, in the  post–Cold  War period, Turkey has
been seen, variously, as (1) a model for states in the Caucasus, Cen-
tral Asia, and the Balkans; (2) a harbinger of the rise or decline of Is-
lamist movements in the Middle East; and (3) a key test of the effect
of a dynamic private sector on political stability and reform.  In all of
these roles, Turkey is of keen interest for a U.S. foreign policy that has
come to focus heavily on notions of “democratic enlargement” and
human rights.
For Europe, the relationship with Turkey has always been complex.
For centuries, Turkey has been a part—sometimes a critical part—of
the European system; that is, part of the pattern of European politi-
cal, economic, and security relations.  The question of whether
Turkey is part of Europe in the narrower sense of cultural and politi-
cal identity, and even part of the European project of recent decades,
is far less clear. Despite a strong preference for a European orienta-
tion since the founding of the Republic, Turkey’s own sense of iden-
tity in this regard has varied with time.  This sense of ambiguity and
ambivalence in relations between Europe and Turkey remains, even
in the wake of the European Union (EU) Helsinki Summit of Decem-
ber 1999.  The summit declared Turkey a candidate for eventual EU
membership, and is rightly seen as an important turning point in the
very mixed history of recent relations between Ankara and Brussels.
But Helsinki raises as many questions as it resolves.  Is Europe seri-
ous about the prospect of Turkish membership?  Can the EU deal ef-
fectively with economic, political, and “scale” challenges posed by
Turkish integration?  Is Turkey really prepared for the compromises
on national sovereignty that closer relations with Brussels imply?
Even short of full membership, what role will Turkey play in a Europe
bent on developing a more concerted set of foreign and defense
policies?  In short, the issue of Turkey’s relationship with Europe—
always a leading economic partner, and increasingly much more
than that—has acquired new significance with changes in Europe.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Introduction
3
As Turkey has become more capable—and assertive—in diplomatic,
economic, and military terms, Ankara has emerged as a more signifi-
cant strategic partner for the West in troubled parts of the world,
from the Balkans to Central Asia and the Middle East.  The post–Cold
War tendency toward a multilateral approach in U.S. foreign policy
reinforces this point.  Turkey is in the unusual position of being both
a contributor to European security in a formal, Alliance context, and
a partner in addressing wider problems influencing European, Mid-
dle Eastern, and Eurasian security, most of which lie outside the
NATO area.  As maintaining European security at its “core” becomes
less challenging, and as Allies focus more heavily on security chal-
lenges on the periphery,  Turkey will be a more important part of this
equation.  Moreover, many of the direct risks facing NATO today are
actually on Turkey’s borders.
Yet recognition of Turkey’s strategic importance on both sides of the
Atlantic is not synonymous with a new and stronger strategic rela-
tionship between Ankara and the West.  Security debates in the
United States and Europe acknowledge Turkey’s geopolitical signifi-
cance and the need to reinvigorate relations with Turkey.  But there
has been relatively little progress in defining what a new agenda for
strategic cooperation between Turkey and the West should include.
As Ankara has become more active on the regional scene, and more
sovereignty conscious, it has become evident that a perception of
shared interest and purpose is critical to a predictable, cooperative
relationship.  Turkey’s location adjacent to areas of critical interest
for the West is just the starting point for a strategic relationship.  It is
not sufficient in its own right.  The West must understand Turkey’s
strategic perspective, and Turks must want to be engaged in U.S. and
European policies toward the region.  Absent a catalyzing and com-
mon threat (as in the Cold War), a concerted strategic approach can
only be developed through a deeper strategic dialogue—and, more
significantly, a new, relevant agenda.
Although this analysis places considerable emphasis on the relation-
ship between Washington and Ankara, the triangular nature of the
relationship is, arguably, more important than ever.  The emerging
relationship between Turkey and the West is likely to be more bal-
anced vis-à-vis Europe and the United States than at any time in the
past, and certainly more balanced than during the Cold War.  To this
extent, it is also more difficult to discuss the future of U.S. relations

--- Sayfa 18 ---
4
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
with Turkey outside the broader and even more important context of
the transatlantic relationship as a whole.2  In the most extreme case,
a decoupling of transatlantic security would pose stark dilemmas for
Ankara, especially if Turkey remains outside emerging European de-
fense initiatives.  In the more likely case, Turkey may wish to hedge
between its ties to the United States as a predominant, multiregional
superpower and its ties to the EU as a predominant economic part-
ner with growing international aspirations.  In any case, the future
character of transatlantic relations will form a key context for
Turkey’s evolving relationship with the West.
STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
Chapter Two examines the most important trends on the Turkish in-
ternal scene in recent years, their consequences for Turkish foreign
policy, and their meaning for the United States and Europe.  Chapter
Three looks in detail at developments in regions surrounding Turkey
and charts the prospects for Turkish foreign and security policy.
Chapter Four critically examines Turkey’s geopolitical importance
from a Western perspective, analyzes the nature of the U.S. stakes in
Turkey, and concludes with observations about what endures, what
has changed, and what is likely to change in the 21st century.  Finally,
Chapter Five concludes by offering a strategic agenda for Turkish re-
lations with the West, including policy recommendations.  In addi-
tion to primary and secondary sources, throughout, the authors have
relied on extensive discussions with official and unofficial observers
in Turkey, Europe, and the United States.
______________

2A full discussion of this broader question is beyond the scope of this report.  For a re-
cent analysis, see David C. Gompert and F. Stephen Larrabee (eds.), America and Eu-
rope:  A Partnership for A New Era, New York:  Cambridge University Press, 1997.  To
compare with a similar study from the early 1990s, see Nanette Gantz and John Roper
(eds.), Towards a New Partnership:  U.S.-European Relations in the Post–Cold War Era,
Paris:  Western European Union Institute for Security Studies/RAND, 1993.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
5
 Chapter Two
CHANGES ON THE TURKISH DOMESTIC SCENE AND
THEIR FOREIGN POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Ian O. Lesser
Turkish society, politics, and economy have changed considerably
over the past decades, with important implications for relations with
the United States and the West as a whole.  The pace of this change
became especially rapid in the Özal years, driven along by economic
reform, high growth rates, and new political currents.  In this same
period, key elements of the Atatürkist tradition that guided Turkish
perceptions and policies since the foundation of the Republic—secu-
larism, Western orientation, and statism—have come under severe
strain.  From the perspective of U.S.-Turkish relations, three aspects
of domestic change are particularly significant:  (1) the rise of Turkish
nationalism; (2) the polarization of “traditional” and “modern” ele-
ments in Turkish society; and (3) the emergence of a dynamic private
sector (and a new constellation of interlocutors for engagement with
the United States).
RISING NATIONALISM AND ITS COUNTERWEIGHTS
A strong sense of Turkish nationalism was always imbedded within
the Atatürkist vision, and was closely tied to the modernization and
Westernization of the country.1  The basic assumptions underpin-
______________

1Some characteristics of this Turkish nationalism, including its basis in 19th-century
European forms, are discussed in Ernest Gellner, Encounters with Nationalism, Ox-
ford:  Blackwell, 1994, pp. 81–91.  See also Hugh Poulton, Top Hat, Grey Wolf and Cres-
cent, New York:  NYU Press, 1997.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
6
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
ning Atatürkism and the Turkish sense of nationalism have been
widely shared among Turkish elites in the period of the Republic.2
The impressive electoral performance of the Nationalist Action Party
(MHP) led by Devlet Bahceli in Turkey’s 1999 general elections has
focused interest on Turkish nationalism both inside and outside
Turkey.  In fact, a more vigorous nationalist sentiment has been vis-
ible on the Turkish scene for some time.  The decade of the 1990s saw
the emergence of independent Turkic republics of the former Soviet
Union, and stimulated a lively debate in Turkey over the prospects
for new ties based on ethnic affinity in the Caucasus and Central
Asia, even embracing a larger region, from the Balkans to Western
China.  This pan-Turkist potential was taken up by fringe elements
on the nationalist right (including MHP), and was embraced in a
milder form, emphasizing trade and cultural ties, by mainstream
parties as well as Turkey’s active business community.  In this same
period, the emergence of an increasingly violent Kurdish insurgency
in southeastern Anatolia, led by the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK),
and a more general rise in Kurdish political activism encouraged a
nationalist reaction across the political spectrum. This reaction
continues today, despite the waning of the PKK challenge, and was
evident in the wake of the capture and trial of the PKK leader
Abdullah Öcalan.  The Öcalan affair, in particular, served as a rallying
point for those who have been directly affected by the war against
the PKK which may have claimed as many as 40,000 victims on all
sides.
The nationalist impulse has been reinforced by the post–Gulf War
experience and Turkey’s frustration in its relations with the Euro-
pean Union (EU).  There is an enduring perception among the public
and elites alike that Turkey’s forward-leaning, pro-Western stance in
the conflict with Iraq has imposed significant economic and political
costs on Turkey.  Iraq had been Turkey’s largest trading partner, and
Ankara has been uncomfortable with containment policies that re-
strict its own economic and diplomatic freedom of action with Mid-
dle Eastern neighbors.  Above all, Turks are wary of Western, espe-
______________

2One scholar views the Turkish case as an example of nationalism that has become
pervasive or “hegemonic” as an ideology of choice in key Middle Eastern states.  See
Ian S. Lustick, “Hegemony and the Riddle of Nationalism,” in Leonard Binder (ed.),
Ethnic Conflict and International Politics in the Middle East, Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida, 1999.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
7
cially U.S., intentions with regard to northern Iraq.  Turkish analysts
often refer to the “Sèvres syndrome,” or the fear of containment and
dismemberment, along the lines envisioned but never implemented
by the Western powers after World War I.  Even in moderate, well-
informed circles, this residual concern encourages the view that
Turkey needs to look after its own interests in a more vigorous way;
that without considerable vigilance on the part of policymakers in
Ankara, Turkish sovereignty and national interests may be “sold out,”
even by strategic partners in the West.  Northern Iraq, closely tied to
the Kurdish issue and Kurdish separatism, is the most sensitive ex-
ample, but similar arguments can be heard in relation to Western
appeasement of Russia, Syria, or Greece at Turkey’s expense.
Flux in Turkey’s relations with the EU has, at key junctures, fueled
nationalist sentiment across a surprisingly wide spectrum of Turkish
opinion.  Turkey’s ambition to “join” Europe in the sense of full
membership in the EU suffered repeated setbacks in the 1990s, and
has only recently been restored with the formal acceptance of
Turkey’s status as a candidate for membership at the EU’s December
1999 Helsinki summit.3  Ankara’s involvement in the Gulf War coali-
tion did not pay dividends in terms of European integration, despite
Özal’s best efforts.  The reintegration of eastern and central Europe
placed the issue of “who is European” in sharper relief, to the detri-
ment of Turkey’s European aspirations.  Turkey, as a long-standing
associate member of the EU, saw former communist states in the
east move ahead of Turkey in the membership queue.  The Luxem-
bourg summit made clear that the EU did not even contemplate the
start of an accession process for Turkey.  As a consequence, even the
most Western-oriented Turkish elites became bitter and disillu-
sioned about Europe, and increasingly receptive to the idea of a more
sovereignty-conscious and independent Turkey.  This sense of re-
sentment could be seen in the most diverse quarters, from the mili-
tary and much of the business community, to the religious and secu-
lar right wing, and also on the left.  Given the pressure that the EU
had been applying on Ankara with regard to human rights, Cyprus,
and other issues, it was even argued that the post-Luxembourg
______________

3See Barry Buzan and Thomas Diez, “The European Union and Turkey,” Survival, Vol.
4, No. 1 (Spring 1999), pp. 41–57; and Ian O. Lesser, Bridge or Barrier?  Turkey and the
West After the Cold War, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, R-4204-AF/A, 1992.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
8
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
summit break in relations with Brussels provided Turkey with a use-
ful breathing space, to pursue a more diversified foreign policy and
to address domestic problems without external pressure.4  In this as
in many other areas, the August 1999 earthquake may well have
helped to change attitudes toward EU-Turkish relations even prior to
the Helsinki summit.  Certainly, the experience produced calls on all
sides for improved relations and the removal of practical impedi-
ments, such as the long-standing hold on EU economic assistance
for Turkey.
The Helsinki summit has clearly effected a fresh chapter in Turkish-
EU relations.  It has also refocused the question of Turkish national-
ism for the future.  A Turkish elite and public that have grown accus-
tomed to a more vigorous assertion of Turkish nationalism—often in
opposition to European preferences—now find themselves with a
renewed European perspective.  This perspective is appealing to
Western-oriented Atatürkists and to an increasingly materialistic
middle class.  It is also appealing to those traditionally on the mar-
gins of Turkish society and politics, including Islamists and Kurds,
who see in Europe the possibility of more tolerance and freedom of
action for their own views.  Thus, the longer-term prospect opened
by Helsinki serves as a counterweight to the recent growth of na-
tionalist sentiment.  However, it does not resolve Turkey’s basic na-
tionalist dilemma which, in some respects, has become more pro-
found with Turkey’s EU candidacy.
So far, Turkey’s leadership and society have not had to confront the
dilemma posed by a strong nationalist tradition and a powerful at-
tachment to state sovereignty, on the one hand, with the prospect of
integration in a sovereignty-diluting Europe, on the other.  Even
short of full EU membership—a very distant prospect for Turkey, at
best—candidacy implies greater scrutiny, convergence, and com-
promise.  From the most mundane (e.g., food regulations) to high
politics (human rights, foreign and security policy), a closer relation-
ship with formal EU structures will threaten Turkish sovereignty at
many levels.  This process has not been easy, even for core European
states.  How much more difficult will it be for a country where 19th-
century notions of nationalism and sovereignty are still prevalent?
______________

4Ilter Turan, “Towards Reconstruction,” Private View (Istanbul), Autumn 1998, p. 11.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
9
Looking ahead, even a multispeed, “variable geometry” Europe will
impose significant sovereignty constraints on states that wish to take
part.  Through the customs union and other mechanisms, Turkey is
already within this EU orbit.  With the progress of Turkey’s candidacy
it will be increasingly difficult for Ankara to choose nationalist op-
tions if it wishes to remain on track for eventual EU membership.
In different ways, the Armenian-Azeri conflict over Nagorno-
Karabakh, the Bosnia crisis, and recurring tensions with Greece
(especially over Cyprus) have also strengthened the nationalist im-
pulse, although these too are balanced by recent countervailing
trends.  Along with the Kurdish question, Cyprus is the nationalist is-
sue par excellence, and tensions over the planned deployment of
Russian surface-to-air missiles on the Greek side, and other flash-
points at the end of the 1990s, touched on nationalist sensitivities.
The perception of Western inaction in Bosnia, where Turkish affini-
ties were engaged, offered yet another basis for Turkish disillusion-
ment with the West and reinforced the perception of Turkish
“otherness” on the periphery of Europe.
Yet, as the Kosovo crisis illustrated, Ankara has opted for a multilat-
eral approach to sensitive crises in the Balkans.  “Earthquake diplo-
macy” played a role in defusing public opinion on frictions with
Greece, and the post-Helsinki thaw in Greek-Turkish relations has
only been possible because the nationalist critics of regional détente
(on both sides) have been held in check by forward-looking leader-
ships.  Even with regard to the crisis in Chechnya, where public sym-
pathy for the Chechens could be expected to encourage a more as-
sertive line, Ankara has reacted cautiously.  One explanation for this
caution is Ankara’s interest in discouraging separatist movements
and cross-border confrontations that could have uncomfortable par-
allels with Turkey’s own problems in the Kurdish southeast and with
Middle Eastern neighbors.
A confluence of influences underlies the recent upsurge in Turkish
nationalism, although as noted, this upsurge faces some countervail-
ing tendencies.  On balance, Turkish nationalism may now be a more
potent force than political Islam, and with equally important impli-
cations for relations with the United States and the EU.  The success
of Turkey’s Islamists at the local and national levels during the 1990s
can be ascribed to many factors, of which the rise in religious senti-

--- Sayfa 24 ---
10
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
ment may not have been the most significant.  Economic populism
and an efficient grass-roots party machinery also played a part.5  In
the period leading up to Refah’s entry in a governing coalition, it was
also very effective in articulating a nationalist message.  This message
has recently been taken up by an MHP that now seeks to portray it-
self as mainstream.  It is echoed on the opposite end of the political
spectrum by Bulent Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party (DLP).  DLP fin-
ished first in Turkey’s 1999 elections, largely on the strength of Prime
Minister Ecevit’s own personality, untainted by corruption and
strongly nationalist in tone.  The traditional centrist parties—True
Path (DYP) and Motherland (ANAP)—faired poorly in the elections,
as did Refah’s successor—the Virtue Party—when measured against
previous results and preelection expectations.  Overall, the 1999
elections were a triumph for Turkish nationalists of the left and the
right.6  Yet the postelection period has also seen significant im-
provement in relations with Greece and the EU, two areas where na-
tionalist sentiment would normally act as a constraint.
The 1999 election results, and the formation of a new coalition em-
bracing MHP, has produced an active debate over whether this party
has definitively abandoned the violent extremism associated with
MHP in the past.  During the late 1970s, MHP under the leadership of
Alparslan Turkes was linked to right-wing terrorism and political vio-
lence carried out by the Grey Wolves and others.7  The youth wing of
MHP has had a particularly violent reputation, a fact that takes on
special significance given the high percentage of young voters opting
for MHP in recent elections.  In postelection pronouncements,
Turkey’s National Security Council identified the Grey Wolves and
______________

5The socioeconomic explanation of Refah’s strength is emphasized in many recent
analyses.  See, for example, Nilufer Narli, “The Rise of the Islamist Movement in
Turkey,” Middle East Review of International Affairs, Vol. 3, No. 3 (September 1999).
61999 general election results gave the Democratic Left Party (DSP) 22 percent, Na-
tionalist Action Party (MHP) 18 percent, Virtue Party 15 percent, Motherland (ANAP)
13.3 percent, and True Path (DYP) 12.5 percent.  The Pro-Kurdish Party (HADEP) re-
ceived some 4 percent of the overall vote, but did very well at the local level in the
southeast.  Similarly, Virtue did well enough at the local level to retain many key
mayoral positions won in 1995.
7The Grey Wolves, the militaristic youth organization affiliated with MHP, played a
major role in the political violence that swept Turkey in the 1970s.  The group has kept
a lower profile over the last decade.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
11
related groups as “an increasing danger.”8  Although ostensibly a
secular party, MHP, like the center-right parties, has a religious wing,
and is flexible on educational and cultural issues (e.g., the headscarf
question) important to Turkey’s Islamists.  The party has benefited
from Virtue’s decline under pressure from the secular establishment
and the courts.9
The postelection political scene in Turkey has several potentially im-
portant implications for Turkish foreign policy and relations with the
United States.  First, and most positively, the formation of a stable
three-party coalition should allow Ankara to move on legislation and
policy initiatives with relevance to Turkey’s external relations.  Social
security reform, privatization, and intellectual property legislation
now have a better prospect of moving forward.  Both are linked to the
longer-term outlook for the Turkish economy and opportunities for
U.S. trade and investment.  The new government may also have
more freedom for maneuver on sensitive issues such as human
rights, including the Kurdish question.  Some evidence of this
movement can be seen in comments by Foreign Minister Ismail Cem
that Kurdish language broadcasts should be allowed, a statement
that would have been unthinkable from a key government minister
until very recently.  Improvements in these areas could have a dra-
matic and salutary effect on relations with Europe as well as the
United States.  That said, the nationalist outlook of the current coali-
tion suggests that Ankara will not be well-disposed toward interna-
tional pressure on these issues; and increasing international
(especially European) scrutiny is now more likely in the wake of the
Helsinki summit.10
Second, growing nationalism is likely to reinforce existing trends in
Turkey’s external policy, and will support a more active, assertive,
______________

8Kemal Balci, “MHP:  Hard to Live with, Harder to Live Without,” Turkish Daily News,
April 27, 1999.
9This pressure is being redoubled in the wake of arrests and revelations surrounding
“Turkish Hizbullah” in the winter of 1999–2000.  See Ersel Aydinli, “Implications of
Turkey’s Anti-Hizbullah Operation,” PolicyWatch, #439, Washington Institute for Near
East Policy, February 9, 2000.
10The EU’s political sanctions on Austria, imposed after the formation of a govern-
ment including right-wing nationalists, suggest that Europe is becoming more critical
and more willing to intervene in areas that could affect Turkey.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
12
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
and sovereignty-conscious approach in key areas.  Prime Minister
Ecevit has consistently emphasized a “regionally based” foreign pol-
icy in which Ankara seeks to play a more active role in defense of its
own interests in adjoining areas.  In practice this has meant a more
assertive policy toward Syria, Iran, Northern Iraq, the Aegean, and
Cyprus.11  Potentially, it could mean a more assertive policy in the
Balkans, the Caucasus, and the Caspian, although Turkish policy-
makers have thus far pursued a very cautious, multilateral approach
to these areas.
Third, the nationalist tendency can complicate Turkish relations with
the United States, despite the growing importance of the bilateral
relationship as seen from Ankara.  Turkish sensitivities with regard to
sovereignty issues will likely be the key concern.  Turkish constitu-
tional provisions do not allow for the permanent stationing of foreign
military forces on Turkish territory.  Yet, through various rotational
arrangements and deployments sanctioned by the Turkish parlia-
ment (e.g., for Operations Provide Comfort and, more recently,
Northern Watch) the United States has enjoyed what amounts to a
standing airpower presence in Turkey.  Since the Gulf War, access to
Turkish facilities for non-NATO purposes has been closely measured
against Turkish interests and, increasingly, public acceptance.  More
active nationalist sentiment does not preclude close cooperation
with the United States in regional matters, including the use of
Turkish facilities for contingencies in the Gulf, the Balkans, or else-
where (as recent experience in Northern Iraq and Kosovo illustrates),
but it does make cooperation less automatic and less predictable.  It
can also complicate relations on key issues such as policy toward
Greece and Russia, where U.S. and Turkish approaches may diverge.
Moreover, it suggests no real diminution in the long-standing Turk-
ish sensitivity to arms-transfer issues in relations with Washington.
MHP’s participation in government is unlikely to signal radical
changes in Turkish foreign policy since, as noted earlier, nationalist
sentiment has been a strong force in Turkish policy for some time.
MHP holds the defense portfolio (a relatively weak actor in the Turk-
ish system) but is otherwise not heavily represented in foreign poli-
______________

11Bulent Ecevit is known for his particularly strong stance on the Cyprus issue, having
approved the Turkish military intervention in Cyprus in 1974.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
13
cymaking circles.  That said, MHP views on external policy can have
an important effect over time, especially in response to crises when
public opinion is actively engaged.  MHP’s foreign policy statements
have emphasized strengthening relations with the Turkic republics
of Central Asia; a tough stance on Cyprus as a matter of “vital and
strategic importance” for Turkey; and a critical, arm’s-length ap-
proach to the EU.  The party has been particularly vocal in relation to
developments in Azerbaijan and Armenian-Azeri relations, and is
likely to be a continuing factor in Ankara’s relations with Baku.  MHP
has also stressed Turkey’s responsibility to defend the interests of
Turks abroad (e.g., in Germany), Turkish and Muslim communities
in the Balkans, and Turkomans in the Middle East.  In a manner rem-
iniscent of Erbakan’s forays during the period of Refah-led govern-
ment, MHP’s program notes the imperative of creating a “social,
economic, scientific, and cultural union” in the Turkish world,
viewing this as essential to peace and stability in Eurasia.12  The MHP
program also asserts that “a ring of pacts should be formed around
Turkey,” including the establishment of an ambitious “East Mediter-
ranean Union” embracing Turkey, Israel, Jordan, Egypt, and
“Palestine,” and perhaps eventually Lebanon, Syria, and Saudi Ara-
bia.13  This idea, probably more rhetorical than substantive, is made
even more curious by MHP’s traditional coolness toward relations
with Israel, and allegations of past anti-Semitism.14
MHP has been very clear on the central role of the Turkish military,
and an extensive military modernization program, in ensuring that
Turkey can play an active geopolitical role, noting the need for
“transcontinental” as well as cross-border military capabilities.  The
MHP program is notably silent on the issue of relations with the
United States, and makes no mention of prominent policy questions
______________

12Cited in Sibel Utku, “MHP Foreign Policy:  Turkish World and Cyprus, But What
Else?” Turkish Daily News, April 27, 1999.  The Erbakan legacy in this area is examined
in Philip Robins, “Turkish Foreign Policy under Erbakan,” Survival, Vol. 39, No. 2
(Summer 1997), pp. 82–100.
13Utku.  The strength of MHP’s nationalist sensitivities was clearly displayed after the
August 1999 earthquake, when the MHP Health Minister, Osman Durmus, issued a
series of statements reflecting the need for foreign assistance in highly chauvinistic
terms.  His comments drew a strongly negative reaction from the media and Turkish
public opinion.
14A Surprise in Turkey,” Foreign Report, No. 2542, May 6, 1999, p. 2.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
14
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
such as relations with Syria and the future of the Baku-Ceyhan
pipeline.  Overall, the MHP program envisions Turkey’s emergence
as a “leader state” and stresses the protection of the national interest
as a guiding principle.15
TRADITIONAL VERSUS MODERN WORLDVIEWS
Beyond the rise of Turkish nationalism as a political force, the past
decade has seen the growth of a sharper division in Turkish society
between “traditional” and “modern” worldviews.  This polarization
can be expressed partly, but not entirely, in terms of friction between
religious and secular outlooks.  Refah and its successor, Virtue,
tapped this vein of traditionalism in Turkish society.  The social and
economic strains caused by Turkey’s changing demographics, with
the steady movement of population from the countryside to the
cities, have been part of this phenomenon.16  Notions of “trickle-
down” secularism, for example, had a very different meaning when
Turkey’s population was 14 million at the foundation of the Republic
(it is some 65 million today).17  Migration to the major urban areas
has brought traditional Anatolian patterns of life and conservative
social attitudes into areas where a secular, “European” outlook has
flourished in recent decades.  Notably, this is not simply a clash of
attitudes between “haves” and “have-nots.”  The ranks of the tradi-
tionally minded include many middle-class Turks, and even some
conservative members of the economic elite.18 The headscarf issue,
as well as the debate over religious education, have been symbolic
battlegrounds in this competition of social outlooks, a competition
______________

15Utku.
16By 1997, 65 percent of Turkey’s population was urban.  In 1945, urban dwellers were
some 25 percent of the population.  Turkey’s Window of Opportunity: Demographic
Transition Process and Its Consequences, Istanbul:  TUSIAD, 1999, p. 21.  On demo-
graphics as a force for change in Turkey, see also Andrew Mango, Turkey:  The Chal-
lenge of A New Role, Westport, CT:  Praeger, 1994, pp. 64–75.
17The author is grateful to Heath Lowry for this formulation.   These issues are also
taken up in a review article by Andrew Mango, “Progress and Disorder: 75 Years of the
Turkish Republic,” Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 35, No. 3 (July 1999), pp. 156–177.
18Affluent, traditionally minded Anatolian businessmen have been among the leading
supporters of Islamic institutions and Islamist politics in Turkey.  Traditional religious
orders—tarikats—operating in a semi-underground fashion, continue to play an im-
portant part in the social and economic life of the country.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
15
that probably reached its peak at the time of Refah’s forced departure
from government.  Although the outcome of the 1999 elections
shifted the focus from religion to nationalism, traditionalism is far
from a spent force.  It is likely that nationalist movements, especially
MHP, have thrived precisely because they bridge these disparate
tendencies, and offer an attractive synthesis.  Various “communal”
organizations and identities—Alevi, Sunni, Kurdish, etc.—have been
another beneficiary of the urbanization process.19  Despite the vary-
ing fortunes of Islamic political parties, Islamic institutions remain a
potent social and economic force, and their containment continues
to represent one of the two principal security challenges identified by
Turkey’s National Security Council (alongside the fight against sepa-
ratism).20
The competing visions of the “traditional” and the “modern” affect
the way foreigners see Turkey.21  The debate over Refah and the Is-
lamist question in Turkey was responsible for a significant increase
in attention to Turkey in Washington and in the international media.
This growth in interest has endured even though the Refah issue has
faded, sustained by the Öcalan affair, Kosovo, the disastrous earth-
quake of August 1999, and the more recent and positive develop-
ments in Turkish relations with Greece and the EU.  U.S. observers,
on the whole, have been more tolerant of Islamist politics (and less
alarmist about religious expression) in Turkey than has been the case
in Europe.  Explanations for this include the more highly politicized
nature of relations with Muslim communities in Europe and a more
relaxed American approach to secularism.  In Europe, especially in
France, the notion of secularism (laïcité) is more restrictive and inti-
mately linked to modernity.  For many Europeans, the success of Is-
lamist political parties in Turkey was interpreted as a retreat from the
modern and a rejection of the European path.  U.S. observers, in
spite of—perhaps because of—the Iranian experience, have been less
concerned about the internal implications of the Refah/Virtue phe-
______________

19Turkey’s Window of Opportunity, p. 25.
20Even in the context of earthquake-relief efforts, Ankara has attempted to limit the
role of Islamic groups.  Stephen Kinzer, “Turkey Blocking Muslim Aid to Quake Vic-
tims,” New York Times, August 27, 1999, p. 3.
21These contrasts have formed the basis for many descriptions of the Turkish scene.
For a recent example, see Nicole and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled:  A History of Mod-
ern Turkey, Woodstock, NY:  Overlook, 1997.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
16
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
nomenon, preferring to focus on the foreign policy consequences of
Islamic politics in Turkey.
One important area in which the distinction between traditionalists
and modernists is less clear concerns the approach to democratiza-
tion, human rights, and minority issues.  Here, the religious and
(some) nationalist elements have adopted a reformist attitude, in
part because a relaxation of existing restrictions gives these groups
greater room for maneuver.  They are joined in this approach by re-
formist intellectuals and influential elements in the business com-
munity whose interest in change is aimed at the development of a
more stable, modern society.22  Closer relations with the EU are in-
terpreted as supporting this reformist tendency.
The Turkish military and the bureaucracy have been more resistant
to reforms, including economic reforms, which they view as threat-
ening to the security, integrity, and welfare of the state.  Ironically,
these two institutions have been pillars of the modern Republic and
staunch supporters of an Atatürkist vision of modernity.  As many
Turks will now admit, the economic dimension of this vision, with its
emphasis on statism and centralization, no longer looks very modern
in light of liberalization and decentralization elsewhere.  The evolu-
tion of the Turkish debate on these issues will shape the outlook for
Turkey in the 21st century, as well as the continued viability of U.S.
and European views of Turkey as a developmental “model.”
EMERGENCE OF A DYNAMIC PRIVATE SECTOR
The rapid, if uneven, economic growth of the last decade has been
supported by the emergence of a dynamic and increasingly influen-
tial Turkish private sector.23  The effects of this change have been
most obvious in the commercial arena, but the changing balance be-
tween private organizations and the state is being felt across Turkish
society.  Many Turks are increasingly uncomfortable with the tradi-
______________

22The Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s Association (TUSIAD) has been an
active and outspoken “elite” advocate for reform, including political approaches to the
issue of Kurdish rights.
23The Turkish economy averaged over 5 percent growth since 1980, the highest aver-
age in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
17
tional, dominant role of state institutions.  This discomfort is re-
flected in declining public confidence in the competence of the state
and a growing tendency to organize lives and enterprises without any
reference to the state.  A prominent Turkish businessman, active in
politics, has termed this tendency a “darker version of the Italian
model”:  a dynamic private sector (and more broadly, “civil society”)
tending to its own business and increasingly frustrated by the ten-
dency of Turkish democracy and administration to lag behind.24  It is
a “darker” version of a trend visible elsewhere in southern Europe
and the Mediterranean because the Turkish state has numerous en-
emies, including some violent ones (e.g., the PKK and extremists on
the secular right, the religious right, and the left). The disorganized
response of the Turkish administration to the devastating earthquake
of August 1999 gave considerable impetus to this criticism of the
state, although it has not produced the pressure for dramatic change
that was widely anticipated at the time.
The state remains a leading actor in the Turkish economy and society
as a whole.25  But the balance is changing, with several important
implications for bilateral relations with the United States.  First, high
growth rates, a large potential market, the proliferation of private
business partners, and the need for investment in key sectors (e.g.,
energy) should make Turkey a more attractive economic partner for
the United States.  The United States has for some time treated
Turkey as a “big emerging market,” and bilateral trade has grown
steadily since the mid-1980s.26 That said, and with some exceptions
such as power generation, U.S. and other foreign investment in
Turkey has consistently fallen short of expectations.  Large deficits,
high inflation, lack of structural reform, halfhearted privatization ef-
forts, and the deepening problem of the illegal sector have con-
______________

24See Stephen Kinzer, “Businesses Pressing a Reluctant Turkey on Democracy Issues,”
New York Times, March 23, 1997.
25State-owned enterprises accounted for some 10 percent of GNP in the first half of
the 1990s.  These enterprises have come under pressure in recent years from Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF)-led monitoring, privatization initiatives, and some out-
right closures.  See OECD, Turkey: Economic Survey, 1995–96.
26The United States has a favorable trade balance with Turkey, and the volume of
trade has more than tripled since 1980, increasing from $1.6 billion in 1985 to $3.4 bil-
lion in 1998.  See Yilmaz Arguden, “Is Uncle Sam Making the Most of Turkey?” Private
View (Istanbul), Spring 1999, available on-line only, solvista@binternet.com.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
18
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
tributed to this lackluster performance.  Political instability and tur-
moil in Ankara’s relations with the EU have also played a role.
Nonetheless, the economic dimension of Turkey’s external relations
has grown enormously in importance over the past decade, most
obviously in relations with Russia and Europe, but also in relations
with the United States.  Economic and “geo-economic” issues such
as energy investment, Caspian oil routes, Balkan reconstruction, and
cooperation on international crime, are acquiring greater impor-
tance, and offer an opportunity to diversify the “security-heavy” bi-
lateral agenda.
Second, the rise of the Turkish private sector is influencing the con-
stellation of actors within Turkey on policy questions of concern to
the United States, from regional trade to defense procurement, and
not least, the Kurdish issue.27  Broadly, leading commercial power
centers in Turkey include the military (with a large stake in the
Turkish economy); secular holding companies; Islamist business
interests; the unions (in decline but still influential, especially on
welfare and privatization issues); and the very substantial illegal
sector (drug trafficking, money laundering, etc.).28  Private-sector
organizations, notably the Turkish Industrialists’ and Businessmen’s
Association (TUSIAD), representing a constellation of the most
prominent Turkish holding companies, have begun to articulate
policy interests in a modern, institutionalized manner.29  At the same
time, these organizations are emerging as more important and
influential interlocutors for the United States on strategic issues—
another useful opportunity for diversification in bilateral relations.
Dynamism in the private sector is also having an important effect on
mobility in Turkish society.  Whereas Turks have traditionally seen
state service (above all, the military) as the path to social and profes-
______________

27On the relationship between the private sector and the state in Turkey, see Ayse Bu-
gra, State and Business in Modern Turkey:  A Comparative Study, Albany, NY:  State
University of New York Press, 1994.
28The role of these power centers is discussed in an analysis of the Turkish private sec-
tor by Ian Lesser and Michele Zanini summarized in Gregory F. Treverton, et al.,
Commercial Power Centers in Emerging Markets, Santa Monica, CA.:  RAND, MR-950,
1998.
29TUSIAD is also a leading sponsor of research and analysis on public policy matters
concerning Turkey. See, for example, the recently published TUSIAD report, Turkey’s
Window of Opportunity.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Changes on The Turkish Domestic Scene and Their Foreign Policy Implications
19
sional advancement, younger generations now look to the private
sector.30  To the extent that this trend continues, it suggests that the
role of the military in Turkish society may be changing, and that new
elites may have a very different background and worldview.  In a bi-
lateral relationship that has stressed military-to-military ties, and has
focused on security issues in preference to economic and other links,
changes along these lines could have important implications for U.S.
engagement in Turkey.  It also points to the importance for Western
interlocutors of identifying new and emerging elites outside tradi-
tional state-centered institutions.
Third, the rise of the private sector has important implications for
Turkey’s future regional role and the potential for bilateral coopera-
tion in regional stability and development.  Turkish entrepreneurs
have played a leading role in the burgeoning economic relationship
between Turkey and Russia (now Ankara’s leading trade partner).  In
the Arab Middle East, where Turkey’s official relationships have often
been difficult, the private sector has been an active player.  Turkish
influence in the Caucasus and Central Asia has been advanced con-
siderably by the role of Turkish companies and foundations.  In the
Balkans, where economic reconstruction is high on the international
agenda, and closely linked to regional security, the Turkish private
sector is involved.  Finally, it is worth noting that leading actors on
the Turkish commercial scene have been among the most active in
attempts to improve Turkish-Greek relations, including joint ven-
tures in the Balkans and elsewhere.31  The role of the private sector is
thus likely to have a considerable influence on Turkish policy in re-
gions where Washington and Ankara have a shared stake.
A MORE STABLE INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT?
In sum, Turkish society, politics, and economy are in a state of con-
siderable flux.  Recent trends have yielded a more stable domestic
______________

30Ties between the military and the private sector remain important, however, espe-
cially for the larger holding companies, where retired general officers are frequently
part of senior management.
31Among the more imaginative of these joint ventures is a plan for a Greek-Turkish
energy generation plant that would export electricity to Turkey and perhaps elsewhere
in the Balkans.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
20
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
scene, but with many residual and unresolved sources of tension.
Turkey’s much vaunted identity crisis, both internal and external,
has hardly been resolved.  What is clear is that today’s Turkey is an
increasingly diverse society in terms of policy perceptions and out-
looks.  Overall, this diversity and the sheer dynamism of the Turkish
debate points in the direction of a more modern and, broadly, more
“Western” Turkey.  It is a Turkey that is capable of having its own vi-
brant debate about what the country’s many new international op-
portunities, including the prospect of deeper integration with Eu-
rope, really mean.
Many of the key risks to stability and security, as Turks define them,
are also internal.  Although the United States and Europe have their
own domestic challenges, including some in the security realm, the
focus on internal security is no longer the norm in the West as a
whole, and points to a critical area of difference between Turkey and
its Western partners.  It can also be the source of enduring U.S., and
especially European, ambivalence in relations with Ankara.  Ideally,
the processes of modernization and reform in Turkish society—sup-
ported by the opening of the European path—will close this impor-
tant gap between Turkey and the West in the coming decades.
Looking ahead, the key trends of nationalism, changing state and
private-sector roles, and the tension between modern and traditional
outlooks (a large part of the identity question) will be important
drivers of Turkey’s external role and Ankara’s relations with Western
allies.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
21
Chapter Three
TURKISH FOREIGN AND SECURITY POLICY:
NEW DIMENSIONS AND NEW CHALLENGES
F. Stephen Larrabee
Turkey’s international role and posture have been profoundly af-
fected by the end of the Cold War.  The collapse of communism in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union forced Turkey to redefine and
reshape its foreign policy in important ways.  Initially many Turks
feared that the end of the Cold War would diminish Turkey’s strate-
gic importance.  These fears, however, proved to be unfounded.
Turkey’s strategic importance has increased, not decreased, as a re-
sult of the end of the Cold War.
In the last decade, moreover, Turkey has become a more self-confi-
dent and assertive actor and has demonstrated a willingness to act
unilaterally if necessary.  The most striking example of this trend was
Turkey’s confrontation with Syria in October 1998 over Baghdad’s
support of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK).  But there are other
recent examples, including Ankara’s threat to use force to prevent
the deployment of the SS-300 missiles by the Greek Cypriot govern-
ment and its daring capture of PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan in Kenya
in February 1999.  Indeed, Öcalan’s capture has significantly con-
tributed to this new mood of self-confidence.
Turkish domestic politics have also been characterized by a more
vigorous nationalism lately.  The current coalition, comprising of
Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party (DLP) and the
right-wing Nationalist Action Party (MPH), reflects this new national-
ist orientation.  Both parties rode to power on a tide of rising na-
tionalism, fueled in part by the struggle against the PKK as well as

--- Sayfa 36 ---
22
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
Turkey’s perceived rejection by Europe.  As Alan Makovsky has
noted, it is this more assertive, more self-confident mood that both
Ecevit and MHP leader Devlet Bahceli exploited and that is increas-
ingly reflected in Turkish policy on a number of international issues.1
In short, the old paradigm that characterized Turkey’s relations with
the West during the Cold War is no longer valid.  Turkey’s foreign
policy interests are beginning to evolve in new and important ways.
This process of rethinking and redefinition of Turkish interests could
have significant consequences over the long run for Turkey’s foreign
policy orientation and, in particular, for its relations with the West.
THE RUSSIAN FACTOR
The new dynamics unleashed by the end of the Cold War have not
only expanded Turkey’s foreign policy horizons but have also led to
an important shift in Turkish security perceptions.  During the Cold
War the main threat to Turkish security came from the Soviet Union.
Today, by contrast, Turkey sees the main threat to its security from
Iraq and Syria (and to a lesser extent Iran).  Russia remains an impor-
tant residual concern but it does not represent the type of existential
threat that the Soviet Union did.
Still, Russia figures more prominently in Turkish security concerns
than it does in those of most NATO members.  The Ottoman Empire
fought 13 wars with czarist Russia, most of which it lost.  This has in-
stilled in Turks a healthy respect for Russian power and Russia’s
ability to bounce back, even if it is weak at the moment.  More fun-
damentally, Russian and Turkish political agendas clash, particularly
in Central Asia and the Caucasus (see below).  As a consequence,
Turkey is both more concerned about containing Russian power as
well as more eager to avoid antagonizing Russia than are most other
NATO allies.
Moreover, Turkish-Russian relations remain burdened by differences
over several specific issues:
______________

1See Alan Makovsky, “Turkey's Nationalist Moment,”
 The Washington Quarterly, Vol. 22, No. 4 (Autumn 1999), pp. 159–166.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
23
Cyprus
The Russian sale of S-300 missiles to the (Greek) Republic of Cyprus
badly strained relations between Ankara and Moscow and created a
major crisis in the Eastern Mediterranean.  While the crisis was later
defused when Cyprus agreed to deploy the missiles on Crete rather
than on the Cypriot mainland, Russia’s role in the crisis reinforced
Turkish concerns about Russia’s broader political ambitions in the
region.
The Kurdish Issue
Russia’s attitude toward the Kurdish insurrection has been ambiva-
lent at best.  While Moscow has refrained from directly stoking the
fires of Kurdish nationalism, it has allowed Kurdish nationalist
groups to openly agitate and hold meetings on Russian soil.2  In ad-
dition, it briefly gave sanctuary to PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan, who
is considered by the Turkish government to be a terrorist, after his
expulsion from Syria.  These actions have deepened Turkish suspi-
cions about Moscow’s policy goals while at the same time making
Turkey wary of antagonizing Russia, for fear that Moscow could step
up its support for Kurdish separatists.
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE)
Turkey has been concerned about the buildup of Russian forces in
the Southern Caucasus in violation of the CFE Treaty.  Under U.S.
pressure, Ankara agreed to the compromise worked out at the First
Review Conference in Vienna in May 1996, which gave Russia an
additional three years to comply with the flank limitations in the
treaty.  However, Ankara is likely to resist further efforts to reduce
these limits or eliminate them entirely, as Moscow wants.  This could
______________

2In November 1994, Moscow permitted the establishment of a Confederation of Kur-
dish Organizations of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).  At its opening
session, posters of PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan bedecked the Congress Hall and some
representatives openly called upon delegates to assist the PKK.  In October 1995, the
third session of the Kurdish “parliament in exile” convened in a building attached to
the Russian Duma, with several Duma deputies in attendance.  See Malik Mufti,
“Daring and Caution in Turkish Foreign Policy,” Middle East Journal, Vol. 52, No. 1
(Winter 1998), p. 38.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
24
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
put Turkey at odds with some of its Western allies, including the
United States, who may be more inclined to compromise in order to
achieve Russian cooperation on other issues, particularly the Strate-
gic Arms Reduction Talks (START).
Chechnya
Turkish sympathy for the Chechens has been a source of friction in
relations with Russia.  However, official Turkish policy toward
Chechnya has been cautious.  The Turkish government had been re-
luctant to openly support the Chechen cause because of its own
problems with Kurdish separatism.  Instead it has regarded Chech-
nya largely as a Russian “internal affair.”3  At the same time, Turkish
officials are worried that Russia’s effort to subdue the rebels in
Chechnya could be a prelude to an attempt by Russia to seek to bring
the whole of the Caucasus—including Georgia and Azerbaijan—un-
der its control.  Such an effort would bring Russia’s military presence
closer to Turkey’s border and undercut Turkish attempts to expand
its influence in the Caucasus.  The refugee outflow from Chechnya
has also caused difficulties for Turkey, which has been forced to ac-
cept thousands of Chechen refugees.
Differences over these issues have tended to exacerbate the broader
political rivalry and struggle for influence in the Caucasus and Cen-
tral Asia.  At the same time, they have made Turkey cautious about
provoking Russia.  Turkey does not want to see a strengthening of
Russian influence in the Caucasus, which is becoming an area of in-
creasing strategic importance for Turkey.  One of the main reasons
for Turkey’s initial lack of enthusiasm for NATO enlargement, for in-
stance, was Ankara’s fear that this would provoke Moscow to try to
expand its military presence in the Caucasus.
______________

3During his trip to Russia in late 1999, Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit referred to
Chechnya as a Russian “internal affair”—a statement that was widely criticized by
many Turks.  Moreover, Turkish criticism of Russia’s policy toward Chechnya at the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) summit in Istanbul in
November 1999 was much more muted than that of many other Western countries
who had far weaker interests in Chechnya.  See Stephen Kinzer, “Turkey Faces
Quandary on Relations by Friends,” New York Times, November 28, 1999.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
25
Turkey also has a strong economic stake in maintaining good rela-
tions with Moscow.  Russia is Turkey’s second largest trade partner
behind Germany and its main supplier of natural gas.  In addition, a
flourishing “suitcase trade” between Turkey and Russia exists.  While
this trade has declined recently, it accounts for an important part of
the unofficial Turkish economy.  Thus, Ankara has a strong economic
incentive to keep relations with Russia on an even keel.
At the same time, Turkey has sought to strengthen ties to other re-
gional actors around the Black Sea, particularly Ukraine.  Turkey and
Ukraine share a number of common interests: both countries are
concerned about Russia’s efforts to increase its influence in the Cau-
casus and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).  Eco-
nomic cooperation, especially in the energy sector, has recently been
intensified.  In June 1997, the two countries signed an agreement for
the construction of a pipeline between the port of Ceyhan on
Turkey’s Mediterranean coast and its Black Sea port of Samsun.  The
pipeline could help Ukraine reduce its dependence on Russian oil.
Military cooperation has also been stepped up.  During the visit of
then Turkish Prime Minister Yilmaz to Ukraine in February 1998, the
two countries agreed to upgrade their relationship and to increase
cooperation in the energy and security field.4  This evolving
“strategic partnership” between Turkey and Ukraine could become
an important geopolitical factor in the Black Sea area in the future.
But Turkey is likely to be careful not to let its cooperation with
Ukraine develop to the point that it becomes a major irritant in rela-
tions with Russia.
CENTRAL ASIA AND THE CAUCASUS
The end of the Cold War has also presented new opportunities and
options in Central Asia and the Caucasus.5  With the collapse of the
former Soviet Union, a whole new “Turkish world” has opened up
______________

4“Turkey and Ukraine Advancing Toward an Extensive Partnership,” Turkish Daily
News, February 17, 1998.
5For a comprehensive discussion, see Graham E. Fuller, Turkey Faces East:  New Ori-
entations Toward the Middle East and Old Soviet Union, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, R-
4234-AF/A, 1992.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
26
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
that was previously closed to Turkish policy.  While Turkey has been
relatively cautious about exploiting these possibilities, the reemer-
gence of Central Asia and the Caucasus has given a new geopolitical
dimension to Turkish policy that did not exist earlier.  It has also
prompted an internal debate in Turkey about Turkish national inter-
ests that could have important implications for Turkish policy over
the long run, especially if pro-Islamic or nationalist forces in Turkey
gain greater strength.6
At the same time, the energy issue has given Turkish interest in Cen-
tral Asia and the Caucasus a sharper focus.7  The Caspian region is a
major source of gas and oil that Turkey needs to meet its increasing
domestic energy requirements.  Ankara is particularly interested in
the construction of a pipeline to carry Caspian oil from Baku in Azer-
baijan to the port of Ceyhan on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast.  This
would not only help ensure Turkey’s growing domestic energy needs
but also increase its political influence in the region.
In addition to its strong support for the construction of the Baku-
Ceyhan pipeline, Ankara is also interested in the construction of a
gas pipeline between Turkmenistan and Turkey.  The line will pro-
vide the first viable export route out of Turkmenistan that circum-
vents Russia and will help to ensure Turkmenistan’s energy inde-
pendence as well as its viability as an independent state.  The Turk-
menistan-Turkey pipeline would parallel the Baku-Ceyhan oil
pipeline and could sideline alternative routes such as the Russian
“Blue Stream” project—dubbed “Blue Dream” by critics—to trans-
port natural gas to Turkey underneath the Black Sea.
The energy issue has given the old historical rivalry between Turkey
and Russia a sharper geopolitical—and economic—focus.  Increas-
ingly Russia has come to see Turkey as the major rival for influence in
Central Asia and the Caspian region.  In some ways the 19th century
“Great Game” is being replayed in a new geopolitical context, with oil
______________

6See Ola Tunander, “A New Ottoman Empire?” Security Dialogue, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp.
413–426.
7For a detailed discussion of the Caspian energy issue, see Rosemarie Forsythe, “The
Politics of Oil in the Caucasus and Central Asia,” Adelphi Paper, No. 300, London:  In-
ternational Institute for Strategic Studies, May 1996.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
27
and pipelines replacing the railroads as the main means of extending
political influence.8
In the initial period after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Turkey,
sparked by euphoric expectations that it could become the unofficial
leader of a Pan-Turkic community, sought to expand its ties to the
countries of Central Asia.9  Turkey opened cultural centers and Tur-
kic schools in most of the Central Asian states and provided training
and technical assistance for thousands of Central Asian students.
Ankara also expanded its television broadcasts in an effort to extend
its cultural influence in Central Asia.
However, Turkey’s effort to expand its ties in Central Asia has met
with mixed results.  The reasons for Turkey’s spotty record are varied:
•
First, Turkey overestimated the cultural and linguistic affinity
with the new independent states of Central Asia.
•
Second, Turkey’s own domestic problems—specifically, the
growth of Kurdish separatism and the challenge posed by the rise
of Islamic forces in Turkish politics—diverted Turkish attention
from the region.
•
Third, Turkey was preoccupied by other, more pressing security
concerns, including threats from Syria and Iraq; instability in the
Balkans; and, until recently, the deterioration of relations with
Greece over Cyprus and the Aegean.
•
Fourth, Turkey lacked the economic means to provide the type of
large-scale economic assistance and investment that the states in
the region need and want.
______________

8See Ariel Cohen, “The ‘New Great Game’:  Pipeline Politics in Eurasia,” Eurasian
Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1 (Spring 1996), pp. 2–15.  Also, Michael P. Croissant, “Oil and Rus-
sian Imperialism in the Transcaucasus,” ibid., pp. 16–25.  On the 19th-century struggle
for influence in Central Asia and the Caucasus, see in particular Peter Hopkirk, The
Great Game, New York:  Kodansha International, 1990.
9For a good discussion of Turkish policy in this early period, see Philip Robins,
“Between Sentiment and Self-Interest:  Turkey’s Policy Toward Azerbaijan and the
Central Asian States,” Middle East Journal, Vol. 47, No. 4 (Autumn 1993), pp. 593–610.
Also, Gareth Winrow, Turkey in Post-Soviet Central Asia, London:  Royal Institute of In-
ternational Affairs, 1995; and Richard Sokolsky and Tanya Charlick-Paley, NATO and
Caspian Security:  A Mission Too Far?, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, MR-1074, 1999, pp.
40–44.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
28
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
•
Fifth, Turkey’s cultural arrogance and pretensions to become the
leader of the Pan-Turkic movement in Central Asia offended
some Central Asian governments.  Having just emancipated
themselves from Soviet rule, these states were not about to ex-
change one form of domination for another.
These factors have dampened Turkey’s initial high expectations
about the prospects for a rapid expansion of Turkish influence in
Central Asia in the near future.  Turkey has by no means given up its
aspirations to play an important role in the region.  However, today
there is a more sober and realistic understanding of the difficulties
involved and the length of time that the process may take.
THE CAUCASUS
While Turkey’s relations with Central Asia have witnessed a slow-
down since the mid-1990s, Ankara has strengthened its position in
the Caucasus, which has emerged as a region of growing strategic
interest and importance for Turkey.  Relations with Georgia have in-
tensified, especially in the military field.  In March 1999, Turkey and
Georgia signed an agreement on military assistance and coopera-
tion.10  This military assistance, while limited, is part of a broader
effort by Georgia to strengthen its independence and ties to the West,
including NATO.
Turkey has also strengthened ties to Azerbaijan and strongly backed
Baku in its struggle with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh.  Turkey
has been especially keen to obtain Azerbaijan’s support for the con-
struction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline, which it regards as an impor-
tant vehicle for solving its growing energy needs in the coming
decade as well as expanding its political and economic influence in
the Caspian region.
Georgia and Azerbaijan both share Turkey’s concerns about Russia’s
hegemonic aspirations in the Caucasus.  With Turkish (and U.S.) as-
sistance, both countries have adopted an increasingly pro-Western
______________

10The five-year agreement envisages the construction in Georgia of military training
centers in Kodori and Gori and a shooting range outside Tbilisi.  See Jamestown Moni-
tor, Vol. V, No. 45, March 5, 1999.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
29
policy in the last several years and intensified their ties to NATO.
Georgian President Eduard Shevardnadze has predicted that Georgia
will be “knocking on NATO’S door” within five years,11 while in De-
cember 1999 Azerbaijan’s Foreign Minister Vilayet Guliev said that
Azerbaijan intended to apply for “aspirant status in NATO.”  Units
from Georgia and Azerbaijan are also participating in the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) as part of a Turkish battalion.
Turkey and Georgia also launched a joint initiative to create a “South
Caucasus Stability Pact.”  The proposal, which was made during
Turkish President Suleyman Demirel’s visit to Tbilisi in January 2000,
would include Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia as well as Turkey,
Russia (and possibly Iran), the United States, the European Union
(EU), and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).12  The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank
would be asked to underwrite reconstruction aid for the region.  The
initiative, however, would not include Chechnya and the Northern
Caucasus.
The pact is designed to increase Turkey’s profile in the region as well
as enhance Western involvement in the area.  By including other
Western powers as well as Russia, Turkey is, in effect, seeking to legit-
imize Western involvement in the area as well as implicitly asking
Russia to view the region as an area of international cooperation
rather than its own backyard.  The proposal has the support of Azer-
baijan as well as key Western governments, including the United
States.
However, Turkey’s ability to expand its influence in the Caucasus
and Caspian region faces important constraints.  The first is Russia’s
political ambitions and presence in the region.  Russia has an exten-
sive military presence in Armenia and also has access to four bases in
Georgia.  While Russia agreed at the OSCE summit in Istanbul
(November 18–19, 1999) to close the bases at Vaziani and Gudauta by
2001, it still retains two other bases at Batumi and Akhalkati.  More-
over, the conflict in Chechnya has increased Georgia’s strategic im-
portance in Russian eyes.
______________

11See Andrew Jack and David Stern, “Georgia Plans to Seek NATO Membership,” Fi-
nancial Times, October 25, 1999.
12Jamestown Monitor, Vol. VI, No. 12, January 18, 2000.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
30
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
In addition, Azerbaijan’s political future remains uncertain.  Presi-
dent Heydar Aliev has been highly successful in playing different in-
ternal factions in Azerbaijan off one another and in blocking
Moscow’s efforts to gain a military foothold in Azerbaijan.  However,
Aliev is 77 and in poor health.  Turkish officials worry that his depar-
ture could spark an internal struggle for power and weaken Azerbai-
jan’s current pro-Western orientation.
Turkey’s poor relations with Armenia pose a third obstacle to an ex-
pansion of Turkey’s influence in the Caucasus.  Recently there have
been small signs of a thaw in relations.  But any far-reaching break-
through in relations is only likely after a settlement of the Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict.  Such a settlement would allow Armenia to reduce
its dependence on Russia and open up prospects for improving
Turkish-Armenian relations.
Turkey’s ability to achieve its broader objectives in the Caucasus and
Caspian region will also heavily depend on the fate of the Baku-Cey-
han pipeline.  Turkey has pinned its hopes for playing a major politi-
cal role in the Caucasus and Central Asia on the construction of the
pipeline, which it sees as the linchpin of its Central Asian and
Caspian strategy.  However, the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline has been
plagued by delays and financing problems and it is unclear whether
it will ever be built.  Because the route is more expensive than other
routes, Turkey has had problems attracting commercial backing for
the project.
Turkey’s campaign to obtain the support of Western oil companies
for the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline received an impor-
tant boost in November 1999 when BP-Amoco issued a statement
supporting the pipeline after previously expressing doubts about its
viability.13  A framework agreement was signed by Turkey, Georgia,
Azerbaijan, and Kazakhstan at the OSCE summit in Istanbul.14  The
inclusion of Kazakhstan considerably boosts the pipeline’s economic
viability.  But Western oil companies remain concerned about the
______________

13Leyla Boulton, “Deal Close on Financing Baku-Ceyhan Pipeline,” Financial Times,
October 22, 1999.  Also Leyla Boulton, “Turkey and BP-AMOCO Step up Talks,” ibid.,
October 26, 1999.
14Stephen Kinzer, “4 Nations in Caspian Sign Oil Pipeline Accord that Favors the
West,” New York Times, November 19, 1999.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
31
commercial viability of the project.15  To allay these concerns Turkey
has agreed to guarantee any cost overruns above $1.4 billion for its
part of the pipeline.  However, the oil companies are likely to want to
see additional alternative financing from other organizations such as
the World Bank before they agree to take part.
In addition, the Baku-Ceyhan project could be affected by political
changes in the Middle East.  The United States has lobbied hard to
exclude Iran from consideration as a transit route for Caspian oil.
However, a thaw in U.S.-Iranian relations could open up prospects
for shipping Caspian oil through Iran, a route that is favored by many
Western companies because it would be cheaper.  This would signifi-
cantly reduce the interest of Western investors in the Baku-Ceyhan
route.
Construction of a trans-Balkan pipeline could also affect prospects
for the Baku-Ceyhan route.  In June 1999, the U.S. Trade and Devel-
opment Agency (TDA) announced a grant to Bulgaria to carry out a
feasibility study for a pipeline across the Balkans.  Under this
scheme, Caspian oil would be shipped by tanker from the ports of
Supsa in Georgia and Novorossiysk in Russia across the Black Sea to
Bulgaria and then would be transported by pipeline across Macedo-
nia and Albania.  This route would be much cheaper than the Baku-
Ceyhan route.16
THE MIDDLE EAST
Since the end of the Cold War, Turkey has also become a more im-
portant regional actor in the Middle East.  The Gulf War was an im-
portant turning point in Turkey’s involvement in the Middle East.
Against the advice of most of his advisors, President Özal squarely
sided with the United States in the war, allowing the United States to
fly sorties against Iraq from Turkish bases.  Turkey also shut down
the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline as part of the effort to impose sanc-
tions against Iraq.
______________

15Jane Perlez, “U.S. Deal on the Caspian Still Faces Problems with the Bottom Line,”
New York Times, November 21, 1999.
16The cost for the Balkan route is estimated to be between $800 million and $1 billion,
whereas cost estimates for Baku-Ceyhan range from $2.4 billion to $4 billion.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
32
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
Özal’s action was an important departure from Turkey’s traditional
policy of avoiding deep involvement in Middle Eastern affairs and
provoked strong opposition, especially from the Turkish military.17
At the same time, it initiated a new period of greater activism in
Turkish policy toward the Middle East, which has intensified visibly
since the mid-1990s.  This more active policy contrasts markedly
with the more passive approach that characterized Turkish policy
before the Gulf War.
Iraq poses a difficult dilemma for Turkey.  Turkish officials have no
love for Saddam Hussein and they consider him to be a brutal dicta-
tor.  At the same time, they have strong reservations about the wis-
dom of U.S. policy.  They fear that U.S. efforts to topple Saddam
could destabilize Iraq and lead to the creation of an independent
Kurdish state on Turkey’s border.  They have looked askance, in par-
ticular, at U.S. efforts to promote a reconciliation between the war-
ring Kurdish factions in northern Iraq.
Economic interests heavily influence Turkish policy toward Iraq.
Before the imposition of UN sanctions, Iraq was Turkey’s third
largest trade partner and its largest oil supplier.  Turkey would like to
see this trade restored.  Thus, Ankara favors a lifting of the UN sanc-
tions against Iraq and an end to Iraq’s economic isolation.  Indeed,
on many issues related to Iraq (and Iran), Turkish policy is much
closer to European policy than it is to U.S. policy.
Turkey’s relations with Syria have been strained by several issues:
Syrian claims on the province of Hatay, which was ceded to Turkey
by the colonial French authorities in Syria in 1939; Syrian demands
for a more equitable sharing of the water resources of the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers; and especially Syria’s support for the PKK, which
has led to tensions in relations between Ankara and Baghdad.  One of
the prime motivations behind Turkey’s growing defense ties with Is-
rael (see below) has been Turkey’s desire to put pressure on Syria to
halt its support of the PKK.
The tie to Israel has strengthened Turkey’s hand diplomatically and
was instrumental in Ankara’s decision to force a showdown with
______________

17The Turkish Chief of Staff, Necip Torumtay, resigned in protest over Özal's policy.
So did Foreign Minister Ali Bozer.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
33
Syria in the fall of 1998.  In October 1998, frustrated by the lack of
success of its repeated diplomatic efforts to get Syria to cease its sup-
port for the PKK, Turkey threatened to take military action against
Syria if it did not halt its support for the Kurdish rebels.18  Faced with
the prospect of possible Turkish military action and military defeat,
Syria backed down.  Under an agreement signed in the Turkish city
of Adana on October 20, 1998, the Syrian government agreed to cease
all support for the PKK; expel PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan from Syria
where he had taken refuge in the early 1980s; and expand coopera-
tion with Turkey against the PKK.
Since then, Turkish-Syrian relations have undergone a visible thaw.
PKK attacks from Syria have virtually ceased and a rudimentary
monitoring system has been set up.  It would be premature, however,
to conclude that Turkish-Syrian relations have been permanently
normalized.  Syria appears to be trying to turn its momentary defeat
into victory by insisting on a reciprocal gesture from Turkey on the
water issue to normalize relations between the two countries.  More-
over, it remains to be seen whether Syria will fully comply with the
provisions of the Adana agreement, especially those regarding in-
spections.
Turkish relations with Iran have witnessed ups and downs over the
last decade.  Turkish policymakers, especially the Turkish military,
remain wary of Iran because of the fundamentalist character of the
current Iranian regime and its support for international terrorism.
The Turkish military’s crackdown against Islamic fundamentalism,
moreover, has increased its sensitivity about Iran’s influence and in-
volvement in Turkish domestic politics.  However, Turkey needs
Iran’s cooperation to curb the activities of the Kurdish guerrillas in
Southeast Turkey, who often use Iranian territory as a sanctuary.
Thus, Turkey has been careful not to let differences over other issues
inflame its relations with Iran too badly.
Turkey’s growing energy needs also give Ankara a strong incentive to
maintain good economic ties to Iran, which is second only to Russia
in the world’s largest gas reserves.  Turkey’s annual gas needs of 8
______________

18For a detailed discussion of the October 1998 crisis, see Mahmut Bali Aykan, “The
Turkish-Syrian Crisis of October 1998: A Turkish View,” Middle East Policy, Vol. VI, No.
4 (June 1999), pp. 174–191.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
34
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
million cubic meters are expected to increase to 30 billion cubic me-
ters by the year 2005 and to reach 40 billion cubic meters by 2010.19
Hence, for Turkey, increasing ties to Iran in the energy field makes
good economic sense.
Relations have been troubled, however, by the delay in completing a
gas pipeline for delivering Iranian natural gas.  Tehran has com-
pleted its part of the pipeline, but Turkey’s portion, which was due to
be completed last year, remains unfinished.  Turkish officials have
said it will not be completed until 2001.  Part of the reason for the
delay is related to Turkey’s economic problems caused by the August
1999 earthquake.  But Ankara also appears to be going slow in
deference to U.S. opposition to the pipeline, which Washington fears
will strengthen Iran economically.
In addition, Turkey and Iran remain competitors for influence in the
Caucasus and Central Asia.  So far Turkey has had the upper hand
because Iran has been isolated and preoccupied with its own internal
problems.  But a further thaw in U.S.-Iranian relations could open up
prospects for Caspian oil to be transported via Iran and make Tehran
a much more serious competitor for influence in Central Asia and the
Caspian region.
The most important example of Turkey’s new activism in the Middle
East, however, has been its growing defense relationship with Israel.
This effort has been highlighted by the signing of two military coop-
eration agreements with Tel Aviv in February and August 1996.  The
two agreements provide for joint air and naval exercises, allow access
to port facilities, and permit the Israeli air force to conduct training
exercises using Turkish airspace.  They also call for increased ex-
changes of intelligence and stepped-up technological cooperation.
Visits by high-level military officials have also increased.
The defense cooperation with Israel is seen by many Turks
(especially the Turkish military) as a means of putting pressure on
Syria and also of acquiring advanced military technology that Turkey
might otherwise have trouble obtaining from Europe and the United
States because of its human rights record and policy toward Cyprus.
Some Turks also hope that the cooperation will enable Turkey to ex-
______________

19See Cenk Bila, “Trade over Politics,” Turkish Probe, November 8, 1996.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
35
ploit the political clout of the Israeli lobby in Washington and
counter the influence of the Greek and Armenian lobbies on Capitol
Hill.
Turkish-Israeli defense cooperation has added an important new
factor to the Middle East equation and given Turkey additional lever-
age in its relations with Syria.  However, Turkey remains worried that
the current Israeli-Syrian peace talks could adversely affect its inter-
ests.20  Turkey has three concerns in particular: (1) that any peace
deal not lead to a redeployment of Syrian troops along the Turkish-
Syrian border; (2) that the United States retain Syria on its list of
countries that sponsor state terrorism unless Syria halts its support
for the PKK; and (3) that the peace negotiations not prejudice
Turkey’s negotiations with Syria over water.21  Turkish officials are
also concerned that a Middle East settlement could lead to a
diminution of Israel’s interest in Turkey.  However, this seems un-
likely to happen.  The defense cooperation between Ankara and Is-
rael has become too important for Israel to easily give it up.
Turkey has also quietly strengthened defense ties with Jordan.
Turkey has had a military cooperation agreement with Jordan similar
to the one with Israel since 1984.  However, cooperation has intensi-
fied since the mid-1990s.  In late 1996, Turkey and Jordan agreed to
hold joint exercises and conduct bilateral training for their pilots in
winter and desert conditions.  Turkey also agreed to help Jordan
strengthen its defense industries.22  While this military cooperation
remains relatively low-key, it has worried some Arab governments
who fear that Jordan is being pulled into a strategic alliance with
Turkey and Israel.
These developments highlight the degree to which Turkey has re-
cently begun to play a more active—and assertive—role in the Mid-
dle East lately.  However, there are important limits to Turkey’s abil-
ity to expand its influence in the Middle East.  First, Turkey is re-
______________

20Burak Ege Begdil and Umit Enginsoy, “Turkey Uneasy with Israeli-Syrian Talks,” De-
fense News, January 10, 2000.  See also Alan Makovsky, “Syrian-Israeli Negotiations
with Turkey,” Peacewatch, December 17, 1999.
21See Haran Kazaz, “Water Talks Get Muddy,” Turkish Daily News, January 15, 2000.
22Lale Sariibrahimoglu, “Turkey, Jordan Unlock Pilot Training Exchange,” Jane's De-
fense Weekly, November 20, 1996.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
36
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
garded with considerable distrust in the Arab world because of its
imperial past.  In addition, Turkey’s strong attachment to secularism
and its close ties to Washington are viewed with suspicion by many
Arab countries.23  Finally, the increasing strategic cooperation with
Israel acts as an important obstacle to any far-reaching rapproche-
ment with the Arab world.
THE BALKANS
Turkey has also pursued a more active policy in the Balkans since
1989.  Historically Turkey has had a strong interest in the Balkans.
From the 14th century until the end of the 19th century, the Ottoman
Empire dominated the Balkan peninsula.24  Gradually, however, the
Ottomans were driven out of the Balkans.  Greece was liberated from
Ottoman rule in 1832.  Romania and Bulgaria became independent
states in 1878.  In addition, Bosnia-Herzegovina was put under Aus-
tro-Hungarian administration in 1878 and formally annexed by Aus-
tria-Hungary in 1908.  Albania and Macedonia were ceded in 1912 as
a result of the First Balkan War.
With the establishment of the Turkish Republic in 1923, Turkey ef-
fectively abandoned its presence in the Balkans.  While Turkey par-
ticipated in four Balkan conferences in the interwar period, the main
priority was the internal transformation of the new Turkish state.
After World War II, Turkey’s main foreign policy emphasis was on
strengthening ties to the West, especially NATO and the United
States.  While Turkey did try to improve bilateral ties with some
Balkan countries, on the whole the Balkans remained of secondary
importance.
______________

23The limits of Islamic solidarity were well illustrated by the ill-fated trip to Libya by
then Turkish Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan, the head of the Islamic Party Refah,
in October 1996.  Libyan leader Muammar-Qaddafi stunned Erbakan by unleashing a
fierce anti-Turkish tirade, condemning Turkey for its ties to Israel and NATO and
calling for an independent Kurdish state.  See Stephen Kinzer, “Tirade by Qaddafi
Stuns Turkey’s Premier,” New York Times, October 9, 1996.
24For a good discussion of the impact of Ottoman rule on the Balkans, see Maria
Todorova, “The Ottoman Legacy in the Balkans,” in L. Carl Brown, Imperial Legacy,
The Ottoman Imprint on the Balkans and Middle East, New York:  Columbia University
Press, 1996, pp. 45–47.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
37
Since the end of the Cold War, however, the Balkans have reemerged
as an important focal point of Turkish foreign policy.  Ties with Al-
bania have been strengthened, especially in the military sphere.  In
July 1992, the two countries signed an agreement on military cooper-
ation.  Under the agreement, Turkey agreed to help modernize the
Albanian army as well as help train Albanian officers.25
Ties with Macedonia have also been strengthened.  Turkey was the
first country after Bulgaria to recognize the new Macedonian state.
Turkey is also helping to modernize Macedonia’s armed forces.  In
July 1995, the two countries signed a military cooperation agreement
providing for the exchange and training of military experts and joint
military exercises.  Turkey also agreed to give Macedonia 20 of its
U.S.-made F-5s as part of its effort to assist the Macedonian army.26
The most far-reaching improvement, however, has occurred in rela-
tions with Bulgaria.  During the Cold War, relations between Ankara
and Sofia were marked by considerable hostility, in particular be-
cause of Bulgaria’s mistreatment of the Turkish minority, which con-
stitutes nearly 10 percent of the Bulgarian population.  Relations de-
teriorated dramatically in 1989 when Bulgaria forced nearly 300,000
ethnic Turks to emigrate and confiscated their property.
However, relations have improved significantly since the collapse of
the communist regime in Sofia in November 1989.  The rights and
property of the Turkish minority have been restored and more than
half of the 320,000 ethnic Turks expelled in 1989 have returned to
Bulgaria.  In addition, several agreements on confidence-building
measures have been signed which have helped to reduce threat per-
ceptions and contributed to better mutual understanding.  Indeed,
Turkish-Bulgarian relations today are the best they have been since
before World War II.
Turkey’s more active policy in the Balkans initially caused some con-
cern in Athens, which feared that Turkey was trying to create a
______________

25See Louis Zanga, “Albania and Turkey Forge Closer Ties,” RFE/RL Research Report,
March 12, 1993, pp. 30–33.
26Umit Enginsoy, “Turkey to Give F-5s to Macedonia,” Defense News, July 13, 1998.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
38
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
“Muslim arc” on Greece’s Northern border.27  However, Turkey’s
policy in the Balkans has actually been relatively cautious.  Turkey
has not tried to “play the Muslim card,” as some feared it might be
tempted to do.  Nor has it shown any inclination to take unilateral
military action in the region.  On the contrary, Turkey has gone out of
its way to demonstrate its credentials as a good NATO ally.  It partici-
pated in military operations in Bosnia and in both the Implementa-
tion Force (IFOR) and Stabilization Force (SFOR).  It also contributed
nearly one-tenth of the troops for Operation Alba (the Italian-led
peacekeeping effort in Albania) and provided bases and aircraft for
Operation Allied Force in Kosovo.
Turkey has also taken the lead in the establishment of a multina-
tional peacekeeping force in the Balkans (the Southeast European
Brigade, or SEEBRIG).  The multinational force—comprising units
from Turkey, Greece, Italy, Romania, Bulgaria, Macedonia, and Al-
bania—has its headquarters in Plovdiv, Bulgaria.  While it may take
some time for the force to become militarily effective, the multilat-
eral cooperation can help to promote greater regional trust and co-
operation.  Indeed, over the long term this may prove to be its most
important function.
In short, while Turkey has pursued an active policy in the Balkans,
this policy has remained very much within the Western mainstream.
This has been true in Kosovo as well.  Despite its strong historical,
religious, and cultural ties to Albania, Turkey’s approach to Kosovo
has been very much in line with Western policy.  Like other NATO
members, Ankara favors maintaining Yugoslavia’s territorial integrity
and supports increased political autonomy—but not indepen-
dence—for Kosovo, in part out of fear of setting a precedent on the
Kurdish issue.
Turkey has a special interest in Kosovo because of the existence of a
sizable Turkish minority there (about 30,000 to 40,000, mostly lo-
cated around Prizren).  The Turkish minority has appealed to Ankara
for support in its struggle to maintain its cultural identity and have its
own schools.  However, these appeals present a dilemma for the gov-
ernment.  The Turkish government cannot demand rights for the
______________

27See Yannis Valinakis, Greece’s Balkan Policy and the “Macedonian Issue,”
Ebenhausen:  Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, SWIP-2746, April 1992.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
39
Turkish minority in Kosovo that it is unwilling to grant the Kurds in
Turkey.  Thus, Turkey is likely to avoid making the rights of the mi-
nority a high-profile issue in its Balkan policy.
RELATIONS WITH EUROPE
While Turkey’s strategic horizons in other areas have broadened, its
relations with Europe have become more difficult over the last
decade.  During the Cold War, Turkey was regarded as an important
part of the Western security system.  As a member of NATO, it served
as a critical bulwark against any possible Soviet invasion of Europe,
tying down some 24 Soviet divisions.  Turkey’s NATO membership
reinforced Turkey’s Western identification and accelerated the gen-
eral process of Westernization of Turkish society that began in the
19th century under the Ottomans.
Turkey saw relations with the European Community (EC) as a natural
complement to its relations with NATO.  As a result of the 1963
Ankara agreement, Turkey became an associate member of the EC,
with the expectation that someday it would eventually become a full
member of the EC.  Turkey’s ties to the EC were enhanced in 1970 by
the Additional Protocol, which foresaw the establishment of a Cus-
toms Union between Turkey and the EC.  Relations with the EC,
however, were always seen by Turkey in a broader political context—
as part of the wider effort to Westernize Turkish society and com-
plete the Atatürk revolution.
However, the end of the Cold War significantly changed the context
for Turkish membership.  Prior to the collapse of the Wall, Turkey’s
problems with the EC were primarily economic.  Afterward, they
broadened as the EC (later EU) began to put greater emphasis on po-
litical, social, and cultural factors.  As Gulnur Aybet has noted, “Not
only the parameters of European security but also those of European
culture were being redefined, as the division of Europe ceased to ex-
ist and Europe—east and west—was finding new grounds for bond-
ing in historical, cultural, and religious terms.”28
______________

28Gulnur Aybet, “Turkey and European Institutions,” The International Spectator, Vol.
XXXIV, No. 1 (January/March 1999), p. 107.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
40
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
The EU’s redefinition since 1989 has tended to highlight Turkey’s
distinctiveness.  Many Europeans have never been entirely con-
vinced that Turkey is really a part of Europe.  During the Cold War
these concerns about Turkey’s “Europeanness” were largely subor-
dinated to broader strategic considerations.  But with the end of the
Cold War and the effort to create a closer political and cultural union,
these other social and cultural concerns have come more promi-
nently to the fore.  As Dutch Foreign Minister, Hans Van Mierlo,
bluntly put it in early 1997: “There is a problem of a large Muslim
state.  Do we want that in Europe?  It is an unspoken question.”29
Turkey’s troubled relations with Greece and its human rights record
have also posed obstacles to its candidacy for EU membership.  But
Greece often provided a convenient excuse for other members to
camouflage their own deep concerns about Turkey’s eligibility for
membership.  As long as Greece vehemently opposed Turkish mem-
bership, they could hide behind Greece and let Greece take the brunt
of Turkish anger and indignation.
The EU’s failure to include Turkey on the list of potential candidates
at the Luxembourg summit in December 1997 caused Ankara to
freeze its relations with the EU and led to a sharp deterioration of
Turkish-EU relations.  However, since early 1999 relations have
slowly improved.  At its summit in Helsinki in December 1999, the
EU officially invited Turkey to become a candidate member, thus ful-
filling one of Ankara’s most important foreign policy goals.
Two factors, in particular, contributed to the shift in the EU’s posi-
tion.  The first was the change in government in Germany.  The Kohl
government had been one of the main opponents of Turkey’s candi-
dacy for EU membership.  However, the SPD-Green coalition under
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder adopted a more flexible and forward-
leaning approach toward Turkey’s candidacy.
The second important factor was a shift in the Greek position.  In
early September, Greece dropped its long-standing veto against EU
financial assistance to Turkey and softened its objections to Turkey’s
______________

29Quoted in Stephen Kinzer, “Turkey Finds European Door Slow to Open,” New York
Times, February 23, 1997.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
41
candidacy for membership.30  The more flexible Greek position has
been part of a broader shift in Greek policy toward Turkey (see be-
low) and has helped to give the recent Greek-Turkish rapprochement
greater impetus.
The EU’s acceptance of Turkey’s candidacy by no means eliminates
all Turkey’s problems with the EU.  Negotiations on membership will
not be opened until Turkey has met the Copenhagen criteria—in-
cluding an improvement in its human rights performance—which
could take quite a long time.  However, the EU’s decision removes an
important political-psychological obstacle and puts Turkey’s rela-
tions with the EU on a new, more positive footing.  This could make
some of the technical issues related to membership easier to resolve.
The decision also weakens the hand of the Islamists, who have con-
sistently argued that the rejection of Turkey’s candidacy proved that
Turkey’s membership hopes were an illusion and that the country’s
salvation lay in closer ties to the Islamic world.  Finally, the decision
increases the prospects for reconciliation between Greece and
Turkey.  Greece’s opposition to Turkey’s EU candidacy was an im-
portant irritant in bilateral relations.  With this obstacle removed, the
chances for a broader improvement in Greek-Turkish relations are
increased.  An improvement in Greek-Turkish bilateral relations
could also have a positive impact on the prospects for a Cyprus set-
tlement over the long run.
NATO AND ESDI
At the same time, the European effort to create a distinct European
Security and Defense Identity (ESDI) has raised new problems for
Turkey.  ESDI is problematic from Turkey’s point of view because
Turkey is not a member of the EU.  Thus it is not involved in EU de-
cisions that have a direct bearing on the security and defense dimen-
sions of the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and
the role of the West European Union (WEU).  This problem could
become more acute if the WEU is folded into the EU, as currently
planned.  If the functions of the WEU Council—in which Turkey
______________

30Peter Norbert and Leyla Boulton, “Greece Supports EU and Package for Turkey,” Fi-
nancial Times, September 6, 1999.  Also, “In a Shift, Greece Backs Turkey as EU Mem-
ber,” International Herald Tribune, September 6, 1999.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
42
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
participates as an associate member—are taken over by the EU
Council, Turkey fears it could find itself marginalized from any
defense-related EU decisions.
These considerations have reinforced the importance of NATO in
Turkish eyes.  NATO provides the main multilateral vehicle for
achieving Turkish security interests.  Ankara thus opposes any weak-
ening of NATO’s role or effort to transfer greater planning and deci-
sionmaking over defense matters to the EU.  In addition, Turkey has
insisted that non–EU allies must be involved in the planning and de-
cisionmaking if the EU is going to draw on NATO assets in a crisis.
At the same time, NATO’s own evolution could create new problems
in Ankara’s relations with the Alliance.  Turkey is the only country in
the Alliance that faces a serious threat to its borders (from Iraq and
Syria).  Ankara, thus, does not want to see a dilution of the Alliance’s
traditional emphasis on collective defense (Article V) and has been
uncomfortable with the Alliance’s emphasis on “new missions” and
non–Article V contingencies.
Initially, Turkey also had reservations about NATO enlargement,
fearing that it would antagonize Russia and possibly provoke Russia
to strengthen its military presence in the Caucasus.31  While in the
end Turkey went along with the decision to expand the Alliance to
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, Ankara would like to see a
stronger focus on the Balkans in the future and is likely to push hard
for the inclusion of Bulgaria and Romania in any second round of
enlargement.
Turkey’s growing engagement in the Middle East could also create
problems for Turkey’s relations with NATO.  Many allies strongly op-
pose broadening of NATO’s scope for action and want the Alliance to
focus on security threats to the Euro-Atlantic area.  Some allies might
balk at aiding Turkey if it gets into a skirmish with one of its Middle
Eastern neighbors, such as Iraq or Syria.32  However, a failure of
______________

31For a good discussion of Turkish concerns, see Ali L. Karaosmanoglu, “NATO En-
largement and the South,” Security Dialogue, Vol. 30, No. 2 (June 1999), pp. 213–224.
32Germany’s hesitant response to Turkey’s request for Allied Mobile Force-Air rein-
forcements during the Gulf crisis highlights this problem.  To many Germans, deter-
ring a possible attack by Iraq against Turkey was not what NATO was all about.  To
many Turks, on the other hand, Germany's ambivalent response called into question

--- Sayfa 57 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
43
NATO to come to Turkey’s aid in such a case could create a crisis in
Turkey’s relations with NATO and could even prompt Turkey to
withdraw from the Alliance altogether.
GREECE AND CYPRUS
The Greek-Turkish dispute has been a major source of instability in
the Eastern Mediterranean and a major concern for Greece and
Turkey’s NATO allies.  In January 1996, the two countries nearly went
to war over the islet of Imia/Kardak.33  Only last-minute, high-level
U.S. intervention prevented a possible military clash between the
two countries.  Moreover, in the wake of the incident, the air forces of
both sides continued to engage in mock dogfights, increasing the risk
that any inadvertent accident or incident could spiral out of control
and lead to armed conflict.34
Recently, however, Greek-Turkish relations have begun to warm.  In
July 1999, the two countries opened a dialogue on nonsensitive is-
sues such as trade, the environment, and tourism.  This dialogue was
given greater impetus by the earthquake in Turkey on August 19 and
the one in September in Athens, which provoked an outburst of
popular sympathy in both countries.  This was followed by Greece’s
support for Turkey’s EU candidacy at the Helsinki summit in De-
cember 1999 and a visit to Ankara by Greek Prime Minister George
Papandreou in January 2000—the first visit by a Greek foreign minis-
ter to Turkey in nearly 40 years.
To date the dialogue has been limited to “low politics”—i.e., non-
controversial items such as trade and tourism.  However, the success
of these talks could lead to a broader dialogue on more sensitive is-
_____________________________________________________________

the validity of Article V (collective defense) of the Washington treaty and raised
broader doubts about the utility of NATO membership.  See Ian O. Lesser, Bridge or
Barrier:  Turkey and the West After the Cold War, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, R-4204-
AF/A, 1992, pp. 14–15.
33Imia is the Greek name for the islet; Kardak is the Turkish name.
34In October 1997, Greece put its forces on alert after two Turkish planes violated
Greek Cypriot airspace and tangled with two Greek fighter bombers.  A few weeks
later, Greek-Turkish warships collided during a Turkish naval exercise in the Aegean.
In both cases, there were no serious injuries and a major confrontation was avoided,
but the incidents underscored the danger of an inadvertent incident spiraling out of
control and possibly leading to armed conflict between the two countries.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
44
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
sues in the Aegean.  Turkey has indicated that it would be willing to
bring the continental shelf issue to the International Court of Justice
in The Hague, a long-standing Greek demand.  This is an important
shift in Turkey’s policy and could lay the basis for an eventual reso-
lution of the continental shelf issue.
Cyprus remains a major irritant in relations.  However, the EU’s ac-
ceptance of Turkey’s candidacy for EU membership, as well as the
recent improvement in Greek-Turkish relations, add a new dynamic
to the Cyprus equation and could eventually contribute to a settle-
ment of the issue.  Turkey now has a greater incentive for trying to
achieve a settlement on Cyprus.  A Cyprus settlement would not only
give new impetus to the recent thaw in Greek-Turkish relations, but
would also remove an important obstacle to Turkey’s eventual
membership in the EU.
However, a major breakthrough on the Cyprus issue seems unlikely
in the near future.  Within the Turkish Cypriot community, the par-
ties that favor a more conciliatory approach to the Cyprus issue have
lost support and are today weaker than they were several years ago.
Nor is there any sign that Ankara is ready to put serious pressure on
Rauf Denktash, the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community, to take
a more conciliatory position.  Denktash did agree to resume the UN-
sponsored “proximity talks” in December 1999.35  But there is little
indication that he is about to drop his insistence that the Turkish Re-
public of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) be recognized as a coequal inde-
pendent state—a nonstarter as far as the Greek Cypriots are con-
cerned.
It is doubtful, moreover, whether either Turkey or the Turkish Cypri-
ots would ever agree to the demilitarization of the island, as the
Greek Cypriots have proposed.  The Turkish military presence is seen
by both Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots as a guarantee of the secu-
rity of the Turkish Cypriot community.  As noted earlier, Turkey in-
creasingly sees this presence as integrally linked to its own security.36
______________

35The proximity talks are designed to lay the groundwork for the resumption of inter-
communal talks, which were broken off in August 1997.
36Prime Minister Ecevit underscored this point in his speech celebrating the 25th
Anniversary of the Turkish intervention in July 1999: “As much as Turkey is the guar-

--- Sayfa 59 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
45
It compensates for Turkey’s weakness vis-à-vis Greece in the Aegean.
Hence, Ankara is likely to oppose any settlement that would lead to a
significant reduction of this presence.
Several factors, however, could provide an incentive for progress
over the medium term.  A Greek-Turkish rapprochement that re-
solved the outstanding differences over the Aegean, for instance,
could provide the much-needed impetus for the two countries to ad-
dress the Cyprus problem.  Moreover, if a real reconciliation with
Greece were to occur, Turkey might feel less of a strategic imperative
to retain a large military presence on Cyprus.
The EU’s approach to Cyprus could also have an important influence
on an eventual settlement.  At the Helsinki summit in December
1999, the EU indicated that a Cyprus settlement would not be a pre-
condition for the admission of the (Greek) Republic of Cyprus.  Thus
if a settlement of the Cyprus issue has not been achieved by the time
of the completion of accession negotiations with the Greek Cypriot
government, the EU might admit the Greek part of Cyprus.  From the
Turkish point of view, this would be highly disadvantageous, since
Greek Cypriot membership would add another potential veto against
Turkish accession to the EU.  To avoid this, Turkey might be willing
to make concessions that would facilitate a settlement.
THE AMERICAN CONNECTION
Close ties to the United States have always been important for
Turkey.  During the Cold War, the United States was seen as the main
guarantor of Turkish security.  While U.S.-Turkish relations have
evolved substantially since then,37 close ties to the United States re-
main an important cornerstone of Turkey’s foreign policy.
However, the focus of the U.S.-Turkish relationship has shifted since
the end of the Cold War.  During the Cold War, the cornerstone of
_____________________________________________________________

antee of KKTC security, the KKTC is the guarantee of Turkish security.”  See “Turkey
and KKTC Not Moving an Inch from Cyprus Policy,” Turkish Probe, July 25, 1999.
37For a good discussion of these changes, see George S. Harris, Troubled Alliance:
Turkish-American Problems in Historical Perspective 1945–1971, Washington, DC:
AEI-Hoover Policy Studies, 1972.  For a more recent discussion, see Lesser, Bridge or
Barrier:  Turkey and the West After the Cold War.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
46
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
Turkish-American security was the need to deter a potential threat
from the Soviet Union.  Today, by contrast, Turkish-American secu-
rity cooperation is focused primarily on the Middle East, the Caspian
region, and the Balkans.  This shift in focus has given Turkish-Ameri-
can relations an important new strategic dimension that did not exist
during the Cold War.
At the same time, the deterioration of Turkey’s ties with Europe has
increased the importance of strong ties to the United States.  The
United States is seen by Turks as being more supportive of Turkey’s
security concerns than Europe.  The United States has strongly
backed Turkey’s candidacy for EU membership and has lent strong
political support to Ankara’s effort to build the Baku-Ceyhan
pipeline.  Washington has also been more supportive of Turkey’s
struggle against the PKK than has Europe, which has generally been
critical of Turkey’s handling of the Kurdish issue.
This support has been greatly appreciated in Ankara and contributed
to a deepening of Turkish-U.S. ties in recent years.  Cooperation has
been particularly intense in the Caspian Basin.  Both countries share
a common interest in promoting the independence and sovereignty
of the states in the Caspian area, limiting Moscow’s influence there,
and developing the region’s energy resources.  As noted, the United
States has strongly backed Turkey’s plans for the construction of the
Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and worked closely behind the scenes to get
the Azerbaijan government and Western oil companies to support
the Baku-Ceyhan project.
Ankara and Washington have also closely cooperated in the Balkans.
Turkey played a key role in training the Muslim army in Bosnia under
the U.S.-led “train and equip” program.  Ankara also put several of its
bases at the disposal of the United States and NATO during the
Kosovo conflict.  These moves have greatly contributed to strength-
ening the U.S.-Turkish security relationship and enhancing Turkey’s
strategic importance in U.S. eyes.
One of the important side benefits of this deepening bilateral coop-
eration is that relations with Turkey have been increasingly decou-
pled from Greek-Turkish relations.  This has allowed the United
States to pursue relations with Turkey on their own merits.  At the
same time, the United States has played an important behind-the-

--- Sayfa 61 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
47
scenes role in encouraging the recent thaw in Greek-Turkish rela-
tions.
Turkish-U.S. relations, however, have been far from trouble free.
Human rights and the Kurdish issue have become an increasing
source of friction, especially with the U.S. Congress.  In 1994, for in-
stance, Turkey canceled the purchase of 10 Cobra helicopters—for
which it had already paid—after Congress froze their delivery be-
cause of human rights concerns.  More recently, the delivery of three
frigates was postponed because of Congressional concern over
Turkey’s human rights record, though the Clinton Administration
was eventually able to secure their release and delivery.
The increasing intrusion of human rights issues into the defense re-
lationship has been a source of growing irritation in Ankara and has
led Turkey to seek to diversify its defense procurement.  One of the
motivations for Ankara’s efforts to deepen defense ties with Israel has
been its desire to avoid the human rights–related hassles on defense
purchases that it has faced of late in Europe and the United States.
At the same time, the decision to phase out military assistance to
Turkey (and Greece) has reduced Washington’s ability to influence
Turkish policy.
Important differences also exist between Ankara and Washington on
key regional issues in the Middle East.  Ankara is more inclined to-
ward a policy of engagement with Iraq—especially economic en-
gagement—than the United States, which has sought to isolate and
contain Baghdad.  Turkey also fears that Washington’s efforts to
topple Saddam Hussein could lead to the creation of a de facto Kur-
dish state on Turkey’s border and thus exacerbate Turkey’s internal
struggle against Kurdish separatism.  Hence, Turkey has imposed
tight restrictions on the U.S. use of Incirlik and other Turkish air
bases to monitor the no-fly zone over Northern Iraq.
Turkish and U.S. perspectives on Iran also differ considerably.
Whereas the United States has generally sought to isolate Iran,
Turkey prefers a policy of engagement.  Ankara needs Iran’s coop-
eration on the Kurdish issue.  Iran is also a major source of energy
supplies.  The alternatives are Russia or Algeria, neither of which is a
particularly attractive partner and both of which bring security

--- Sayfa 62 ---
48
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
problems that Ankara is eager to avoid.  Thus, Turkey is unlikely to
join U.S.-sponsored efforts to isolate Iran.
On Syria, U.S. and Turkish perspectives have been closer.  Turkey
viewed U.S. efforts to court Syria during the first Clinton Administra-
tion with suspicion because of Syria’s support for the PKK.  However,
Turkish concerns have decreased since the expulsion of PKK leader
Abdullah Öcalan in late 1998 and the subsequent thaw in Turkish-
Syrian relations.  Nevertheless, Ankara remains wary of any U.S.-
backed peace initiative that might lead to a redeployment of Syrian
troops along the Turkish-Syrian border or prejudice its discussions
with Syria over water.
These differences make it unlikely that Turkey will allow the United
States to use Turkish facilities in Middle East contingencies, except if
Turkish national interests are directly threatened.  In short, Özal’s
policy during the Gulf War is likely to be the exception, not the rule.
Thus, it would be unwise for the United States to assume that Turk-
ish bases will be available to the United States except in circum-
stances where Turkish territory or Turkish interests are directly
threatened.
These differences also present important obstacles to the develop-
ment of a broader “strategic partnership” between Washington and
Ankara.  At the same time, both sides have too much at stake to let
relations seriously languish.  For the United States, Turkey is at the
nexus of three areas of increasing strategic importance for U.S. pol-
icy: the Caspian, the Middle East, and the Balkans.  Thus, Washing-
ton has a strong strategic interest in maintaining close ties to Turkey.
For Ankara, Washington remains an indispensable security partner,
especially since its chances of becoming a member of the EU in the
next decade are slim.
CONCLUSION:  TURKEY’S STRATEGIC OPTIONS
Turkey’s foreign and security policy is currently undergoing revision
and redefinition in response to changes in Turkey’s security envi-
ronment as well as domestic pressures.  Where this process will lead
and exactly how it will affect Turkey’s overall security orientation will
depend on a number of factors, particularly U.S. and European pol-
icy.  In principle, Turkey has several broad options:

--- Sayfa 63 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
49
•
European Option.  In this option, Turkey would strengthen its
ties to Europe.  EU membership would be a top Turkish priority
and Turkey would accelerate efforts to achieve it.  If the strategy
were successful, this would complete the Atatürk revolution and
end the ambivalence about Turkey’s “Europeanness.”  There are,
however, a number of problems with this option.  First, Euro-
pean attitudes toward Turkish membership remain ambivalent.
Thus Europe would have to adopt a more proactive approach to
Turkish membership—something Europe has so far been reluc-
tant to do.  It would also require important changes in Turkey’s
own policy, especially toward Cyprus and the Kurdish issue—
changes Turkey may not be willing to make.  Third, it would take
a long time.  Even under the best of circumstances, Turkey would
probably not be ready for membership for 15 to 20 years.  The
Turkish public might lose patience with the long delay, especially
if it required heavy sacrifices and compelled Turkey to forgo
other policy options considered to be in the Turkish national in-
terest.
•
Eurasian Option.  In this option, Turkey would concentrate on
strengthening ties to the newly independent states in Central
Asia and the Caucasus.  While not breaking ties to the West,
Turkey would define itself more as a Eurasian power.  This op-
tion has strong support in parts of the Turkish political spectrum,
especially the Nationalist Action Party (MHP), which is a member
of the current ruling coalition.  This option, however, also has a
number of weaknesses.  First, it would heighten tensions with
Russia, which has looked askance at Ankara’s efforts to increase
its influence in Central Asia and the Caucasus.  It would also in-
tensify rivalry with Iran, possibly driving Iran and Russia into a
tacit alliance.  Third, it could overstretch Turkish resources.  All
of the states in Central Asia and the Caucasus countries are poor
and it will be quite a while before the impact of the energy bonus
is felt—and even then the impact is likely to be considerably less
than many observers initially expected.
•
Middle Eastern Option.  In this option, Turkey would emphasize
its Islamic heritage and seek to strengthen ties to the Islamic
countries of the Middle East and Asia.  Here again, however,
there are problems.  For one thing, any effort to put an Islamic
stamp on Turkish foreign policy would meet strong resistance

--- Sayfa 64 ---
50
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
from the Turkish military, who consider themselves the guardian
of the Atatürk revolution and are the dominant influence on
Turkish foreign policy.  It would also be opposed by much of the
Westernized elite, which dominates the bureaucracy, universi-
ties, and media.  Finally, many Middle Eastern countries remain
suspicious and mistrustful of Turkey because of its imperial past.
Some also regard Turkey’s emphasis on secularism as a betrayal
of Islam.  Hence they are likely to react with reserve to any at-
tempt by Turkey to play a major role in the region.
•
Strategic Partnership with the United States.  In this option,
Turkey would make a strategic partnership with the United
States the centerpiece of its foreign policy.  The problem is that
this option was tried before (under Özal) and was never really
successful.  Moreover, it could run into domestic opposition
from the Greek lobby in the U.S. Congress.  Also, Turkish and
U.S. approaches to a number of key issues in the Middle East—
especially concerning Iran and Iraq—differ.  Hence Turkey might
be reluctant to embrace U.S. policies too closely for fear of dam-
aging relations with either country.
•
Multidimensional Policy.  In this option, Turkey would pursue a
multidimensional policy based more strongly on national inter-
ests.  Ankara would still seek good relations with Europe, but EU
membership would be less of an “obsession.”  Similarly, Turkey
would maintain strong ties to the United States, but it would not
seek to achieve a broad-based strategic partnership.  At the same
time, it would expand ties to some areas such as the Caucasus
and Iraq even if these conflicted in some ways with Western pol-
icy.
In many ways, this is the most likely policy option.  It would allow
Turkey to preserve the essence of its traditional relationships but
avoid the burdens of overdependence on any single one.  It would
also be in keeping with Turkey’s traditional (i.e., pre–World War II)
foreign policy, which avoided overtly siding with one particular
country or group of countries.  The downside is that this option
might overstretch Turkey’s resources and leave Turkey more isolated
in the event of a crisis—always a danger given Turkey’s location in a
troubled and unstable neighborhood.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
Turkish Foreign and Security Policy:  New Dimensions and New Challenges
51
Regardless of which option—or combination of options—is eventu-
ally chosen, Turkey is likely to pursue a more assertive and active
policy in the future, one which is less constrained than in the past.
Such a policy would be in keeping with changes in Turkey’s security
environment since the end of the Cold War as well as with emerging
trends in Turkey’s domestic policies—above all, growing national-
ism.  Turkey will continue to maintain strong ties to the West, but be
less disposed to automatically follow the U.S. lead when doing so
conflicts with its narrow national interests.  This will make managing
relations with Ankara more difficult—and more challenging.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
53
Chapter Four
WESTERN INTERESTS IN A CHANGING TURKEY
Ian O. Lesser
Along with changes on the domestic and regional levels, Turkey has
been deeply affected by global changes in international relations
over the last decade.  The consequences for Ankara’s policy toward
specific regions and issues are examined elsewhere in this report.
But it is useful to understand the ways in which broad-gauge changes
on the geopolitical scene affect Turkey’s role from a Western and,
above all, an American perspective.1  Western stakes in Turkey are
substantial and continue to evolve in the post–Cold  War era.
TRANSREGIONAL ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
First, in a security environment increasingly characterized by
“transregional” problems, Turkey is a transregional partner par
excellence.  Traditionally, U.S. national security strategy has made
sharp distinctions between the security of key regions—European
security, Middle Eastern security, Asian security, etc.  As the defense
of territory has become a less prominent concern in the wake of the
Cold War, there has been a parallel rise in attention to transnational
risks, from spillovers of terrorism and political violence, to the
growing reach of ballistic missiles.  In fact, these risks are not simply
transnational, but, more significantly, transregional (i.e., cutting
______________

1For a discussion from a European perspective, see Ludger Kühnhardt, “On Germany,
Turkey and the United States,” in Huseyin Bagci, Jackson Janes, and Ludger Kühn-
hardt (eds.), Parameters of Partnership:  The U.S.-Turkey-Europe, Baden-Baden:
Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, 1999, pp. 217–235.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
54
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
across regional security lines).  Turkey has long viewed itself as a
“bridge” in international relations, whereas the Western tendency,
even after the Cold War, has been to see Turkey as a “barrier” to
instability emanating from Eurasia and the Middle East.2  The notion
of Turkey as a borderland state, to use the terminology of early 20th-
century geopoliticians, has considerable relevance in an era of
transregional challenges.  But today, Turkey is not simply a barrier to
security risks, but also an increasingly capable and assertive actor in
its own right, and potentially a more valuable partner in managing
transregional problems; that is, problems that may have regional
origins but are capable of influencing the security environment
further afield.  Such problems abound on Turkey’s borders, from the
Gulf and the Arab-Israeli dispute, to the Caucasus and the Balkans.
New lines of communication for energy and nonenergy trade,
converging in or near Turkey, reinforce this transregional role.3
CHANGING DEFINITION OF EUROPEAN SECURITY
A second related factor affecting Turkey’s importance in U.S. per-
ception concerns its role in relation to European security.  European
security has come to be defined in broader terms, as a result of the
enlargement of NATO and its partners, and the growth of new Al-
liance missions, most of which are likely to be performed outside the
traditional NATO area.  In the new European environment, the most
prominent risks are on Europe’s southern periphery.  Indeed, con-
tingencies on Turkey’s borders, or nearby, now represent the bulk of
______________

2This theme is explored in Ian O. Lesser, “Bridge or Barrier? Turkey and the West After
the Cold War,” in Graham E. Fuller, Ian O. Lesser et al., Turkey’s New Geopolitics:
From the Balkans to Western China, Boulder, CO:  Westview/RAND, 1993.  The analysis
is reassessed in Lesser, “Bridge or Barrier Revisited: Turkish Security Relations with the
West,” in Alan Makovsky and Sabri Sayari (eds.), Changing Dynamics of Turkish
Foreign Policy, Washington, DC:  Washington Institute for Near East Policy, forthcom-
ing.  A recent restatement of the “bridge” thesis can be found in Suleyman Demirel,
“Turkey a Role Model at Turbulent Crossroads,” Special Policy Forum Report, Wash-
ington, DC:  Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 30, 1999.
3Turkey’s importance as part of the “strategic energy ellipse” is highlighted in Geoffrey
Kemp and Robert E. Harkavy, Strategic Geography and the Changing Middle East,
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment, 1997.  See also Temel Iskit, “Turkey: A New
Actor in the Field of Energy Politics?” Perceptions (Ankara), March–May 1996, pp. 58–
82; and Bulent Gokay, “Caspian Uncertainties:  Regional Rivalries and Pipelines,”
Perceptions (Ankara), March–May 1998, pp. 49–66.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
55
the scenarios against which the Alliance must plan.  Risks in Turkish
relations with Iran, Iraq, and Syria are part of this equation, as is the
potential for spillovers of refugees and instability in the Caucasus.
Should Russia move to challenge U.S. and Western security interests
in the future, it may choose to do so on the European periphery—in
the eastern Mediterranean, the Balkans, the “near abroad,” or the
Middle East—rather than in Eastern Europe where recent geopoliti-
cal changes will be difficult to overturn.  Turkey could therefore
emerge as a leading partner in the longer-term security relationship
with Russia.  A history of Turkish-Russian strategic competition has
produced a particularly wary attitude in Ankara, and Turkish strate-
gists often worry about the prospect that Turkey may be left to deal
with these residual Russian risks alone.  Even as Ankara has enjoyed
major successes in countering the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK),
the reconfiguration of the PKK’s strategy and operations in the wake
of the Öcalan trial introduce the possibility of more active Russian
and Armenian support for Kurdish separatism, a development that
would touch directly on Turkey’s leading security concern.4  The
need for deterrence and reassurance with regard to Russia is likely to
be a key motivator in Turkish relations with the United States.  In the
event of a deterioration of relations with Russia, Turkey could be of
central importance to Washington for similar reasons.  At the very
least, Turkey will be highly exposed to the consequences of anarchy
and chaos in the Black Sea and Caucasus regions—one reason that
Turkish policymakers have been troubled by the crisis in Chechnya.
This concern has also led Ankara to propose a stability pact for the
south Caucasus that embraces Turkey, Georgia, and Azerbaijan.
Turkey may be a more important actor in an expanded European se-
curity space, but the institutional framework for this role is becoming
less clear as the European Union (EU) develops a more ambitious
foreign and security policy, potentially more independent from the
United States and NATO.5  Despite the apparent leap forward in
Turkish-EU relations at Helsinki, the uncertain longer-term outlook
______________

4This could also affect the political-risk climate for the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline. “Where,
Oh Where, Has the PKK Gone?” Stratfor.com, August 30, 1999.
5For recent Turkish perspectives on NATO adaptation, see Suleyman Demirel,
“Turkey and NATO at the Threshold of a New Century,” and Gulnur Aybet, “NATO’s
New Missions,” Perceptions (Ankara), March–May 1999, pp. 5–12.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
56
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
for full Turkish membership in the EU makes Turkey a difficult fit.
On the one hand, both the United States and Europe have a stake in
engaging Turkey as an increasingly capable security partner adjacent
to insecure regions.  In the absence of a legitimate role in European
security, Ankara’s new foreign policy assertiveness, coupled with a
more vigorous Turkish nationalism, may be a source of concern.  On
the other hand, Europe is not inclined to give Turkey, even as an EU
“candidate,” more than a peripheral say in its nascent foreign and
security policy.  Above all, Europe is wary of taking on new and po-
tentially controversial security commitments on Turkey’s behalf.  If
Europe is unable to develop an effective framework for integrating
Turkey in its future foreign and security policy decisionmaking,
Turkey’s position in European security will become even more
anomalous and more dependent on bilateral ties with the United
States.6  Turkey’s EU candidacy coupled with a more serious com-
mitment to building a common foreign and security policy in Brus-
sels places these questions in sharper relief.  It is now harder to leave
Turkey outside Europe’s defense decisionmaking, and Turkey can
bring a good deal to the table. On the other hand, there is a greater
European incentive to streamline decisionmaking, and greater sen-
sitivity to the challenges imposed by having borders with Iran, Iraq,
and Syria.
NEW SECURITY GEOMETRIES
Third, Turkey is at the center of a relatively recent phenomenon with
important implications for U.S. strategy: the rise of new “security ge-
ometries,” or new alliances in critical regions.  The most prominent
example has been the steadily expanding political, economic, and
security relationship between Turkey and Israel.  Jordan is a more
ambivalent but potentially significant third partner in this equation.7
______________

6This issue was the subject of intensive Turkish diplomacy at NATO’s 1999 Washing-
ton Summit.  The assurances offered to Turkey in the context of future WEU deci-
sionmaking, while viewed as a success from Ankara, will likely prove insufficient over
the longer term, as the WEU’s own role is absorbed by the EU.
7These links have encouraged the rise of other new “geometries” involving Iran, Syria,
Iraq, Armenia, and Greece.  Russia and Serbia are also part of this equation.  Despite
reports of new security “agreements” involving some of these states, none appear
comparable to the Israeli-Turkish relationship in substance or geopolitical signifi-
cance.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
57
Underlying these new relationships is the dominant role of the
United States as an international partner for all three countries.  The
United States stands to gain considerably from these alignments of
allied states, as a contribution to power balances in the Middle East,
and as an alternative set of partners in the management of regional
problems and in power projection for the Gulf.  In a less direct fash-
ion, the growth of Turkish ties with the Turkic republics of the Cau-
casus and Central Asia, although more modest than envisioned in
the early 1990s, makes Turkey an important counterweight to Rus-
sian, Iranian, and Chinese influence.  Ankara’s much improved rela-
tions in the Balkans, including new bilateral ties with Bulgaria, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), and Albania, also
make Turkey a more important player in this sphere.
A PIVOTAL STATE?
The end of the Cold War and the emergence of a more fluid interna-
tional environment have encouraged a revival of geopolitical think-
ing and the rediscovery of neglected regions (e.g., Central Asia).  Ab-
sent Cold War imperatives, the American foreign policy debate has
focused, increasingly, on the question of interests (broadly or nar-
rowly construed) and modes of action (multilateral or unilateral).  A
full discussion of these tendencies in the current debate is beyond
the scope of this analysis.  But different worldviews and foreign pol-
icy preferences imply different conceptions of Turkey’s strategic im-
portance and different views of Ankara as an ally.
Only the narrowest (“homeland defense”) approach to U.S. interests
places Turkey outside the definition of an important ally.  As a con-
tributor to European, Middle Eastern, and Eurasian futures, Turkey is
arguably unique.  An emphasis on the transregional challenges noted
above underscores this point.  The phrase “location, location, loca-
tion” has considerable relevance in the Turkish case.8  But this geo-
graphic approach is only a starting point, albeit an important one,
especially in relation to the projection of military power, lines of
communication for resources, and trade.  Location implies a poten-
tial for regional influence; it does not ensure it (as the relatively lim-
______________

8See Alan Makovsky, “Marching in Step, Mostly!” Private View (Istanbul), Spring 1999,
pp. 30–38.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
58
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
ited nature of Turkey’s external policy from the formation of the Re-
public through the 1980s demonstrates).  In the absence of agree-
ment on the Turkish side, it also does not ensure that Turkey’s allies
will be able to derive any advantage from Turkey’s valuable position.
Ankara is, unusually, an attractive international partner for multilat-
eralists and unilateralists alike.  For the former, Turkey’s NATO role,
growing potential for regional action (diplomatic, economic, and
military), and coalition approach to critical regions such as the
Balkans is attractive.  For the latter, selective cooperation with capa-
ble partners remains useful, and Turkey’s ability to facilitate U.S.
power projection and preference for close bilateral ties count heavily.
Skeptics with regard to European defense initiatives tend to see
Turkey as one of the few “serious” security partners for contingencies
outside the center of Europe.  Moreover, U.S. interests in adjacent
regions are hardly transient, and are among the most durable in U.S.
foreign policy.  Turkish strategists periodically worry about the po-
tential for declining interest in Turkey as a result of the resolution of
regional problems.  It requires extraordinary optimism to imagine
the confluence of a smooth transition to a reformed, benign Russia;
the absence of instability in the Caucasus, Central Asia, and the
Balkans; the full resolution of Arab-Israeli disputes; the disappear-
ance of interstate frictions in the Gulf; and the end of Greek-Turkish
conflict.  Some of these transitions are attainable (and, in the case of
Greek-Turkish relations, are arguably under way).  But the multiple
sources of instability on Turkey’s borders argue for a continuing U.S.
stake.  Moreover, the U.S. stake in Turkey is a product of opportuni-
ties as well as challenges.  These may expand to the extent that long-
standing regional problems are resolved (e.g., the potential for
Turkey to play a key role in regional development and reconstruction
in the Balkans or the Middle East).
Turkey’s human rights problems are more problematic in the context
of an American foreign policy that has in recent years come to rely
heavily on notions of “democratic enlargement,” the promotion of
international norms, and doctrine of humanitarian intervention.9
The normalization of Turkey with regard to human rights issues and,
______________

9See the discussion in Joseph S. Nye, Jr., “Redefining the National Interest,” Foreign
Affairs, July/August 1999, pp. 22–35.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
59
above all, the resolution of the Kurdish problem, would likely have a
transforming effect on the character of bilateral relations.10  It would
also have a potentially transforming effect on the prospect for Turk-
ish integration in Europe, and therefore on the future balance in
Ankara’s relations with the West as a whole.  There is considerable
irony in the fact that U.S. policy looks to Turkey as a partner in re-
form and stability in several key regions, yet finds Turkey’s own diffi-
culties in these areas the leading obstacle to closer cooperation.  This
tension is arguably most pronounced for American multilateralists
given their natural emphasis on norms in internal and external be-
havior.  This dilemma is not unique to Turkey, and occurs elsewhere
in U.S. foreign policy, notably in relation to China, where the balance
between cooperation and alienation is also critical.11
Turkey has been evocatively described as a “pivot” state.12  Popula-
tion, location, and economic potential (one might add military
power and potential) are key requirements for pivot status.  But the
defining quality of a pivotal state is, above all, the capacity to affect
regional and international stability.  By this measure, Turkey clearly
qualifies, along with such states as Mexico, Brazil, Algeria, Egypt, In-
dia, and Indonesia.  This disparate list is bound together by the fact
that developments in these states hold the capacity for transregional
progress—or mayhem. 13
At a multifold crossroads between East and West, North and South,
Christendom and Islam, Turkey has the potential to influence
countries thousands of miles from the Bosporus. . . .  Turkey enjoys
solid economic growth and middle class prosperity. However, it also
shows many of the difficulties that worry other pivotal states: popu-
______________

10For the most recent official U.S. assessment of the human rights situation in Turkey,
see U.S. Department of State, Turkey Country Report on Human Rights Practices for
1998, Washington, DC:  Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. De-
partment of State, February 1999.
11This aspect of contemporary U.S. policy has had sharp critics.  See, for example,
Michael Mandelbaum, “Foreign Policy as Social Work,” Foreign Affairs, January/
February 1996, pp. 16–32.
12Robert S. Chace, Emily Hill, and Paul Kennedy, “Pivotal States and U.S. Strategy,”
Foreign Affairs, Volume 75, No. 1, January/February 1996, pp. 33–51.  See also Alan
Makovsky’s chapter in the volume based on this article, Robert Chace et al. (eds.), The
Pivotal States, New York:  Norton, 1999.
13Chace et al., p. 37.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
60
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
lation and environmental pressures, severe ethnic minority chal-
lenges. . . .  A prosperous, democratic, tolerant Turkey is a beacon
for the entire region; a Turkey engulfed by civil wars and racial and
religious hatreds, or nursing ambitions to interfere abroad, would
hurt American interests in innumerable ways and concern everyone
from pro-NATO strategists to friends of Israel.14
The “pivot” analysis takes as its starting point the traditional image of
Turkey as a geopolitical bridge, and goes on to argue that short of
preventing great power conflicts, applying energy and resources to
ensure the success of pivotal states such as Turkey should be the
most important goal of  post–Cold  War U.S. foreign policy.  What
sets Turkey apart from the developing countries commonly viewed
as regional pivots is its membership in the Western strategic “club,”
principally through NATO, but also through a deepening relationship
with the EU.15  Thus developments in Turkey are even more directly
linked to U.S. and Western interests.  Consider, for example, the ef-
fect on the future of the Alliance, including the enlargement process,
of Turkish conflict with Greece—or Russia.  By this measure, Turkey
is a pivot state par excellence.
Turkey’s sheer scale is also a factor in geopolitical calculations.
Turkey’s population in 1999 is roughly 65 million.  Even with a popu-
lation growth rate that is now only 1.4 percent, Turkey will shortly
have a larger population than Germany, the largest member of the
EU, although continued declines in the population growth rate sug-
gest that Turkey’s population by the middle of the 21st century may
still fall short of the 100 million mark.16  These figures add a dimen-
sion of scale to political and economic arguments about Turkey
within the EU and regionally.  Issues of integration, competition, and
cooperation with Turkey become compelling in Brussels or Athens,
______________

14Chace et al., pp. 47–48.
15This makes Turkey unique in terms of other recent arguments about where U.S.
“intrinsic” and “extrinsic” interests are engaged.  See Michael C. Desch, “The Keys
That Lock Up the World: Identifying American Interests in the Periphery,” Interna-
tional Security, Vol. 14, No. 4 (Summer 1989), pp. 86–121.  Turkey is arguably of both
intrinsic and extrinsic interest to the United States.
16Turkey’s Window of Opportunity; Demographic Transition Process and Its Conse-
quences (Istanbul:  TUSIAD, 1999), p. 18.  Onur Oymen’s recently published
Turkiye’nin Gucu (Turkey’s Strength) discusses demographic factors as a component
of Turkish power and potential.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
61
in part, because of the sheer size of the country.  In a related mea-
sure, it is notable that Turkey has the second largest military estab-
lishment in NATO, exceeded only by the United States.
THINKING THROUGH U.S. STAKES
Changes in the internal and external environment have made Turkey
more, not less pivotal in strategic terms.  But what precisely are the
U.S. stakes in Turkey toward the 21st century?  The following discus-
sion identifies three broad concepts of U.S. concern:  first, Turkey as
a stable, democratic ally; second, Turkey as a positive actor in re-
gional security and development; and third, Turkey as a contributor
to U.S. freedom of action.
Stability and Democracy
Turkey’s domestic evolution is of particular interest for the United
States in the sense that democratization, prosperity, and stability in
Turkey will continue to set the parameters for bilateral relations in
the future.  Leaving aside Greek-Turkish relations and the Cyprus is-
sue, Turkey’s internal situation has, historically, been a leading
source of constraint on the bilateral relationship and Turkish-West-
ern relations more generally.  Indeed, the Western preoccupation
with developments inside Turkey has a long history, dating back to
the Ottoman Empire and its perceived decadence and resistance to
reform.  Republican Turkey too has often been analyzed “from the
inside out” by Western observers.  The current debate about the
implications of social and political change within Turkey is only the
most recent manifestation of a tendency to view Turkey’s interna-
tional role as determined by domestic developments.  The internal
focus has, if anything, been reinforced over the last decade by the
disappearance of overwhelming Cold War imperatives, the emer-
gence of “democratic enlargement” as a feature of NATO, and EU as
well as U.S. policy.  Turkey’s own inclinations have also played a role,
with internal issues dominating Turkish national security thinking in
a way that is unique within NATO.
The confluence of these factors has resulted in close U.S. scrutiny of
the domestic Turkish scene, with extraordinary focus on human
rights and the continuing process of democratization.  Attention has

--- Sayfa 76 ---
62
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
been further encouraged by the increasingly active debate on these
issues within Turkey itself.17  The human rights situation has been
especially problematic and probably represents the leading obstacle
to a closer and more effective strategic relationship.  It directly affects
the ability of the United States to deliver on arms transfers, them-
selves an important measure of the health of the bilateral relation-
ship as seen from Ankara.  If, for example, Congress does not ap-
prove pending coproduction agreements for attack helicopters or
main battle tanks, in part because of human rights concerns, Turk-
ish-U.S. relations will be dealt a severe blow.  Human rights concerns
have also shaped the environment on other issues of importance to
the bilateral relationship, from support for Caspian oil pipelines to
trade and investment.  U.S. policy in the 1990s has consistently urged
Ankara to “take risks for democracy” both because there is a strong
tradition of this in U.S. foreign policy, and out of a realization that
lack of reform spells a troubled relationship at many levels.  U.S. re-
ports on the human rights situation in Turkey remain sharply criti-
cal.18  Indeed, if Turkey were to apply for NATO membership today,
it is arguable that its application would be rejected on the basis of
human rights problems, concerns about civilian control of the mili-
tary, and the persistence of conflicts on its borders—criteria that
have been rigorously applied in the NATO enlargement process.19
Even from a narrower strategic perspective, it is clear that the full po-
tential for regional security cooperation with Turkey (e.g., in the
Balkans, the Middle East, and elsewhere) will be difficult to capture if
human rights concerns are not effectively addressed.
Indirectly, U.S. interests are also affected by the even more serious
consequences human rights matters have had for relations between
Ankara and the EU.  European analysts and policymakers have
______________

17For a collection of mainstream Turkish perspectives, see Perceptions (Ankara), Vol.
III, No. 4 (December 1998–February 1999), “Special Issue on Human Rights.”
18See U.S. Department of State, Turkey Country Report on Human Rights Practices for
1998.
19The issue of civil-military relations is also sensitive on the Turkish side.  The Turkish
military, for its own reasons, does not wish to encourage the view that they are valid
interlocutors on domestic as well as security issues.  This has been cited as one reason
for a recent Turkish General Staff (TGS) refusal to receive a visiting U.S. congressional
delegation.  See remarks by then Turkish Minister of Defense Hikmet Sami Turk on
“Turkish Defense Policy,” WINEP, Washington, March 3, 1999.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
63
tended to take a harder line with Ankara on issues of human rights
and political reform, with Turkey’s domestic difficulties tending to
reinforce the perception that Turkey is an important Middle Eastern
rather than European partner. The circumscribed nature of the EU’s
relations with Turkey have, in turn, complicated U.S. policy by plac-
ing additional pressure on the bilateral relationship with Washing-
ton.  The domestic situation also makes it more difficult for the
United States to argue convincingly for Turkish integration in Euro-
pean institutions.  All of these factors will continue to play a role in
the European evaluation of Turkey’s candidacy in light of the
“Copenhagen criteria.”  This is a long-term prospect in which in-
creasing EU scrutiny will be balanced against the likelihood of con-
tinued, positive change in Turkish society and politics.
Political reform, including progress on human rights, may also have a
pronounced effect on Turkish external policy.  A stable political
scene, including the reinvigoration of the centrist political class,
would likely allow a more predictable and less overtly nationalist
foreign policy.  A Turkey that is “doing well,” with a self-confident
leadership, might also be inclined to take the political risks necessary
for sustained détente with Greece, and perhaps, new approaches to
the conflict in the southeast.  (It is noteworthy that Atatürk and Özal,
at the height of their political careers, were able to engineer im-
provements in relations with Athens.)  In the post-Helsinki climate
there are signs that this is happening, with salutary effects in the
Aegean and elsewhere.  Economic reform, including more ambitious
privatization policies, would likely create a more favorable climate
for U.S. investment and assist Turkey to fulfill its promise as a “big
emerging market.”20  In short, the Turkey that “matters most” to the
United States is one that has undertaken the economic and political
reforms necessary for Turkey to feel confident about its identity and
its future in the West.21
By contrast, turmoil in politics and the economy would drain the en-
ergies of the key actors in Turkish foreign and security policy, from
______________

20It is noteworthy that Turkey had a negative growth rate in 1999 for the first time in
several years; this is a reflection of the economic impact of the devastating 1999 earth-
quake.
21Richard Perle, “A Turkish Story: The First Annual Robert Strausz-Hupe Lecture,”
Foreign Policy Research Institute Wire, Vol. 7, No. 11 (September 1999).

--- Sayfa 78 ---
64
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
the military to the private sector, and inhibit a more active and posi-
tive role in regional affairs.  The inability of successive Turkish gov-
ernments to develop a coherent scheme of incentives for construc-
tion of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline offers an example.  Overall, the
success of the Turkish economy, perennially on the verge of
“takeoff,” will have a considerable influence on the ability of Wash-
ington and Ankara to move toward a more diverse, “enhanced”
strategic relationship in which security cooperation is augmented by
better trade and investment ties, and regional joint ventures outside
the military sphere.
The United States also has an interest in promoting positive change
within Turkey so that Turkey can serve as a model for development
elsewhere.  The notion of Turkey as a model has been a recurrent
fashion in Washington and Ankara since the end of the Cold War, es-
pecially in relation to the Caucasus and Central Asia.  Movement in
the Middle East peace process and regime changes in the Middle
East have brought similar issues of reform and democratization to
the fore.  Policymakers in the United States and Turkey will un-
doubtedly wish to make the case for Turkey as a regional model in
this setting (and in the Balkans).  Resistance to this idea is more likely
to emanate from Turkey’s neighbors—who might well want Turkey
as an economic and perhaps a security partner, but who dislike the
notion of Turkey as a “model” for cultural and historical reasons.22
More broadly, it is unclear whether the notion of regional models will
retain its relevance in an era of globalization where trends are set by
preferences and policies emanating from New York or Tokyo—or
perhaps no longer “set” by states at all.23
______________

22Arab ambivalence toward Turkey as a model is especially pronounced as a result of
the Ottoman experience, modern Turkish secularism, and Ankara’s NATO ties.  See
Philip Robins, Turkey and the Middle East, London:  Royal Institute of International Af-
fairs, 1991; Amikam Nachmani, Turkey and the Middle East, Ramat Gan:  BESA, 1999;
and Sabri Sayari “Turkey and the Middle East in the 1990s,” Journal of Palestine Stud-
ies, Vol. xxxvi/3, No. 103, 1997.
23For a discussion of Turkish planning objectives in an era of globalization, see Orhan
Guvenen, “Turkey’s Medium and Long-Term Strategic Objectives: TR2007/15-TR
2017/9,” Perceptions (Ankara), December–February 1999, pp. 5–20.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
65
A Positive Regional Actor
As Turkey emerges as a more capable and active power, Washington
will have a strong stake in encouraging Ankara to play a positive role
in regional security and development.24  At the level of general re-
gional aims, American and Turkish interests are broadly congruent.
Ankara and Washington speak in similar terms about the need for
peace, stability, and economic development in the Balkans, the
Middle East, and Eurasia.  When examined in greater detail, there is
considerable divergence in policy approaches to some key regions.
In general, Turkish policy toward the Balkans has been almost en-
tirely congruent with U.S. interests and preferences.  As noted earlier,
Ankara has pursued an active but very positive policy, normalizing
relations with key neighbors such as Bulgaria, and adopting a multi-
lateral approach to regional security (e.g., through participation in
IFOR, SFOR, and KFOR; by leading the formation of a multinational
peacekeeping force for the Balkans; and by authorizing the use of
airbases in Thrace during the latter stages of Operation Allied
Force).25  Turkish F-16s flew missions from Italy during the Kosovo
crisis, and Ankara was among the most active contributors to NATO
humanitarian relief activities.
With regard to Russia and the former Soviet Union, Ankara has, simi-
larly, played a positive role from a U.S. perspective.  Close Turkish-
Russian economic ties, restraint in policy toward the Caucasus
(especially Chechnya and Azerbaijan) where Turkish interests and
affinities are engaged, and a role in diversifying the political and eco-
nomic ties of the newly independent states (e.g., Baku-Ceyhan as
part of a “multiple-route” arrangement for Caspian oil exports) are
all part of this equation.26  In the event of a sharp deterioration in
strategic relations with Moscow and a resurgent military threat,
______________

24See Antony Blinken, “The Future of U.S.-Turkish Relations,” Turgut Ozal Memorial
Lecture, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, December 8, 1999.
25Ankara and Athens were leading forces behind the formation in 1998 of the South-
east European Brigade (SEEBRIG) involving seven Balkan states.
26Arguably, it is the diversification of energy routes rather than simply “an oil route for
Turkey” that has driven U.S. policy in support of Baku-Ceyhan.  Other routes, includ-
ing proposed trans-Balkan lines, have also attracted favorable U.S. attention. See
“Trans-Balkan Pipeline Complicates U.S.-Turkey Relations,” Stratfor.com, January 14,
2000.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
66
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
Ankara would once again play a critical containment role.  Friction,
to the extent that it exists in this setting, comes from Turkish concern
over U.S. policy toward the East.  In sharp contrast to burgeoning
economic relations, Turkish observers tend to take a more pes-
simistic view of Russian futures and the potential for a renewed Rus-
sian military threat to Western interests.  Unlike the situation in the
Gulf, for example, the view from Ankara is more likely to be that U.S.
policy toward Moscow is too soft, rather than too tough.  There is a
widespread perception in Turkey that Washington, while supportive,
has not thrown its full weight behind the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline for
fear of provoking a strongly negative reaction in Moscow.  The real-
ity, made evident at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) summit in Istanbul in November 1999, is that the
United States fully endorses Baku-Ceyhan, but looks to the private
sector to finance this costly project.
Since the Gulf War, U.S. interests in Turkey as a partner in the Middle
East have come to the fore.  Here, the record and the outlook are
mixed.  Turkey’s increasingly close and diverse relationship with Is-
rael is an especially positive development from the U.S. perspective,
bringing together separate strands of U.S. policy, enhancing the se-
curity of two key allies, and opening new avenues for trilateral and
even wider regional cooperation.  The Turkish-Israeli relationship
places useful pressure on Syria, Iraq, and Iran and could enhance
Washington’s ability to address specific issues such as theater ballis-
tic missile defense and terrorism.  In the event of a comprehensive
Arab-Israeli settlement, Turkey could also have much to offer as a
partner in economic development, infrastructure projects, and as a
source of “water for peace.”  Ankara’s interest in the latter is, how-
ever, mixed.  As a water surplus state, Turkey’s regional influence
could be enhanced by new water-supply arrangements.  On the other
hand, Ankara is concerned that its resources are not taken for
granted, or its interests put on the table in the rush to achieve new
peace agreements.
In the Gulf, where U.S. interests are heavily engaged, the outlook is
less clear.  Turkey has been an important base for power projection
for the Gulf over the last decade (as during the Cold War).  Incirlik,
Batman, Mus, and other bases were heavily used during the Gulf
War, and Turkish forces themselves made an important contribution
by tying down Iraqi forces in the north.  Above all, the closure of

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
67
Turkish oil pipelines and Turkish participation in the sanctions
against Iraq have been a key component in the economic isolation of
Baghdad—at massive economic cost to Ankara (Iraq had been
Turkey’s leading trade partner prior to the Gulf War).  Operations
Provide Comfort and Northern Watch have been instrumental to the
policy of containment and the enforcement of the no-fly zone in
northern Iraq, and have turned on access to Incirlik airbase.
But Ankara’s own policy preferences on Iraq and Iran differ from
those of Washington in important respects.  With regard to Iraq,
Turkey would clearly prefer to see an end to the costly sanctions
regime (despite its own concerns about Iraqi weapons-of-mass-
destruction [WMD] programs), and would probably accept a reasser-
tion of full Iraqi sovereignty in the north as a means of controlling
any residual PKK operations across the border.  Although Ankara
tolerates the ongoing air campaign against targets in the northern
no-fly zone, Turkey has adopted an arm’s-length attitude toward
wider military operations (as in Operation Desert Fox) against Bagh-
dad.  Overall, Ankara regards Iraq as a difficult neighbor with whom
it must ultimately coexist.  The notion of an open-ended contain-
ment strategy does not fit well in this framework.  Turkish strategists
are also skeptical about multilateral approaches to Gulf security in
the face of an overwhelmingly important American role.27
Turkey has a similarly important place in U.S. strategy toward Iran,
where, for the moment, it would suit U.S. interests to have Ankara as
an active participant in the policy of containment.  Turkey has its
own sources of friction with Iran, including concerns about Iranian
support for Turkish Islamists and the PKK.28  But, even more clearly
than in the case of Iraq, political and economic engagement with
Iran is a policy preference for Turkey.  Turkey’s interest in access to
Iranian energy is an important factor in this regard (the United
States, by contrast, objects to Turkish gas imports from Iran, and sees
Turkey itself as an alternative to reliance on a more convenient Ira-
nian route for the export of Caspian oil).  The Turkish approach to
______________

27See, for example, Aylin Seker, “The Fallacy of Multilateralism:  The UN Involvement
in the Gulf War and Its Aftermath,” Perceptions (Ankara), June–August 1999, pp. 196–
213.
28The recent revelations regarding Turkish Hizbullah have revived periodic Turkish
accusations of Iranian assistance to Islamists in Turkey.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
68
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
both Iran and Iraq is, in general, closer to the mainstream European
view than to that of the United States.  This approach may well be
strengthened to the extent that Turkey leans toward EU foreign and
security policy initiatives.
Turkish and U.S. approaches to Syria are broadly congruent al-
though, as with Russia, Ankara is more wary and has historically
pressed for a harder line on Syrian support for terrorism (i.e., the
PKK) and other issues.  As with the water issue, there is some concern
that Washington—and Israel—include suitable arrangements to
forestall the redeployment of Syrian forces to the north in the event
of a Syrian-Israeli disengagement.  Relations with Syria have been a
leading outlet for the new activism in Turkish policy toward the
Middle East at the end of the 1990s.  To a point, this assertiveness has
been convergent with U.S. policy interests, but the need to keep
Damascus engaged in the peace process and concerns about reac-
tions in Europe impose certain limits.  The United States, and NATO,
would certainly be obliged to assist Turkey in the event of any con-
flict with Syria.  But a NATO consensus could be difficult to achieve,
especially if the Kurdish insurgency provides the flashpoint.  From a
U.S. perspective, therefore, Turkish policy toward Syria is delicately
poised between positive and negative influences.
Finally, Washington looks to Turkey to play a positive role in the
Aegean and the eastern Mediterranean.  Here, the experience has
traditionally  been most difficult, although the new thaw in Greek-
Turkish relations starting in 1999 suggests that the environment is
changing rapidly and positively.
The dynamics of the Greek-Turkish dispute are addressed elsewhere
in this report.  But from the perspective of U.S. interests, resolution—
or at least a reduction of risk—in Greek-Turkish relations is a key
objective.  The Cyprus dispute, in particular, remains an obstacle to
Congressional support for a more expansive relationship with
Turkey.  At the same time, the scope for a more flexible Turkish ap-
proach to Cyprus and the Aegean has appeared to narrow in recent
years with the growth of nationalist sentiment within Turkey and the
possibility that the “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” (TRNC)
and Ankara could respond to EU-Cyprus membership negotiations
by a de facto merger of the Turkish side with Turkey proper.  Such a
development would effectively end the potential for a settlement on

--- Sayfa 83 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
69
the island and make this source of tension in relations with the
United States a permanently operating factor.  The post-Helsinki
atmosphere in Turkish-EU and Turkish-Greek relations makes this
damaging possibility more remote.
There may be little strategic rationale for conflict between Greece
and Turkey, but the risk of an accidental clash, and the potential for
escalation touches directly on U.S. interests.  The United States has
an obvious stake in preventing conflict between two close allies.
More significantly, the United States has a stake in preventing con-
flict that could negatively affect the geostrategic equation in Europe
and the Middle East.  Possible broader consequences of a clash over
Cyprus or the Aegean include the open-ended estrangement of
Turkey from Western institutions, making Ankara a far more difficult
partner for Washington to engage in any form (this could include the
loss of access to Incirlik airbase); casting of a shadow over future
NATO enlargement and adaptation; and the deepening of
“civilizational” cleavages in the Balkans and around the Mediter-
ranean.  Russia, Syria, and Iran could also become involved in ways
that would work against U.S. security interests in the eastern
Mediterranean, the Middle East, and the Caucasus.  Even continued
brinkmanship in the region, short of actual conflict, complicates the
outlook for improved U.S.-Turkish relations across the board.  Thus,
second only to promoting the stable, internal evolution of Turkey,
Washington has a key “enabling” stake in risk reduction and strategic
dialogue between Greece and Turkey.29
With the potential for continued rapprochement between Ankara
and Athens, the U.S. and the West as a whole have a strong stake in
seeing tentative steps toward better relations deepened and ex-
tended.  Washington, the EU, and NATO can contribute in different
ways to this process.  Washington and NATO can facilitate the im-
plementation of military confidence-building measures in the
Aegean, and provide opportunities for joint Greek-Turkish initiatives
______________

29It is noteworthy that the 1999 earthquake has had a salutary effect on Greek-Turkish
relations, with Greece providing some highly symbolic emergency assistance.  This
assistance was very well received in Turkey (with some notable exceptions in national-
ist circles), and follows a steady improvement in the diplomatic climate in the months
preceding the disaster.  It has formed the basis for more positive steps in the wake of
these disasters.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
70
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
in the Balkans and the eastern Mediterranean.  With the approval of
Turkey’s candidate status, and the decision to move ahead with ac-
cession negotiations for Cyprus, Brussels now has far greater lever-
age and credibility with all sides, although much will depend on the
longer-term nature of Europe’s engagement with Turkey.  If Helsinki
proves to have given Turkey a “hollow” candidacy, the inevitable
disillusionment in Ankara could spill over into relations with Greece
and will return Washington to center stage in this equation.  To the
extent that Greek-Turkish relations continue to evolve positively, this
should remove a leading constraint on strategic cooperation be-
tween Washington and Ankara.
The current environment encourages U.S. interest in Turkey that is
more balanced, in regional terms, than has generally been the case in
the past.  In the period since 1945, Turkey’s importance in American
eyes has been defined alternately in Middle Eastern and European
terms, driven by the security concerns of the moment.  Thus, in the
early years of the Cold War, Turkey was seen as a key contributor to
security in the “Northern Tier” comprising Greece, Turkey, Iran, and
Afghanistan, and a barrier to Soviet aggression in the Middle East.30
Over time, Ankara came to be seen as a part of the larger European
security equation, not least because Ankara itself encouraged this
Westward-looking focus.  Successive crises in the Middle East, cul-
minating in the Gulf War, cast Turkey once again in a Middle Eastern
role.  Today, with pressing security challenges from the Balkans to
the Middle East and Eurasia, Turkey’s strategic relevance is more di-
verse and, as noted earlier, essentially transregional.  With the steady
expansion of Turkey’s own foreign policy horizons, Turkish policy
elites are now more comfortable with a role that looks south and
east, as well as toward Europe.  But this new diversity in Turkish in-
terests also means many more points of potential friction with key
partners—above all, the United States.
______________

30The evolution of Western policy in this context is treated in detail in Bruce Kuni-
holm, The Origins of the Cold War in the Near East: Great Power Conflict and Diplo-
macy in Iran, Turkey and Greece (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 1980).

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
71
Enhancing U.S. Freedom of Action
Beyond Turkey’s potential to play a positive role in regions of impor-
tance to U.S. strategy, the United States has an interest in Turkey as a
direct contributor to U.S. freedom of action—in essence, power pro-
jection—in adjacent regions.  This aspect of the bilateral relationship
came to the fore during the Gulf War, and has remained an impor-
tant and controversial aspect of relations.  Recognition of the impor-
tance of Turkey as a base for projecting military power was also a fea-
ture of Cold War planning, in which Turkey was not only a glacis
confronting Soviet military power in Thrace and the Caucasus, but
also a base for intelligence gathering and, in the event of conflict, the
conduct of strategic attacks on targets within the Soviet Union.
Despite concerns in Ankara that the end of the Cold War would re-
duce Turkey’s strategic importance to Washington, Turkey has be-
come even more central to planning for the projection of military
power.  The fact that the Özal government permitted the United
States to use Incirlik airbase and other facilities for offensive air op-
erations against Iraq during the Gulf War encouraged the belief that
Ankara would welcome a more forward-leaning approach to access
and overflight.  In reality, the Turkish contribution to coalition op-
erations was highly controversial within the Turkish security estab-
lishment.  The TGS in particular was wary of hyperactive participa-
tion in the air war (the chief of staff resigned during the Gulf crisis,
reportedly over this question).  Sovereignty concerns were central to
this debate, and remained divisive throughout the period of Opera-
tion Provide Comfort.  On occasions since the Gulf War when re-
newed U.S. air strikes on WMD and other targets in Iraq have been
threatened or carried out, Turkish facilities have not been used.
During the Iraqi incursion into the north in October 1996, and again
during Operation Desert Fox, Ankara made it clear that the use of
Turkish bases would not be welcome.  This reticence can be ascribed
to a closer measurement of Turkish interests in defense cooperation,
and concern that a more provocative stance toward Baghdad might
complicate Turkey’s campaign against the PKK.  Turkish policymak-
ers, including the military, worry that they will be left to address the
consequences of a wider confrontation with Iraq on Turkey’s bor-
ders, while U.S. military intervention is aimed at containment rather
than a definitive change in the regional order.  In the event of a full-
scale Western military campaign aimed at regime change in Bagh-

--- Sayfa 86 ---
72
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
dad, the Turkish response might well be favorable—as it was during
the Gulf War.  Today, against a background of rising nationalism, the
Turkish interest in having a “seat at the table” in the context of large-
scale security initiatives is arguably even greater than in the early
1990s.
That said, the extent of the air operations in the northern no-fly zone
being conducted by U.S. and British aircraft flying from Incirlik re-
veals that Turkish policymakers, especially the TGS, are willing to
tolerate such operations when convenient and compatible with
Turkish security interests.31  Recent Turkish successes in countering
the PKK have put Ankara in a more confident mood vis-à-vis the sit-
uation in northern Iraq.  Operation Northern Watch may also have
some utility (e.g., intelligence sharing, control of the airspace, and
reassurance against Iraqi retaliation) as an adjunct to Turkey’s own
cross-border operations against the PKK within what has become a
de facto security zone across the border.
Looking ahead, the United States and Western allies may have even
greater interest in Turkey as a base for air operations and the logisti-
cal support of ground operations in adjacent regions.  As U.S. plan-
ners become increasingly concerned about reliance on bases and
defense relationships within the Gulf for the defense of the political
order and the region’s resources, other power projection options
may become more attractive.  Bases such as Incirlik in southern
Turkey are actually closer to the northern Gulf than facilities on the
Arabian Peninsula.  Concerns about political acceptance, regime
stability, and terrorism in relation to deployed forces will be less
pressing in Turkey than in the Gulf states.  A northern route for
power projection in the Gulf, relying on Turkey and perhaps Israel
and Jordan, may also be more suitable to U.S. strategy, which is in-
creasingly expeditionary in character.
U.S. and NATO interest has tended to focus on Incirlik for power
projection purposes, but Turkey has a variety of bases that might be
______________

31Some discomfort with the Operation Northern Watch mission persists.  Former
Defense Minister Hikmet Sami Turk, for example, has suggested while in office that
the no-fly zone creates an “authority vacuum” in northern Iraq that is exploited by
PKK terrorists.  March 3, 1999, speech at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
summarized in PolicyWatch #374 (Washington: WINEP), March 15, 1999.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
73
useful for contingencies in the Balkans, the Caucasus, or the Caspian.
The offer of facilities in Turkish Thrace during Operation Allied Force
points to these alternatives, and suggests that Ankara is capable of
prompt decisionmaking about the use of these facilities in a crisis.32
Nonetheless, it is likely that the NATO context for Operation Allied
Force was critical in Turkish perception.  A unilateral request from
the U.S. might not have been viewed favorably.  Indeed, Ankara has
always made a very clear legal and perceptual distinction between
NATO and non-NATO uses of Turkish facilities.  Given the over-
whelming importance of the Alliance link for Turkey, this distinction
is unlikely to lose its significance over the coming years.  From an
American point of view, this argues for giving access requests and
proposals for expanded defense cooperation a NATO imprimatur
wherever possible.  It also reinforces the U.S. interest in NATO’s
evolution toward a more expansive, global alliance in which Middle
Eastern contingencies can be addressed with Ankara in a multilateral
manner.
Many contingencies in which access to Turkish bases would be nec-
essary are, in fact, related to the defense of Turkey’s own territory.
These would be a NATO (Article V) responsibility, although the forces
involved would be largely American.  The range of such contingen-
cies is potentially quite broad, and embraces ground, air, and missile
risks from Syria, Iraq, Iran, and, perhaps under certain conditions,
Russia.  Under these circumstances, access to Turkish facilities
would unquestionably be forthcoming.  The more difficult question
concerns the nature of day-to-day Western reassurance to Turkey,
especially against WMD and missile risks, as this is set to have a more
profound influence on the Turkish calculus of risk in future defense
cooperation with the United States.33
______________

32Some 55 U.S. aircraft were assigned to Balikesir and Bandirma airbases (together
with the refueling base at Corlu) toward the end of Operation Allied Force.  Hugh
Pope, “Turkey Once Again Becomes Key Strategic Ally of the West,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 25, 1999, p. 23.
33Ankara will be especially sensitive to developments in this sphere; the August 1999
U.S. decision to withdraw a Patriot battery from the defense of Incirlik sends a very
mixed signal at a time when the United States would like to engage Ankara in closer
cooperation on theater missile defense.  Turkey is also acquiring some new, indige-
nous capabilities for deterrence and retaliation, including Turkish-manufactured
short-range surface-to-surface missiles.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
74
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
The potential for new progress in the Middle East peace process
could improve the outlook for U.S. access to Turkish facilities in non-
NATO contingencies by opening the possibility of a coalition ap-
proach (as in the Gulf War, but very likely including Israel and Jor-
dan) in which sovereignty issues are diluted.  The defense coopera-
tion equation with Turkey is, in this sense, similar to the equation
with other European allies.  The appearance of “singularization” in
cooperation with the United States, especially where the Turkish in-
terest in the use of force is unclear, is no more attractive in Ankara
than in Paris or Rome.  One motivation for the rapid development of
a strategic relationship with Israel has been the Turkish desire for a
more diverse set of defense relationships, and opportunities for vari-
able geometry in defense cooperation with the West.
Recent experience, combined with a distinctly nationalist mood in
Ankara, argues for caution in U.S. assumptions about the future for
Turkey as a power projection partner.  But Turkey too has important
stakes in cooperation, and these stakes are growing for several rea-
sons.  First, the proliferation of conventional and unconventional
risks in regions adjacent to Turkey is of a sort that Turkey will find
difficult to counter alone, despite its own military modernization
program.34 Even a more militarily capable Europe cannot replace the
role of U.S. military power in these (for NATO) far-flung regions.
Second, the place of Turkey in nascent European defense arrange-
ments outside NATO is far from clear, even for a Turkey that has be-
come an EU candidate.  Ankara has a strong stake in keeping the
United States engaged in European and Middle Eastern security, and
in the viability of the transatlantic link. The price of keeping the
United States engaged in an expeditionary environment will be a
clearer understanding with regard to access in regional contingen-
cies.
Third, Turkey’s own growing capacity for power projection suggests
that future contingencies in the Gulf or elsewhere could see a more
active Turkish contribution, countering the perception of Turkey as
______________

34Planned modernization of conventional forces in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle
East, as well as the Caucasus, are part of this equation, as are missile proliferation
trends.  See “The Caucasus: Racing for Arms,” The Economist, June 5, 1999, p. 50; and J.
David Martin, “Defending Against the Middle Eastern Ballistic Missile Threat,”
PolicyWatch #373 (Washington:  WINEP), March 11, 1999.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
75
simply a facilitator with valuable real estate (a harmful perception in
Turkish public opinion).  The power disparity between the United
States and Turkey will inevitably loom large, but need not be as dra-
matic a factor in public acceptance as in the past.  With the second
largest military establishment in the Alliance, a vigorous moderniza-
tion program, and a growing emphasis on mobility, Turkey will be
increasingly capable of significant defense contributions in neigh-
boring regions.  Finally, and despite clear efforts at diversification,
Ankara will have a continuing practical interest in access to U.S. de-
fense systems to support the modernization and restructuring of its
forces.35  Absent significant improvements on human rights and
Greek-Turkish relations, the strategic argument about preserving the
bilateral relationship will be of leading importance in this regard, es-
pecially in Congress. Under these conditions, Ankara will be wary of
“letting the U.S. down” in critical contingencies.
This suggests that one key to improving the predictability of bilateral
defense cooperation with Turkey is to gain a better understanding of
how “critical” contingencies are to be defined, alongside the broader
set of regional and functional problems that are amenable to bilat-
eral management and “environment shaping.”  At the start of the
21st century, there is a trend toward closer bilateral planning in
which Turkish interests are not taken for granted.  In this setting, the
list of contingencies that Washington and Ankara will regard as criti-
cal is broadly congruent: threats to existing borders; WMD and bal-
listic missile risks; and major threats to energy security.  These are
problems featured in the contemporary Turkish debate on security
and strategy, and these are areas where Turkey is most likely to con-
tribute to U.S. freedom of action (the discussion of a new bilateral
agenda incorporating these and other issues is taken up in the final
chapter of this report).
ELEMENTS OF CONTINUITY AND CHANGE
Despite many complications and constraints, the strategic relation-
ship between Turkey and the United States, and with the West as a
______________

35U.S. systems Turkey is currently seeking to acquire include 145 attack helicopters,
1,000 main battle tanks, five modern frigates, four AWACS aircraft, and heavy-lift heli-
copters.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
76
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
whole, has proven durable in the post–Cold  War period.  Enduring
elements include Turkey’s geostrategic position, a tradition of coop-
eration, and a persistent Western orientation in Turkish foreign pol-
icy.  Some negative elements (e.g., periodic political instability, a
problematic human rights performance, and unresolved tensions
with Greece) have proven equally durable as constraints on bilateral
and multilateral relations.  Also enduring is a relatively underdevel-
oped sense of U.S. and European affinity with Turkey at the level of
public opinion, and among some political elites (changes in this
sphere may be one of the positive consequences of the otherwise
tragic earthquake of 1999 and its aftermath).
The elements of change, within Turkey and in the strategic environ-
ment, are pronounced.  Internally, rapid economic growth and at-
tendant social and political strains have left the Atatürkist tradition
badly frayed.  The authority of the Turkish state is declining (albeit
from a very high starting point), accompanied by growing diversity
and polarization in Turkish opinion.  Public opinion, bolstered by a
very active media, also carries greater weight than in the past, with
implications for foreign policy and relations with the United States,
in particular.  Above all, Turkish nationalism has emerged as a potent
force on the political scene, just as the quest for eventual Turkish
membership in Europe has experienced both setbacks and advances.
At the same time, the international environment has changed in
ways that fundamentally change Turkey’s strategic importance.
Many of the key challenges—and opportunities—are now transre-
gional, emphasizing Turkey’s position between increasingly interde-
pendent “regions” (Europe, the Middle East, and Eurasia).  NATO
and other institutions are in the process of adjusting to this new
environment in ways that directly affect Turkish interests and
Ankara’s utility as a strategic partner.  New patterns of cooperation
are emerging, including Turkish-Israeli relations, that respond to this
new environment and offer Washington new ways of engaging
Turkey.  Above all, Turkey has shaken off a good deal of its traditional
conservatism in foreign and security policy. It is an increasingly self-
confident actor, impelled by a much expanded security debate and
closer measurement of its own interests.  Moreover, extensive de-
fense modernization and restructuring, as well as an expanding web
of political and commercial ties, are giving Ankara the ability to act in
support of these interests.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Western Interests in a Changing Turkey
77
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Anticipating some of the recommendations offered later in this re-
port, what implications can be identified for U.S. policy toward
Turkey?  Some overall observations can be offered concerning
Turkey’s internal evolution, its regional role, and its contribution to
U.S. freedom of action (the three basic areas of U.S. interest de-
scribed above).
On the internal scene, the United States should strive to reinforce
some positive trends, including a movement away from the domi-
nance of the state in various aspects of Turkish life, the growth of an
active debate on domestic and foreign policy, and growing pressure
from Turks themselves on human rights and political reform (a force
for change that is likely to be far more effective than arm-twisting
with Ankara).  Although some might see a tension between American
strategic interests and democratic imperatives in Turkey, these can
more reasonably be seen as mutually reinforcing.  A modern, re-
formist Turkey is also likely to be a more capable and active partner
for Washington and the West.36
In our engagement with political forces within Turkey, as elsewhere
in the Alliance, it will be important to favor elements that reject the
renationalization of Turkish external policy.  It is worth recognizing,
however, that the U.S. ability to influence the domestic evolution of
Turkey is extremely, and rightly, limited.  Turks will choose for them-
selves.  The United States, with Europe, can help to provide a climate
for success.  The rise of an influential and policy-aware private sector
offers the U.S. opportunities to engage a somewhat broader class of
elites, although the Turkish military and the traditional security es-
tablishment continues to exert a dominant influence on key foreign
and security policy decisionmaking.
Turkey has become a more capable and assertive actor, making the
question of Ankara’s regional role a more critical one.  The thrust of
U.S. and Western policy in this regard should be to engage Ankara in
a set of multilateral policies (as has been done very successfully in
the Balkans), to reduce the attractiveness of options driven by Turk-
______________

36See Stephen Kinzer, “Between Strategic Interest and Democratic Imperative,” Pri-
vate View (Istanbul), Spring 1999, pp. 48–54.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
78
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
ish nationalism (the United States is not the only NATO ally with uni-
lateralist tendencies).  To accomplish this, the balance between
Ankara’s Middle Eastern and European roles must be maintained by
vigorously reasserting the  post–Cold  War Western commitment to
Turkish security, and by assuring—to the extent possible—that
Turkey is not isolated by emerging European defense initiatives.
Continued improvement in Greek-Turkish relations would make an
enormous contribution to the integration of Turkey in European
structures, and would vastly simplify bilateral engagement with
Ankara.  At a minimum, Greek-Turkish risk reduction is essential to
avoid the extremely negative consequences for U.S. interests that
would result from open conflict, or even continued brinkmanship
over Cyprus and the Aegean.
Turkey can be a significant contributor to U.S. freedom of action in
critical regions, but a business-as-usual approach to bilateral defense
cooperation faces clear challenges in a climate of rising nationalism
and wariness about unilateral U.S. intervention.  Expeditionary re-
quirements are making Turkey more important, but changes in
Turkey and adjacent regions are increasing Ankara’s own exposure
and making cooperation less predictable.  This dilemma may be
eased through the development of a more diverse relationship in
which defense cooperation is part of a broader web of interests and
initiatives, and through more serious, joint consideration of an
agenda for cooperation in the new strategic environment.  In the ab-
sence of new rationales and relevant issues for cooperation, an en-
hanced “strategic relationship”—the stated preference of leaderships
in both countries over the past decade—will remain elusive.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
79
Chapter Five
A STRATEGIC PLAN FOR WESTERN-TURKISH
RELATIONS
Zalmay Khalilzad
During the Cold War, Turkey was an important pillar of the Western
Alliance.  As members of NATO, the United States, Western Europe,
and Turkey agreed on the vital objective of opposing Soviet expan-
sion.  There was broad agreement among Western Europeans, Turks,
and Americans on what they were for and what they were against.
Containment of the Soviet Union gave the strategic relationship a
clear direction.  Since the end of the Cold War, the strategic consen-
sus among the United States, Western Europe, and Turkey has
eroded.  As described elsewhere in this study, Turkey is very impor-
tant to Western interests.  This chapter identifies four critical com-
mon interests for Turkey and the West: ensuring energy security;
countering the threat of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
missiles to Turkey, the adjacent areas, and Western Europe;
“congaging”—containing and engaging—Russia; and further inte-
grating Turkey into the West to provide direction for a revitalized
strategic alliance between Turkey and its NATO allies.
THE IMPACT OF THE END OF THE COLD WAR
Turkey played a critical role in the containment of Soviet power.
Turkey tied down some 24 Soviet divisions and contributed to deter-

--- Sayfa 94 ---
80
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
ring Moscow from launching a war against NATO.1  It also provided a
platform for the West to monitor Soviet compliance with arms con-
trol agreements and related military developments in the Soviet
Union.  Recognizing that it could not deal with the Soviet threat
without support from the West, Ankara worked closely with the
United States and key Western European powers.
There was also agreement between the United States and West Ger-
many, in particular, on the central importance of Turkey in Western
strategy.  A similar recognition of the Turkish role generated support
and assistance for Turkey on Capitol Hill.  With the end of the Cold
War, the geopolitical environment and strategic priorities changed.
In Europe,  post–Cold  War concern focused on stabilizing the secu-
rity environment to the east by expanding NATO to East-Central Eu-
rope, and on building a new Europe by advancing the political, eco-
nomic, and security integration of the European Union (EU) nations.
Turkey’s role in the Gulf War—allowing the use of the Incirlik airbase
by U.S. warplanes and supporting the economic embargo against
Iraq—demonstrated Turkey’s relevance to U.S. strategy in this new
era.  Many officials in the United States emphasized the increased
importance of Turkey.  Some have even argued that Turkey’s role in
the new era could be as important as Germany’s during the Cold
War.2
However, for much of the past decade, there has been a large gap be-
tween the rhetoric from Washington on the importance of Turkey
and the reality of the bilateral security relationship.  In fact, the rela-
tive weight of factors complicating security relations between
Washington and Ankara has grown, especially on Capitol Hill.  As a
result, forces opposing strong strategic ties between the United
States and Turkey have gained ground.  Washington has put obsta-
cles in the way of Turkey’s desire to buy American military equip-
ment and, at times, Ankara has felt itself to be under a de facto arms
embargo.  Military-to-military relations have often been contentious
______________

1See F. Stephen Larrabee, “U.S. Policy Toward Turkey and the Caspian Basin,” in
Robert D. Blackwill and Michael Stürmer (eds.), Allies Divided:  Transatlantic Policies
Toward the Greater Middle East, Cambridge:  The MIT Press, 1997, pp. 143–173.
2Richard Holbrooke, as assistant secretary of state for European and Canadian affairs,
was especially active in emphasizing Turkey’s role as Europe’s new “front line” state.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
81
as demonstrated by persistent U.S. Air Force problems at Incirlik.  To
express their displeasure with the state of the security relationship,
the Turks have at times limited training for U.S. pilots.  They have de-
tained equipment and supplies intended for U.S. forces at Incirlik.
They have also slowed approval of construction and modernization
of facilities and, at times, even restricted flights over northern Iraq.
In periods of direct military confrontation with Iraq since the Gulf
War, Ankara has generally been unwilling to allow the use of Turkish
bases for U.S. air strikes.
Turkey’s behavior since the demise of the Soviet threat suggests that
it views security cooperation with the United States and key Western
European nations as less critical.  Turkey no longer faces the colossal
threat that the Soviet Union presented.  The Turks have become
more nationalistic and more sensitive about how their territory and
assets are used by the United States.3
Turkey’s domestic political scene has also complicated “triangular”
strategic cooperation with the West.  Because of domestic ideological
polarization and continued Kurdish unrest, it appeared that Turkey
might be headed toward greater instability.  These developments led
some observers to advocate that the West continue cooperative rela-
tions with Turkey, while hedging against some negative outcomes,
the potential for which existed as a result of internal trends.4
Things have turned out more positively.  The Islamist trend has
weakened.  The PKK has suffered a number of major setbacks.  The
emergence of a relatively stable coalition in Ankara has created a bet-
ter climate for political and economic reform.  These developments
have had a positive effect on Turkey’s relations with Europe, as indi-
cated by the 1999 Helsinki decision on Turkey’s candidacy for EU
membership.  Relations with the United States have also improved
and become more diverse with new trade and investment opportu-
nities.
______________

3See Ian Lesser’s Chapter Two of this report; see also Lesser, “Turkey’s Strategic Op-
tions,” International Spectator, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1 (January-March 1999), pp. 79–88.
4For an assessment from the period of Refah’s ascendancy, see for example, Simon V.
Mayall, Turkey:  Thwarted Ambition, Washington, DC:  National Defense University,
January 1997.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
82
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
However, the triangular relationship between Turkey, Western Eu-
rope, and the United States still lacks a clear sense of direction.  Un-
certainty remains as to what big issues the three, together, can work
for, or against, in a new strategic environment.
ELEMENTS OF A NEW STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES, WESTERN EUROPE, AND TURKEY
Are there objectives that could provide a strong direction for the tri-
angular relationship and shape strategic cooperation for the next 50
years?  In particular, can such objectives revitalize relations among
the armed forces of the United States, Turkey, and key Western Eu-
ropean nations?  Our analysis suggests a number of areas that can
form the basis of a solid, cooperative relationship for the next
decades.
Energy Security
Ensuring the security of energy supplies from the oil-rich Persian
Gulf and the Caspian Basin could be adopted as one specific ratio-
nale and purpose for the triangular alliance.  The Persian Gulf has
some 65 percent of the world’s known oil resources but is not as big a
player when it comes to natural gas.  The Caspian Basin has some 3
percent of the world’s known oil reserves and some 12 percent of the
world’s proven natural gas resources.5
The Persian Gulf is the critical region in meeting the world’s oil
needs.  In fact, dependence on the Persian Gulf will grow as demands
for energy consumption increase because of growth in demand in
Asia— particularly China and India.  The West will also become more
dependent on oil from the region because of increased demand.
Energy consumption in the United States and Western Europe is ex-
pected to grow by 1.3 percent annually between now and 2015.  By
the year 2015, 34 percent of North American oil imports will come
from the Gulf.  In the case of Western Europe, the figure will be 40
percent.  Although there are differences in the degree of dependence
______________

5International Energy Outlook, 1997, Washington, DC:  Department of Energy, 1998.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
83
on the Gulf, the price of the remaining oil will increase for everyone,
should supplies from the Gulf be dramatically reduced.
The direct impact of an interruption in oil supplies on the U.S. and
European economies might not be as great as it was during the 1973–
74 Arab oil embargo because both are more service oriented than
they were in the 1970s.  The U.S. and several European nations now
have strategic petroleum reserves that could cushion the impact of
any embargo or interruptions.  Both have also diversified their en-
ergy dependence.  By comparison, the impact on the weak democ-
racies and emerging economies could be far more severe.  Neverthe-
less, a prolonged interruption in the supply of energy from the Gulf
would result in dramatic increases in oil prices and have a negative
impact on the U.S., European, and Asian economies.  The Persian
Gulf will be the key to energy security in the coming decades because
its oil is cheap to extract, the reserves are large, and there is signifi-
cant existing and potential production capacity.
The world potentially faces two types of challenges to oil security in
the Gulf: interruption of oil supplies because of internal or regional
conflicts or the domination of the region by a hostile power.  Inter-
ruption could take place in several scenarios—for example, an Iraqi
or Iranian attack against one or more Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) states; attacks against major oil facilities using WMD; a con-
flict inside Saudi Arabia that includes the oil-producing region; or
terrorist attacks against major oil-producing facilities.
Oil supplies from the Gulf might also be interrupted if the region
came to be dominated by a hostile power.  A hostile hegemon might
use the income from oil to build its military capability and expand its
political influence to pose a broader challenge.  It might use oil as a
vehicle for blackmail, to seek concessions on political issues or the
transfer of technology, or to split allies.  In the past, both Iran and
Iraq have sought regional hegemony.  Both continue to have such
ambitions.  Because of the U.S. military presence in the region and
the relative capabilities of both countries, prospects for regional
hegemony by Iran or Iraq are remote.  Unless the U.S. abandons the
region, the likely threats are terrorism and limited military attacks
against the GCC states, including their oil facilities.  For planning
purposes, a U.S., European, and Turkish agreement to provide se-
curity for energy supplies from the Gulf would have to include not

--- Sayfa 98 ---
84
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
only measures to deal with these smaller threats, but also to deter or
defeat an invasion of the GCC states by Iraq and Iran.
As of now, the United States, as the Persian Gulf’s ultimate security
guarantor, has assumed the responsibility for defending access to the
region’s oil supplies.  The United States has deployed forces in the
GCC states and the surrounding areas for this purpose.  However, the
disproportionate U.S. burden in defending the region might not be
sustainable if the costs of playing such a role increase, and because
of other U.S. commitments around the world.  Burden sharing has
been a contentious issue in the Alliance.  It may become even more
so.  Since Turkey and Western European nations are more dependent
on Persian Gulf oil than the United States, the United States might
expect them to contribute their fair share to ensure the security of
energy supplies.
While the Gulf is critical to future energy security, the Caspian Basin
can also play a significant role and should not be ignored.  Compared
to the Gulf, the region has much less oil, production costs are much
higher, and the cost of exports will be significantly higher.  Neverthe-
less, it can assist in diversifying supplies.  For Turkey’s own energy
security, the region could become vitally important.  If the current
plans for bringing oil and gas from the region to Turkey materialize,
Ankara will become critically dependent on the Caspian Basin.
A key part of the Turkish plan is to build the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline,
which would bring Caspian oil and gas across Turkey.  The United
States and Turkey have been very vocal supporters of the project.
However, the Turks, Western Europeans, and Americans have not
been serious about building the pipeline.  The initiative has been left
largely to the private sector, and the energy companies involved are
understandably reluctant to move ahead with such a costly project if
the economics of the scheme are uncertain.  If current trends hold, it
is unlikely to be built.
The reason for supporting the project has been geopolitical: to bol-
ster Turkey’s regional role; to orient the exporting countries toward
the West and to consolidate their independence from Russia; to dis-
courage increased reliance on Iran and the Straits of Hormuz (likely
if future supplies are shipped via the “cheaper” route from the
Caspian region to Iran’s Gulf coast); and to reduce the environmental

--- Sayfa 99 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
85
risks of increased tanker traffic through the Black Sea and the
Bosphorus.  Given these considerations, and compared with the al-
ternatives, the United States, Western Europe, and Turkey should be
prepared to subsidize the construction of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline
across Turkey, offsetting the attractiveness of less expensive but
strategically unwise alternatives.  The investment can be justified in
geopolitical terms, and can be one of the first steps in focusing the
Turkish-European-American alliance on a new agenda on which en-
ergy security figures prominently.
The Turks already consider the Caspian Basin as very important be-
cause of ethnic ties and geographic proximity.  Energy dependence
will make the region even more important.  The Caspian Basin is also
potentially very unstable because of internal factors in each of the
key energy-producing countries, threats of regional conflicts, and
possible intervention from outside the region.
In order to get Turkish cooperation to provide security for energy
supplies from the Persian Gulf, and because of the importance of the
Caspian Basin, the West should be more attentive to Turkish stakes
in the security of the region and work with Ankara to promote its po-
litical and economic development.  Should the alliance between
Turkey, the United States, and Western European nations be revital-
ized along the lines proposed here, Turkey will become even more
central in strategic terms.  It will be unrealistic to regard Turkey as
critically important in the energy security equation, and yet ignore
the Caspian Basin which Turkey regards as critical to its own inter-
ests.
Turkey is ideally located to play a vital role to ensure security both in
the Persian Gulf and in the Caspian Basin.  Turkish military  facilities
provide an excellent location for projecting power to both regions.
For example, the bulk of Persian Gulf and Caspian energy resources
are within 1,000 miles of Incirlik.
An agreement between Turks, Europeans, and Americans on energy
security will provide one clear, strategic direction for relations, and
should focus on planning and developing scenarios to deal with
these issues jointly.  It will also provide a basis to determine the kind
of forces that each will need for missions related to ensuring energy
security, and the kind of presence and facilities the United States and

--- Sayfa 100 ---
86
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
1,000 miles
Incirlik
Ankara
Istanbul
Tbilisi
Baku
Ashkhabad
Tehran
Yerevan
Baghdad
Riyadh
RANDMR1241-1
Figure 1—Turkey-Persian Gulf and Caspian Basin
the Europeans would need in Turkey.  Such a development can also
offer new flexibility in planning the U.S. military presence in adjacent
regions.  For example, access to Turkish bases can reduce the
amount of military presence required in some of the GCC states.
Countering the Threat of Weapons of Mass Destruction and
Missiles
Western Europe, the United States, and Turkey have a strong shared
interest in countering the spread of WMD and ballistic missiles.
The regions adjacent to Turkey pose one of the greatest challenges to
the global nonproliferation regime.  Missiles of ever increasing
ranges and WMD are spreading in the region.  The Missile Technol-

--- Sayfa 101 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
87
ogy Control Regime (MTCR) has not prevented their spread.  Already,
Iraq, Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and reportedly Armenia, have ballistic
missiles that can reach Turkish targets.6  Several countries, such as
Iran, have plans for longer-range missiles and nuclear weapons.
Since Desert Storm, the attractiveness of acquiring ballistic missiles
and WMD, especially nuclear and radiological weapons, has in-
creased.  Iraqi missiles provided Saddam Hussein with significant
leverage over the United States and Israel. During Desert Storm, the
United States faced major difficulties in dealing with Iraqi mobile
missiles.  Some countries appear to believe that such capabilities
would lessen the likelihood that the United States would use force
against them, or use force in a way that could impose a decisive de-
feat, even if they were to challenge U.S. interests.  Some believe that
this type of capability offers weaker hostile states the ability to com-
pete with the United States asymmetrically—investing in cheap
technologies that negate or lessen U.S. advantages.7
Regional incentives—the competition between Iran and Iraq, Pak-
istan and Iran, Saudi Arabia and Iran, Israel and several Middle East
states, and Syria and Turkey—are probably more important.8  Some
believe that missiles and WMD can affect the outcome of war by un-
dermining the rival’s other advantages.  Another reason for increased
interest in WMD and missiles is that the cost of modernizing con-
ventional forces has increased significantly.  Many potentially hostile
states are in such economic condition that they cannot afford large-
scale conventional modernization.
In the future, the relative importance of this issue will grow.  First,
continued Turkish vulnerability to missiles deployed by hostile  gov-
ernments will increase Ankara’s incentive to either acquire defenses
against such missiles, in cooperation with its Western allies, or to ac-
quire its own missiles and deterrent capabilities.  Turkey has ex-
______________

6Armenia is reported to possess a number of SCUD missiles.  See The Military Balance
1999–2000, London:  International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1999.  Russia, Israel,
and Egypt also possess capable missile systems in the Turkish neighborhood.
7New World Coming:  American Security in the 21st Century, Arlington, VA:  U.S.
Commission on National Security/21st Century, 1999, p. 49.
8See Ian O. Lesser and Ashley J. Tellis, Strategic Exposure: Proliferation Around the
Mediterranean, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, MR-742-A, 1996.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
88
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
pressed interest in missile defenses, and is having more detailed dis-
cussions with key allies, including the United States and Israel, on
missile defense technologies and architecture.  Turkey is also em-
barking on the design and production of its own short-range mis-
siles, and could move to develop longer-range systems.  Turkey’s in-
centives to develop its own retaliatory capabilities, as opposed to
defensive efforts, will depend critically on the health of the strategic
relationship with the United States and NATO.  Ankara seeks reas-
surance that the NATO security guarantee, including its nuclear di-
mension, remains valid in the face of a more diverse set of  post–Cold
War risks to Turkish territory.
Second, although Turkey is now the NATO ally most exposed to mis-
sile and WMD risks, it is only a question of time before West Euro-
pean cities can be attacked with missiles armed with WMD from hos-
tile regional states on Europe’s southern periphery, and sooner or
later, Europeans will have to worry about homeland vulnerability.
This change is likely to take place in the next 10 years.9  Europe’s vul-
nerability to WMD and missile attacks from the Middle East could
have grave consequences.  The ability of Europeans, Americans, and
Turks to cooperate to defeat threats to common interests (e.g., en-
ergy security) might well be impaired if hostile regimes hold Istanbul,
Rome, Paris, Berlin, and London hostage to retaliatory attacks.10
Aggressors might well believe that Turks, or other Western allies, will
not trade their cities for Kuwait or Riyadh.  The possibility of this type
of retaliation will complicate any unilateral military action by the
United States even if North American cities are not vulnerable.  At a
minimum, this exposure to the retaliatory consequences of Western
intervention will sharpen debates about access and defense coop-
eration with NATO allies, especially Turkey.  Finally, in the longer
term, even U.S. cities will become vulnerable to missiles launched
from areas near Turkey.
Within the Alliance, Turkey and the United States take the threat of
the spread of missiles and WMD to the areas adjacent to Turkey most
seriously.  They are alarmed.  But European perceptions differ.  In
______________

9Ibid.
10Zalmay Khalilzad, “Challenges in the Greater Middle East,” in Gompert and
Larrabee (eds.), Europe and America, pp. 205–206.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
89
general, Europeans, including some already within range of current
systems, have yet to be convinced of the seriousness of the problem.
This may change as the missile capability of countries such as Iran
increases and as Europe becomes more vulnerable to missile attacks.
There are already some signs that the danger is being acknowledged.
The new NATO strategic concept stresses the missile threat to NATO
countries.  Some joint committees have been established, including
the Defense Group on Proliferation, the Senior Group on Prolifera-
tion, and the Weapons of Mass Destruction Center.  A serious effort
will have to focus on mission development plans, capabilities, and
concept of operations.  The United States is making a significant ef-
fort.  Europe, too, is moving toward a multilayered missile defense
system, but at NATO speed, in part, because many Europeans are
still uncomfortable with military approaches to proliferation risks.
Security elites in Ankara do not share this discomfort.
Turkey can play a critical role, not only for its own defense, but as
part of a coordinated group with Europe, the United States, and
friendly regional states such as Israel, Jordan, Egypt, and Saudi Ara-
bia.  For its own defense and the defense of U.S. forces and friends in
the area, antitactical missile systems could be based in Turkey or its
territorial waters.  The best defense would be a Boost Phase Intercept
system which can also help with deterrence, since part of the attack-
ing missile will fall in the country launching it.  As part of the missile
defense architecture for Europe, early warning systems could be
placed in Turkey and in some Middle Eastern countries.  Some of the
systems for intercepting longer-range missiles launched against
Western Europe could also be stationed in Turkey—an arrangement
that would usefully reinforce Turkish defense ties with both NATO
and emerging EU security institutions.
“Congage” Russia
Russia’s future remains uncertain and, at present, it is neither an ally
nor an enemy of the United States, Europe, and Turkey.  The politi-
cal, economic, and military forces that will shape Russia’s future can
produce a variety of outcomes—some positive and some very nega-
tive. As a democratic state, Russia should be expected to follow a
generally cooperative strategy similar to that followed by other
democratic powers, primarily focused on increasing the welfare of its

--- Sayfa 104 ---
90
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
citizens and cooperating with the current international system.  It
could become increasingly democratic and integrated as a positive
contributor to regional peace and stability.  However, the process of
democratization could be protracted and could be accompanied by a
more aggressive Russian nationalism.  This is already visible in the
aftermath of the Kosovo crisis and the Russian assault on Chechnya.
Alternatively, Russia could face a major domestic crisis, and collapse
into chaos and disintegration.  As the conflict in Chechnya demon-
strates, some regions in the country are resentful of the center.  The
country faces many political, economic, and social problems that,
without a democratically oriented leadership, could strengthen
centrifugal forces and destabilize the state.
A third outcome is the possibility of a strong authoritarian leader-
ship.  Such a leadership might seek to restore its lost empire, at least
in some form, and pursue policies hostile to the United States,
Turkey, and Europe.  Many in Russia are dissatisfied with the current
international system, in which the United States, as the only
“superpower,” often seeks to act in a “hegemonic” manner.  Replac-
ing the current international system with a multipolar one, in which
Russia will be one of several relatively equal powers, is a declared
objective of Russian policy.
Should Russia become aggressive and expansionist, the Caspian
Basin is likely to become a target of such activism.  In the aftermath
of the recent Russian war in Chechnya, there is a significant rise in
the perception of a Russian threat in surrounding regions, particu-
larly Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Central Asia.  A number of these coun-
tries face domestic instability and succession problems, and are vul-
nerable to Russian manipulations.  Russian expansion in the Caspian
Basin and Central Asia will pose significant problems for Turkish and
Western interests.
As long as Russia’s future is uncertain, neither pure engagement nor
containment is an adequate Western strategy toward Moscow.  En-
gagement rests on the hope that economic, political, and military
connections will transform Russia into a cooperative democracy or,
at a minimum, produce convergence on some key interests.  This is a
supposition.  Should Russia become a hostile authoritarian state, a

--- Sayfa 105 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
91
policy of engagement will merely have made Russia into a potentially
more threatening adversary.
But shifting to containment is troublesome.  Such a strategy presup-
poses that Russia would ultimately become hostile, ignoring the
possibility that Western-Russian relations could evolve in a more co-
operative direction.  Containment could become a self-fulfilling
prophecy, setting the stage for a confrontation where none existed.
Neither engagement nor containment balances the two key Western
objectives, which should be to encourage Russia to become more
democratic and cooperative while at the same time protecting West-
ern interests by hedging against the possibility that Russia might be-
come more hostile.  Such a strategy could be called
“congagement.”11  It would continue to assist and encourage politi-
cal and economic reform and seek to integrate Russia into the cur-
rent international system, while both preparing for a possible Rus-
sian challenge to this system, and seeking to convince the Russian
leadership that any such challenge would be difficult to mount and
risky to pursue.
Under congagement, we would enhance military, economic, and
political relations with Russia.  However, we would criticize disturb-
ing aspects of Russian domestic and foreign behavior more vigor-
ously.  When Moscow threatens Western interests, we must be pre-
pared to respond.  NATO expansion to East-Central Europe is a good
hedge against Russia becoming hostile and imposing hegemony in
that region and the nearby areas.  In addition, as a hedge against a
potentially hostile Russia, the United States, Europe, and Turkey
should move on two fronts:
First, we should avoid doing anything that directly helps the growth
of Russian military power.  Existing U.S. and allied export controls
that now restrict access to Western technology need to be strength-
ened.  This will be an important point for discussion with Ankara as
______________

11The term “congagement” is offered as a theme for U.S. strategy toward China in
Zalmay Khalilzad et al., The United States and a Rising China:  Strategic and Military
Implications, Santa Monica, CA:  RAND, MR-1082, 1999.  The term is equally relevant
to the question of policy toward Russia.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
92
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
Turkey seeks to diversify its own sources of military technology and
develops more extensive contacts with Russia.12
Second, deterring Russian expansionism in the Caspian Basin and
Central Asia (and perhaps a more aggressive stance in the Balkans
and the eastern Mediterranean), and planning a response to such
expansion, should become a core focus of policy and defense plan-
ning between Europe, the United States, and Turkey.  Dealing with
potential Russian threats to this region requires many steps, includ-
ing measures to enhance ties with states in the Caspian Basin and
Central Asia.  New formal alliance relationships, such as expansion of
NATO to the region, are neither necessary nor practical at this time.
However, in the aftermath of the war in Chechnya, and especially in
light of the brutal way in which the operation was conducted, it
would be prudent to expand security cooperation, including en-
hanced military-to-military relations with key states such as Azerbai-
jan, Georgia, and Uzbekistan.  In addition, it would be important to
promote regional cooperation including the settlement of local dis-
putes among the states of the area along the lines of the Caucasus
“pact” proposed by Ankara.
These steps are important in themselves for deterrence and regional
stability, but they can also assist to toughen policy toward Russia
should this become necessary.  It is not in the interest of the United
States, Turkey, and Western Europe for Russia to dominate this re-
gion.  A congagement strategy would sharpen the choice faced by
Russian leaders.  If Russia cooperates with the current international
system, seeks cooperation rather than hegemony in regions such as
the Caspian Basin, and becomes increasingly democratic, this policy
could evolve into mutual accommodation and partnership.  If Russia
becomes a hostile power bent on regional domination, this policy
can shift toward containment.
Congagement of Russia is an area where Turkey has much to con-
tribute and also has a strong stake in Western reassurance and deter-
______________

12Examples include Turkish consideration of attack helicopter purchases from a Rus-
sian-Israeli consortium, and possible joint production of S-300 surface-to-air missiles.
In the past, Ankara has purchased support helicopters and armored personnel carriers
from Russia.  See Lale Sariibrahimoglu, “Russia Offers Turkey S-300 Production Deal,”
Jane’s Defence Weekly, March 8, 2000.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
93
rence.  As with proliferation risks, Ankara worries more than its
NATO allies about the possibility of a renewed competition with
Russia. History plays a role here, together with the sense that a new
cold war with Moscow would likely take the form of friction on Rus-
sia’s southern periphery rather than a more direct confrontation in
Europe.  Ankara is concerned that it could be left to face such “flank
risks” alone.  At the same time, Turkey has an important stake in
stability and reform in Russia, not least because Russia has emerged
as a leading economic partner, especially important to meet Turkey’s
ever growing energy needs.  All of this suggests that strategy toward a
changing Russia will be one of the key points for coordination be-
tween Ankara and its Western security partners.
Deepening Turkish Integration in the West
Integrating Turkey into the EU should be an important objective of
the future strategic cooperation between the United States, Europe,
and Turkey.  Most Turks are interested in reinforcing ties to the West,
and deepening the relationship with the EU.  The United States fa-
vors Turkey’s eventual full membership in the EU for the following
reasons:
•
Integrating a state that favors strong transatlantic ties into the EU
can have a positive effect on how EU-U.S. relations evolve over
the long term;
•
Preparing for and joining the EU will have a positive effect on
Turkey’s own evolution as a secular, Western-oriented democ-
racy;
•
This, in turn, will improve prospects for strategic cooperation of
the kind discussed above between Turkey, the United States, and
Europe.
Whereas the United States tends to take a strategic view of the ratio-
nale for Turkish membership, EU members pay relatively greater at-
tention to how Turkey fits in Europe’s economic, political, and even
cultural order.  Turkey’s size exacerbates these issues and suggests
that the road to Turkish membership will not be straight or easy.  It
could end in a closer Turkish-EU relationship that stops short of full
membership. Or the EU itself may evolve into a multispeed, multi-

--- Sayfa 108 ---
94
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
level institution with more options for Turkey.  Turks, too, will have
their reservations about the sovereignty compromises inherent in EU
membership.  The key point from the “triangular” point of view is to
ensure that the path toward Europe remains open and gives Turkey a
legitimate Euro-Atlantic role.  Ankara must not be shut out.  As Eu-
rope and the United States focus more heavily on challenges in
Turkey’s neighborhood, the West, as a whole, has a stronger stake in
ensuring that Turkey’s integration is strengthened and made irre-
versible.
Because Turkish integration is important, the United States should
continue to encourage its Europeans allies to put real substance be-
hind the Helsinki summit decision on Turkey’s candidacy for EU
membership.  If the Helsinki decision turns out to be a hollow
commitment, it could harm prospects for Turkish cooperation with
the West, and would strengthen those Turks who favor other options.
It is up to the Europeans how they proceed on the EU membership,
and it is up to Turks to take the steps necessary for accession.  The
United States can put the case for Turkish membership on strategic
grounds, but it has no standing to decide the outcome.  Washington
would have to move delicately so as not to harm Turkey’s prospects.
While Turkish membership in the EU is the ultimate answer to the
question of integrating Turkey into the West, there are interim issues
that must be addressed in the near future.  Like the United States,
Turkey is concerned about the evolution of the European Security
and Defense Identity (ESDI) and emerging European power projec-
tion arrangements.  The United States should work with Europe to
make sure that Turkey is not excluded.  Defense issues may actually
evolve more easily between Turkey and the EU, compared with some
of the other issues that must be resolved on the way to deeper Turk-
ish integration in Europe.  But, in the immediate future, assisting
with the resolution of the defense issues and preventing discrimina-
tion against Turkey must become a principal U.S. concern.  Turks too
will view this aspect of the relationship with Europe as a key test of
the EU’s willingness to integrate Turkey.
Closer Turkish integration in Europe will encourage a constructive
diversification of Turkish-Western relations outside the security
realm.  This diversification should also apply to the bilateral relation-
ship with the United States.  Although Europe will undoubtedly be

--- Sayfa 109 ---
A Strategic Plan for Western Turkish Relations
95
the most important economic partner for Ankara over the next
decades, there will also be opportunities to strengthen trade and in-
vestment with U.S. partners.  The energy sector is already emerging
as a leader in this respect with, for example, significant new business
in the power-generation field.  A more prosperous Turkey, with a
streamlined set of regulations governing foreign investment and
arbitration, more closely harmonized with European practices, will
create a more attractive environment for American business activity
in the country.  In short, a more European Turkey can facilitate
Turkey’s development as a “big emerging market” as seen from
Washington.
CONCLUSION
Turkey, the United States, and Europe have important common in-
terests: energy security, counterproliferation, “congaging” Russia
and integrating Turkey into the West.  These common interests call
for a more ambitious triangular partnership.  As a first step, the three
must reexamine the status of the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline and develop
a strategy for generating the financial resources necessary for making
it happen.  Future security relations, objectives, strategies, and insti-
tutions should be organized around these interests and in a new revi-
talized alliance.  This should affect several institutions: NATO, the
EU, and bilateral American-Turkish arrangements.
The new NATO strategic concept is a step in the right direction, and
provides a better basis for triangular security cooperation.  But it
does not go far enough.  For example, energy security and scenarios
that might undermine it must be a direct focus for the Alliance, and
provide the guidance needed by force planners.
For Turkey, too, a partnership focused on these four major interests
will have important implications.  The Turks talk about these issues
in a serious manner.  But will they accept the responsibilities associ-
ated with it—such as the reconfiguration of allied military presence
on their territory?  It serves their interests to do so.  They cannot
protect these interests alone.  And unless they play a role in protect-
ing important common interests, the security dimension of the rela-
tionship will continue to erode.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
96
The Future of Turkish-Western Relations:  Toward a Strategic Plan
The U.S. role—as the leader and the catalyst for refocusing the rela-
tionship between the United States, Europe, and Turkey on these
core interests—is critical.  Without such a role by the United States,
the necessary adaptation in American-Turkish-European relations
will not take place, and the West as a whole will be less well equipped
to address some of the most important new challenges on the inter-
national scene.