--- Sayfa 1 ---
This document and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law as indicated in a notice appearing later in
this work.  This electronic representation of RAND intellectual property is provided for non-commercial use only.
Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited.  RAND PDFs are protected under
copyright law.  Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of our research
documents for commercial use. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please see RAND Permissions.
Limited Electronic Distribution Rights
This PDF document was made available from www.rand.org as a public
service of the RAND Corporation.
6
Jump down to document
THE ARTS
CHILD POLICY
CIVIL JUSTICE
EDUCATION
ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
HEALTH AND HEALTH CARE
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
NATIONAL SECURITY
POPULATION AND AGING
PUBLIC SAFETY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
SUBSTANCE ABUSE
TERRORISM AND
HOMELAND SECURITY
TRANSPORTATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
WORKFORCE AND WORKPLACE
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit research
organization providing objective analysis and effective
solutions that address the challenges facing the public
and private sectors around the world.
Visit RAND at www.rand.org
Explore the	RAND Center for Middle East Public Policy
View document details
For More Information
International Programs at RAND
CENTER FOR MIDDLE EAST PUBLIC POLICY
Browse Books & Publications
Make a charitable contribution
Support RAND

--- Sayfa 2 ---
This product is part of the RAND Corporation conference proceedings series. RAND
conference proceedings present a collection of papers delivered at a conference. The
papers herein have been commented on by the conference attendees and both the in-
troduction and collection itself have been reviewed and approved by RAND Science
and Technology.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
International Programs at RAND
CENTER FOR MIDDLE EAST
PUBLIC POLICY
Middle East Perspectives
Conference Proceedings from
Gstaad, Switzerland
Shahram Chubin, David Aaron, Abdulaziz Sager,
Shai Feldman
Prepared for the RAND Center for Middle East Public Policy

--- Sayfa 4 ---
The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit research organization providing objective analysis
and effective solutions that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors
around the world. RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its
research clients and sponsors.
R® is a registered trademark.
© Copyright 2008 by the RAND Corporation, the Geneva Center for Security Policy, the Gulf
Research Center, and the Crown Center for Middle East Studies at Brandeis University
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from RAND.
Published 2008 by the RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street, P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1200 South Hayes Street, Arlington, VA 22202-5050
4570 Fifth Avenue, Suite 600, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2665
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information, contact
Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Email: order@rand.org
The research described in this report was sponsored by the RAND Corporation, the Geneva
Center for Security Policy, the Gulf Research Center, and the Crown Center for Middle East
Studies at Brandeis University and was conducted within the RAND Center for Middle East
Public Policy (CMEPP) under the auspices of the International Programs of the RAND
Corporation.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
iii
The Middle East 2007
Gstaad, 1-3 July 2007

Preface

This conference report summarizes the discussion that took place at the eighth
annual Workshop on the Middle East held in Gstaad, Switzerland, from July 1 to 3, 2007.
The workshop was sponsored by the Geneva Centre for Security Policy (GCSP), the
RAND Corporation, the Gulf Research Center (GRC), and the Crown Center for Middle
East Studies at Brandeis University.

The summary was prepared by GCSP and was reviewed by the other sponsoring
institutions.  However, the views expressed in this report are not necessarily those of the
sponsoring organizations or their personnel.

The publication of this document is being carried out under the aegis of the
RAND Center for Middle East Public Policy. The RAND Center for Middle East Public
Policy, part of international programs at the RAND Corporation, aims to improve public
policy by providing decisionmakers and the public with rigorous, objective research on
critical policy issues affecting the Middle East.

For more information on the RAND Center for Middle East Public Policy, contact
the director, David Aaron. He can be reached by email at David_Aaron@rand.org; by
phone at 310-393-0411, extension 7782; or by mail at RAND, 1776 Main Street, Santa
Monica, California 90407-2138.  More information about RAND is available at
www.rand.org.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
1
Introduction

The Middle East remains an arena of prime strategic importance for U.S., European, and
global security. Wars, instability, and regional turbulence affect not just energy security
but also migration, political extremism, and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. This workshop analyzes the continued interaction of a range of key regional
security dynamics and functional issues in the Middle East over the last year, identifying
major emergent themes, linkages, and trends in the region and reflecting on their strategic
impact and implications.

The workshop, now in its eighth year, took place in Gstaad for the third year in
succession. It was comprised of 24 participants from 12 countries. Participants come
from a variety of institutions in the Middle East, Europe, and the United States. This
year’s workshop included senior participants such as the president of RAND; the
directors of the German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP, Berlin), the
Stimpson Center (Washington, D.C.), the Al Ahram Centre (Cairo), and the Wilson
Center (Washington, D.C.); and a regional director of the Nixon Center (Washington,
D.C.), in addition to the sponsors, the GCSP, RAND, GRC, and the Crown Center.
(Participant list appended.)

An Overview of Geopolitical and Regional Dynamics

The most obvious change in the Middle East over the last year has been the failure of
constructive unilateralism and its replacement by negotiations between actors in the
region. In addition, a number of other key factors collectively reflect and reinforce
contemporary regional security dynamics and trends:

• Regime and state weakness: Such structural weakness is apparent in different
combinations, and only in the cases of Lebanon and Iraq are the two synonymous.
In Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia we find strong regimes but weak states; Israel has
a strong state but weak regime. States in the Middle East are generally unable to
provide public goods (such as human security, welfare, a monopoly on violence,
and disparate militias, parties and foreign actors all too readily fill the vacuum.
Explanations center variously on the delegitimization of the Washington
Consensus in the region, the strength of authoritarian impulses from the “Arab
street,” and an identity/modernization crisis. The legitimation of the state system
needs to be supported in order to counter state failure, though in the Middle East
we do find a variety of states—failed states, antistates and city-states—which
suggest that a variety of legitimation models need to be developed. Paradoxically,
the widespread fear of complete sectarian-led disintegration of the state (the
nightmare scenario) serves to reinforce regimes through the promotion of
nationalist solidarity and international cooperation. It can also encourage states to
change their basis of legitimation, from traditional and charismatic to legal-
rational, where performance-related indicators such as rule of law, human rights,
and good governance predominate.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
2
• Instrumentalization of confessional and sectarian impulses: Distributional
resource conflicts have been increasingly depicted in cross-national confessional
terms (Sunnis versus the Shia Crescent or Axis) by some regional and
international state actors. These actors (Saudi Arabia and Egypt) sought to
instrumentalize such an easily understood concept to mobilize support of their
mainly Sunni populations to further their state interests. In reality, Arab Sunni
solidarity against Shia Iran is better understood through the prism of traditional
state power competition and rivalry than the prism of confessional clashes.
However, such instrumentalization has only served to promote “political Islam”
(where politics is perceived to be a means to salvation) and buttress the rise of
nonstate societal-based transnational fundamentalism. The strengthening of
transnational confessional and sectarian actors has, in turn, undermined the
cohesion of societies and states that are unable then to deal with the phenomena
they have partly served to create. Paradoxically, however, the splintering of
societal and confessional solidarity also has the effect of strengthening the state:
“Hold onto nurse for fear of something worse” is a strong, unifying impulse in the
region, particularly apposite in the context of a disintegrating Iraq.

• De facto borders and frontiers are no longer sacrosanct: While formal and
legal state territorial borders in the Middle East remain unchanged (even Iraq has
not physically collapsed), the long-term existence of what might be called
“frontiers of domination” (that is, de facto buffer zones and power projection into
neighboring states) and other unregulated borders is diminishing. This trend
began with Israel withdrawing from South Lebanon in 2000, Syria from Lebanon
in 2005 (after 30 years) and Israel from Gaza in 2006 (after 40 years).
Paradoxically, the inability of states to maintain their power-projection capability
at once reflects their diminished state power capacity, but in turn reinforces the
statehood of former recipients of such projection.

• Grand strategic evolution centered on two competing models: The
geopolitical balance of power and influence is now centered on two competing
projects for the hearts and minds of societies in the region. The first camp or
model is characterized by the desire for an international order based on the
fundamentalist principles and philosophies of theocratic Islam (political Islam),
which views the current world order as inherently unjust. This camp is not a
coherent political force but rather consists of parties and movements—such as
Hezbollah and the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt—and is led by a new and
untested leadership whose ideological discourse projects the global and
transnational idea of the umma that seeks to bring salvation to Islamic
communities. The ideology of political Islam is not an import as was fascism or
communism to European states, but embedded in the culture of particular states in
the region and part of the vocabulary of dissent. However, this discourse of
universalism appears more rhetorical than real, as in practice Islamists have state-
based, local, and immediate objectives. State concessions towards this camp in an
attempt to ameliorate grievances or induce cooption only allow it to gain
momentum: Islamists use democratic means to nondemocratic ends—electoral

--- Sayfa 9 ---
3
democracy is useful insofar as it allows majoritarianism to predominate.
Nonetheless, demobilized jihadists armed with an ideology that transcends the
region and technologies of destruction are now well placed to export lethality to,
for example, Southeast Asia, rather as the Mujahadin did from Afghanistan in the
1990s. The second camp is characterized by a secular-based order that can be
despotic or democratic in nature and uses state-based nationalism is a means of
countering political Islam. Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon, the defeat of Fatah
in Gaza, and the fall of the Baathist Party in Iraq have seriously weakened this
camp. In response, Egypt stresses an “Egypt first” policy and protection of the
homeland and places an emphasis on pre-Islamist Pharaonic traditions. Such
competition between the two camps finds contemporary expression in models
promoted by Iran and Turkey, two non-Arab Muslim actors seriously involved in
the Middle East, and this complicates the geopolitics of the region.
o Iran has undoubtedly been strengthened in military, intelligence, and
ideological terms by the removal of Saddam and the emergence of Iraq as
a weak and fragile neighbor.1 While relatively strong, Iran’s influence is
limited by its neighbor’s suspicions of its agenda and the risk of backlash
among the predominantly Arab-Sunni populations of the region. Currently
under UN Security Council (UNSC) sanctions, Iran is unlikely to reverse
course either on its nuclear program or its ambitions to be a regional
hegemon. It is still questionable if economic sanctions would change
Iranian policy.
o Within the Arab fold the diplomatic rise of a newly assertive Saudi
Arabia is evident, all the more remarkable given predictions in some
quarters of the immediate demise of the Saudi system following 9/11. The
renewal of Saudi engagement is prompted by its diminishing regard for
the implications of the U.S.-led freedom and democracy agenda in the
region and an increased concern for the potential strategic implications if
the Iraq “experiment” fails further. Saudi Arabia now promotes pan-Arab
nationalism as an antidote to political Islam. The Saudi monarchy is
characterized as paternalistic (“a good father to an extended family”)
rather than authoritarian, working through political mediation (enhanced
by its role as moral custodian of the two holy cities), accommodation, and
inclusiveness. In Saudi Arabia two political cultures coexist, the
exclusivist monarchy and exclusivist Wahhabi doctrine, which the
monarchy uses instrumentally for its own ends.  It is not hegemonic in
terms of military power but rather because of its approach to regional
political development.

• Evolving U.S. policy approaches to the region: U.S. policy post-Afghanistan
has helped reinforce the division of the region into two competing camps,

1 The Middle East is the most economically sanctioned region of the world (Iran, Iraq, Syria, Sudan).
Statistically, 34 percent of sanction cases result in moderate policy changes and then only when backed by
the threat or active use of force. Economic sanctions destabilized Iraq, eroded the middle class, and induced
societal rather than state disintegration. In the process they delegitimized the UN through association.
Ultimately, though, Iraq was not a threat to its neighbors after Gulf War I.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
4
splitting the broad coalition (Russia, India, Pakistan, and China) which it had
created.  Post-Iraq, the United States and its new coalition allies (mainly Western
and Christian) gained an unprecedented military presence in the region through
the insertion of ground troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as the presence of
ships, satellites, and new bases. However, the Bush administration insisted on
moral clarity in foreign policy, which undercut flexibility, transitions, and
imaginative leaps and precluded effective statecraft. By clearly dividing the
Middle East into “good” (the United States, Israel, and conservative allies) and
“bad” (Iran and al-Qaeda) the United States has been drawn into supporting
secular versus Islamists, Sunni versus Shia, Arabs versus Iranians. As a result, the
political strategic goal encapsulated by the freedom and democracy agenda and
the Great Middle East Initiative is in retreat. Although the United States is losing,
it is not clear if Iran or al-Qaeda will be the main beneficiaries. The Bush
presidency is physically and psychologically exhausted after having faced a
number of crises and a huge agenda, including two wars (Afghanistan and Iraq), a
simmering crisis with Iran, civil war in Palestine, and potential state failure in
Pakistan. It has no real control over events and what happens on the ground, and
its ineffectiveness is underscored by the poor personal chemistry between
President Bush, President Mubarak, and King Abdullah.
o Iraq: Mainstream senior U.S. republicans, most notably Senator Lugar,
call on the president to create a bipartisan approach towards Iraq before
the electoral cycle of autumn 2007 makes this untenable. This implies a
substantial troop cut in Iraq within months. The next U.S. administration
must now assess the strategic implications of U.S. defeat in the region, not
least how the domestic backlash against future Middle East entanglements
will shape policy. Reassessments and recalculations of U.S. strategic
interests suggest that the United States should not exit the region entirely,
but just redeploy within it.
o Iran: The Bush administration changed course in 2005, adopting the
European approach based on diplomacy, and now two rounds of UN
sanctions are beginning to impact the thinking of the Iranian elite. How
the Bush administration manages President Putin’s Russia will determine
if a third round of UN sanctions is possible and so have a significant
impact on Iran.
o Palestine: With the election of Hamas, the new U.S. discourse now
emphasizes support for “moderates” (old-style authoritarians) against
“radicals.” This policy shift suffers from two obvious defects. First, it has
occurred too quickly for European policymakers to adjust. Second, it
maintains a Manichean world view that is misplaced in the context on the
Middle East: Moderation is not a static and fixed behavioral pattern in the
region, but rather contingent upon the extent to which the interests of
actors are accommodated.

• Changed geographical reality: With the end of the Cold War the geographical
reality of the Middle East is extended to Central Asia, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
(from Casablanca to Kabul). After 9/11 most of the Islamic world was

--- Sayfa 11 ---
5
incorporated, including the Philippines and Indonesia. Old traditional national
conflicts were based on territory, identity, and nationalism, and such disputes
were redefined in terms of a larger cultural and civilizational clash—Islam versus
Christianity. Three previously separated geographical worlds are now connected
as conflicts are more readily redefined in terms of religion—from the global war
on terror, through regional conflicts to local conflict.

• Mutual Penetration: Hitherto the Middle East has been considered as a single
system, zone, or security complex, albeit one that was the most penetrated in the
global system.  Such penetration is increasing as the globalization process spreads
Internet and mobile phone usage with over 400 Arab-speaking satellite stations in
the region. Such connectivity is powered by technological innovation and is
media-based. The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) business community invests
its prosperity in the surrounding region (Egypt, Morocco, Sudan, Lebanon, Syria,
and Iraq) and elsewhere in the world and is becoming increasingly integrated into
the process of globalization. At the same time, the growth of Muslim communities
in Europe (and the United States) means that the penetration is reciprocal—“the
Middle East” is now a domestic political issue in Europe. This penetration is also
accompanied by fragmentation. The Middle East region can be considered in
terms of three different sub-zones: failed states (Palestine, Lebanon, Afghanistan,
Iraq); authoritarian stagnation (Libya, Egypt); and cities and societies that are
global in terms of culture, politics and economy (Abu-Dhabi, Dubai, Qatar) but
are geographically located in the Middle East.

• Oil: The oil price increase ($72 per barrel) has allowed an unprecedented
accumulation of money in the region, with an estimated $1 trillion in the hands of
elites. This is more money than can be invested, creating calls to limit production
in the region to 7 million barrels per day until the West opens up investment
opportunities for the region. GCC economies are booming and refining capacity
of the Saudis has doubled, with five major refineries. A process of
deindustrialization and economic diversification is now under way. It is in the
U.S. and Western interest in general to maximize oil production in Iraq; it is not
in the interest of its neighbors who are energy competitors, and it can be argued it
would be in Iraqi interest to lower production and revenues in order to keep this
strategic asset under national control. Conversely, Iraq will need capital and
investment for reconstruction, including its oil sector.

Arab-Israeli Conflict, Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey

The region has experienced a number of key changes over the last year which are notable
and together shape the prospects and conditions for a permanent settlement in the region.
• First, the “constants”: Israel’s commitment to end occupation, partly motivated by
demographic considerations, remains firm.
• Second, a majority in Palestine favor a two-state solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
6
• Third, strong minorities in both Israel and Palestine are strongly opposed to such a
solution. The big changes, not least a weaker Israeli government and
unilateralism, is dead, especially post-Lebanon (2006).
• Fourth, the Israeli occupation of Gaza ended and now between 65 and 75 percent
of the populations of both states favor a two-state solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
• Fifth, Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank will have to be negotiated.
However, it is not clear what Israel is prepared to concede, for example in terms
of territory, to facilitate the formation of a viable Palestinian state on the West
Bank. The Gaza experience of instability has discredited the policy of
“constructive unilateralism” and weakened the Israeli government: A strong
Israeli government is a necessary prerequisite for unilateral action. Nevertheless, a
Grand Coalition consists of 83 seats in the Knesset (the largest ever) and a
strategic alliance between “the two Ehuds” (Barak and Olmert) allows for a
stabilization of the Israeli political scene.
• Sixth, the reality of power distribution in Palestine has changed and a duopoly
now exists, with Hamas and Fatah contesting control. The defeat of Fatah in Gaza
suggests that the Palestinian cause and with it Arab nationalism is in strategic
decline, unless Hamas builds itself into a transnational pan-Islamic movement.
• Seventh, changes in Israeli power distribution have also occurred: The military is
now led by a new defense minister and new military commanders have been
promoted (during the war of 2006 the chiefs of staff, intelligence, planning, and
the air force were all air force officers who believed in effects-based doctrine).
The next Israeli military encounter will look very different from the war in 2006
that violated every principle of Israeli ground force military doctrine. The Israeli
Defense Forces now argue that military intervention in Gaza in response to rocket
attacks will prove meaningless as the situation in Gaza is too chaotic.
• Eighth, the United States is no longer a viable Middle East mediator; all Bush
administration peace initiatives/road maps have failed to gain traction. But if the
United States is disengaged from the peace process, can progress be expected?
The Oslo peace process demonstrated that if the interests of the two parties are
strong enough, progress can be made without U.S. involvement, though all
progress is easily reversible. Israel could well evacuate small and dispersed
settlements in the West Bank Settlement projects on the West Bank, but the final
status of Jerusalem still remains the most hypersensitive issue.
• Ninth, the regional balance of power has shifted and Hamas has at least to tolerate
the process of Arab-Israeli negotiation. A “grand bargain” needs to be struck on
the Palestinian side to give Israel a viable interlocutor, but it is not clear that
pragmatists and centrists in Fatah and Hamas can overcome their own militants
and radicals to provide this role. The sine qua non of a sustainable, permanent
Israeli-Palestinian settlement is Hamas acceptance—but even the most moderate
Hamas members cannot agree with even the most moderate Israelis over the right
of return to Jerusalem issue.  A huge debate is under way as to how best to bolster
Abu Mazen without discrediting him, how to engage Hamas at a low level, and
how to prevent a human disaster amongst the 1.5 million Palestinians in Gaza.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
7
• Finally, when reviewing possibilities for stability in the region, it is likely that the
“Syrian option” will gain favor on the Arab and the Israeli side.

How to stabilize Palestine under current conditions? External aid is a traditional tool to
influence events and actors in Palestine. However, although King Abdullah of Jordan
supports Fatah more than Hamas, his relations with the Fatah leadership have eroded and
he is unwilling to become deeply involved in the West Bank (advocating instead a
“Jordan-first” policy aimed at consolidating Jordanian identity). As a result, the “bailing
out” option is difficult to achieve and a vacuum of power will continue in the West Bank.
In Jordan the middle class is squeezed by a huge inflow of cheap Iraqi labor and an
economic boom in the capital which caused inflation and raised rents and land prices. At
the same time, this has helped assimilate Palestinians by decreasing the divide between
Palestinians and Jordanians.

Lebanon is in the process of searching for a new equilibrium as the state and society
attempt to recover after a 15-year war with Syria.  In September 2004 UN Security
Council Resolution 1559 called for the Syrian military withdrawal from Lebanon and the
disarming of all militias so that for the first time in 30 years Lebanon could regain
sovereignty.  A new national unity government in 2005, which has expanded to include
all parties, found UNSC Resolution 1559 hard, but not impossible, to implement.
Although the Syrian military did withdraw, its power and influence was maintained
through other means—in particular, assassination. Will the promise to end the U.S. and
European isolation of Syria (the “Libyan option”), together with an Israeli withdrawal
from the Golan Heights, be sufficient inducement for the Assad regime to dissolve its
strategic partnership with Iran and its lynchpin role between Tehran and Hezbollah?

Following the war between Hezbollah and Israel in 2006, UNSC Resolution 1701 saw the
Lebanese army deployed to the South for the first time since the 1970s, the UN Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was strengthened and the border demilitarized. As a result,
three trends are apparent. First, south Lebanon is now experiencing a process of
normalization. Second, although the state and the Lebanese army still face challenges to
their monopoly of force, it is no longer taboo to discuss Hezbollah’s weapons and the
Lebanese army has fought Fatah Islam in Palestinian refugee camps in North Lebanon.
Militias, particularly Hezbollah, did not disarm and are detached from the peace process.
In addition, Sunni fundamentalists groups (such as Fatah al-Islam) have been radicalized
by the war in Iraq and are now powerful in Tripoli and Sidon and other northern cities.
Third, there is an immunity from violent conflict as it is not in the interest of any party in
Lebanon to mobilize for war (unlike 1975). However, as the state faces multiple security
challenges and has a weak and divided government this immunity could easily be eroded.
Another security vacuum in Lebanon would damage not just Lebanon but the region as it
would not be contained within its state borders.

Turkey faces an ongoing civil-military struggle. The “deep state”—that is, the military,
constitutional courts, and middle class secularists (some of whom are “secular
fundamentalists”)—contests power with Islamist religious parties. This struggle
culminated in the victory of the AKP Party (Justice and Development Party) in the July

--- Sayfa 14 ---
8
22, 2007, elections. AKP is meticulous in its efforts to avoid being characterized as an
Islamist party: It stresses its democratic and liberal economic credentials at every turn.
The government is widely credited with a successful economy policy and has
democratised the political arena, most notably reversing government policy on Cyprus.
Turkey enjoys record levels of foreign direct investment and lower unemployment;
predictability and self-confidence characterize the booming economy, which is
countrywide in impact (except in its southeast). However, a less visible social and
cultural Islamization process is occurring, with Islamic elements penetrating the
education system, courts, national holidays and symbolic elements of public life.  Much
of this is perception-led: While 60 percent of women wear headscarves, this as an overall
proportion is less than 10 years ago, but only more visible as rural more traditional
populations migrate to the cities.

Paradoxically, the tragedy of Turkish democracy is that military intervention in defense
of democracy has itself undercut the need for a civil opposition, and so weakened
democratic practice and oversight. A new generation of military leaders at the brigadier
and major general level present a more radical secular and anti-Western face. The
Achilles heel of the state, according to the military, can be located in Turkish policy to
Iraq’s Kurdistan. Here, continuous transfers of IED technology between camps outside
the control of Kurdistan leaders and the PKK in Turkey itself highlight a source of
insecurity which the Turkish military can use to mobilise support against the government
for its failure to take action. A Turkish military strike would destroy Turkish-U.S.
relations; unless the United States encourages Iraqi Kurdish leaders to arrest PKK
leaders, the outcome will be the same. At present, only 9 percent of Turks support U.S.
policy; 86 percent oppose it.

The new government will most likely adopt a more activist policy in the Middle East and
begin by striking a “grand bargain” with Iraqi Kurdish leadership. In return for remaining
part of Iraq, the Turkish government would guarantee trade relations ($2 billion in
investments and contracts) and help the Kurds establish a buffer zone between
themselves and fundamentalist Shia and Sunni communities in the south. This would
remove the “separatism leading to independence” demonstration effect for Kurds in
Turkey.

Along with Iran and Syria, Turkey shares a concern about the status of Kurdistan and
other minorities in the region and also receives energy supplies from Iran.  As a result,
Turkey engages Iran and Syria, rather than supporting a U.S. policy that aims to isolate
and promote a policy of regime change in these two states. On the issue of the Iranian
nuclear program, the key concern of Turkey is not that Iran would threaten it with
weapons but that a regional nuclear arms race would be destabilizing for the region.
Behind the more critical rhetoric towards Israel (“policy of state terrorism”), the basic
Turkish commitment to defense and intelligence sharing has not changed.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
9

Iraq

Iraq constitutes the most serious blunder in U.S. foreign policy and the US now has the
lowest Pew Research Center Poll ratings in the region since the history of polling—even
a majority of the Israeli public find the U.S. approach to the region unbalanced.  Unlike
Iraq and the region, the United States is likely to recover from the long-term
consequences of this miscalculation. It is easier to focus on the reasons for the
miscalculation than to outline a coherent plan for addressing its consequences. The Bush
administration underestimated the manpower and finance necessary for Iraq, failing to
learn the lessons of and build on the U.S. and UK experiences of 1990s nation-building.
It also failed to recognize how difficult it would be to hold Iraq together if neighbors,
who had access to Iraq and could influence events, were not prepared to cooperate and
that status quo regimes would not support the emergence of a democratic Iraq established
through coercive regime change.

Insurgencies and civil wars usually end in three ways. Most frequently a clear victor
emerges.  States can also fragment permanently, though this has not happened often since
1945 as the international community has acted to prevent this outcome. The least frequent
outcome is for a negotiated settlement between the parties. A lack of trust usually means
the settlement is temporary, giving factions the chance to rest and rearm, unless foreign
peacekeeping forces assume a protectorate role or an external balance of power is
maintained (as was the case with Lebanon after Syrian intervention in the 1990s).

How can Iraq be best “read”? Transhistorical sectarianism appears to be a constant
feature of Iraqi historical development, as does coexistence and cooperation between
groups, with sectarianism imported from outside. Divisions did exist in Iraq but they
were largely politicized and then only under certain conditions.
• The revolution of 1920 (a rebellion against the British) has been portrayed in
terms of a great nationalist uprising uniting all Iraqis, but can also be understood
in sectarian terms. The rhetoric and discourse of a pan-Islamic uprising against
the infidels cloaked a desire of the chief clerical Shia families of Najaf and
Kerbala to maintain their autonomy: The more national the discourse, the more
local the objectives.
• Between 1958 and the 1970s the politics of ideology and social mobility rather
than sects predominated, with a diverse, emerging city-based middle class
enjoying a golden age.  Saddam promoted the secularization and detribalization of
society to create Iraqi subjects loyal to the regime and party.  Shia clerics and
institutions (which generated revenues outside government control) opposed this
process, and therefore the Sunni elites moved to destroy, eliminate, and
incorporate independent, autonomous social power not under Baathist control.
• The Iran-Iraq war of the 1980s reintroduced sectarian politics, and sanctions in
the 1990s promoted a retribalization and the fragmentation and localization of
Iraqi society.
• The post-Saddam environment can best be understood not as civil war or
complete chaos, but as a thriving ruthless local political environment based on

--- Sayfa 16 ---
10
decentralized “associations of trust” in disparate localities. These associations use
violence for multiple ends: to establish their status (violence generates recognition
and respect), to defend their communities, and to impress rivals. The forms and
idioms that these associations take (ethnic, sectarian, or class-based) depends on
locality. The public or national state has little weight, unlike the powerful
patronage networks of an emerging shadow state: national coalition parties, armed
tribal groups, a disaffected opposition, insurgents (ex-Baathists), and criminal
networks. These six strata are armed, are partisan, have territorially defined
constituencies that are regional in scope and express themselves through local
forms of power.

External actors possess neither the capacity to determine where the fragmentation and
disintegration ends nor the sophistication to play power politics effectively (constant
troop rotations make the institutionalization of localized knowledge difficult), but they
can still accelerate or retard processes already in motion. Through a combination of
default and design national politics (“a fiction”) is undermined and localist tendencies
upheld. In Basra, for example, the UK oversaw the institutionalization of an entrenched
localism though building local security services which reinforced local power structures.
The U.S. surge does not represent a national security plan but rather an incremental, ad
hoc policy based on a series of local agreements: Some militias are dispersed and wait for
the surge to pass, localism based on isolation and resentment has been reinforced, and the
dependency of the national government on the United States has been strengthened. The
Turkish government plays a powerful role in isolating the Kurds, and Iran utilizes
patronage, violence, and dependence in the southeast.

In addition, the U.S. domestic presidential political timeline does not support medium- or
longer-term rational course adjustments to U.S. policy in Iraq.  A significant reduction in
US casualties would change the tone of the debate in Washington (100 dead and 300
seriously wounded each month constitutes the single most troubling factor), but if the
“surge” is to be effective, U.S. casualties will increase; if the United States were to
redeploy from Iraq’s cities, intra-Iraqi violence would increase and a “cutting and
running” discourse would dominate.  Both are politically unacceptable outcomes.

The Bush administrations focus on al-Qaeda in Iraq generates status and prestige for a
group whose power relative to other internal militias is weak. This emphasis does,
however, play well domestically by defining and reducing current objectives and
missions, and preparing for a more limited set of missions in the future. The U.S.
administration treats reconciliation and better governance as an integrated whole.
However, just because the Iraqi Parliament might function, we cannot assume the
automatic presence of a reconciliation process (indeed, with the death of Saddam there is
no leading Baathist with whom to forgive and reconcile): The reconciliation process is
largely abstract and has yet to be operationalized.

To stabilize Iraq is to destabilize Iran and Syria. As a result, over the medium term the
United States must prioritize and choose which of its objectives and interests are vital
(stabilizing Iraq?) and subordinate all other tasks (democratize Lebanon, denuclearize

--- Sayfa 17 ---
11
Iran, or punish Syria?) to that end. An inability to choose and prioritize will result in the
failure of U.S. policy in the region. What, then, can be done to stabilize Iraq and deny al-
Qaeda an incubator to recruit and a base of operations?

The adoption of classic counterinsurgency tactics in al-Anbar province, low civilian
deaths in June and the initiation of dialogue with Iran over Iraq all appear positive
indicators, but they do not outweigh the negative one and this is reflected in U.S. public
opinion which drives the U.S. public debate. The pivot point in Iraq will occur over the
next 12 months, as the United States attempts to undertake a gradual and controlled de-
escalation—which runs the danger of uncontrolled de-escalation and the collapse of the
Iraqi government.  After the Iraq Study Group’s bipartisan option was rejected and the
“surge” adopted, the compromise option may not be on offer in September 2007.

As a result of continued instability in Iraq, all options appear to be on the table and a
process of revaluation and consultation is now under way. The choice facing U.S.
policymakers might be expressed in binary and negative terms: The United States can
choose to stay in Iraq and allow the situation to deteriorate slowly or it can leave and the
situation will deteriorate quickly—violence will intensify as factions fight for resources.
From another perspective, three options are possible.
• First, the United States could embrace a peace-enforcement mission and flood
Iraq with troops. However, U.S. public opinion would object and unless the
United States provided core contingents, it could not happen.
• Second, exit quickly and let events take their course—but U.S. moral
responsibility and U.S. interests rule this out as a viable option.
• Third, pick a side (a Shia-Kurd government with as many Sunnis as possible) and
assist it and maintain a sustained though lower engagement in Iraq (essentially the
Lugar and Iraq Study Group option). Senator Lugar suggests that the United
States should consider redeploying U.S. forces outside Iraq, undertaking a
diplomatic offensive to create a forum with regional participation, developing
biofuels to give the United States energy independence and solving the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

But given the reality of how power is structured and distributed in Iraq, regional powers
will need to recognize and legitimize the authority of local leaders who can enforce local
settlements (though it is hard to envisage the outcome of imposed settlements in Kirkuk
or Mosul or how the United States could avoid getting involved in the ethnic cleansing
that this could provoke). A viable central government would need a strong national
military and security force.  However, the reality in Iraq is that devolved local power can
protect neighborhoods and, in effect, the U.S. policy already trains and equips factions it
supports.  Access to national energy in Iraq (82 percent of which is pumped by national
companies) demands a national presence and local security (which local leaders would
have a stake in securing in return for energy). Thus, the production and distribution of
public goods (oil revenues) can be used as a lever to bind the periphery to the center and
help unify the state.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
12
All of Iraq’s neighbors, particularly U.S. allies in the region, want Iraq to stay together
rather than emerge as a failed state—not least as such failure would boost Iranian
hegemony. A series of bilateral and multilateral interlocking conferences allowing for
consultative arrangements in a constellation of consecutive circles needs to be created.
This could begin with a core group of friends (Kurds, Saudis, Turks, and Jordanians) to
ascertain common ground and negotiate agreements. The Iranians and Syrians could then
be integrated into these consultations: As Iran wants Iraq as a satellite state (akin to
Syria’s relations with Lebanon) and both these states can play the role of spoilers, the
purpose of such diplomacy would be to minimize this potential. A wider regional group,
including the EU, World Bank, Egypt, and Japan, would play a financial role in helping
to stabilize Iraq.

Iran and the Gulf

GCC perceptions of a nuclear-armed Iran center on how to manage the secondary and
tertiary regional effects, the regional aftershocks, and unanticipated consequences.  Might
the GCC states be caught in the cross-fire of an Israeli or U.S. preventative strike on Iran,
with disruption to the Haj or the eastern oil fields of Saudi Arabia, assassinations of
leaders, or military rocket attacks as the result? The possibility of a Chernobyl-like
nuclear contamination worries Kuwait and highlights the lack of GCC focus on
consequence management. An emboldened Iran threatens the UAE and its ongoing
maritime territorial dispute. The specter of a regional arms race could pressure the GCC
to develop its own nuclear program, or, for example, the UAE, could ask to be placed
under Egypt’s nuclear umbrella. GCC states also focus on Shia communities in the
region, particularly in Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, where there is an active policy debate
centered on how best to integrate them, the pace of reform and prospects for their
radicalization, and their potential role as a fifth column, ready to be mobilized if the
United States attacks Iran. The GCC has a nuanced understanding of the implications of
the nuclearization of Iran: The regional order would be thrown into question and new
credible guarantees for security would need to be generated.

The GCC response to the implications of this threat, though, is diverse, ranging from
accommodation and détente, to increased security guarantees (whether bilateral with the
United States or multilateral), to developing its own nuclear deterrent (for example,
Egypt and Saudi Arabia). Iran can misinterpret public and private discourse—for
example, the UAE has stated that it will not allow U.S. bases in the UAE to attack Iran,
unless under a UNSC resolution. The GCC also expresses deeper anxieties, frustrations,
and fears, and it is an open question whether these states would welcome the role of a
nuclear Saudi Arabia as regional hegemon (indeed, for Oman, a nuclear Saudi Arabia
constitutes a greater potential threat than Iran). It is also open as to how U.S. or Russian
negotiations might impact the region, whether states will accept the offer of a U.S.
nuclear umbrella, or if Pakistan would provide aid if Iran attacked.

The domestic political environment in Iran can be divided into two broad factions
competing for power, patronage, and resources. One group, consisting of reformists
(students, the urban middle class and some of the bazaar) and pragmatic conservatives,

--- Sayfa 19 ---
13
believes the revolution is over and seeks to normalize relations with the world.  For this
group, the nuclear program provides Iran with a bargaining chip to normalize relations
with the West and integrate into the global economy. Another consists of ideological
conservatives (who, like Ahmadinijad, want to return to “first principles”), the rural
power, the Basij militia, and some of the revolutionary guard susceptible to Islamic
revolutionary rhetoric. This group argues that revolutionary values have not yet been
fully implemented and wants the revolutionary state to revert to first principles, rather
than integrate into the globalized world. For this group, nuclear power provides the
means to equalize Iranian power with the West.

The nuclear program is symbolic of Iran’s regional role and behavior, the nature of the
state and its character. The principal motive for the nuclear program is to bolster
performance legitimacy: A political and technical momentum is propelled by the image
of a technical mastery (over both nuclear enrichment and military weaponization) which
provides status, prestige, and a substitute for a per capita income fall in Iran.

How can such a momentum be halted?  Neither China nor Russia wants to see a nuclear
Iran but they are not prepared to accept military strikes to prevent this.  Iran tries to blunt
the military option by splitting the West, attempting to stop a new UN resolution,
threatening to accelerate the nuclear program, and developing spillover strategies in the
region through appealing to the Arab street over the heads of their rulers and
strengthening Hezbollah-Iranian links.  In addition, it appears that the technical timeline
for enrichment is not synchronized with the diplomatic timeline currently in place, which
creates a fault line in Western policymaking. Furthermore, if sticks are not to be used,
how can Iran could be rewarded—what does it want: legitimacy, geopolitical
advancement, assurances about U.S. presence in Iraq and Afghanistan?

Although Iran is weak in terms of conventional military power, the nuclear program itself
is far too advanced to be susceptible to sanctions.  How, then, might the Iranian regime
be contained?  For the Iranian leadership a central dilemma remains: external investments
create dependency; without such investments it cannot modernize its economy. Thus,
compared with the rest of the Middle East, Iran is relatively economically isolated,
without dense ties or large levels of external investment—a complete contrast to the
1970s, when it was the economically most modernized state in the region.

Sanctions to stop refined products reaching Iran would impact society (the government is
sensitive to public sentiment) and sanctions to prevent foreign companies investing in the
Iranian energy (oil and gas) sector would destabilize the leadership of the state.  Oil price
decline (a Saudi-induced drop in oil prices would hurt Iran the most and could be
implemented quickest), as well as dropping exports and flat and falling production,
impacts Iran’s oil distribution fund and so undermines the governments distributive
patronage system.  This threat to regime survival could cause a regime shift back towards
the moderates and realists and so render a nuclear Iran more palatable. If the nuclear
ambitions of the state conflict with its real economic interest as a first-rate energy
exporter, then this could create pressure to shift policy emphasis and priorities in Iran:

--- Sayfa 20 ---
14
Iran wants to have a nuclear capability but not at the cost of becoming an economic
basket case.

Iran can also be challenged ideologically via sophisticated media campaigns and the oil
wealth of neighboring states can be used to fund such efforts to delegitimize Hamas and
Hezbollah in the region.  As the reality of Iran begins to be known—for example, there is
not a single Sunni mosque in the state, no Sunni is a member of the cabinet or an
ambassador, and it is ranked 105 on the transparency corruption scale—the moral and
virtuous image it projects will be undercut: Iranian “Third Worldism” is undercut by
Persian chauvinism.   Preexisting dividing lines amongst the Arab and Persian Shia can
also be deepened through stoking fears of Iranian domination and Arab Shia theological
supremacy (Najef over Qom), building an immunity and resistance capacity to Iranian
ideological and political warfare efforts.

In addition to economic sanctions and efforts to counter the ideological appeal of the
regime, there are signs of regime decay itself, which help fuel the regional backlash
against Iran that is gathering pace.  Iran is has overplayed its hand and is overextended in
Iraq and suffers from short-termism, no overall strategy, misjudgements which create
internal opposition and dissent, and poor timing, not to mention a weak military.  There
are therefore a number of built-in barriers and structural impediments to Iranian influence
in the region.  These barriers can be strengthened but how exactly to operationalize this
process is less clear.

The United States needs Iranian support for an orderly exit from Iraq.  Iranian policy
towards the United States is not consistent—vacillating between calls to leave
immediately and to leave, but slowly. A “grand bargain” assumes that there is one
interlocutor in Iran with whom to negotiate, but the Iranian president and supreme guide
are not consistent in policy statements (the former bypasses the latter and manipulates the
system). Moreover, there are no constituencies in Iran that press for better U.S.-Iranian
relations. The strategic national security community, business community, and diaspora
are either uninterested or against taking a risk to improve such relations.

The United States is now multilateralizing the Iranian nuclear file—framing it as a global
problem—while dealing with Iraq in a more unilateral manner. While Iran cannot be
excluded from a new regional security architecture, it is not clear how it might be
included. The threat of a nuclear Iran gives the United States leverage over GCC states in
the region to help stabilize in Iraq. This leverage is strengthened by the fear in GCC
states that the United States could compromise with Iran, striking a “grand bargain” to
save U.S. policy in Iraq but at the expense of GCC security interests.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
15

Concluding Remarks

Four central themes have threaded through this workshop.
• There are tensions between different models for organizing political behavior in
the region, between state structures, and on the basis of secular ideals or through
transnational, subnational and non-national movements based on ethnoreligious
identity and beliefs. Stability is enhanced through nationalism which creates
stronger, more competent and cohesive states.
• How the region responded to the 2006 war in Lebanon illustrates that frontiers of
domination are not enduring and that satellite states are on the retreat. The
performance of the Lebanese army and the rising credibility of the prime minister
project greater state stability. Expectations are now more realistic, lessons have
been learned, and Iranian influence appears to have peaked.
• Perceptions concerning the role of outsiders in shaping the region have changed.
Outsiders bring violence to the region but cannot shape Iraqi politics; sanctions
alone are not effective, but high oil revenues provide an opportunity to
redistribute wealth and so undercut conflict.
• It is clear that 9/11 continues to be the prism that dominates the arc of U.S. policy.
The perception of vulnerability in the United States and that threats are linked to
the character of U.S. adversaries has led to the conclusion that changing regimes
will change state behavior.  While the Iraq war had illustrated a clear willingness
to use coercive regime change as part of U.S. nonproliferation policy, the message
with regard to Iran is mixed. Does the United States want regime change or
regime behavior change and does it distinguish between the two? The United
States has substituted coherent policy for competing impulses, and if it abandons
coercive regime change as an option, the Iranians will need to decide if Iran is a
revolutionary or an ordinary state.
o In the short term, the United States has no real leverage over the
government in Iraq. Although its influence is both overwhelming and
marginal (political outcomes occur at the margins), there is no
reconciliation or political process in place that will produce outcomes
necessary to stabilize the state in the short and medium term.  A timetable
for troop withdrawal and the threat of actual withdrawal could supply
leverage and the political incentive to facilitate reconciliation.
o A nuclear Iran poses profound implications for U.S. extended deterrence
and countering terrorism: The reduction of the U.S. military footprint in
the Gulf would remove a cause of terrorist recruitment; but extended
deterrence is more credible if the United States has a near neighborhood
presence. Is the U.S. “surge” a deterrent force or designed to strike Iranian
nuclear sites? A counterproliferation strike carries with it a significant risk
of a general war akin to 1914 or 1967.
o U.S. withdrawal from the region suggests that the United States could then
jettison its current strategic incoherence in favor of a new set of strategic
relations based on feasible political goals. The United States should
continue democratization efforts in the region, but should pursue this

--- Sayfa 22 ---
16
policy more intelligently by focusing first on the process of political
liberalization—an effective press, functioning civil society, the rule of
law—before electoral democracy. U.S. policy towards Israel is
unbalanced, with detrimental outcomes for the United States and Israel.
The perception in the Muslim world that the United States is not an honest
broker increases the need for it to gain credit and legitimacy, and reoccupy
the moral high ground that an Arab-Israeli settlement would generate. Al-
Qaeda has reconstituted itself as a serious threat and the US needs to
discover how to counter the current threat without generating the next and
think more intelligently about how to bolster moderates without
undermining them.
o A future focus and agenda should include the long-term implications of
effective hearts-and-minds campaigns, demographic and economic
change, how these impact development, and how the post-Iraq syndrome
will shape U.S. policies in the region.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
17
Participants
Ambassador David AARON, Director, Center for Middle East Public Policy, RAND
Sir Tom ARNOLD, Former Senior Leader, Conservative Party, United Kingdom
Dr. Robert ART, Christian A. Herter Professor of International Relations, Brandeis University
Dr. Henri J. BARKEY, Bernard L. and Bertha F. Cohen Professor and Chair of the International
Relations Department, Lehigh University, Bethlehem
Ms. Kristina CHERNIAHIVSKY, Associate Director, Crown Center for Middle East Studies,
Brandeis University
Dr. Shahram CHUBIN, Director of Studies, GCSP
Ambassador James DOBBINS, Director, International Security and Defense Policy Center, RAND
Dr. Farid EL KHAZEN, Professor of Political Science,  American University of Beirut
Prof. Shai FELDMAN, Director, Crown Center for Middle East Studies, Brandeis University
Dr. Graeme HERD, ETC Co-Director, GCSP (rapporteur)
Dr. Geoffrey KEMP, Director, Regional Strategic Programs, The Nixon Center, Washington, D.C.
Ms. Ellen LAIPSON, President and CEO, The Henry L. Stimson Center, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Steve LARRABEE, International Security Analyst, Center for Middle East Public Policy,
RAND
Dr. Robert LITWAK, Director, Division of International Studies, Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Giacomo LUCIANI, Director, The Gulf Institute (Geneva), and Professorial Lecturer, SAIS
Johns Hopkins University Bologna Center
Dr. Volker PERTHES, Director, German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP),
Berlin
Mr. Abdulaziz SAGER, Chairman, Gulf Research Centre, Dubai
Dr. Abdel Monem SAID, Director, Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies, Cairo
Ambassador Fred TANNER, Director, GCSP
Mr. Tariq TELL, Amman
Dr. James A. THOMSON, President and CEO, RAND
Dr. Charles TRIPP, Head of Department, School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London
Dr. Frederic M. WEHREY, International Policy Analyst, Center for Middle East Public Policy,
RAND
Prof. Sami ZUBAIDA, Emeritus Professor of Politics and Sociology, School of Politics and
Sociology, Birkbeck College, University of London

--- Sayfa 25 ---
19
Program

Sunday, 1 July 2007
Arrival of Participants

19h00
Aperitif at the Hotel Arc-en-ciel

19h30
Welcoming Dinner at the Hotel Bellevue

Monday, 2 July 2007
09h00-09h15
Welcome and Introduction to the Conference

Dr. Shahram CHUBIN, Director of Studies, GCSP

Ambassador David AARON, Director, Center for Middle East Public

Policy, RAND
Prof. Shai FELDMAN, Director, Crown Center for Middle East Studies,
Brandeis University
Mr. Abdulaziz SAGER, Chairman, Gulf Research Center, Dubai
09h15-11h30
Geopolitical and Regional Dynamics: an Overview
Chair: Dr. Geoffrey KEMP, Director, Regional Strategic Programs, The
Nixon Center, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Abdel Monem SAID, Director, Al Ahram Center for Political and
Strategic Studies, Cairo
Dr. Volker PERTHES, Director, German Institute for International and
Security Affairs (SWP), Berlin
11h30-12h00
Coffee Break
12h00-13h00
General Discussion
13h00-14h00
Buffet Lunch
14h00-15h30
Arab-Israeli Conflict
Chair: Ambassador Fred TANNER, Director, GCSP
Prof. Shai FELDMAN, Director, Crown Center for Middle East Studies,
Brandeis University
Jordan
Mr. Tariq TELL, Amman
Lebanon
Dr. Farid AL KHAZEN, Professor of Political Science,  American
University of Beirut

--- Sayfa 26 ---
20
Turkey
Dr. Henri J. BARKEY, Bernard L. and Bertha F. Cohen Professor and
Chair of the International Relations Department, Lehigh University,
Bethlehem
Dr. Steve LARRABEE, International Security Analyst, Center for Middle
East Public Policy, RAND
15h30-16h00
Coffee Break
16h00-17h00
General Discussion
19h30
Dinner at the Hotel Alpenland

Tuesday, 3 July 2007
09h00-10h30
Iraq
Chair: Ambassador David AARON, Director, Center for Middle East
Public Policy, RAND
Dr. Charles TRIPP, Head of Department, School of Oriental and African
Studies, University of London
Prof. Sami ZUBAIDA, Emeritus Professor of Politics and Sociology,
School of Politics and Sociology, Birkbeck College, University of
London
Amb. James DOBBINS, Director, International Security and Defense
Policy Center, RAND
10h30-11h00
Coffee Break
11h00-12h00
General Discussion
12h00-13h00
Buffet Lunch
13h00-14h30
Iran and the Gulf
Chair: Mr. Abdulaziz SAGER, Chairman, Gulf Research Centre, Dubai
Dr. Shahram Chubin, Director of Studies, GCSP
Dr. Frederic M. WEHREY, International Policy Analyst, Center for Middle
East Public Policy, RAND
Dr. Giacomo LUCIANI, Director, The Gulf Institute (Geneva) and
Professorial Lecturer, SAIS Johns Hopkins University Bologna Center
14h30-15h00
Coffee Break
15h00-16h00
General Discussion
16h00-17h00
Concluding Remarks
Chair: Ms. Ellen LAIPSON, President and CEO, The Henry L. Stimson
Center, Washington, D.C.
Dr. Robert LITWAK, Director, Division of International Studies, Woodrow
Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
21
Dr. James A. THOMSON, President and CEO, RAND
Dr. Robert ART, Christian A. Herter Professor of International
Relations, Brandeis University
19h30
Concluding Informal Dinner at Restaurant Rialto
Rapporteur
 Dr. Graeme HERD, ETC Co-Director, GCSP