--- Sayfa 1 ---
13
The Second Ray
The Final Fruit of Eskisehir Prison
The Second Ray of the Thirty-First Flash
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
This Ray was written sixteen years ago at a time I remained alone in
Eskisehir Prison after my friends had been released. It was written at great
speed, with my own very deficient pen at a distressing, disagreeable time and
is therefore somewhat lacking in order. Still, I saw when correcting it
recently that in respect of belief and the affirmation of Divine Unity it is
extremely valuable, powerful, and important.
                                                         S a i d  N u r s i
[This forms a seventh ‘Point’ about the six Greatest Names and is about the
Greatest Name of ‘God, The One.’]
NOTE
In my view, this treatise holds great importance, for the significant and subtle
mysteries of belief that it contains unfold and develop. One who reads and understands
this treatise will save his belief, God willing. Unfortunately I have been unable to meet
with anyone here and have been unable to write out a fair copy myself. If you want to
understand the treatise’s value, read first of all the Second and Third Fruits of the First
Station carefully and the Conclusion at the end and the matter in the two pages
preceding that, then study the whole of it slowly!

--- Sayfa 2 ---
14
THE SEVENTH OF THE SIX POINTS ABOUT THE SIX
GREATEST NAMES, ABOUT ‘GOD, THE ONE’
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And from Him do we seek help.
Inspired by one splendid meaning of the verse,
And know that there is no god but God,1
and by a famous oath of the Prophet (PBUH), this treatise consists of a subtle point I
perceived about three beautifully sweet and subtle fruits of the affirmation of Divine
unity, and three matters necessitating it, and three proofs of it.
The oath God’s Most Noble Messenger most frequently used was the oath: “By
Him in whose hand is Muhammad’s being,”2 which shows that even the furthermost
tips of the tree of the universe, and its broadest extent, and its minor particulars, exist
through the power and will of the Single One of Unity. For if the most choice and
exceptional of creatures, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), does not own
himself, and if he is not free to act as he wishes and is tied in his actions to another
will, certainly, nothing, no function, state or circumstance, whether particular or
universal, can be outside the power of that all-encompassing will.
Yes, what this meaningful oath of Muhammad (PBUH) indicates is the mighty,
all-encompassing unity of dominicality. Since a hundred, perhaps a thousand, clear
proofs of this Divine unity have been set forth and explained in the Risale-i Nur, which
is the Siracü’n-Nur (The Illuminating Lamp),3 we refer to that the details and proofs
of this elevated truth. In this Second Ray, in the first of three brief ‘Stations’ contained
in this

1 Qur’an, 47:19.
2 Musnad, iv, 16.
3 A collection from the Risale-i Nur consisting of A Supplication (Third Ray), Treatise For The
Sick, Treatise For The Elderly, ‘For us God suffices’ (Fourth Ray), the Thirteenth Flash, Thirty-
Three Windows, A Supplication in Arabic, and the Denizli Defence Speeches. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 3 ---
15
most important truth of belief, three subtle, sweet, precious, and luminous universal
fruits out of innumerable fruits will be explained in summary fashion, thereby alluding
to the insights and experiences which impelled my heart to those fruits.
In the Second Station, three universal matters and motives necessitating this
sacred truth will be explained, which have the power of three thousand such matters.
In the Third Station, three signs pointing to this truth of Divine unity will be
mentioned, which have the power of three hundred signs, indications, and proofs.
The First Fruit of the First Station
In Divine unity and the affirmation of it, Divine beauty and dominical perfection
become apparent. If there was no unity that pre-eternal treasury would remain hidden.
Yes, it is only in the mirror of unity and in the manifestation of the Divine Names
concentrated by means of unity in the faces of particulars at the extremities of the tree
of creation that infinite Divine beauty and perfection, unending dominical excellence
and loveliness, the incalculable bounties and gifts of that Merciful One, and the utterly
perfect beauty of that Eternally Besought One, are all to be seen.
For example, when the particular act of sending to the assistance of a powerless
infant lacking will, pure white milk from an unexpected place, that is, from between
blood and excrement, is considered from the point of view of the affirmation of Divine
unity, suddenly, through the wondrous, tender sustaining of all infants and young and
their subjugating their mothers to themselves, the undying beauty of the mercy of the
Most Merciful is seen in all its splendour. If not looked at through the eyes of Divine
unity, that beauty is hidden, and that particular providing of sustenance is ascribed to
causes, chance, and Nature, thus losing all its value and even transforming its very
nature.
Also, for example; if being healed of a dreadful disease is considered from the
point of view of the affirmation of Divine unity, on the face of the bestowal of healing
on all the sick in the huge hospital called the earth, through the remedies and
medicines from the vast pharmacy called the world, the beautiful compassion of the
Absolutely Compassionate One and the acts of His mercy become apparent in
universal and splendid fashion. If it is not considered from the point of view of the
affirmation of Divine unity, that particular but knowledgeable, perceptive, and
conscious bestowal of healing will be attributed to the properties of lifeless medicines
and to blind force and unconscious Nature; its nature will be completely changed and it
will lose its wisdom and value.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
16
I am explaining here because of its relevance a point which occurs to me about a
benediction for the Prophet (PBUH). It concerns the well-known benediction which is
recited regularly by the Shafi‘i’s at the end of tesbihat following the five daily prayers:
O God! Grant blessings to our master Muhammad and to the family of Muhammad,
to the number of ills and their remedies, and bless him and them and grant them
unending peace. It is important because due to the wisdom in man’s creation and the
mystery of his comprehensiveness, every moment he entreats his Creator and seeks
refuge with Him, and offers Him thanks and praise. Just as illnesses are the most
effective whip driving him to the Divine Court, so the chief of the sweet bounties
prompting him to give thanks earnestly and to truly offer praise gratefully are
remedies, healing, and good health. It is for this reason that this benediction is most
meaningful and widely accepted. Sometimes when reciting “to the number of all ills
and their remedies,” I see the earth in the form of a hospital and sense the clearly
obvious existence of the True Healer, Who supplies the remedies for all ills, physical
and spiritual, and answers all needs, and His universal clemency and sacred all-
embracing compassion.
Also for example; if the bestowal of guidance and belief on someone who
experiences the ghastly pains of misguidance is considered from the point of view of
the affirmation of Divine unity, the pre-eternal beauty of One Munificent and Generous
becomes apparent on the face of that supreme gift, which transforms the insignificant,
transitory, and impotent man into the slave-addressee of the One True Object of
Worship, the Creator and Sovereign of all the universe, and through his belief bestows
on him —and on all believers according to their degree— eternal happiness and a
broad and splendid everlasting world and property. One flash of that unfading beauty
is such that it makes all believers love it, and the elite enamoured of it and captivated
by it. If such an event is not considered from the point of view of Divine unity, the
man’s particular belief will be attributed either to the person himself, as with the self-
centred and self-opinionated Mu‘tazilites, or to causes. Then that sparkling gem of the
Most Merciful, the true price and value of which is Paradise, will be reduced to being a
piece of glass and it will no longer reflect the flashes of that sacred beauty.
Thus, it may be seen from these three examples that being concentrated in them
through the affirmation of Divine unity, the innumerable sorts and varieties of Divine
beauty and dominical perfection are apparent in the particular beings at the extremities
of the sphere of multiplicity, and in all their states and conditions, and the certain
existence of Divine beauty and perfection is understood and established.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
17
It is because Divine beauty and perfection are to be seen with the heart in the
affirmation of Divine unity and perceived by the spirit that all the saints and purified
ones have found their sweetest illuminations and most delectable spiritual sustenance
in repeated recitation of “There is no god but God,” the profession of Divine unity.
And it is because Divine grandeur and magnificence, Divine glory, and the absolute
sovereignty of the dominicality of the Eternally Besoughted One are realized in the
profession of Divine unity that God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) declared: “The best thing I and the prophets before me have said is ‘There is no
god but God.’”4
Yes, although a small bounty, gift and sustenance like a flower, a fruit, or a light,
is a tiny mirror, through the mystery of Divine unity each suddenly stands shoulder to
shoulder and joins with all its fellows. Being transformed into a large mirror, its
species displays the sort of Divine beauty which is manifested on it. With transient,
fleeting beauty it points to an everlasting, undying beauty. As Mawlana Jalal al-Din5
said:
The imagination which is the snare of the saints
Is the reflection of the moon-faced beauties of the garden of God;
it becomes a mirror to Divine beauty. If not for the mystery of the affirmation of
Divine unity, each particular fruit would remain on its own, and would show neither
that sacred beauty nor its elevated perfection. Even the particular flash of beauty
within it would be extinguished and vanish. It would quite simply become its opposite;
from being a diamond, it would turn into glass.
Also, through the mystery of the affirmation of Divine unity, in living beings,
which are the fruits of the tree of creation, is a Divine personality, a dominical
oneness, an immaterial face of the Most Merciful defined by the seven attributes, a
concentration of the Names, and the manifestation of the determination and
personification of the One Who is addressed by the words “You alone do we worship
and from You alone do we seek help.”6 Otherwise that personality, that oneness, that
face, the manifestation of that determination would expand to the extent of the
universe, disperse and be hidden. It would be seen only by eyes of the heart that were
truly vast and comprehensive. For the magnificence of Divine grandeur would veil it;
not everyone could see it with the eye of the heart.
Also, it is clearly understood from those particular living beings that

4 Muwatta, Qur’an, 32; Hajj, 246; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 153; al-Albani, Sahih al-
Jami’u’s-Saghir, no: 1113.
5 Mawlana Jalal al-Din Rumi (604/1207-672/1273), author of the Mathnawi.
6 Qur’an, 1:5.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
18
their Maker sees them, knows them, hears them, and does as He wishes. Quite simply,
behind the createdness of each living being, the immaterial personification and
determination of one who has power and will, hears, sees and knows, is apparent to
one who believes.
Especially behind the createdness of man from among living creatures, through
belief and through the mystery of Divine unity, that immaterial personification and
determination are to be observed in extremely clear fashion. For samples of meanings
such as knowledge, power, life, hearing, and sight, which are the bases of that
personification of oneness, are present in man, and he indicates them through those
samples. For example, the one who bestows the eyes, both sees the eye, and, a subtle
meaning, sees what the eye sees, then he bestows them. For sure, the oculist who
makes some spectacles for your eyes, sees that they are suitable for your eyes, then he
makes them. And the one who bestows the ears, surely hears what the ears hear, then
he makes them and bestows them. Examples for the other attributes may be made in
the same way.
Also, man bears the impresses and manifestations of the Names; through them, he
testifies to those sacred meanings.
Also, through his weakness, impotence, poverty, and ignorance, man acts as a
mirror in another way; he testifies to the power, knowledge, will, and other attributes
of the one who has pity on his weakness and poverty, and comes to his aid.
Thus, since through the mystery of Divine unity, a thousand and one Divine
Names are concentrated in the furthest points and most scattered particulars of the
sphere of multiplicity, in the tiny missives known as living beings, and are to be read
most clearly, the All-Wise Maker multiplies the copies of them extensively. He makes
exceedingly numerous and various the copies of the species of small living beings in
particular, and publishes them everywhere.
What impelled me to the truth of this First Fruit was a certain feeling and
experience. It was like this:
At one time, due to my excessive feelings of pity, sympathy and kindness, I was
exceedingly touched and sorry for living beings, and of them, intelligent beings and
man, and particularly the oppressed and disaster-stricken. I exclaimed from my very
heart: “Neither these monotonous laws which prevail over the world hear the woes of
these powerless and weak unfortunates, nor do the overwhelming, deaf elements and
events hear them. Is there no one who will take pity on their wretched state and
intervene in their particular plights?” My spirit was crying out from its very depths. My
heart called out with all its strength: “Do these fine crea

--- Sayfa 7 ---
19
tures, these valuable goods, these yearning and grateful friends, have no owner, no
master, no true friend who will look to their business, accompany them and protect
them?”
The satisfying, soothing, and sufficient answer to the cries of my spirit and tumult
of my heart was this: through the mystery of the Qur’an and light of belief, and the
mystery of Divine unity, I perceived the particular favours and special assistance of the
All-Glorious One, Who is All-Merciful and Compassionate, above the law, to those
lovable creatures who weep and lament under the pressure of universal laws and the
assaults of events; and His particular dominicality towards everything directly; and the
facts that He Himself directs everything personally and listens to the plaints of all
things; and that He is the true owner, protector, and master of everything. I felt an
infinite joy in place of that endless despair. Being totally owned by such a Glorious
Owner, and being connected to Him, in my view all living beings gained in importance
and value a thousand times over.
For since everyone takes pride in his master’s honour and fame, and at the rank of
the person to whom he is attached, and acquires a dignity, through the unfolding of
this relation through the light of belief and the state of being owned, and due to its
strength, an ant vanquished the Pharaoh and could feel the pride of a thousand
Pharaohs, who were heedless, imagined themselves to be independent and to own
themselves, and had overweening pride —which was extinguished at the door of the
grave— at their forefathers and the land of Egypt. And in the face of Nimrod’s pride,
which changed into torment and shame when he tasted the pangs of death, the fly
pointed to the pride of its own relationship, reducing Nimrod’s to nothing.
The verse,
To assign partners to God is verily a great transgression7
states that to associate partners with God is an infinite wrong. Assigning partners to
God is a vast crime, since it transgresses the rights, honour, and dignity of all
creatures. Only Hell can cleanse it.
The Second Fruit of the Affirmation of Divine Unity
The First Fruit considered the Most Pure and Holy One, the Creator of the
Universe, now this Second Fruit considers the universe and its essential nature. Yes, it
is through the mystery of Divine unity that the perfections of the universe are realized;
and the elevated duties of beings under

7 Qur’an, 31:13.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
20
stood; and the results of the creation of beings are established; and the value of
creatures known; and the Divine purposes in the world find existence; and the
instances of wisdom in the creation of living beings and conscious beings become
apparent; and behind the stern, angry faces of the violent storms of upheaval and
change the smiling, beautiful faces of mercy and wisdom are seen; and the numerous
existences of transitory beings —such as their results, identities, true natures, spirits,
and glorifications, which they leave in their places in the Manifest World before they
depart— are known.
Furthermore, it is only through the mystery of Divine unity that it is known that
the universe as a whole is a meaningful book of the Eternally Besought One; and all
beings from the ground to the Divine Throne are a miraculous collection of Divine
missives; and all the realms of creatures are a magnificent regular dominical army; and
all sorts of beings from microbes and ants to rhinoceroses, eagles, and planets are
diligent officials of the Pre-Eternal Sovereign; and since they act as mirrors to and
have a relation with that Sovereign, the value of all things infinitely surpasses their
individual value; and the answers are revealed of the unsolved, abstruse questions
“Where do this flood of beings and these caravans of creatures come from? Where are
they going? Why did they come? And what are they doing?” Otherwise, these elevated
perfections of the universe would vanish, and those lofty, sacred truths be transformed
into their opposites.
It is because the crimes of ascribing partners to God and disbelief constitute
aggression against all the universe’s perfections and its sacred truths and the elevated
rights of beings, that the universe becomes angry at the disbelievers and idolators. The
heavens and earth become wrathful, and the elements unite to destroy them,
overwhelming and submerging those who ascribe partners to God, such as Noah’s
people, and the ‘Ad and Thamud peoples, and the Pharaoh. In accordance with the
verse,
Well-nigh bursting with fury,8
Hell so rages and fumes at the disbelievers and ascribers of partners to God that it
almost bursts apart. Yes, to associate partners with God is a terrible insult to the
universe and a great transgression against it. By denying the sacred duties of beings
and the purposes of their creation, it insults their honour. To illustrate this, we shall
allude to one example out of thousands.
For example, through the mystery of Divine unity the universe resem

8 Qur’an, 67:8.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
21
bles a huge, corporeal angel; glorifying and sanctifying its Maker with hundreds of
thousands of heads, to the number of species of beings, and with hundreds of
thousands of mouths, to the number of members of those species, and with hundreds
of thousands of tongues in every mouth, to the number of organs, parts, and cells of
those members — a wondrous collection of elevated creatures engaged in worship like
the Angel Israfil. Through the mystery of Divine unity, the universe is also an arable
field yielding copious crops for the worlds and dwelling-places of the hereafter; a
factory producing numerous goods, such as human actions, for the levels of the Abode
of Bliss; and a movie-camera with a hundred thousand lenses continuously taking
pictures of this world to show to the spectators in the eternal realm and especially in
Paradise. To ascribe partners to God is to transform this truly wondrous, absolutely
obedient, living, corporeal angel into a lifeless, soulless, unemployed, perishing,
meaningless, wretched, futile collectivity, revolving in the tumult of events and storms
of change and darkness of non-existence; and to convert this strange, utterly orderly,
beneficial factory into an idle, confused, unconscious plaything of chance which is
without product or result or function; to make it into the playground of deaf Nature
and blind force, a place of mourning for all intelligent beings, and the slaughterhouse
of all living creatures, and a vale of tears.
In accordance with the verse,
To assign partners to God is verily a great transgression,9
to associate partners with God, although a single evil, leads to such vast and numerous
crimes that those who perpetrate it deserve infinite torment in Hell. Anyway... since
this Second Fruit has been explained and proved repeatedly in The Illuminating Lamp,
we have cut short the long story here.
A strange feeling and perception which drove me to this Second Fruit. It was
like this:
One time when observing the season of spring, I saw that the successive caravans
of beings, and especially living creatures and the small young ones at that, which
followed on one after the other and in a flowing torrent displaying hundreds of
thousands of samples of the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering on the face
of the earth, appeared only briefly then disappeared. The tableaux of death and
transience amid that constant, awesome activity seemed to me excessively sad; I felt
such pity it made me weep. The more I observed the deaths of those lovely small

9 Qur’an, 31:13.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
22
creatures, the more my heart ached. I cried at the pity of it and within me felt a deep
spiritual turmoil. Life which met with such an end seemed to me to be torment worse
than death.
The living beings of the plant and animal kingdoms, too, which were most
beautiful and lovable and full of valuable art, opened their eyes for a moment onto the
exhibition of the universe, then disappeared and were gone. I felt grievous pain the
more I watched this. My heart wanted to weep and complain and cry out at fate. It
asked the awesome questions: “Why do they come and then depart without stopping?”
These apparently useless, purposeless little creatures were being despatched to non-
existence before my very eyes, despite having been created, nurtured and raised with
so much attention and art, in such valuable form. They were merely torn up like rags
and thrown away into the obscurity of nothingness. The more I saw this the more my
inner senses and faculties, which are captivated by beauty and perfection and
enamoured of precious things, cried out: “Why does no one take pity on them? Isn’t it
a shame? Where did they come from, the death and ephemerality in these bewildering
upheavals and transformations which persistently attack these wretched beings?”
As I started to utter fearful objections about Divine Determining and the grievous
circumstances of the outer face of life and its events, the light of the Qur’an, the
mystery of belief, the favour of the Most Merciful, and belief in Divine unity all came
to my assistance. They lit up those darknesses, and transformed my laments into joy
and my weeping into happiness and my pity into exclamations of “Blessed be God!
What wonders God has willed!” They caused me to declare: “All praise be to God for
the light of belief.” For through the mystery of Divine unity I saw that all creatures,
and particularly living creatures, produce truly significant results and have general
benefits.
In Short: All living beings, for instance this adorned flower or that sweet-
producing bee, are Divine odes full of meaning which innumerable conscious beings
study in delight. They are precious miracles of power and proclamations of wisdom
exhibiting their Maker’s art in captivating fashion to innumerable appreciative
observers. While to appear before the gaze of the Glorious Creator, Who wishes to
observe His art Himself, and look on the beauties of His creation and the loveliness of
the manifestations of His Names, is another exceedingly elevated result of their
creation.
A further elevated function of their creation is described in the Twenty-Fourth
Letter, and is their serving in five ways the manifestations

--- Sayfa 11 ---
23
of dominicality and Divine perfections which necessitate the infinite activity in the
universe.
I saw that if it is a being with a spirit, besides benefits and results such as the
above, since it leaves behind in its place in this Manifest World its spirit, and in
innumerable memories and other ‘preserved tablets’ its form and identity, and in its
seeds the laws of its being and a sort of future life, and in the World of the Unseen and
Realm of the Divine Names the perfections and beauties it has mirrored, its apparent
death has the meaning of a joyful release from duties; it merely passes behind a curtain
of death and is hidden from worldly eyes. I exclaimed: “All praise and thanks be to
God!”
These genuine, powerful, faultless, utterly brilliant instances of beauty and
loveliness which are visible in all the levels of the universe and all its realms of beings,
and have spread everywhere, demonstrate with complete certainty that the ugly, harsh,
abhorrent, wretched former situation, which the association of partners with God
necessitates, is impossible and illusory. For such ghastly ugliness could not exist
hidden under the veil of such genuine beauty. If it was found there, that true beauty
would be untrue, baseless, futile, and illusory. This means that the association of
partners with God has no reality, its way is closed, it has become stuck in a bog; what
it posits is impossible and precluded. Since this truth of belief, which pertains to the
emotions, is explained in detail with numerous proofs in many parts of The
Illuminating Lamp, we shall suffice here with this brief indication.
Third Fruit
This fruit looks to conscious beings, and particularly to man. Through the mystery
of Divine unity, among all creatures man may attain to the highest perfections, and
become the most valuable fruit of the universe, the most perfect and refined of
creatures, the most fortunate and happy of animate beings, and the addressee and
friend of the world’s Creator. Indeed, all man’s perfections and his lofty aims are tied
to the affirmation of Divine unity and find existence through its meaning. For if there
were no unity, man would be the most unhappy of creatures, the lowest of beings, the
most wretched of the animals, the most suffering and sorrowful of intelligent beings.
For together with his infinite impotence, his innumerable enemies, his boundless want,
and endless needs, he has been decked out with a great many faculties and senses, so
that he feels innumerable sorts of pains and experiences countless sorts of pleasures.
He has such aims and desires that one who does not govern the whole universe at once
cannot bring about those desires.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
24
For example, man has an intense desire for immortality. Only one who has
disposal over the whole universe as though it were a palace can answer this wish; who
can close the door of this world and open that of the hereafter, like closing the door of
one room and opening that of another. Man also has thousands of desires, both
negative and positive, which like the desire for immortality spread throughout the
world and stretch to eternity. It is only the Single One, Who through the mystery of
unity holds the whole universe in His grasp, that by answering these desires of man can
cure the two awesome wounds of his impotence and want.
Moreover, man has wishes for tranquillity and ease of heart so insubstantial,
secret, and particular, and aims connected with the immortality and happiness of his
spirit so vast, comprehensive, and universal, that they can be answered only by one
who sees the subtlest and most imperceptible veils of his heart, and is not
unconcerned, and hears its most inaudible, secret voices, and does not leave them
unanswered. That one must also have sufficient power to subjugate the heavens and
earth as though they were two obedient soldiers, and make them perform universal
works.
Also, through the mystery of unity, all man’s members and senses gain a high
value, while through ascribing partners to God and disbelief they fall to an infinitely
low degree. For example, man’s most valuable faculty is intelligence. Through the
mystery of Divine unity, it becomes a brilliant key to the sacred Divine treasuries, and
to the thousands of coffers of the universe. Whereas if it descends to associating
partners with God and to unbelief, it becomes an inauspicious instrument of torture
which heaps up in man’s head all the grievous pains of the past and awesome fears of
the future.
Also, for example, compassion, man’s most gentle and agreeable characteristic: if
the mystery of Divine unity does not come to its assistance, it becomes a calamitous
torment which reduces man to the depths of misery. A heedless mother who imagines
she has lost her only child for all eternity feels this searing pain to the full.
Also, for example, love, man’s sweetest, most pleasurable, and most precious
emotion: if the mystery of Divine unity assists it, it gives miniscule man the expanse
and breadth of the universe, and makes him a petted monarch of the animals. Whereas
if —I seek refuge with God— man descends to associating partners with God and
unbelief, because he will be separated for all eternity from all his innumerable beloveds
as they continuously disappear in death, love becomes a terrible calamity constantly
lacerating his wretched heart. But vain amusements causing heed

--- Sayfa 13 ---
25
lessness temporarily numb his senses, apparently not allowing him to feel it.
If you make analogies with these three examples for man’s hundreds of faculties
and senses, you will understand the degree to which Divine unity and the affirmation
of it are the means by which he may be fulfilled and perfected. Since this Third Fruit
too has been very well explained in detailed manner with proofs in perhaps twenty of
the treatises of The Illuminating Lamp, I am sufficing with this brief indication here.
What impelled me to this Fruit was the following feeling:
At one time I was on the top of a high mountain. Through a spiritual awakening
powerful enough to dispel my heedlessness, death and the grave appeared to me in all
their stark reality, and transience and ephemerality with all their painful
representations. Like everyone’s, my innate desire for immortality surged up and
rebelled against death. The fellow-feeling and compassion in my nature, too, revolted
against the annihilation of the people of perfection, the famous prophets, the saints,
and the purified ones, for whom I feel great love and attachment; it boiled up angrily
against the grave. I looked in the six directions, seeking help, but I found no solace, no
assistance. For looking to the past, I saw a vast graveyard; and to the future, darkness;
and above I saw horror; and to the right and left, grievous situations and the assaults
of numberless harmful things. Suddenly, the mystery of Divine unity came to my
assistance and drew back the veil, revealing the face of reality. “Look!”, it said.
First of all I looked at the face of death, which I feared greatly. I saw that for the
people of belief it was a discharge from duties. The appointed hour was the discharge
papers. It was a change of abode, the introduction to an everlasting life, and the door
leading to it. It was to be released from the prison of this world and to fly to the
gardens of Paradise. It was the occasion one enters the presence of the Most Merciful
in order to receive the wages for one’s service. It was a call to go to the realm of bliss.
Understanding this with complete certainty, I began to love death.
I looked then at transience and ephemerality, and I saw them to be a pleasurable
renewal, like pictures on the cinema screen and bubbles on flowing water under the
sun. Coming from the World of the Unseen in order to refresh the exquisite
manifestations of the Most Beautiful Names, they were an excursion, a trip, in the
Manifest World, with certain duties to perform; they were a wise and purposeful
manifestation of dominical beauty; they performed the function of mirrors to the
eternal beauty of beings. This I knew with certainty.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
26
I then looked at the six directions, and I saw that through the mystery of Divine
unity they were so luminous they dazzled the eyes. I saw that the past was not a vast
grave, but having been transformed into the future, had become thousands of
enlightened gatherings of friends and thousands of light-filled vistas. I looked at the
true faces of thousands of matters like these two, and I saw that they afforded nothing
but joy and thanks.
I have described my feelings about this Third Fruit with proofs, particular and
universal, in perhaps forty treatises of The Illuminating Lamp. They have been
explained so clearly and decisively in the thirteen ‘Hopes’ of the Twenty-Sixth Flash in
particular, the Treatise For The Elderly, that there could be no clearer elucidation.
Here I have therefore cut this very long story very short.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
27
Second Station
 [There are incalculable proofs necessitating in absolutely certain form
Divine unity and the affirmation of it, which neither accept nor permit the
association of partners with God. Since hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of
these are demonstrated in detail in the Risale-i Nur, here only three of them
which necessitate Divine unity will be set out briefly.]
The First
According to the testimony of the wise and discerning acts which are to be
observed in the universe, creatures are made through the limitless attributes and
Names of an All-Wise Sovereign, One Perfect and Mighty Whose knowledge and
power are absolute.
Yes, it may be surmised certainly from the works in the universe, that their Maker
possesses sovereignty and rulership at the degree of absolute dominicality, and
grandeur and magnificence at the degree of absolute might, and perfection and self-
sufficiency at the degree of absolute godhead; and that His activity and rule are
absolutely without restriction or limit; these are understood clearly, and are visible. As
for
sovereignty,
grandeur,
perfection,
self-sufficiency,
absoluteness,
comprehensiveness, unrestrictedness, and unlimitedness, they necessitate unity and are
opposed to partnership.
The testimony to unity of sovereignty and rulership: This has been proved
with complete certainty in numerous places in the Risale-i Nur. A brief summary is as
follows:
The mark of rulership is independence, solitariness, and the rejection of
interference; rulership necessitates these. Due to only a shadow of rulership, impotent
men even, who by their natures are in need of assistance, reject the interference of
others and preserve their independence. It is for this reason that there cannot be two
kings in a country, or two governors of a province, two mayors of a town, or even
two headmen of a village. If there are two of any of these, it leads to chaos; rebellions
break out and law and order are overturned. Since a mere shadow of rulership in
impotent men needy of assistance repels the partnership and interference of

--- Sayfa 16 ---
28
others to this extent, surely the rulership, which is in the form of dominicality, of an
Absolutely Powerful One free of all impotence will in no way accept any partners or
interference. He will reject it vehemently and angrily repulse from His court those who
ascribe imaginary partners to Him. The All-Wise Qur’an’s severe threats against those
who ascribe partners to God arise from this truth.
The testimony to unity of grandeur, magnificence, and glory: This too has
been explained with brilliant proofs in the Risale-i Nur, and here a very brief meaning
of it is alluded to:
For example, the magnificence and grandeur of the sun’s light leave no need for
any weak lights near to it, nor does its light allow any other light an effect. Similarly,
the magnificence and immensity of Divine power leave no need for any other force or
power, and afford no other power a true effect or ability to create. Especially living
and conscious beings, which are the points on which of all the dominical aims in the
universe turn and where they are concentrated; it is impossible that they should be
referred to others. It is also in no way possible that the fruits, results, and
circumstances of man’s creation and of living beings, which are the origin of
innumerable sorts of bounties and where the aims of their creation are manifested,
should be referred to other hands. For example, it would be an affront to the
magnificence of dominicality for an animate being to be truly grateful to anyone other
than Almighty God for being healed from some minor ailment, or for some sustenance,
or for guidance, and to praise and applaud the person extravagantly; the grandeur of
the Godhead would be offended; the dignity of the Absolute Object of Worship
affronted, and His glory, vexed.
How perfection points to the mystery of unity: Again this has been explained
with brilliant proofs in the Risale-i Nur, and an extremely brief meaning of it is this:
self-evidently, the creation of the heavens and earth necessitate an absolute power of
utter perfection. The wondrous bodily systems of animate beings also necessitate a
power of absolute perfection. And the perfection of an absolute power which is
exempt from impotence and free of restriction necessitates unity. For to apply defect
to perfection and restrict the unrestricted, and to make infinity finite, and reduce the
strongest power to the weakest impotence means making an infinite power finite with
something finite at a time it is infinite, and this is utterly impossible in five ways.
The testimonies to unity of unrestrictedness, comprehensiveness, and
infinity: This too has been mentioned in detail in the treatises of The Illuminating
Lamp. A summary of its meaning is as follows: since by

--- Sayfa 17 ---
29
spreading pervasively around their own works, the acts in the universe all show that
they are comprehensive and unrestricted, unlimited and absolute; and since partners
and participation place a restriction on the comprehensiveness and unrestrictedness,
and limit the unlimitedness, destroying their nature and reality; most certainly
partnership in those acts which are absolute and comprehensive is impossible and
precluded. Yes, the very nature of unrestrictedness is opposed to partnership, for its
meaning, even in finite, material, and limited things, is to spread, pervade, and
permeate everywhere.
For example, if air, light, and heat, and even water, manifested unrestrictedness,
they would spread everywhere. Since this aspect of unrestrictedness makes physical
and limited things invasive, even if they are particular, surely true, universal
unrestrictedness would afford such encompassment and pervasiveness to attributes
that were both infinite, and free of matter, and unlimited, and free of defect, that there
could be no possibility whatsoever of their accepting any partners or partnership.
In Short: Both the sovereignty, and the grandeur, and the perfection, and the
comprehensiveness, and the unrestrictedness, and the infinity of the thousands of
general acts and the hundreds of Divine Names whose manifestations are to be seen in
the universe are extremely powerful proofs of Divine unity and the affirmation of it.
Also, a superior force wants to overrun its surroundings in order to become
activated, scattering other forces. Similarly, it is apparent from all the works of
dominicality and manifestations of the Names of the Godhead that their forces are so
extraordinarily overwhelming that if it were not for general sovereignty and absolute
justice, which prevent them, they would have overrun all beings. For example, is it at
all possible that the universal power which creates all the poplar trees on the earth and
administers them, should not take under its control the individual trees like walnut,
apple, and apricot, which have become interspersed among the poplars, and not
regulate them and dominate them, or that it should hand them over to other forces?
Yes, in all species of creatures, and even in each individual, a governing force and
power are felt which clearly have the capacity to overrun the whole universe and
subjugate all beings. Certainly, such a power would not accept partners of any sort,
nor permit partnership.
Also, for the owner of a fruit-bearing tree, the matter of greatest importance is the
fruit at the tips of the tree’s branches, and for future planting, the seeds in the hearts of
its fruits, rather that are the hearts of its fruits. If the tree’s owner has any sense, he
will not make his ownership go for nothing by handing over the fruits to someone else.
In exactly the

--- Sayfa 18 ---
30
same way; the elements, which are the branches of the tree called the universe, and the
plants and animals, which are at the tips of the elements and are like the flowers and
leaves of the tree, and human beings, which are the topmost of the leaves and flowers,
—the owner of the tree would in no way hand over to other forces the worship and
thanks of those fruits, which are their most important fruits and the result of their
creation, and especially their hearts, the all-encompassing seeds of the fruits, and their
faculties of memory, which are known as the ‘outer heart,’ so negating the sovereignty
of His dominicality, and cancelling also his fitness to be worshipped.
Also, since the aims of dominicality are centred in the particulars at the extremities
of the sphere of contingency and multiplicity, and even in the states and circumstances
of those particulars; and since they are the source of the thanks, gratitude, and
worship, which are extended and look to the One True Object of Worship; for sure He
would not hand them over to others and so nullify His wisdom, and by nullifying His
wisdom, annul His Godhead. For the most important dominical aim in the creation of
beings is to make Himself known to conscious beings, and loved, and praised and
extolled, and to attract their gratitude to Himself.
It is because of this subtle mystery that, in order to demonstrate that the bounties
and acts, universal and particular, at the extremities of the sphere of multiplicity, like
sustenance, healing, and particularly guidance and belief, which result in thanks,
worship, gratitude, love, praise, and worship, are directly the works, bounties, gifts,
and acts of the universe’s Creator, the Monarch of all beings, the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition repeatedly ascribes sustenance, guidance, and healing to the
Necessarily Existent One, stating that the bestowal of them is His alone and restricted
to Him, and strongly rejecting the interference of others.10 Yes, the One Who bestows
the bounty of belief, which wins for a person an abode of bliss, can surely only be the
One Who creates the abode of bliss and makes belief the key to it. It could only be His
bounty. Nobody could shut up this largest window opening onto the True Object of
Worship by bestowing an equally great bounty; no one could block up this most
important means to Him, or steal it.
In Short: The most particular events and fruits at the tips of the tree of creation
testify to Divine unity and the affirmation of it in two ways:
Firstly: The aims of dominicality in the universe are gathered together in those
fruits and events and their aims are centred on them, and most of the manifestations of
the Divine Names and their determinations, and the

10 For example, God is the Provider, the firm possessor of strength (Qur’an, 51:58).

--- Sayfa 19 ---
31
results of and benefits in the creation of beings are gathered together in them. In this
respect, each of them therefore declares: “I am the property, act, and work of the One
Who created the whole universe.”
The Second Way: Since the hearts of those particular fruits, as well as man’s
memory, which in a Hadith is called “the outer heart,”11 are concise indexes of most
species of beings, and small maps of them, and bear the meaning of seeds of the tree of
the universe, and are subtle mirrors of most of the Divine Names; and since hearts and
memories, which are all similar and bear the same stamp, spread pervasively
throughout the universe; they look to the One who holds the whole universe in the
grasp of His power, and they each declare: “I am the work and art of Him alone.”
To Conclude: With regard to its benefits, a fruit looks to its tree’s owner. With
regard to its seed, it looks to all the parts, members, and nature of the tree. And with
regard to the stamp on its face, it gazes on all the fruits of the tree, whose stamp is the
same. Together they declare: “We are all the same and we have one maker. We are the
property of a single person. Whoever made one of us, made all of us.” In exactly the
same way, in regard to the stamps on the faces of the living creatures at the extremities
of the sphere of multiplicity, and especially the stamps on man’s face, and his index-
like heart, and the results of his nature and his being a fruit, they look directly to the
One Who holds the whole universe in the grasp of His power, and testify to His unity.
The Second Matter Necessitating Divine Unity
This is the fact that in unity are an ease and facility which render it necessary,
while in associating partners with God are difficulties to the point of its being
impossible. This truth has been explained and demonstrated with brilliant and decisive
proofs in many of the treatises of what Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him)
called The Illuminating Lamp, especially in the Twentieth Letter, in detail, and in the
Fourth Point of the Thirtieth Flash, briefly. It has been demonstrated with most
powerful proofs that if all things are attributed to one single Being, the creation and
regulation of the universe are as easy as the creation and regulation of a tree; and the
creation and making of a tree are as easy as the creation and making of a fruit; and the
origination and management of the spring are as easy as the origination and
management of a flower; and the admininstration and raising of a species containing
numerous members are as free of trouble as the administration and raising of a single
individual.
Whereas if, on the way of associating partners with God, all things are

11 Bukhari, al-Mu’sir, v, 237; al-Nikah, vii, 8; al-Nasa’i, al-Nikah.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
32
ascribed to causes and nature, the creation of a single individual is as difficult as that of
a species, indeed, of many species; and the creation and decking out of a single living
flower as difficult as the creation and decking out of the spring, or many springs; and
the creation, making, raising to life, administering, nurturing, directing, and regulation
of a tree as difficult as those of the universe, or even more difficult.
Since the reality of the matter has been thus proved in The Illuminating Lamp,
and since as we see plainly before us, together with the very highest degree of art and
the greatest value there is a superabundance of beings; and together with being
wondrous machines with numerous miraculous components and members, all living
creatures come into existence in absolute profusion infinitely easily with extraordinary
speed just like striking a match; it demonstrates necessarily and self-evidently that the
profusion and ease arise from unity and from their being the works of a single Being.
Otherwise, it would not be cheapness, abundance, speed, ease, and value; a fruit that is
now obtained for five para would not have been obtainable for five hundred lira,12 or
would have been so rare as to have been unobtainable. And the creation of living
beings, which resemble regular machines that work like setting a clock or turning on
an electric switch, would have been so difficult as to have been impossible, and some
animals who come into existence together with all their bodily systems and vital
conditions in a day, or an hour, or a minute, would not have come into existence in a
year, or a century, or perhaps ever at all.
It is proved in a hundred places in The Illuminating Lamp, so decisively as to
silence the most obdurate denier, that if all things are ascribed to the Single One of
Unity, they are as easy, swift, and cheap as a single thing. Whereas if causes and
nature are given a share as well, the creation of a single thing becomes as difficult,
slow, unimportant, and expensive as all things. If you want to see the proofs of this
truth, you may refer to the Twentieth and Thirty-Third Letters, the Twenty-Second
and Thirty-Second Words, the Twenty-Third Flash, which is about nature, and the
Thirtieth Flash, which is about the Greatest Name, particularly its Fourth and Sixth
Points which are about the Names of Single and Self-Subsistent respectively. There
you will see that it has been proved with the certainty of two plus two equalling four.
Here, only one of those hundreds of proofs will be alluded to, as follows:
The creation of things is either from non-existence, or from the elements and
other beings in the form of composition. If attributed to a single Being, that Being is
bound to have all-encompassing knowledge and

12 4 para = 1 qurush, 100 qurush = 1 lira. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 21 ---
33
power that prevails over all things. In this way, the giving of external existence to
things whose forms are present in His knowledge or who exist as knowledge, and
bringing them out of apparent non-existence, is as easy and simple as striking a match
or spreading a special liquid over invisible writing in order to reveal it, or transposing
an image from photographic film to paper. Through the ‘command of “Be!” and it
is,’13 the Maker brings into external existence from apparent non-existence things
whose plans, programmes, and shapes and proportions are present in His knowledge.
If it is in the form of composition and art, and not creating from non-existence and
nothing, and in the form of gathering together from the elements and surroundings, it
resembles the members of a regiment mustering at the call of a bugle after having
dispersed to rest, and the soldiers collecting together in regular and orderly fashion,
and in order to facilitate this exercise and preserve their positions, the whole army
being like the power, law, and eye of its commander. In exactly the same way, as
though they were the power, law, and officials of the Monarch of the Universe, the
minute particles under the command of that Monarch —together with the beings with
whom they have contact— are mobilized according to the principles of His knowledge
and determining and the laws of His pervasive power. In order to form a living being,
they assume a specified measure and proportion, which resembles an immaterial mould
specified by Divine knowledge and determining, and there they stop.
If things are referred to different hands and causes, and to nature, then as all the
reasonable agree, no cause can in any way create from nothing and non-existence. For
causes do not possess comprehensive knowledge and all-pervading power, and non-
existence would not be only apparent and external, it would be absolute. And absolute
non-existence can in no way be the source of existence. It which case, creation would
be in the form of composition. But if in the form of composition, the particles of a fly
or a flower could come together only with innumerable difficulties after collecting the
body of a fly and parts of a flower from all over the earth and passing them through a
fine sieve. Even having come together, since there would be no immaterial moulds
existing as knowledge to preserve them in orderly form without dispersing, physical,
natural moulds, in fact moulds to the number of their members, would be necessary so
that the particles that had come together could form the bodies of those living
creatures.

13 Qur’an, 36:82.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
34
Thus, the ascribing of all things to a single Being is so easy as to be necessary and
the attributing of them to numerous causes so difficult as to be impossible and
precluded. Similarly, if all things are ascribed to the Single One of Unity, they become
valuable, full of art, meaningful, and powerful to the utmost degree at the same time as
being infinitely cheap. While if, on the way of associating partners with God, they are
ascribed to numerous causes and nature, they become valueless and completely lacking
in art, meaning, and power, as well as being infinitely expensive.
For since a man who joins the army becomes connected with its commander-in-
chief and he relies on him, he gains the potential moral support of the army, if it is
necessary. And since the power of the army is his reserve force, he acquires a physical
strength far exceeding his individual strength. And since because the army carries
them, he is not compelled to carry the sources of that significant strength of his and his
ammunition, he will be able to carry out superhuman works. Despite being a single
private soldier, he may capture an enemy field-marshal, or compel all the inhabitants of
a town to migrate, or capture a citadel. His works will be extraordinary and of great
worth.
If, however, he leaves the army and remains on his own, he will lose that
miraculous moral strength, power, and force, and be able to perform only insignificant,
valueless works in accordance with his personal strength like a common irregular
soldier. His achievements will diminish proportionately.
In exactly the same way, since on the way of Divine unity everything becomes
connected with the All-Powerful One of Glory and relies on Him, an ant may defeat
the Pharaoh, a fly vanquish Nimrod, and a microbe subdue a tyrant. So too a seed the
size of a fingernail may bear on its shoulders a tree the size of a mountain, and be the
source of all the tree’s parts and members and their workbench. All particles, too,
through that connection and reliance, may perform innumerable duties in the formation
of bodies, which are of innumerable sorts and arts. The works in which those miniscule
officials and tiny soldiers are employed are infinitely perfect and of the highest art and
value. For the one who makes them is the All-Powerful One of Glory; it is He Who
put the works in their hands, making them a veil. Whereas if attributed to causes on
the way of associating partners with God, the works of the ant would have been as
insignificant as the ant, not an atom’s worth of value would have remained in the
particle’s art, and everything would have lost all value both in meaning and physically
so that no one would give a farthing for the vast world.
Since the reality is this; and since as we see with our own eyes every

--- Sayfa 23 ---
35
thing is infinitely valuable, and full of art, and meaningful, and powerful; most
definitely there can be no way other than the way of Divine unity. If there was, it
would be necessary to change all beings, empty the world into non-existence, and then
refill it with meaningless junk, so that a way could be opened up to associating
partners with God.
So now you have heard a brief summary of only one of the hundreds of proofs
which elucidate the affirmation of Divine unity in the Risale-i Nur, which in the words
of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) is Siracü’n-Nur (The Illuminating
Lamp) and Siracü’s-Sürc. You may make analogies with this for the others.
The Third Matter Necessitating Divine Unity
Since, together with the extraordinary art in the creation of things, especially in
living beings, a seed is a small sample of the fruit, a fruit is a miniature specimen of the
tree, a tree is a summary index of the species, and the species is a concise map of the
universe and in meaning is its seed, and each of these is a comprehensive point and a
droplet gathered together and distilled from the universe according to the principles of
knowledge and balances of wisdom; the one who created any one of them must be the
one who created the whole universe. Yes, the one who creates the seed of a melon is
self-evidently he who created the melon; it is impossible and precluded that it should
be anyone other than him.
Yes, we look and see that all the atoms in blood are so orderly and perform so
many duties that they are not inferior to the stars. All the red and white corpuscles in
blood work with such a degree of consciousness in protecting and feeding the body
that they are more efficient than the best commissaries or bodyguards. All the cells of
the body manifest such orderly processes and incomings and outgoings that their
administration is more perfect than the best-run body or palace. All plants and animals
bear such a seal on their faces and such machines in their chests that only one who
created all of them could situate those seals and machines in their places. And all the
species of living beings have spread over the face of the earth in such orderly fashion
and have intermingled with the other species having mutual relations with them, that
one who could not simultaneously create, administer, regulate, and raise all those
species, and not place that veil on the face of the earth, and not weave that most
ornate, artistic, living tapestry with its warp and weft of the four hundred thousand
plant and animal species — one that could not do all these could not create and
administer a single species. If analogies are made with these for other things, it will be
understood that in respect of creation and bringing into existence, the universe is a
whole that may not be split up

--- Sayfa 24 ---
36
into parts, and in respect of dominicality and management is a universal whose division
is impossible.
This third necessitating factor has been explained and proved decisively and
brilliantly in many of the treatises of The Illuminating Lamp, and especially in the First
Stopping Place of the Thirty-Second Word, demonstrating that like reflections of the
sun, a proof of unity and its affirmation is reflected and represented in everything’s
mirror. Making do with those explanations, we are here cutting a long story short.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
37
Third Station
 [In this station three universal signs of the affirmation of Divine unity will
be explained.]
The signs, proofs, and evidences of Divine unity are incalculable. Since thousands
of them have been explained in detail in The Illuminating Lamp, in this Third Station
three universal proofs are set forth briefly.
The First Sign and Proof
The phrase “He is One” is the conclusion of this. There is a unity in everything,
and unity points to one. Yes, a work that has unity self-evidently proceeded from one
maker. One proceeds from one. The fact that there is a unity in everything
demonstrates that they are the works and artefacts of a single being. The universe is
like a rosebud swathed in a thousand veils of unity. Or it is a single macroanthropos
dressed in unities to the number of Divine Names and universal Divine works. Or it is
a Tuba-tree of creation on the branches of which are hung unities to the number of
realms of creatures.
Yes, the administration of the universe is one and the same; and its regulation is
one and the same; its sovereignty is one and the same; its stamp is one and the same; a
thousand and one things are all one and the same. Also, although the Names and acts
which make the universe turn are one and the same, they each encompass the universe,
or most of it. That is to say, the wisdom that works in it is one and the same; the
bestowal in it is one and the same; its regulation is one and the same; the providing of
sustenance in it is one and the same; the mercy which hastens to assist the needy is one
and the same; the rain, which is that mercy’s dispenser of soft drinks, is one and the
same, and so on; thousands of things are all one and the same. The sun, the universe’s
stove, is one and the same; the moon, its lamp, is one and the same; fire, its cook, is
one and the same; its mountains, which are its stores, treasuries, and masts, are one
and same; its water dispensers are one and the same; its sponges which water the
gardens are one and the same; a thousand and one things are all one and the same.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
38
All these instances of unity in the world are proofs indicating the Single One of
Unity, as clear and brilliant as the sun. Moreover, the elements and realms of beings of
the universe each encompassing the face of the earth, as well as being one and the
same, and their interpenetration and their uniting through their mutual relations and
even mutual assistance, are clear signs that their Owner, Maker, and Master is one and
the same.
The Second Sign and Proof
The conclusion of this is the phrase “He has no partners.” It is the fact that there
is a faultless, perfect order in everything in the universe, from minute particles to the
stars, and an utterly beautiful harmony that is free of defect, and a just balance that
wrongs nothing. Perfect order and balanced harmony can occur only through unity.
For numerous hands interfering in a single work cause only confusion.
Come now and behold the magnificence of this order: it has made the universe
into a splendid mansion every stone of which is as full of art as a palace; and into a
magnificent city whose endless incomings and outgoings, and boundless valuable
goods and foods, arrive perfectly regularly at exactly the right time from unexpected
places, from behind the veil of the Unseen. The order has also transformed the
universe into a miraculous book so full of meaning that each of its letters expresses the
meanings of a hundred lines, and each of its lines the meanings of a hundred pages, and
each of its pages the meanings of a hundred chapters, and each of its chapters the
meanings of a hundred books. Moreover, all its chapters, pages, lines, words, and
letters look to each other and allude to each other.
Now come and look at the perfect ordering within this wondrous order: it has
made the vast universe as clean as a modern city; or made it into a fine palace which is
constantly swept and polished; or a houri of Paradise wearing seventy ornamented
garments one on top of the other; or an immaculate rosebud enwrapped in seventy
delicate, ornamented petals.
Now come and consider the perfect justice of the balance within the order and
cleanliness; microscopic organisms that are visible only on a thousandfold
magnification are weighed up on those scales and balances together with suns and
stars a thousand times larger than the earth, and all are given their necessities without
deficiency. Those minute creatures and those vast beings stand shoulder to shoulder
before the scales of justice, despite there being among the large ones some that if they
were to lose their balance even for a split second, it would destroy the equilibrium of
the world and doomsday would occur.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
39
Now come and behold the wondrously attractive beauty within the order,
cleanliness, and balance; it has made the vast universe into a splendid festival, an
exhibition of highly decorated works, and a springtime with freshly opened flowers.
The vast spring too it has made into a beautiful flower-pot and gorgeous bunch of
blooms, and to each spring it has given the form of a magnificent flower with hundreds
of thousands of adornments which opens every season on the face of the earth. All the
flowers of the spring it has beautified with every sort of decoration. Yes, through the
beautiful manifestations of the Most Beautiful Names, which possess the utmost
beauty and loveliness, all the realms of beings in the universe, and all the members of
each, manifest such beauty according to their capacities that Hujjat al-Islam Imam
Ghazali said: “There can be nothing better or more beautiful than what exists in the
sphere of contingency.” Thus, this all-encompassing, captivating beauty, and general,
wondrous cleanliness, and all-pervasive, exceedingly sensitive balance, and
comprehensive and in every way miraculous order and harmony, are such proofs and
signs of Divine unity that they are clearer and more brilliant than the light that indicates
the sun at noon.
[There follows a very concise yet powerful reply to a two-part question
related to this Station.]
The First Part of the Question: You are saying in this Station that beauty, good,
and justice encompass the universe, so what do you say to all the ugliness, disasters,
illness, tribulations, and death we see around us?
The Answer: A single instance of ugliness which results in or shows up numerous
instances of beauty is indirectly an instance of beauty. While the non-existence of an
ugliness, or its being invisible, which then conceals numerous instances of beauty and
does not permit them to be seen, is not a single, but a manifold, ugliness. For example,
if an ugliness which is a unit of measurement is non-existent, the beauty would be of
only one sort, and its numerous degrees would remain concealed. For it is through the
intervention of ugliness that the degrees of beauty unfold. Just as the degrees of heat
become apparent through the existence of cold, and the degrees of light are known
through darkness, so universal instances of good, universal benefits, universal
bounties, and universal instances of beauty become apparent through there being
minor instances of evil, harm, calamities and ugliness. This means that the creation of
ugliness is not ugly, it is beautiful, because the majority of its results are beautiful. Yes,
a lazy man who suffers loss due to the rain, cannot deny the good results it produces in
the name of mercy; he cannot transform the mercy into harm.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
40
As for transience and death, it is demonstrated with extremely powerful and
decisive proofs in the Twenty-Fourth Letter that they are not contrary to general
mercy, all-embracing beauty, and comprehensive good; in fact, they are necessitated by
them. The creation of Satan, even, since he is the cause of striving and competition,
the springs of man’s spiritual progress, is also good, as is the creation of his species;
their creation is beautiful in that respect. Also, for unbelievers to suffer torments in
Hell even is good, since through their unbelief they have transgressed the rights of all
beings and insulted their honour. These two points have been explained in detail in
other treatises, so here we are curtailing the discussion with this brief indication.
The Second Part of the Question:14 Alright, so we can accept the answer about
Satan and the unbelievers from a general point of view, but how is it that the
Absolutely Beautiful One, the Absolutely Compassionate One, the Absolutely Self-
Sufficient One, Who is absolute good, inflicts evil, calamities, and ugliness on
particular wretched individuals?
The Answer: Whatever good, beauty, and bounty there are, they come directly
from the treasury of mercy of that Absolutely Beautiful and Compassionate One, and
from His particular bestowal. Evils and calamities on the other hand are occasional
results out of the many results of the general, universal laws which are called ‘adat
Allah and represent His universal will. Since they are minor and required by those
laws, He creates them in order to preserve and maintain the laws, which are the means
to universal benefits. But in the face of those minor, grievous results, He responds
with special, merciful assistance and particular dominical favours to the cries for help
of individuals afflicted by misfortune and tribulations. And by showing that He acts as
He wishes, and that all aspects of all things are tied to His will, and that universal laws
too are always subject to His will and choice, and that a Compassionate Sustainer
heeds the individuals who cry out at the constraint of the laws and responds to their
cries for help with His favours, through exceptions to those universal Divine principles
and general laws and their minor evil results and His particular favours and making
Himself loved in special ways, He opens up an unrestricted infinite field for the
unrestricted infinite manifestations of His Names, and opens too the doors of
particular manifestations.
This second sign of the affirmation of Divine unity has been elucidated in perhaps
a hundred places in The Illuminating Lamp, and here we suffice with a brief hint to it.

14 The answer to the second part of the question has great importance; it dispels numerous
doubts.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
41
The Third Sign and Proof
This consists of the innumerable stamps of Divine unity alluded to by the phrases
“His is the dominion and His is the praise.” Just as the manifestation of the sun in a
mirror shows the sun, so on the faces of all things, whether particular or universal
from minute particles to the planets, is a mirror-like stamp which, pointing to the Sun
of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, testifies to His unity. Since a great number of those
stamps have been described in detail in The Illuminating Lamp, here with a brief
indication, we shall take a look at only three of them. As follows:
Just as on the face of the universe as a whole a large stamp of unity has been
placed consisting of mutual assistance, co-operation, mutual resemblance, and
interpenetration among the species of beings, so on the face of the earth is a stamp
affirming Divine unity placed through the army of the Glorious One, composed of the
four hundred thousand animal and plant species, all being given their different
provisions, weapons, uniforms, instructions, and discharges with complete regularity
and no confusion at exactly the right time. So too on man’s face a stamp of unity is
placed through each having features distinguishing it from all other faces, as there is on
the faces of all beings, whether particular or universal. Also, on the heads of all
creatures, whether large or small, numerous or few, a seal of Divine oneness is to be
observed. The stamps on living creatures are particularly brilliant; indeed, all living
creatures are themselves each a stamp of unity, and seal of oneness, and a signature of
Eternal Besoughtedness.
Yes, all flowers, all fruits, all leaves, all plants, all animals are such seals of Divine
oneness and stamps of Eternal Besoughtedness that they transform all trees into being
dominical missives, all species of creatures into books of the Most Merciful, and all
gardens into Divine decrees, placing stamps on the letters of the tree to the number of
its blossoms, and signatures to the number of its fruits, and seals to the number of its
leaves. In order to show their scribe, stamps have been put on the species and groups
of creatures to the number of individuals. And in order to announce and describe its
ruler, stamps have been set on the decree of the garden to the number of the plants,
trees, and animals it contains. In fact there are four stamps of Divine unity on trees; on
their origins, ends, outsides and insides, alluded to by the Names of “He is the First,
and the Last, and the Outward, and the Inward.”15
As the Name of First suggests, the original seeds16 of fruit-bearing

15 Qur’an, 57:3.
16 Since olden times, a common expression in the popular language was “to raise from seed,”
which may be seen as a sort of allusion to the author of this treatise. For through the effulgence of the
Qur’an, ‘the servant of the Risale-i Nur’ [its author] discovered two ascents in knowledge of God and
the affirmation of Divine Unity in seeds and flowers. He discovered the water of life in the very places
the Naturalists drowned. He reached reality and the light of knowledge of God from seeds. It is for
this reason that these two things are repeated frequently in the Risale-i Nur.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
42
trees are coffers containing the programmes, indexes, and plans of the trees. They are
workbenches for the production of their formation, systems, and necessities; and
machines regulating the tiny amounts they take in and expend.
As the Name of Last suggests, the results and fruits of trees are instruction sheets
setting forth through the seeds in the fruits’ hearts, the trees’ shapes, attributes, and
stages; they are proclamations stating their functions, benefits, and characteristics; and
summaries announcing the trees’ peers and progeny.
As the Name of Outward suggests, the forms and shapes in which trees are
clothed are skilfully fashioned and embroidered garments which have been cut out,
trimmed, and decorated exactly according to the branches, members and parts of the
trees. They are so fine, well-proportioned and full of meaning that they transform the
trees into odes, missives, and books.
As the name of Inward suggests, the workbenches within trees are factories
which produce all the parts and members of the trees, and manage and run them with
the very finest balance. They despatch too with perfect regularity and order, the food
and substances necessary for all the separate members. Those wondrous factories
function with the speed of lightning, the ease of setting a clock, and the uniformity of
commanding an army.
In Short: The origins of trees are coffers and programmes, their ends are
instruction sheets and samples, their outer faces are artistically fashioned and
embroidered garments, and their inner faces are factories and workbenches. These four
aspects look to each other and as a whole form a supreme stamp. Indeed, a Greatest
Name becomes apparent through them, for self-evidently none other than the Single
Maker of Unity Who administers the whole universe could perform these works. Like
trees, the origins, ends, and outer and inner faces of all animate creatures bear seals of
Divine oneness and stamps of unity.
Making an analogy with the trees in these three examples, the spring is a tree
laden with blossoms. The seeds and roots entrusted to the hand of the autumn bear the
stamp of the Name of First. The fruits, grains, and vegetables poured into the lap of
summer, filling its skirts, bear the seal of the Name of Last. The brocades and natural
garments decorated with a

--- Sayfa 31 ---
43
hundred thousand designs which the spring wears one on top of the other like a houri
bear the seal of the Name of Outward. While the factories of the Eternally Besought
One working away in the springtime inside the earth, and the bubbling cauldrons of the
Most Merciful and dominical kitchens cooking foods, each bear the signet of the Name
of Inward.
All species, for instance the human species, are trees: just as, with its roots and
seeds in the past and fruits and results in the future, the orderly laws regulating sexual
life and the perpetuation of the species bears a stamp of unity; so its present
circumstances bear a stamp of unity governed by the principles of individual and social
life; humankind bears a hidden, orderly seal of unity under the apparent disorder; and
under its confused circumstances, it bears a stamp of unity governed by the principles
of Divine Determining and Decree, known as the appointed course of life.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
44
Conclusion
 [A brief allusion to the other pillars of belief, within the mystery of the
affirmation of Divine unity.]
Heedless man! Come now and consider if only once the three Fruits, Necessitating
Causes, and Proofs in the three Stations of this treatise: is it at all possible, since the
All-Powerful, Wise, Compassionate, and Knowing Maker Who has disposal over the
universe takes into account the smallest cure and least thanks; does not refer to others
nor is indifferent towards the tiniest art, such as that of a fly’s wing; attaches to the
lowliest common seed duties and instances of wisdom as great as a tree; and makes
perceived His mercifulness, compassionateness, and wisdom through all His arts, and
Himself known through every means and loved through every bounty — is it at all
possible that He should be indifferent towards the virtues of the Muhammadan
(PBUH) reality and his glorifications, and the lights of Islam?
Is it at all possible that the Messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which gilds all
creatures and fills them with joy, illuminates the universe and brings the heavens and
earth to tumult, and has for fourteen centuries taken under its rule, physical and
spiritual, half the globe and a fifth of mankind, and has perpetuated that glorious rule
on account of the Creator of the universe and in His Name — is it at all possible that
his Messengership is not one of the Maker’s most important aims, lights, and mirrors;
and that the other prophets, who served the same truths as Muhammad (PBUH),
should not also have been that Maker’s envoys, friends, and officials? God forbid, to
the number of the prophets’ miracles!
And is it at all possible that the Wise and Compassionate Creator Who attaches a
hundred purposes and fruits to the least significant thing like a branch or twig, and
through His wisdom and general mercifulness makes known His dominicality, should
deny all His wisdom and mercy, and even His dominicality and perfection, by not
bringing about the resurrection, which is as easy for His power as the spring? Is it at
all possible that he should not open up an abode of happiness and everlasting realm,
and make His wisdom and mercy, dominicality and perfection denied, and condemn to
eternal annihilation all His beloved creatures whom He

--- Sayfa 33 ---
45
loves? God forbid, a hundred thousand times! That Absolutely Beauteous One is
utterly exempt from such an absolute abomination.
A Lengthy Note
A question related to the resurrection of the dead:
The frequently repeated verse,
It will be naught but a single cry,17
and the verse,
The command of the Hour will be like the glance of the eye,18
show that the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering will occur instantaneously,
in a flash. But man’s narrow reason requires some tangible example so that it can
conceive of this wondrous, extraordinary, and unparalleled event, and accept it.
T h e  A n s w e r : At the resurrection there will be the return of spirits to their
bodies, the revivification of the bodies, and the remaking of the bodies. It consists of
three matters.
THE FIRST MATTER: An example for the return of spirits to their bodies is
the mustering, at a loud bugle call, of the members of a disciplined army after they
have dispersed to rest. Yes, the Sur of the Angel Israfil is no less powerful than an
army bugle. The spirits, too, who while in post-eternity, reply with “Yes, we accept” to
the question “Am I not your Sustainer?”,19 which comes from pre-eternity, are
infinitely more subjugated, disciplined, and obedient than the soldiers of an army. The
Thirtieth Word has demonstated with decisive proofs that not only spirits, but all
particles, form a Divine army and are its soldiers under command.
SECOND MATTER: An example for the revivification of bodies is the springing
to life in an instant of the hundred thousand electric lights of a large city on a festival
night, switched on from one centre. It would be possible to light up in the same way a
hundred million lamps scattered over the face of the earth from one centre. Since
through the training and instruction in regularity and order it has received from its
Creator, a creature of Almighty God like electricity —a servant and candleholder in
His guest-house— possesses this quality, surely the resurrection of the dead could
occur in the twinkling of an eye within the bounds of the regular laws of Divine
wisdom which thousands of luminous servants represent, like electricity.

17 Qur’an, 36:29.
18 Qur’an, 16:77.
19 Qur’an, 7:172.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
46
THIRD MATTER: An example for the remaking of bodies instantaneously is the
perfect remaking within a few days of all the trees in the spring, which are far more
numerous than all humanity, together with all their leaves, in exactly the same way as
those of the previous spring; and the bringing into being, again like those of previous
springs, all the blossoms, fruits and leaves of the trees with the speed of lightning; and
the sudden awakening of the uncountable numbers of seeds, grains, and roots, which
are the source of the spring, and their unfolding and being raised to life; and reflecting
the meaning of “resurrection after death,” the sudden raising to life at a command of
the upright skeleton-like corpses of the trees; and the reanimation of the innumerable
members of all the species of small animals; and the revivification of all the sorts of
flying insects, particularly those which continually cleaning their faces, eyes, and
wings, remind us of our ablutions and cleanliness, and caress our faces — the
resurrection and remaking of all the members of this tribe within a few days every
spring before our very eyes together with all the other species, despite being greater in
number than all mankind since the time of Adam, provides not one example of the
remaking of all human bodies at the resurrection, but thousands.
Yes, since this world is the realm of wisdom and the hereafter the realm of power,
numerous Divine Names like All-Wise, Arranger, Disposer, and Nurturer, as well as
dominical wisdom, require that the creation of things in this world is gradual and in the
course of time. In the hereafter, however, power and mercy will be manifested more
than wisdom, and there being no need for matter, time, and waiting, things will be
made instantaneously. Alluding to the fact that things which are made here in a day or
in a year will be made in the hereafter in an instant or a flash, the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition states:
The command of the Hour will be like the glance of the eye, or briefer.20
If you want to be as certain about the occurrence of the resurrection of the dead
as you are about the arrival of next spring, study the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words
carefully, which are about this, and you will see! If you do not then believe that it will
occur as you believe the coming of spring, come and stick your finger in my eye!
A FOURTH MATTER: The death of the world and Doomsday. The sudden
collision with this globe, our guest-house, at a dominical command, of a planet or
comet, could wipe out this dwelling-place of ours. Like the

20 Qur’an, 16:77.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
47
destruction in a minute of a palace the building of which had taken ten years.
The above summaries of the four matters of the resurrection are sufficient for
now, and we return to our main subject.
Also, is it at all possible that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, which is the
eloquent interpreter of all the universe’s elevated truths, the miraculous tongue of all
the perfections of the universe’s Creator and the wondrous collection of all His aims,
should not be that Creator’s word? God forbid, to the number of the mysteries of its
verses.
Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Maker should cause his living and
conscious creatures to speak with one another in all their myriad tongues, and that He
should know their voices and what they say, and listen to them and clearly reply
through His acts and bounties, but Himself not speak or not be able to speak? Is there
any possibility or probability of this? Since self-evidently He speaks and the chief of
those addressed by His speech, who comprehends it perfectly, is man; more certainly,
foremost the Qur’an and all well-known holy scriptures are His speech.
Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Maker, Who made the universe a means
of making Himself known, loved, and praised; and through His multifarious bounties
makes living creatures happy and contented, and their thanks and gratitude a
significant pivot of His dominicality; and made the vast universe together with all its
elements and realms, a docile servant, a dwelling-place, an exhibition, and banquet;
and so wanted to multiply the thousands of all the different sorts of animate beings,
that He made some of the leaves of trees that do not bear fruit like the poplar and elm
both the cradle, and the womb, and the foodstore for the living creatures that perform
their glorifications in the air, that is, for a regiment of flies; —is it at all possible that
having done all this he should leave empty, purposeless, and without owner, life, spirit,
or inhabitants the adorned heavens and light-scattering stars; that is, that He should
leave them without angels and spirit beings? God forbid, to the number of angels and
spirit beings!
Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Maker, the Disposer, should write with
the pen of His determining in the seeds and fruits of the commonest plant and smallest
tree their origins and ends and the courses of their lives within a perfect order, and that
He should write with perfect order and differentiation the origins and results of the
vast spring as though it were a tree, and not remain indifferent to the least signficant
things, then not record the actions and deeds of man, which have great importance,
since he is the result of the universe, vicegerent of the

--- Sayfa 36 ---
48
earth, the supervisor of all the realms of beings and their officer; that He should not
include them within His determining or be unconcerned with them? God forbid, to the
number of the deeds of man, all of which will be weighed up on the scales!
In Short: The universe together with all its truths shouts out:
I believe in God, and in His angels, and messengers, and in the Last Day,
and in Divine Determining, that both the good of it and the evil of it are
from God Almighty, and that resurrection after death is the truth; I testify
that there is no god but God, and I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger
of God, may God grant blessings to him and to his Family and Companions,
and grant them peace. Amen.
A Supplication about Divine Unity
and its Introduction
In his Qasidat al-Jaljalutiya in the place he mentions it, Imam ‘Ali (May God be
pleased with him and honour him) gives the Risale-i Nur the names of Siracü’n-Nur
and Siracü’s-Sürc in wondrous fashion. Since he gives it these two additional names
and the name Siracü’n-Nur is repeatedly mentioned in the present treatise, we have
taken one of his most important supplications, and expanding it two degrees, offer it in
his elevated tongue and in our tongues on his account to the Court of the Single One
of Unity.
Supplication
O God! There is in the heavens no circulation, no star, and no motion of the
planets...
In the atmosphere no cloud, no lightning, and no glorification of the thunder...
On the earth no profusion of animate beings and no wondrous artefact...
In the seas not a droplet of water nor a fish nor any strange creature...
On the mountains no stone or plant, and within them no mineral...
On the trees, no leaf or blossom, nor any decorated fruit...
In the bodies of living things no activity, nor any well-ordered member or
system...
In man’s heart no thought, no inspiration, and no illumined belief...
But it testifies to the necessity of Your existence and is evidence for Your unity,
and in Your dominions is utterly subjugated. Through the power by which You
subjugate the heavens and earth, subjugate to me

--- Sayfa 37 ---
49
my soul and subjugate to me my wish, and subjugate to the Risale-i Nur and to
service of the Qur’an and belief the hearts of Your servants and the hearts of the
spirit beings, both elevated and lowly; O All-Hearing! O Near One! O Answerer
of Prayer! Amen. And all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught us;
indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.21

21 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
50
The Third Ray
A Supplication
 [This treatise proves with extraordinary decisiveness, authenticity, and
certainty together with a wondrous conciseness, the most important of the
fundamentals of belief such as the necessary existence, unity, and oneness of
God, the splendour of His dominicality, the immensity of His power, the
breadth of His mercy, the universality of His sovereignty, the
comprehensiveness of His knowledge, and the all-inclusiveness of His
wisdom. The indications of the resurrection of the dead, and especially those
emphasized at the end, are extremely powerful.]
Introduction
This Eighth Proof of the Fundamentals of Belief1 offers evidence for the necessary
existence and unity of God, and certain proofs of the comprehensiveness of
dominicality and the immensity of Divine power. It proves too both the
comprehensiveness of Divine sovereignty, and the extensiveness of Divine mercy, and
the encompassment of Divine knowledge, and the fact that Divine wisdom embraces
all the beings of the universe.
In Short: In each of the introductory passages of this Eighth Proof are eight
conclusions.2 Proving these eight conclusions through their evidences, this Eighth
Proof has high value.

1The Eighth Proof of the Fundamentals of Belief refers to this treatise’s position among the parts
of the Risale-i Nur included in the collection called Asâ-yi Musa (The Staff of Moses). [Tr.]
2 All the ‘Proofs of the Fundamentals of Belief’ demonstrate the necessary existence and unity
of God explicitly, and their other conclusions indirectly. In addition to proving explicitly God’s
necessary existence and unity, this Eighth Proof, A Supplication, has nine conclusions. It proves:
i. The majesty of dominicality;
ii. The tremendousness of Divine power;
iii. The comprehensiveness of Divine sovereignty;
iv. The unbounded extensiveness of Divine mercy;
v. The fact that Divine knowledge embraces all things;
vi. The encompassment of Divine wisdom;
vii. The glittering magnificence of Divine rule.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
51
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the alternation of
night and the day; in the sailing of the ships through the oceans for the
profit of mankind; in the rain which God sends down from the skies, and the
life He gives therewith to an earth that is dead; in the beasts of all kinds that
He scatters through the earth; in the disposal of the winds and the clouds
subjugated between the sky and the earth, indeed are signs for people who
think.3
[This treatise, A Supplication, which forms the Third Ray, is a sort of
commentary on the above verse.]
God’s Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him), the supreme
Qur’anic commentator and interpreter, expounded one level —about Divine unity— of
the numerous luminous levels of this sublime verse in one of the ninety-nine sections of
his peerless supplication, Jawshan al-Kabir. Alluding in the supplication through a
thousand and one Divine Names to a thousand and one proofs of Divine unity, he
described his Sustainer. One of those sections is this:
O You Who is the First of all things, and the Last;
O God of all things, and their Maker;
O Provider of all things, and their Creator;
O Maker of all things, and their Owner;
O Giver of want to all things, and Giver of plenty;
O Originator of all things, and their Renewer;
O Causer of all things, Who determines them with due measure;
O Nurturer of all things, and their Administrator;
O You Who ‘rolls up’ all things, and causes their constant change;
O Giver of life to all things, and Dealer of death.
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You! Mercy! Mercy! Deliver us from
Hell-fire!
This sample shows that the Noble Messenger’s (Peace and blessings be upon him)
knowledge of God, and his proofs of Divine unity were at such a level that no one is
equal to him, and that in this field he is the supreme

3 Qur’an, 2:164.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
52
leader. By following him, everyone may enter that treasury. It is clear that knowledge,
sciences, and arts are perfected through the conjunction of ideas and blending of
minds; through ideas being combined and different works complementing each other,
the works are perfected. This is why the craftsman who invented the shishhane rifle
was more skilful than the one who invented the machine gun now. Whereas one who
listens attentively with the ear of the heart to the supplication of Jawshan al-Kabir,
imagining himself to be in the presence of the Unlettered Prophet (PBUH) and hearing
it from him, will understand and see that those thousand and one sacred truths, which
comprise a thousand and one proofs and descriptions, and each of which is the
conclusion of a chain of thought and a window opening onto Divine unity, were
composed by one unlettered (PBUH) among an illiterate people in an illiterate
environment, and a nation lacking a holy scripture in totally original, inventive fashion
imitating no one, solving on his own through illumination the riddle of creation and
talisman of the universe. This was not in imitative fashion like today with the help and
supplications of thousands of other luminaries, but out of his boundless compassion
and infinite clemency —due to which he invites to listen both the inhabitants of the
heavens under the celestial dome and the vast congregation in the huge mosque of the
universe— he seeks help, succour, mercy, and salvation for men, and he says:
O You Who in the heavens is His grandeur;
O You Who in the earth are His signs;
O You Who in all things are His evidences;
O You Who in the ocean are His strange wonders;
O You Who originates creation then renews it;
O You Who in the mountains are His treasures;
O You Who creates everything in the best way;
O You to Whom return all matters;
O You Whose grace is apparent in all things;
O You Who displays His power through all creatures.
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You! Mercy! Mercy! Deliver us from
Hell-fire!
Here, the Supreme Qur’anic Commentator is expounding one aspect of the above
verse. A short translation and meaning of it is this. He says:
“O One of Glory Whose magnificence is to be seen in the skies and heavenly
bodies! O One of Perfection, the signs and evidences of Whose unity are to be
observed in the earth and in all its beings! O Necessary Existent, proofs to Whose
necessary existence are present in all things and all creatures! O All-Glorious One of
Perfection, Who creates all the

--- Sayfa 41 ---
53
strange beings in the vast oceans! O Munificent Creator, Who creates the treasures
stored up in the mountains to meet the needs of living beings! O Beauteous Bestower
of Bounties, Who creates everything in the best way, administers them in the best way,
and provides all the necessaries for each in the best way! O Omnipotent One, Sustainer
of All Things, to Whom all things have recourse in all matters, for all needs, and on
Whom all beings rely in all circumstances, and to Whom pertain all rights and dues,
judgements and rule! O Gracious and Knowing One, the clear traces of Whose
favours, and the manifestations of Whose grace, and the subtle inscriptions of Whose
arts, and the fine gifts of Whose mercy, are observed in all things! O All-Powerful and
Wise One, Who made the universe an exhibition of marvels in order to display His
power to His conscious creatures, and made all His artefacts heralds and
proclamations announcing His perfections, such as His power, wisdom, and mercy!
You are free of all impotence and fault; Other than You there is no god who might
succour our plight! Mercy! Mercy! Save us from Hell-fire!”
God’s Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him), the Supreme
Qur’anic commentator, expounded the verse with this supplication. Then the
Messenger’s important, precise, intelligent, and exacting student, Imam ‘Ali (May God
be pleased with him), composed a supplication-like commentary on his Master’s
supplicatory commentary, and discovering another aspect of the supplication,
uncovered a further face of the verse. Keeping in mind his Noble Master’s
supplication, he described that aspect of the verse as follows. As we gave a short
meaning and translation of the supplication above, so do we for this one:
“O God! In the heavens are no rotations or motions but through their order and
wisdom they testify to your existence, making You known. On the earth are no
changes and transformations, and no states or circumstances, but through their order
and regularity they make You known together with Your unity and dominicality. In
the seas is no creature, nor even a drop of water, but through its wisdom it points to
Your existence and testifies to Your dominicality. In the mountains are no minerals,
chemicals, or rocks, stored up for living beings, but through their uses and benefits
they testify to Your dominicality and existence. In the heart is no thought inspired
from the Unseen but it points to Your existence and testifies to Your unity. On the
trees are no leaves but through their order and wisdom they recognize You, that is,
they proclaim that they are the works of Your art. In bodies there are no movements
but they testify to Your dominicality. O my Creator! For the sake of Your power,
which subjugates the heavens and the earth, subjugate to me those things that I wish!”

--- Sayfa 42 ---
54
Now, an impotent student of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and
wretched servant of the Qur’an, expounding this supplication of his also with a
supplication, wanted to disclose in the light of the Greatest Name one aspect of the
sublime verse by expounding that aspect of the above supplication, which is only one
of the hundred sections of the supplication of the Supreme Interpreter, that is,
Jawshan al-Kabir. The student of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) says:
O My God and Sustainer!
I see through the eyes of belief, the instruction and light of the Qur’an, the
teachings of God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him), and the
indications of the Name of All-Wise, that in the heavens there are no rotations and
motions but through their order and regularity they point to Your existence. There is
no heavenly body but through its silently performing its duty and remaining in place
without prop it testifies to Your dominicality and unity. There is no star but through its
balanced creation, regular position, luminous smile, and the stamp of its similarity to
the other stars, it indicates the majesty of Your Godhead and Your unity. There is not
one of the twelve planets but through its wise motion, docile subjection, orderly
duties, and significant satellites, it testifies to Your necessary existence and indicates
the sovereignty of Your Godhead.
Yes, —O Creator of the Heavens and Earth, Who directs and administers all
particles together with all the orderly components they make up, and spins the planets
and their regular satellites, subjugating them to His command!— just as each of the
inhabitants of the heavens testifies on its own, so in their totality they testify to Your
necessary existence and unity in a way so clear and powerful that shining proofs to the
number of stars in the heavens affirm that testimony.
Also, appearing as a regular army or imperial fleet decked out with electric lights,
the limpid, beautiful, spotless heavens with their extraordinarily huge and speedy
bodies, point clearly to the splendour of your dominicality and tremendousness of
Your power, which creates all things; and to the boundless extent of Your sovereignty,
which overspreads the heavens, and to Your mercy, which embraces all living things;
and testifies indubitably to the comprehensiveness of Your knowledge, which is
concerned with all the states and circumstances of all the creatures of the heavens, and
embraces them and orders them, and to Your wisdom, which encompasses all things.
This testimony is so evident it is as though the stars are the words and luminous
embodiments of the skies’ testimony.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
55
Also, like disciplined soldiers, orderly ships, wondrous aeroplanes, or marvellous
lamps, the stars in the arena of the heavens, and in their seas and vast spaces, show the
glittering splendour of the sovereignty of Your Godhead. As is suggested by the duties
of the sun —one star among the members of that army— which are related to its
planets and our earth, some of its companions, the other stars, look to the worlds of
the hereafter and are not without duties; they are the suns of eternal worlds.
O Necessarily Existent! O Single One of Unity!
These wondrous stars, these strange suns and moons, are subjugated, set in order,
and employed in Your dominions, in Your heavens, through Your command, power,
and strength, and Your administration and direction. All those heavenly bodies glorify
and exalt their single Creator, Who creates, spins, and administers them; through the
tongue of disposition, they declare: “Glory be to God! God is Most Great!” Through
all their glorifications, I too declare You holy.
O Omnipotent One of Glory, hidden in the intensity of His manifestation and
concealed in the magnificence of His grandeur! O One of Absolute Power!
I have understood through the teaching of the All-Wise Qur’an and instruction of
Your Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) that just as the
heavens and stars testify to your existence and unity, so with its clouds, lightning,
thunder, winds, and rain, does the atmosphere testify to Your necessary existence and
unity.
Yes, the lifeless, unconscious clouds sending the water of life, rain, to the
assistance of needy living beings is only through Your mercy and wisdom; confused
chance could in no way interfere. The most powerful of electricity, lightning, which
alluding to its potentiality for lighting, encourages man to benefit from it and
spectacularly lights up Your power in space. The thunder announces the coming of
rain, causing boundless space to speak, and makes the heavens ring out with the
reverberations of its glorifying; it hallows You verbally, testifying to Your
dominicality. The winds, which are charged with numerous duties like providing the
sustenance most vital for animate creatures, and the easiest to benefit from, and
ensuring and facilitating respiration, for some purpose turn the atmosphere into a
‘tablet for writing and erasing,’ thus pointing to the activity of Your power and
testifying to Your existence. Similarly, the mercy milked through Your compassion
from the clouds and sent to living beings, testifies through the words of its balanced,
orderly droplets, to the breadth of Your mercy and compassion.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
56
O Potent and Active Disposer! O Sublime and Bountiful Bestower!
The clouds, lightning, thunder, wind, and rain each testify on their own to Your
necessary existence, so too as a whole, being one within the other and assisting each
other in their duties, although they are by nature dissimilar and opposed to each other,
they indicate most powerfully Your unity. They point too to the magnificence of Your
dominicality, which makes the vast atmosphere into an exhibition of wonders, on some
days filling and emptying it several times; and to the immensity and all-pervasiveness
of Your power, which makes it resemble a slate which is written on then rubbed clean,
and wrings it out like a sponge and waters the garden of the earth; and to your
unbounded mercy and limitless rule, which under the veil of the atmosphere administer
all the earth and all creatures. Moreover, the air is employed in duties so wise and the
clouds and rain utilized in benefits so percipient that if it was not for a knowledge and
wisdom that encompass all things, they could not be thus employed.
O You Who acts as He wishes!
Through Your activity in the atmosphere, Your power, which continuously
displays examples of the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering and transforms
the summer into winter and winter into summer and similar acts, gives the sign that it
will transform this world into the hereafter and there display its everlasting acts.
O All-Powerful One of Glory!
The air, clouds, rain, and thunder and lightning in the atmosphere are subjugated
and employed in Your dominions, through Your command and power and strength.
These creatures, which by nature are so different to each other, sanctify their ruler and
commander, who makes them submit instanteously to his swift commands; they praise
and extol His mercy.
O Glorious Creator of the Heavens and Earth!
Through the instruction of the All-Wise Qur’an and teaching of God’s Noble
Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him), I believe and know that just as the
heavens testify to Your necessary existence and unity through its stars and the
atmosphere testifies through all it contains, so the earth testifies to Your existence
and unity through all its creatures and states.
Indeed, there is no change on the earth, such as that of the trees and animals
changing their garb every year, but through its orderliness it indicates Your existence
and unity. There is no animal but through its sustenance being compassionately
provided in relation to its need and weakness, and its being given all the members and
faculties necessary to

--- Sayfa 45 ---
57
pursue its life, it testifies to Your existence and unity. There is not a plant or animal
created before our eyes in the spring that through its wondrous art, its subtle
adornment, its being distinguished from all other creatures, and through its order and
balance, it makes you known. The marvels of Your power which fill the earth and are
known as plants and animals, and their creation from seeds and grains and droplets of
fluid, perfectly, without error, in adorned fashion, each with its distinguishing features,
form a testimony more brilliant and powerful than the sun to the existence, unity,
wisdom, and endless power of their All-Wise Maker.
Also, there is no element, such as air, water, light, fire, and earth, but through its
performing functions consciously and perfectly despite its lack of consciousness, and
being the means for the arrival of various well-ordered fruits from the treasury of the
Unseen despite being simple, without order, and overrunning and spreading
everywhere, it testifies to Your existence and unity.
O Omnipotent Creator! O Omniscient Opener Up Of Forms! O Active Creator!
Just as together with all its inhabitants the earth testifies to the necessary existence
of its Creator, so too, O Single One of Unity! O Clement and Kind One! O Most
Bounteous Provider!, through the stamp on its face and the stamps on the faces of all
its inhabitants and their unity and being one within the other and assisting each other,
and through all the Names and acts of dominicality that look to them being the same, it
testifies with the utmost clarity to Your unity and oneness; indeed it offers testimony
to the number of its creatures.
Similarly, through its being an army encampment, an exhibition, a place of
instruction, and through all the four hundred thousand different nations present in the
divisions of its plants and animals regularly being given all their necessary equipment,
the earth points to the magnificence of Your dominicality and to the fact that Your
power penetrates all things.
Also, all the different sustenance of innumerable living beings, and its being given
to them compassionately, generously, at exactly the right time from simple, dry earth,
and the complete subjugation and obedience to the dominical commands of those
innumerable individuals, demonstrates that Your mercy embraces all things and that
your sovereignty encompasses them.
Also, the despatch of the caravans of creatures, which are in a state of constant
change on the earth, and the alternations of life and death, and the administration and
management of the plants and animals, and this

--- Sayfa 46 ---
58
being possible only through a knowledge that is concerned with all things and an
infinite wisdom governing in all things, points to Your comprehensive knowledge and
wisdom.
Also, the supreme importance given to man, who in a brief span performs infinite
duties, has been equiped with abilities and faculties which suggest he is to live for all
eternity, and has disposal over all the beings of the earth; and the infinite outlay made
for him in this training-ground of the world, this temporary military encampment of the
earth, this transient exhibition; and the boundless manifestations of dominicality,
innumerable Divine addresses, and incalculable Divine gifts, which look to him, surely
cannot be contained in this fleeting, sorry, confused life, this transitory world so full of
tribulation. Since they could be only for another, eternal, life and an everlasting abode
of bliss, they point to, even testify to, the bestowals of the hereafter in the everlasting
realm.
O Creator of All Things!
All the creatures of the earth are administered and subjugated in Your dominions,
in Your earth, through Your strength and power and will, and Your knowledge and
wisdom. The dominicality whose activity is observed on the face of the earth is so
comprehensive and all-embracing, and its administration and management are so
perfect and precise, and it is carried out with such sameness that it shows it is a
dominicality, a disposal, which is a whole that cannot be broken into parts and a
universal that cannot be divided up. Together with all its inhabitants, the earth
sanctifies and glorifies its Maker with innumerable tongues far clearer than the spoken
word; they praise and extol their Glorious Provider for His infinite bounties with the
tongues of their beings.
O Most Pure and Holy One, hidden in the intensity of His manifestation and
concealed in the magnificence of His grandeur!
Through all the sanctifications and glorifications of the earth I sanctify you and
declare You to be free of all fault, impotence, and partners; and through all its praise
and extolling, I offer You praise and thanks.
O Sustainer of the Land and the Seas!
I have understood from the teaching of the Qur’an and instruction of Your Most
Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) that just as the skies, the
atmosphere and the earth testify to Your unity and necessary existence, so do the seas,
rivers, streams, and springs testify to them most clearly. Yes, there is no being in the
seas, which are like the strange boilers of our world producing steam —there is not a
drop of them even— but through its well-ordered being, its benefits and state, it

--- Sayfa 47 ---
59
makes known its Creator. And of the strange creatures whose splendid sustenance is
given them out of simple sand and water, and the living creatures of the seas with their
well-ordered beings, especially of the fishes who populate the seas with one fish
producing a million eggs, there is not one but through its creation and its duties, its
being sustained and administered, nurtured and superintended, it indicates its Creator
and testifies to its Provider.
Also, of the precious, decorated jewels in the seas, there is not one but through its
attractive creation and beneficial qualities it recognizes You and makes You known.
Yes, just as they testify to You singly, so too in so far as they are all mixed up
together, bear the same stamp in their natures, are created with great ease, and are
found in great numbers, they altogether testify to Your unity.
Also, through the seas, which surround the globe with its land masses, being held
suspended without spilling over or dispersing or overrunning the land as the earth
voyages around the sun; and creating the multifarious ornamented living creatures and
jewels out of simple sand and water, and all their sustenance and other needs being
supplied in general and complete fashion; and through their administration, and
through none of the inevitable innumerable corpses of their dead fellows being found
on the surface of the seas; they testify indirectly to their number to Your existence and
its necessity.
Also, just as they point clearly to the splendid sovereignty of Your dominicality
and to the magnificence of Your power, which encompasses all things; so do they
indicate the limitless breadth of Your mercy and rule, which govern all things from the
huge yet orderly stars beyond the skies to the tiny fishes at the bottom of the sea,
which are nurtured in regular fashion. They point too to Your knowledge and wisdom,
which as demonstrated by the order, benefits, instances of wisdom, and the balance
and equilibrium of all things, encompass and comprehend them. There being such
reservoirs of mercy for the travellers in this guest-house of the world and their being
utilized for man’s journeying, and for his ship, and his benefit shows that the One Who
bestows such a profusion of gifts out of the seas on his guests of one night in a
wayside inn, must surely have eternal seas of mercy at the seat of His everlasting rule,
and those here are merely their small and transitory samples.
Thus, the truly wondrous situation of the seas around the earth and the
exceedingly orderly administration and nurturing of their creatures demonstrate self-
evidently that it is only through Your power, will, and administration that they are
subjugated to Your command in Your domin

--- Sayfa 48 ---
60
ions; and through the tongues of their beings they sanctify their Creator, declaring:
“God is Most Great!”
O All-Powerful One of Glory, Who makes the mountains masts and holds of
treasure for the ship of the earth!
Through the instruction of Your Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an, I have understood that just as the seas with
their strange creatures recognize You and make You known, so do the mountains
through the wise services they perform. For they ensure that the earth is released from
the effects of earthquakes and internal upheavals; save it from being overrun by the
seas; purify the air of poisonous gases; are tanks for the saving and storage of water;
and treasuries for the minerals and metals necessary for living beings.
Yes, there is not one of the stones to be found in mountains, or the various
substances used as remedies for illness, or the varieties of metals and minerals, which
are essential for living beings and especially man, or the species of plants that adorn
the mountains and plains with their flowers and fruits, but through the wisdom, order,
and fine creation it displays, which is impossible to ascribe to chance, it testifies to the
necessary existence of an infinitely Powerful, Wise, Compassionate, and Munificent
Maker. This is especially true of substances found in the mountains like salt, potassium
oxalate, quinine sulphate, and alum, which superficially resemble each other, but
whose tastes are totally dissimilar; and particularly of all the varieties of plants, and the
great diversity of their flowers and fruits. Moreover, through their being administered
and managed as a totality, and their origins, situations, creation, and art all being
similar, and the ease, speed, and cheapness in their making, they testify to the unity
and oneness of their Maker.
Also, the creatures on the surface of the mountains and inside them being made
everywhere on the earth at the same time in the same fashion, perfectly and without
error, with none impeding others, and their being created without confusion despite
being intermingled with all the other sorts of other creatures, all point to the splendour
of Your dominicality and the immensity of Your power, for which nothing is difficult.
Also, the mountains —both their surfaces and their interiors— being filled in
orderly fashion with trees, plants, and minerals to meet the innumerable needs of all
the living creatures on the earth, and even to supply the remedies for their many
different illnesses, and gratify their various appetites and tastes, and these being
displayed for those who need them, indicates the infinite breadth of Your mercy and
infinite extent of Your

--- Sayfa 49 ---
61
sovereignty. While their being prepared percipiently, knowingly, without confusion, in
orderly fashion according to need, despite being all mixed up and concealed in the
darkness of the soil layer, indicates Your all-embracing knowledge, which
encompasses all things, and the comprehensiveness of Your wisdom, which sets all
things in order. Then the storing up of medicinal substances, minerals, and metals
points clearly to the compassionate, generous, planned processes of Your dominicality
and the subtle precautions of Your grace.
Also, the lofty mountains holding stored up in orderly fashion the reserves to meet
the future needs of the travellers in the guest-house of this world, and their being
stores stocked up with all the treasures necessary for life, indicates, indeed, testifies,
that the Maker Who is thus Munificent and hospitable, All-Wise and Compassionate,
Powerful and nurturing, surely possesses eternal treasuries for His never-ending
bestowal in an everlasting realm, for His guests Whom He clearly loves. There the
stars will perform the function the mountains perform here.
O One Powerful Over All Things!
The mountains and the creatures within them are subjugated and stored up in
Your dominions through Your power and strength, Your knowledge and wisdom!
They sanctify and glorify their Creator, Who subjugates and employs them in this way.
O Merciful Creator, Compassionate Sustainer!
Through the instruction of Your Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an I have understood that just as the heavens,
atmosphere, earth, seas, and mountains, together with their creatures and all they
contain, recognize You and make You known; so too do all the trees and plants,
together with all their leaves and flowers and fruits. All their leaves, with their ecstatic
movements and recitations; all their flowers, which describe through their decoration
the Names of their Maker; and all their fruits, which smile with their agreeableness and
the manifestation of Your compassion, testify —through the order within their
wondrous art, which is utterly impossible to ascribe to chance, and the balance within
the order, and the adornment within the balance, and the embroideries within the
adornment, and the fine and various scents within the embroideries, and the varying
tastes of the fruits within the scents— so clearly as to be self-evident to the necessary
existence of an infinitely Compassionate and Munificent Maker. At the same time,
their similarity and mutual resemblance throughout the earth, and their bearing the
same stamps on their creation, and their being related in their administration and
organization, and the coincidence of the creative

--- Sayfa 50 ---
62
acts and dominical Names connected with them, and the innumerable members of their
one hundred thousand species being raised one within the other without confusion,
forms a testimony through them as a whole to the unity and oneness of their
Necessarily Existent Maker.
Also, just as they testify to Your necessary existence and unity, so too the
nurturing and administration in hundreds of ways of the innumerable members of the
army of living creatures on the face of the earth, which is formed of four hundred
thousand different nations, perfectly, with no confusion or difficulty, point to the
majesty of Your dominicality within Your unity and to the immensity of Your power,
which creates a flower as easily as the spring, and its comprehending all things. They
point also to the unlimited breadth of Your mercy, which prepares innumerable
varieties of foods for animals and men all over the earth; and through all those works
and bestowals, administering and nurturing, being carried out with perfect regularity,
and everything, even minute particles, being obedient and subjugated to those
commands, they indicate certainly the infinite extent of Your rule; and through every
part of those trees and plants, like their leaves, blossoms, fruits, roots, branches, and
twigs, being made with every aspect of them being known and seen, in accordance
with useful purposes, instances of wisdom, and benefits, they point clearly with
innumerable fingers to Your knowledge, which embraces all things, and to the
comprehensiveness of Your wisdom. With innumerable tongues, they praise and extol
the utterly perfect beauty of Your art and the sheer beauty of Your perfect bestowal.
Also, these precious gifts and bounties and this extraordinary outlay and bestowal,
in this temporary hostel and transitory guest-house, for this brief time and fleeting life,
indicate through the hands of the trees and plants, indeed, testify, that in order not to
make all creatures say, contrary to the necessary result of all His expense and bestowal
which is to make Himself loved and known: “You gave us a taste, but then executed
us without permitting us to eat;” and not to nullify the sovereignty of His Godhead,
and not deny His infinite mercy and make it denied, and in order not to turn all his
yearning friends into enemies through depriving them thus, the munificent All-
Compassionate One has of a certainty prepared for His servants whom He will send to
an everlasting realm, an eternal world, fruit-bearing trees, and flowering plants
appropriate to Paradise out of the treasuries of His mercy, in His eternal Paradises.
Those here are merely samples to show the customers.
Also, just as through the words of their leaves, flowers and fruits, the trees and
plants praise, sanctify, and glorify You, so each one of those words singly declare You
to be holy. The glorifications of fruits in partic

--- Sayfa 51 ---
63
ular through the tongue of disposition —with the great variety of their original flesh,
their wondrous art, and extraordinary seeds, and those trays of food being given to
hands of the trees and placed on them, and sent to Your living guests— their
glorifications are so evident they are almost verbal. All these are subjugated and
submissive to Your command in Your dominions through Your power and strength,
and Your wisdom and bestowal!
O Wise Maker and Compassionate Creator, hidden in the intensity of His
manifestation and concealed within the magnificence of His grandeur!
Through the tongues of all trees and plants, and their leaves, flowers, and fruits,
and to their number, I praise and extol You and declare You free of all defect,
impotence, and partners!
O All-Powerful Creator! All-Wise Planner! Compassionate Nurturer!
Through the instruction of Your Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be
upon him) and the teaching of the Wise Qur’an, I have understood and believed that
just as plants and trees recognize You and make known Your sacred attributes and
Beautiful Names; so too among men and the animals, which are those living
creatures which have spirits, there is not one that through its internal and external
members, which work as regularly as clockwork, and the extremely fine order and
balance of their bodies, and the significant benefits and purposes of their senses and
faculties, and the great art in their making, and their being decked out with much
wisdom, and the precise equilibrium of their physical systems, but it testifies to Your
necessary existence and the reality of Your attributes. For blind force, unconscious
nature, and aimless chance could in no way interfere in such percipient, delicate art,
and conscious subtle wisdom, and perfect providential balance; they could not be their
work; it is impossible. It is also utterly impossible that living creatures made
themselves, for then each of their particles would have to possess comprehensive
knowledge and wisdom like a god, to be able to know, see, and make all the parts of
their bodies and form it, indeed, it would have to be able to know, see, and make
everything in the world connected with it, then the body’s formation could be referred
to it, and it could be said that “it makes itself.”
Also, their being subject to the same administration, and the same planning, and
their all being the same kind, and their bearing the same stamp, such as the
resemblance in features like the eye, ear, and mouth, and the unity in the stamp of
wisdom observed on the faces of members of the same species, and the resemblance in
livelihood and creation, and

--- Sayfa 52 ---
64
their all being one within the other; there is not one of these circumstances but it
testifies categorically to Your unity, and, by the manifestations of all Your Names
which look to the universe being on each individual, to Your oneness within unity.
Also, through being equipped, trained, and subservient like a regular army and
from the smallest to the largest, their conforming in orderly fashion to the commands
of dominicality, man and the hundred thousand animal species on the face of the earth
point to the degree of splendour of that dominicality; and through their great value
despite their great multitude, and their perfection despite the speed of their making,
and their great art despite the ease of their making, to the degree of grandeur of Your
power. Also, they point decisively to the boundless expanse of Your mercy, which
sends their sustenance to all of them, from the microbe to the rhinoceros, and the
tiniest fly to the largest bird, dispersed from east to west and north to south; and
through all of them performing their natural functions like soldiers under command,
and every spring the face of the earth being the encampment of an army newly taken
under arms in place of those discharged the previous autumn, to the infinite extent of
Your sovereignty.
Also, through a profound knowledge and precise wisdom all living creatures being
miniature copies of the universe, and their being made faultlessly, with none of their
parts being confused or any of their different forms mixed up, they point to their
number to Your knowledge, which embraces all things, and Your wisdom, which
comprehends all things; while by their all being made so beautiful and fine as to be
miracles of art and wonders of wisdom, they indicate in innumerable ways the utterly
perfect beauty of Your dominical art, which You greatly love and want to exhibit; and
through all of them, and particularly their young, being nourished in the finest way,
with their wishes and desires being satisfied, to the sweet beauty of Your grace.
O Most Merciful and Compassionate! O One Most True to His Promise!
Owner of the Day of Judgement!
Through the instruction of Your Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) and the guidance of the All-Wise Qur’an I have understood that since the
choicest result of the universe is life, and the choicest essence of life is spirit, and the
choicest of beings with spirits are intelligent beings, and of intelligent beings the one
with the most comprehensive nature is man; and since all the universe is subjugated to
life and works for life, and living beings are subjugated to beings with spirits and they
are sent to this world for them, and beings with spirits

--- Sayfa 53 ---
65
are subjugated to man and they assist him; and since by nature men earnestly love their
Creator and their Creator both loves them, and by every means makes them love Him;
and since man’s innate capacity and spiritual faculties look to another, permanent
world and everlasting life, and his heart and intelligence desire eternity with all their
strength, and his tongue beseeches his Creator for eternity with endless prayers; He
surely would not offend men, who love Him greatly and are loved, by causing them to
die then not raising them again to life, and while He created them for an eternal love,
to make them feel eternal hostility; to do that would not be possible. Men were sent to
work in this world in order to live happily in another, eternal world, and to win that
life. The Names manifested on man in this brief and fleeting life indicate that men, who
will be their mirrors in the eternal realm, will receive their eternal manifestations.
Yes, the true friend of the Eternal One should be eternal, and the conscious mirror
of the Enduring One should be enduring.
It is understood from sound narrations that the spirits of animals will live
eternally, and that certain individual animals, like the Hudhud of Solomon (PUH) and
his ants, Salih’s (PUH) she-camel, and the dog of the Companions of the Cave, will go
to the eternal realm with both their spirits and their bodies,4 and that each species will
have a single body that may be utilized from time to time. This is also demanded by
wisdom and reality, and mercy and dominicality.
O All-Powerful Self-Subsistent One!
All living creatures, beings with spirits, and conscious beings are subjugated to the
commands of Your dominicality and employed in their innate duties only through
Your power and strength, Your will and planning, and Your mercy and wisdom. Some
have been subjugated to man, not because of man’s power and dominance, but by
Divine mercy because of his innate weakness and impotence. Through the tongues of
both disposition and speech they absolve their Maker and True Object of Worship of
all defect and partner, and offering thanks and praise for His bounties, perform the
worship particular to them.
O Most Pure and Holy One, hidden in the intensity of His manifestation and
concealed within the magnificence of His grandeur!
Forming the intention, I sanctify You with the glorifications of all beings with
spirits, and declare: Glory be to You Who has made from water all living things!5

4 Bursawi, Ruh al-Bayan, v, 226; Tafsir al-Qurtubi, i, 372.
5 Qur’an, 21:30.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
66
O Sustainer of All the Worlds! O God of the First-comers and the Last-comers!
O Sustainer of the Heavens and the Earth!
Through the instruction of Your Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) and the teaching of the All-Wise Qur’an I have understood and believe that just
as the heavens, atmosphere, earth, land and sea, trees, plants, and animals, together
with all their members, parts, and particles, know and recognize You and point to and
testify to Your existence and unity; so too living beings, the essence of the universe,
and man, the essence of living creatures, and the prophets, saints, and purified
scholars, the essence of men, and, through their visions, unfoldings, inspirations, and
the discoveries of their hearts and intellects, which form the essence of the prophets,
saints, and purified scholars, testify with the certainty of a hundredfold consensus to
Your necessary existence, unity and oneness, and give news of them; and through their
miracles, wonder-working, and certain proofs, prove what they tell of.
Yes, there is nothing that occurs to the heart, which looks to one who inspires it
from behind the veil of the Unseen; and there is no inspiration, which makes one look
to the giver of inspiration; and there is no certain belief, which discloses in the form of
‘absolute certainty’ Your sacred attributes and Most Beautiful Names; and there is no
luminous heart of the prophets and saints, which observes with ‘the vision of certainty’
the lights of the Necessary Existent; and there is no enlightened intellect of the purified
scholars and veracious ones, which confirms and proves with ‘the knowledge of
certainty’ the signs of the existence of the Creator of All Things and the proofs of His
unity; —there is not one of these that does not testify to Your necessary existence, and
sacred attributes, and Your unity, oneness, and Most Beautiful Names, and point to
them and indicate them.
Also, just as relying on their miracles, wonder-working and proofs, all those
hundreds of thousands of truthful bringers of good news testify to Your existence and
unity; so they unanimously give news of, proclaim, and prove the degree of majesty of
Your dominicality, which governs from the administration of the totality of matters of
the Sublime Throne, which encompasses all things, to knowing and hearing and
administering the secret, private thoughts of the heart, and its desires and
supplications. They tell of and prove too the immensity of Your power, which creates
innumerable different things at once, and makes the greatest thing as easily as the
smallest with no act impeding another and no matter obstructing another.
Also, they give news of and prove through their miracles and proofs

--- Sayfa 55 ---
67
the immense breadth of Your mercy, which makes the universe a magnificent palace
for beings with spirits, and especially man; has prepared Paradise and everlasting
happiness for jinn and man; does not forget even the tiniest living being; and tries to
satisfy and please the most impotent heart.
They give news too of the infinite extent of Your sovereignty, which makes
comply with Your commands all the realms of creatures from particles to the planets,
and subjugates and employs them.
So also they unanimously testify to Your comprehensive knowledge, which makes
the universe into a vast book containing treatises to the numbers of its parts, and
records the life-stories of all beings in the Clear Record and Clear Book, which are the
notebooks of the Preserved Tablet, and inscribes completely and without error in their
seeds the indexes and programmes of all trees and the biographies of conscious beings
in the memories in their heads.
They testify too to the comprehensiveness of Your sacred wisdom, which attaches
numerous purposes to all beings, causing even trees to produce results to the number
of their fruits, and follows benefits in all living beings to the number of their members,
and even their parts and cells, and employing man’s tongue in numerous duties, equips
it with the ability to weigh up tastes to the number of foods.
They also unanimously testify that the manifestations of the Names related to
Your Beauty and Glory, samples of which are to be seen in this world, will continue in
more brilliant fashion for all eternity, and that your bounties, samples of which are to
be observed in this transitory world, will persist in the abode of bliss in even more
glittering fashion, and that those who long for them in this world will accompany them
and be together with them for all eternity.
Also, relying on hundreds of evident miracles and decisive signs, foremost Your
Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) and the All-Wise
Qur’an, and the prophets with their luminous spirits, and the saints, who are
spiritual poles with their light-filled hearts, and the purified scholars with their
enlightened intellects, relying on Your repeated threats and promises in all the sacred
scriptures, and trusting in Your sacred attributes, like power, mercy, favour, wisdom,
glory, and beauty, and on Your functions, and the dignity of Your glory, and the
sovereignty of Your dominicality, and in consequence of their illuminations and visions
and beliefs at the degree of ‘the knowledge of certainty,’ give the glad tidings to men
and jinn of eternal happiness and inform them of Hell for the people of misguidance;
they believe this and testify to it.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
68
O All-Powerful and Wise One! O Most Merciful and Compassionate! O
Munificent One True to His Promise! O All-Compelling One of Glory, One of
Dignity, Grandeur, and Wrath!
You are utterly exempt from and exalted above giving the lie to so many loyal
friends, and so many promises, and attributes and functions, and denying the certain
demands of the sovereignty of Your dominicality and the endless prayers and
supplications of Your innumerable acceptable servants, whom You love and who
attract Your love by assenting to You and obeying You; and You are exempt from
confirming the denial of resurrection of the people of misguidance and unbelief, who
through their disbelief and rebellion and denial of Your promises, offend the
magnificence of Your grandeur and affront Your dignity and glory and the honour of
Your Godhead, and sadden the compassion of Your dominicality. I declare Your
justice, beauty, and mercy to be exempt from such infinite tyranny, such ugliness. With
all the particles of my being, I want to recite the verse,
Glory be to Him! He is high above all that they say! —Exalted and Great
[beyond measure]!6
Indeed, those truthful envoys of Yours and heralds of Your sovereignty testify
with ‘absolute certainty,’ ‘knowledge of certainty,’ and ‘the vision of certainty’ to the
treasuries of Your mercy in the hereafter and the stores of Your bounties in the
everlasting realm, and to the wondrously beautiful manifestations of Your Beautiful
Names, which will be manifested totally in the abode of bliss, and they give good news
of these. Believing that the supreme ray of Your Name of Truth, which is the source,
sun, and protector of all realities, is this truth of the resurrection and Great Gathering,
they teach it to Your servants.
O Sustainer of the Prophets and Veracious Ones!
They are all subservient to You and charged with their duties in Your dominions
through Your command and power, Your will and planning, Your knowledge and
wisdom. They demonstrate through sanctifying, exalting, and extolling You, and
declaring You to be One, that the globe is a vast place for Your remembrance and the
universe, a huge mosque.
O My Sustainer and Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth! O My Creator and
Creator of All Things! For the sake of Your power, will, wisdom,
sovereignty, and mercy, which subjugate the heavens and their stars, the
earth and all it contains, and all creatures together with all their attributes
and acts, subject my soul to me and subjugate to me

6 Qur’an, 17:43.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
69
my wishes! Subjugate the hearts of people to the Risale-i Nur, so they may
serve the Qur’an and belief! And grant me and my brothers perfect belief
and a happy death! As You subjugated the sea to Moses (Peace be upon
him), fire to Abraham (Peace be upon him), the mountains and iron to David
(Peace be upon him), jinn and men to Solomon (Peace be upon him), and the
sun and moon to Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), subjugate
hearts and minds to the Risale-i Nur! Preserve me and all the students of the
Risale-i Nur from the evil of the soul and Satan, and the torment of the grave
and Hell-fire, and grant us happiness in Paradise! Amen. Amen. Amen.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7
And the close of their prayer will be: All praise be to God, the Sustainer of
All the Worlds.8
If I have been at fault in offering to the Court of my Compassionate Sustainer this
instructive piece which I have taken from the Qur’an and the Jawshan al-Kabir, a
supplication of the Prophet (PBUH), as worship in the form of reflective thought,
making the Qur’an and the Jawshan my intercessors, I beseech forgiveness for my
fault.
                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i

7 Qur’an, 2:32.
8 Qur’an, 10:10.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
70
The Fourth Ray
 [While being the Fifth Flash in meaning and degree, in form and ‘station’
this forms the valuable Fourth Ray of the Thirty-First Letter’s Thirty-First
Flash and is an important and subtle point concerning the verse, For us God
suffices.]
NOTE: Unlike other works, the Risale-i Nur starts off in veiled manner and gradually
unfolds. Especially the First Degree of this treatise, in addition to being a most valuable
truth, it is extremely subtle and profound. Peculiar to myself, it took the form of a
significant discussion governed by the feelings, an animated conversation about belief, a
secret discourse of the heart; it was healing for my various deep ills. Those who are
completely in harmony and agreement with me may understand it. Otherwise it will not
be entirely appreciated.
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.1
One time when I had been isolated from everything by ‘the worldly’, I was
afflicted with five kinds of exile. I suffered too at that time of old age from five
illnesses arising in part from my sorrows. Due to the heedlessness resulting from the
distress, I looked not to the lights of the Risale-i Nur, which would have consoled and
assisted me, but straight to my heart, and I sought my spirit. I saw that dominant in me
were an overpowering desire for immortality, an intense love of existence, a great
yearning for life, together with an infinite impotence and endless want. But an
awesome transience was extinguishing the immortality. Suffering that state of mind, I
exclaimed like the sorrowing poet:2

1 Qur’an, 3:173.
2 This refers to Niyazi al-Misri (1218-1294 AD), a sufi poet who was born in the province of
Malatya in Turkey. He studied in al-Azhar, hence the name ‘al-Misri,’ wrote a diwan of poetry and
other works, and taught in the religious schools of Istanbul for many years. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 59 ---
71
While my heart desires its immortality, Reality wants the passing of my
body;
I am afflicted with an incurable ill which not even Luqman could cure!
I bowed my head in despair. Suddenly the verse, For us God suffices, and He is
the Best Disposer of Affairs came to my assistance, summoning me to read it with
attention. So I recited it five hundred times every day. Writing briefly a part of the
valuable lights which were unfolded to me in the form of ‘the vision of certainty’, and
only nine lights and degrees, I refer readers to the Risale-i Nur for the details, known
with ‘absolute certainty’ rather than the former ‘vision of certainty.’
The First Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
Because of a shadow in my essential being of a manifestation of one of the Names
of the One of Glory and Perfection, Who, possessing absolute perfection, is of Himself
and for no other reason worthy of love, I had an innate desire for immortality, directed
not to my own immortality, but to the existence, perfection, and immortality of that
Absolutely Perfect One. However, due to heedlessness, that innate love had lost its
way, become attached to the shadow and enamoured of the mirror of immortality.
Then the verse, For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs raised the
veil. I saw and felt and experienced at the degree of ‘absolute certainty’ that the
pleasure and happiness of my immortality lay exactly and in more perfect form in the
immortality of the Enduring One of Perfection, in affirming my Sustainer and God, in
believing in Him and submitting to Him. For an undying truth was realized through His
immortality. The insight of belief established that “my essential being is the shadow of
a Divine Name which is both enduring and eternal.”
Also, through the insight of belief, one knows the existence of the Absolutely
Perfect One, the One Who is absolutely beloved, and the innate, intense love for His
Essence is satisfied. And through perceiving through the insight of belief the Eternally
Enduring One’s eternal existence, the perfections of the universe and of mankind are
known and exist, and one’s natural infatuation with perfection is saved from endless
pains and becomes the means to pleasure and enjoyment.
Also, through the insight of belief a connection is formed with the Eternally
Enduring One, and through belief in that connection a relation comes into being with
all His dominions. And due to that connection and relation —with the eye of belief—
one looks on infinite dominions as though they were in a way one’s own possessions,
and benefits from them.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
72
Also, through the insight of belief and that connection and relation, a bond is
formed with all beings, a sort of union is attained with them. In this way, apart from
one’s personal existence in second place, through the insight of belief and that
connection, relation, bond and union, a boundless existence comes into being which is
as though one’s own; and one’s innate passionate love of existence is quietened.
Also, through that insight of belief, and the connection, relation, and bond, a
brotherhood is formed with all the people of perfection. Thus, through knowing that
due to the eternal existence of the Eternally Enduring One those innumerable people of
perfection have not gone to nothingness and are not lost, the immortality and
continued existence of those innumerable friends’ perfections, whom such a person
with the insight of belief loves, admires, and appreciates and to whom he is attached,
yields an elevated pleasure for him.
Also, through that insight of belief, connection, relation, bond, and brotherhood, I
felt and experienced in myself an infinite happiness at the happiness of all my friends
—for whose happiness I would willingly sacrifice my life and immortality. For one
kind friend is happy and pleased at the happiness of his sincere friend. I therefore felt
and perceived through the insight of belief that through the eternal existence of the
Enduring One of Perfection, foremost the Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be
upon him) and his Family and Companions, and all my masters and those I love, the
prophets, saints, and purified scholars, and all my other innumerable friends, had been
saved from eternal extinction and would experience eternal happiness. I understood
through the mystery of relations, bonds, brotherhood, and friendship that their
happiness was reflected in me and made me happy.
Also, through the insight of belief, I was saved from endless sorrows arising from
love of my fellow men and love for relatives, and felt a boundless spiritual pleasure.
For I felt and perceived through the insight of belief that foremost my parents and all
my blood relatives and relatives of the spirit, for whom by nature I desired to sacrifice
my life and immortality, and would proudly do so, were saved through the eternal
existence of the Truly Enduring One from annihilation, non-existence, eternal
annihilation, and endless pains, and would receive His infinite mercy. I felt and
perceived that an infinite mercy was protecting and supervising them in place of my
insignificant, ineffective compassion, which produces sorrow and pain. Like a mother
takes pleasure at the ease, comfort, and enjoyment of her child, I felt pleasure and joy
at the salvation and ease of all those persons for whom I had compassion under the
protection of that mercy, and I offered profound thanks.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
73
Also, through the insight of belief, and through its connection, I knew and felt that
the Risale-i Nur, which was the result of my life, means of my happiness, and my
natural duty, was saved from being lost and without benefit and from annihilation and
losing its meaning, and that it was fruitful and enduring; I had the conviction that this
was so and I experienced a pleasure of the spirit far exceeding the pleasure at my own
immortality. For I believed that through the Enduring One of Perfection’s eternal
existence, the Risale-i Nur was not only inscribed in the hearts and memories of
people, but was studied by innumerable sentient creatures and spirit beings, and in
addition, receiving God’s pleasure, was inscribed on the Preserved Tablet, and
guarded records, and adorned with fruits of reward. I knew that in particular its being
connected with the Qur’an, and its acceptance by the Prophet (PBUH), and —God
willing— being the object of Divine pleasure, one moment of its existence and being
under the dominical view was far more valuable than the appreciation of all the people
of this world.
Thus, I realized that I am ever-ready to sacrifice my life and immortality for the
immortality, continuance, statement, and acceptance of each of those treatises, which
prove the truths of belief, and that my happiness lies in their serving the Qur’an. In this
way I understood through the connection of belief that through Divine immortality,
they are the object of appreciation a hundred times greater than the appreciation of
men. I exclaimed with all my strength: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best
Disposer of Affairs!”
Also, through the insight of belief I knew that belief in the eternal existence of the
Enduring One of Glory, Who bestows everlasting immortality and perpetual life, and
the results of belief like good works, are the everlasting fruits of this fleeting life and
the means to unending immortality. I persuaded my soul to leave aside the shell of this
worldly immortality in order to yield those enduring fruits, like a seed leaves aside its
casing in order to be transformed into a fruit-bearing tree. Together with my soul I
said: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! For us His eternal
existence is sufficient!”
Also, through the insight of belief and relation of worship I knew with ‘the
knowledge of certainty’ that what lies beyond the screen of the earth was lit up and
that the heavy layer of earth was lifted from the dead, and that under the ground,
which was entered by the door of the grave, was not dark and stained with non-
existence. With all my strength I exclaimed:“For us God suffices, and He is the Best
Disposer of Affairs!”
I had the firm conviction and through the insight of belief knew with

--- Sayfa 62 ---
74
‘absolute certainty’ that while the intense desire for immortality looked in two respects
to the eternal existence of the Enduring One of Perfection, I had become someone
stunned and bewildered who had lost his beloved on his ego veiling him and begun to
worship the mirror itself. That very deep, powerful desire for immortality governed in
my essential being by means of the shadow of one of the Names of the Absolute
Perfection, Who is loved and worshipped for Himself and no other reason, and Whom
it is man’s nature to love. He had given the desire for immortality, and while the
perfection of His Essence, which apart from Himself requires no other reason or
motive for love, was sufficient as the cause of worship, as we explained above, by
bestowing the above-mentioned enduring fruits —each one of which is worthy of
having sacrificed for it not one life and immortality, but if possible thousands of
worldly lives and immortalities— He had made that innate desire even more intense;
this I perceived and felt. If it had been within my power I would have declared with all
the particles of my being: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs!”, and I did declare it with that intention.
Also, the insight of belief, which seeks its immortality and the eternal existence of
God —some of the fruits of which I have indicated above in the paragraphs starting
“Also... Also... Also... ” — afforded me such pleasure and joy that I exclaimed with all
my spirit, all my strength, from the depths of my heart, together with my soul: “For us
God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!”
The Second Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
One time when afflicted with old age, exile, loneliness, and isolation in addition to
my innate and infinite impotence, ‘the worldly’ were attacking me with their spies and
stratagems, and I declared: “Armies are attacking a single sick, weak man whose
hands are tied. Is there nothing that unfortunate (that is, me) can find to support him?”
I had recourse to the verse For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs! It told me: through the relation resulting from belief you may rely on a
monarch so absolutely powerful that together with every spring equipping with perfect
order all the armies of the plants and animals on the face of the earth, which comprise
four hundred thousand nations, he renews the uniforms of the two regular armies of
the trees and flying creatures, clothing them in fresh apparel and changing the skirts
and top garments of the hens and birds. He changes too the dress of the mountains and
the veil of the plains.
Furthermore, this Monarch places all the rations of the vast army of foremost man
and all the animals in the merciful ‘extracts’ known as seeds and grains, which are far
more wondrous than the ‘food extracts’

--- Sayfa 63 ---
75
like the meat, sugar and other extracts the ‘civilized’ have discovered in recent times.
He rolls up inside these the instructions for their cooking and growth in accordance
with Divine Determining, depositing them in minute casings for their protection. The
creation of these containers is with such speed, ease and abundance from the factory of
“‘Be!’ and it is”3 that the Qur’an says it is carried out at a mere command. Although
all those extracts resemble each other and are of the same matter and would not fill a
town, the Munificent Provider could fill all the towns on the earth with the exceedingly
various and delicious foods He cooks from them in the summer.
Thus, you may find a point of support such as this through the relation of belief,
and rely on an infinite power and strength.
On receiving this lesson from the verse, I acquired such moral strength and
firmness of belief that I could have challenged not only my present enemies, but the
whole world. I declared: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs!”
Seeking a source of help for my infinite poverty and need, I again had recourse to
the verse. It said to me: through the relation of worship and servanthood you become
connected to and are recorded in the wages book of a Munificent Master Who every
spring and summer sets out and removes a hundred times over tables bearing a
multiplicity of foods, producing them out of nothing from unexpected places and the
dry earth. It is as though the years and the days are all receptacles for the fruits of
bounty and foods of mercy that appear in unending succession. They are exhibitions
for the degrees of bestowal, universal and particular, of a Compassionate Provider.
You are the servant of a Possessor of Absolute Riches Who is thus. If you are aware
of your servanthood, your grievous poverty will be transformed into pleasurable
appetite. This lesson I absorbed, and placing my trust in God, declared together with
my soul: “Yes, yes! That is right! For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs!”
The Third Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
At a time I found my attachment to the world broken due to the pressures of my
exile and sickness, and the wrongs I suffered, and belief was informing me that I was
destined for an eternal world, an everlasting land, and perpetual happiness, I gave up
sighing “ah! ah!” and said “oh! oh!” But this goal of the imagination, aim of the spirit,
and result of creation could only be achieved through the infinite power of One
Absolutely

3 Qur’an, 36:82, etc.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
76
Omnipotent Who knows the motion, rest, acts and states of all creatures, and records
them, and takes insignificant and absolutely impotent man as his friend and addressee,
giving him a rank over all creatures. Thinking of this and His attaching infinite
importance to man and bestowing infinite grace on him, that is, pondering over the
activity of such a power and man’s importance despite his apparent insignificance, I
wanted an explanation that would increase my belief and satisfy my mind. I again had
recourse to the verse. It commanded me: “Note carefully the ‘us’ of For us God
suffices and see who is saying this together with you verbally and through the tongue
of disposition.”
So I looked and I at once saw that innumerable birds and miniature birds and
flying creatures, and countless animals and small living creatures, and uncountable
plants and growing things, and infinite numbers of trees and bushes, like me, were
reciting through the tongue of disposition the meaning of For us God suffices, and He
is the Best Disposer of Affairs!, and were calling it to mind. For the One Who has
disposal over them and guarantees all the necessities of their lives is such that He
creates before our eyes and particularly in the spring in great abundance and with great
ease and speed and extensiveness, without error, defect, or confusion, from eggs,
droplets of fluid, seeds and grains which resemble each other and whose matter is the
same, the adorned, balanced, and regular hundred thousand species of birds, the
hundred thousand sorts of animals, the hundred thousand varieties of plants, and the
hundred thousand kinds of trees, which, all with their distinguishing characteristics, are
different to each other. With all this intermingling, resemblance, and closeness, He
demonstrates to us His unity and oneness within the immensity and majesty of His
power. I understood then that it was not possible for there to be any interference or
partnership in that act of dominicality and disposal of creative power, which displayed
such innumerable miracles.
I noted next the ‘I’ in the For us God suffices, that is, I considered myself, and I
saw that among the animals, He had created me miraculously from my origin, a drop
of fluid, had opened my ear, attached my eye, and had placed in my head a brain, and
in my breast a heart, and in my mouth a tongue containing hundreds of scales and
measures with which I might weigh up and know all the gifts of that Most Merciful
One stored up in the treasuries of mercy. He had inscribed on these, thousands of
instruments for unlocking and understanding the treasures of the infinite manifestations
of His Most Beautiful Names, and given instructions to the number of smells, tastes,
and colours for the assistance of those instruments.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
77
He had moreover included with perfect order in this body the numerous sensitive
feelings and senses, and subtle, non-physical faculties and inner senses. He had created
with perfect art all the systems and members and faculties necessary for human life so
that He might allow me to experience and understand all the varieties of His bounties,
and make known to me the countless different manifestations of His Names. Like the
bodies of all believers, He had made this poor body of mine, which appears so
insignificant, a fine calendar and diary of the universe; an illuminated summary of the
macrocosm; a miniature sample of the world; a clear miracle of His handicraft; a
desirous seeker after every sort of His bounty, and the means of enjoying them; and a
list and index, like a model garden, of the gifts and flowers of mercy; and the
understanding recipient of His Divine pronouncements. He also had given me life, to
expand and increase in my existence, which is the greatest bounty. For through life, the
bounty of my existence may expand to the extent of the Manifest World.
He had also bestowed humanity on me, through which the bounty of existence
may unfold in the physical and spiritual realms, opening up the way to benefiting —
through the senses particular to man— from those broad spreads of bounties.
He had also bestowed Islam on me, through which the bounty of existence may
expand to the extent of the Manifest World and World of the Unseen.
He had also given me certain, verified belief, through which the bounty of
existence may encompass this world and the hereafter.
He had also given me the knowledge and love of God within belief. Through this
He bestowed a rank through the bounty of existence at which one may stretch out the
hands to reap benefits, through praise and laudation, at all the levels from the sphere of
contingency to the Necessary World and realm of the Divine Names.
He had also given me in particular knowledge of the Qur’an and the wisdom of
belief, through which bounty He had bestowed on me a superiority over many
creatures.
He had also given me comprehensive abilities like the above-mentioned whereby I
might be a complete mirror to His oneness and Eternal Besoughtedness, and respond
with universal worship to His universal, sacred dominicality.
And as unanimously confirmed by all the holy scriptures and books He had
revealed to men by means of the prophets, and attested by all the prophets, saints, and
purified ones, He buys from me my existence, life,

--- Sayfa 66 ---
78
and self —as stated by verses of the Qur’an— which are gifts and in trust to me, so
that they will not be lost and go for nothing. He has repeatedly and categorically
promised that He will preserve them in order to return them, and that as the price He
will give eternal happiness and Paradise. This I understood with ‘the knowledge of
certainty’ and believed with utter conviction.
Thus, I was taught by the verse For us God suffices that my Sustainer, the
Glorious and Munificent One, ‘opens up’ through His Name of Opener the forms of
the hundreds of thousands of varieties of animals and plants from limited, similar
droplets and seeds, with the uttermost ease, speed, and perfection, and as we
mentioned before, gives man this astonishing importance, making him the chief pivot
of the works of His dominicality; so too He will create the resurrection of the dead and
Paradise and will bestow eternal happiness as easily and definitely as He will create
next spring. Had it had been possible, I would have declared through the tongues of all
creatures, but since it was not possible, I declared by intention and through thought
and imagination: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!  And so
I want to repeat it through all eternity.
The Fourth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
One time, when a period of heedlessness coincided with my being shaken by
various indispositions like old age, exile, illness, and defeat, I was overcome by a
grievous anxiety that my very existence, to which I was intensely attached and by
which I was captivated, would cease to be, as would the existences of all creatures.
Again I had recourse to the verse For us God suffices. It told me: “Study my meaning
and look through the telescope of belief!”
I looked and I saw through the eyes of belief that my miniscule being was the
mirror to an infinite existence, and through an infinite expansion was the means of
gaining innumerable existences; it was a word of wisdom yielding the fruits of
numerous everlasting existences far surpassing itself in value. I understood with ‘the
knowledge of certainty’ that due to its relation with that infinite existence, to live for
an instant was as valuable as existing eternally. For by understanding through the
insight of belief that my being is the work, artefact and manifestation of the
Necessarily Existent, I was saved from the endless darkness of desolate fears and the
pains of innumerable separations. I knew that within a temporary separation was a
permanent union with the beings I loved, with which, through bonds of brotherhood to
the number of Divine Names manifested in the acts related to living creatures in
particular, I had gained a relation.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
79
It is clear that those who share the same village, town or country, or the same
regiment, commander, or master will feel a close brotherhood and warm friendship.
While those deprived of such bonds feel a constant painful torment surrounded by
darkness. The fruits of a tree, too, if they had intelligence, would feel that they were
brothers, companions, and observers of each other. If the tree ceased to exist or they
were plucked from it, they would experience separations to the number of fruits.
Thus, through belief and the relation that results from it, my existence —like that
of all believers— gains the lights of myriad existences untouched by separation. Even
if it departs itself, it is content, for they remain behind as though it had itself remained.
Moreover, as is demonstrated in detail in the Twenty-Fourth Letter, the existences of
all living creatures and particularly those with spirits, are like words. They are spoken
and written down, then disappear. But in place of their own existences, they leave
behind numerous existences which may be counted as second degree existences, like
their meanings, their similitudes and forms, and their results, and if they are blessed,
their rewards and their realities. Only then do they pass beneath the veil.
In just the same way, when they depart from external existence, my existence and
the existences of all living creatures, leave behind them their spirits, if they possess
them, and their meanings, and realities, and similitudes, and the worldly results and
fruits of the hereafter produced by them individually; they leave their forms and their
identities behind in memories and on the Preserved Tablet, and in the films displaying
eternal vistas, and in the exhibitions of pre-eternal knowledge; and they leave the
Divine glorifications offered by their essential beings, which represent them and give
them permanence, in the notebooks of their deeds; and their innate responses to the
manifestations of the Divine Names and what the Names necessitate, and their being
existent mirrors to them, they leave in the sphere of the Names. They leave behind in
their places numerous non-physical existences like these, more valuable than their
external existences, then they depart. This I knew with ‘the knowledge of certainty.’
Thus, through belief and the insight and relationship resulting from belief, one may
lay claim to the above-mentioned everlasting, immaterial existences. In the absence of
belief, besides being deprived of all those other existences, even one’s own existence
goes for nothing, for oneself, and is lost in non-existence.
At one time, I felt great sorrow at the speedy destruction of the spring flowers; I
even pitied those delicate creatures. But the above-mentioned

--- Sayfa 68 ---
80
truth arising from belief shows that such flowers become flowers in the world of
meaning. Each like a fruit-producing tree or a shoot, —in respect of the lights of
existence— all those existences apart from spirit produce a hundredfold profit. Their
external existences do not go to non-existence, they are hidden. They are also the new
forms of the permanent reality of a species. For the beings of last spring such as the
leaves, flowers, and fruits, are the same as those of this spring; the difference is only
apparent. I realized that the apparent difference, even, was to allow those words of
wisdom, phrases of mercy, and letters of power to acquire numerous different
meanings. Instead of lamenting, I exclaimed: “What wonders God has willed! How
great are His blessings!”
Thus, through the insight of belief and by being connected through belief to the
Maker of the heavens and earth, I perceived from afar what a source of pride and
honour it is to be the work of art of a craftsman who adorns the skies with stars and
the earth with flowers and exquisite creatures, and demonstrates a hundred miracles in
every one of his artefacts—how precious and unique it was to have been made by such
a wondrous artist. The verse taught me in particular that since that wonder-working
Artist had inscribed in the tiny copy of man the mighty book of the vast heavens and
earth, even making him a choice and perfect summary of the book, what a great
honour and achievement and way of acquiring value it was for man, and that through
the relation and insight of belief, he could receive and lay claim to that honour.
Conceiving of all beings in my mind, I formed the intention and declared through the
tongues of all of them: “For us God suffices; and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!”
The Fifth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
Another time when my life was being shaken by severe conditions, it turned my
attention towards life and I saw that mine was swiftly passing. I was approaching the
end of my life; it had begun to be dimmed with the oppression I suffered. But I
thought sorrowfully of how, because of its important duties and virtues and valuable
benefits, which are explained in the treatise on the Divine Name of Ever-Living, life
deserved to be very lengthy, not to be swiftly extinguished in that way. I once again
had recourse to my master, the verse For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer
of Affairs!, and it told me: “Consider life from the point of view of the Ever-Living
and Self-Subsistent One, Who gives you life!” So I considered it and I understood that
if one aspect of life looks to me, one hundred aspects look to the Ever-Living Granter
of Life. If one of its results concern me, a thousand of its results pertain to my Creator.
In that respect it did not require great length, in fact it needed no time at all;

--- Sayfa 69 ---
81
to live for an instant was sufficient. This truth is elucidated together with proofs in
various parts of the Risale-i Nur, so here it will be explained in four ‘Matters,’ in brief
and summary form.
F i r s t   M a t t e r : I looked in the manner the essence and reality of life look to
the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, and I saw that in reality my life was a
collection of keys with which to open the treasuries of the Divine Names, and a small
map of their inscriptions, an index of their manifestations, a sensitive balance and
measure of the vast truths of the universe, and a word of wisdom written to know and
make known, and to understand and make understood, the meaningful Names of the
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. When life’s reality is this, its value increases a
thousandfold and one hour of it gains the significance of a lifetime. In respect of its
relation to the Pre-Eternal One, Who has no time, life may not be considered with
regard to its length or brevity.
S e c o n d   M a t t e r : I considered the true rights of life, and I understood that
my life is a dominical missive; it invites my brothers, other intelligent creatures, to read
itself; it is a place of study making known its Creator. It is also a manifesto
proclaiming my Creator’s perfections. Knowingly adorning itself in the priceless gifts
and decorations bestowed on it by life’s Creator, it displays them consciously,
gratefully, and believingly to the Peerless Monarch in the daily parade. It
comprehends, observes, and proclaims the thankful benedictions and glorifications of
the Creator of innumerable living beings. And it makes known verbally and through
the tongues of disposition and worship, the beauties of the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One’s dominicality. I understood with ‘the knowledge of certainty’ that the
elevated rights of life like these did not require lengthy time, and that they elevate life a
thousandfold and are a hundred times more valuable than the worldly rights of life. I
exclaimed: Glory be to God! Belief is so valuable and living that it infuses with life
everything it enters! It transforms the fleeting glimmer of transitory life into eternal
life, dispelling the transience in it.
T h i r d   M a t t e r : I considered the innate duties of my life and its non-
material benefits which look to my Creator, and I saw that it acts as a mirror to the
Creator of life in three ways:
The First Way: Through its impotence, weakness, poverty, and need, my life acts
as a mirror to the power, strength, wealth, and mercy of the Creator of life. Yes, just
as the pleasure of food is known in proportion to the degree of hunger, and the
degrees of light through the degrees of darkness, and the degrees of heat through the
degrees of cold; in the same way, through the boundless impotence and poverty in my
life, I under

--- Sayfa 70 ---
82
stood the infinite power and mercy of my Creator, who answers my needs and wards
off my innumerable enemies. I understood my duties of entreaty, supplication,
worship, abasement, and seeking refuge with God, and I undertook these duties.
The Second Way is acting as a mirror to the universal and comprehensive
attributes and acts of my Creator through such meanings in my own life as partial
knowledge, will, hearing and sight. Yes, I understood through the many meanings in
my own life and my conscious acts like knowing, hearing, seeing, speaking, and
wanting —like my size relative to the universe but in far greater degree— my
Creator’s all-encompassing attributes such as knowledge, will, hearing, sight, power,
and life, and His qualities such as love, anger and compassion. Believing, I assented to
them, and admitting this, I found another way leading to knowledge of God.
The Third Way is acting as a mirror to the Divine Names, inscriptions and
manifestations of which are present in my life. Yes, as I beheld my own life and body, I
saw hundreds of sorts of miraculous works, inscriptions, and arts, and observed
moreover that I was being most compassionately nurtured. I understood therefore
through the light of belief, how extraordinarily generous, merciful, skilful and gracious
was the One Who created me and gave me life; how wondrously powerful and, if one
may say so, ingenious, provident, and efficient. I understood too what the innate duties
and aims of creation and results of life consisted of, such as glorification,
sanctification, praise, thanks, exaltation, affirming God’s unity, and declaring His
greatness and His praises. And I understood with ‘the knowledge of certainty’ the
reason life is the most valuable creature in the universe and why everything is
subjugated to it, and the wisdom in everyone having an innate passion for life; I
understood that belief is the very life of life.
F o u r t h   M a t t e r : In order to learn what the true pleasure and happiness of
life consist of in this world, I again pondered over the verse For us God suffices, and
He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! I saw that the purest pleasure and most untarnished
happiness in this life of mine lay in belief. That is to say, my certain belief that I was
the creature, artefact, and totally owned slave of a Compassionate Sustainer Who
created me and gave me life, and was in His view and was being nurtured by him, that
I was all the time in need of Him, and that He was both my Sustainer and my God and
was most kind and compassionate to me, was such a perfect, permanent, painfree
pleasure and happiness that it is indescribable. I understood from the verse just how
appropriate is the saying: All praise be to God for the bounty of belief!

--- Sayfa 71 ---
83
Thus, these four matters, that is, the reality, rights, duties, and pleasure of life,
show that the more life looks to the Eternally Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One and
the more belief becomes the life and spirit of life, the more enduring it becomes and
the more enduring fruits it produces. Moreover, it becomes so elevated, it receives the
manifestation of eternity; it no longer looks to the length and brevity of life. This I
learnt from the verse. And in the name of all lives and living beings, and with that
intention and idea, I declared: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs!
The Sixth Degree of the Luminous Verse ‘For us God suffices’
At a time my old age was warning me of my own departure amid the events of the
end of time, which in turn give warning of the end of the world and departure of all
beings, my innate passionate love of beauty and fascination by perfection developed to
an extraordinary degree, and I observed with extreme clarity and sorrow that death,
transience, and non-existence were continuously causing the destruction of beings and
their separation, and were pounding this beautiful world and its creatures, breaking
them up and spoiling their beauty. Seeking consolation as that ‘metaphorical’ love in
my nature rebelled violently against this situation, I again had recourse to the verse. It
told me: “Recite me, and study my meaning carefully!”
So I entered the observatory of the Light Verse in Sura al-Nur and trained the
telescope of belief on the farthermost levels of the verse For us God suffices, and
turned the microscope of the insight of belief at its most obscure mysteries. I saw that
just as mirrors, shining objects, fragments of glass, and even bubbles, reveal the
various sorts of concealed beauty in the sunlight; and with their different capacities and
their change and renewal, renew its beauties; and by reflecting and refracting the light,
make known the hidden beauties of the sun and the seven colours in its light; so,
without cease, in order to act as mirrors to the sacred beauty of the All-Beauteous
One of Glory, the Sun of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, and to the everlasting
beauties of His infinitely lovely Most Beautiful Names, and to renew their
manifestation, these fine creatures, these lovely beings, these exquisite artefacts, come,
then depart. As is explained in detail in the Risale-i Nur supported by powerful proofs,
all the shades of beauty that are to be observed on them are not theirs, but are the
hints, signs, flashes, and manifestations of an eternal, sacred and transcendent beauty
which desires to be perpetually manifested and visible. Here, three of those proofs
shall be alluded to briefly.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
84
First Proof: The beauty of a finely worked object points to the beauty of the
craftsmanship. The beauty of the craftsmanship points to the beauty of the name which
was the source of the craftsmanship. The beauty of the name of the craftsman’s art
points to the beauty of the craftsman’s attributes manifested in that art. The beauty of
his attributes points to the beauty of his talent and abilities. And the beauty of his
abilities points self-evidently to the beauty of his essential self and his reality.
In exactly the same way, the beauty in all the fine creatures which fill the universe,
all exquisitely made, testifies decisively to the beauty of the acts of the All-Glorious
Craftsman. And the beauty of the acts points indubitably to the beauty of the titles,
that is, Names, that look to those acts. And the beauty of the Names testifies certainly
to the beauty of the sacred attributes that are the source of the Names. And the beauty
of the attributes testifies to the beauty of the essential qualities and abilities that are the
source of the attributes. And the beauty of the essential qualities and abilities testifies
self-evidently to the beauty and sacred perfection of the Essence which is the source of
the acts and is qualified by the Names and attributes, and to the holy beauty of His
reality.
That is to say, the All-Beauteous Maker possesses an infinite beauty and
loveliness which are fitting for His Most Sacred Essence, one shadow of which has
beautified all beings from top to bottom; He possesses a transcendent, sacred beauty a
single manifestation of which has endowed with beauty the whole universe, and has
adorned and illuminated with its flashes the entire sphere of contingency.
Yes, just as a crafted work cannot have come into existence without an act, so an
act cannot occur without the performer of the act. And just as it is impossible for there
to be names without the one they signify, so attributes cannot be without the one they
qualify. Since the existence of a work of art self-evidently points to the act which
crafted it, and the existence of the act points to the existence of the worker of the act
and his title, and to the existence of the attribute and name which gave rise to the
work; the perfection and beauty of the work of art point also to the beauty and
perfection particular to the act which crafted it, and they point to the beauty particular
to and fitting for the name of the performer of the act, and, with ‘knowledge of
certainty,’ to the beauty and perfection of his essence and reality, which are fitting and
appropriate to them.
In just the same way, since it is impossible for the constant activity under the veil
of the works of art in the universe to be without the causer of the activity, and the
names whose manifestations and inscriptions are

--- Sayfa 73 ---
85
visible on creatures to be without the one they signify, and the attributes like power
and will which are almost visible to be without the one they qualify; with their limitless
existences, all the works of art, creatures and artefacts in the universe point decisively
to the existence of their Creator, Maker, and Doer, and to the existence of His Names,
and to the existence of His attributes, and to the existence of his essential qualities, and
to the necessary existence of His Most Pure and Holy Essence.
Similarly, all the different varieties of beauty, perfection, and loveliness to be seen
in creatures testify with complete clarity —but in a way particular to and fitting for
their sacredness and necessity— to the infinite, unlimited, multifarious beauties and
perfections of the acts, names, attributes, qualities, and Essence of the All-Glorious
Maker; they point most decisively to their beauties, which far surpass those of all
beings.
The Second Proof contains five Points:
First Point: Relying on their illuminations and unveilings, the chiefs of the people
of reality have believed and stated unanimously —despite their paths and methods
differing greatly from one another— that the instances of beauty in all beings are the
shadows, flashes and manifestations of the sacred, hidden beauty of the Necessarily
Existent One.
Second Point: All beautiful creatures appear caravan after caravan, and not
stopping, disappear; they come one after the other in succession, then depart. Yet an
elevated and unchanging beauty displays itself in the mirrors of those creatures,
demonstrating certainly through the continuity of its manifestation that the beauty does
not belong to the beautiful creatures, to those mirrors. Rather, like the beauty of the
sun’s rays is to be seen on the bubbles floating on the surface of running water, they
are the lights of an eternal beauty.
Third Point: It is clear that just as light comes from something luminous, the
giving of existence from something existent, bounty from riches, munificence from
wealth, and instruction from knowledge, so the giving of excellence is from the
excellent and the bestowal of beauty is from the beautiful; it could not be in any other
way. It is as a consequence of this truth that we believe that all the beauty in the
universe comes from the beauty of the beauteous one the constantly changing and
renewed universe describes and defines through all its creatures and the tongues of
their mirror-like beings.
Fourth Point: Just as the body relies on the spirit and subsists through it and is
animated by it, and a word looks to the meaning and is illuminated by it, and form
relies on reality and acquires value through it; so this corporeal and material manifest
world is a body, a word, a form

--- Sayfa 74 ---
86
which rests on the Divine Names behind the veil of the Unseen, receiving life and
vitality from them; it looks to them, and is beautified. All the instances of physical
beauty proceed from the non-physical beauties of their own realities and meanings; and
as for their realities, they receive effulgence from the Divine Names and are shadows
of them of a sort. This truth is proved decisively in the Risale-i Nur.
This means that all the varieties and sorts of beauty in the universe are the signs,
marks, and manifestations —by means of names— of a faultless, transcendent Beauty
which is manifested from beyond the veil of the Unseen. However, since the Necessary
Existent’s Most Pure and Holy Essence resembles absolutely nothing at all and His
attributes are infinitely superior to the attributes of contingent beings, His sacred
beauty also does not resemble the beauties of creatures and contingent beings, and is
infinitely more exalted. Certainly, an everlasting beauty one manifestation of which is
vast Paradise together with all its exquisiteness and beauty, and one hour’s vision of
which makes the inhabitants of Paradise oblivious to it cannot be finite, nor have any
like, equal or peer.
It is clear that the beauties of a thing are in accordance with itself; and there are
thousands of sorts of beauties which all differ according to the different sorts of
beings. For example, beauty perceived by the eye is not the same as something
beautiful heard with the ears, and an abstract beauty comprehended by the mind is not
the same as the beauty of food relished by the tongue; so too, the beauties appreciated
and perceived as beautiful by the external and inner senses and the spirit are all
different. For example, the beauty of belief, the beauty of reality, the beauty of light,
the beauty of a flower, the beauty of spirit, and the beauties of form, compassion,
justice, kindness, and wisdom. Similarly, since the utter and infinite beauties of the
Most Beautiful Names of the All-Beauteous One of Glory are all different, the beauties
in beings also differ.
If you want to observe one manifestation of the beauties of the All-Beauteous
One’s Names in the mirrors of beings, take a sweeping look with the eye of the
imagination at the face of the earth supposing it to be a small garden; you will see that
terms like mercifulness, compassionateness, wisdom, and justice allude to both the
names, and acts, and attributes, and qualities of Almighty God.
Observe the sustenance of foremost man and of all living creatures, which arrives
regularly from behind the veil of the Unseen, and see the beauty of Divine
mercifulness.
Then consider the miraculous sustenance of all young, and the two pumps of milk
hanging over their heads on the breasts of their mothers,

--- Sayfa 75 ---
87
as sweet and pure as the water of Kawthar, and see the captivating beauty of Divine
compassion.
Then observe the peerless beauty of Divine wisdom, which makes the whole
universe into a mighty book of wisdom every letter of which contains a hundred
words, and every word of which contains a hundred lines, and every line of which
contains a thousand chapters, and every chapter of which contains hundreds of small
books.
Then see the imperious beauty of a justice which holds the whole universe and all
its beings in equilibrium; and maintains the balance of all the heavenly bodies, lofty and
lowly; and supplies symmetry and proportion, the most important elements of beauty;
and causes everything to acquire the optimum state; and gives the right to life to living
beings, and ensures that their rights are preserved; and halts and punishes aggressors.
Then consider the inscription of man’s life story in his memory, as tiny as a grain
of wheat, and the programmes of the second lives of all plants and trees in their seeds;
and the members and faculties necessary for the defence of living beings, for instance
bees’ wings and their poisonous stings, and the small bayonets of thorned plants, and
the hard shells of seeds; and see the subtle beauty of dominical preservation and
protection.
Then consider the guests at the table of the earth of the Most Merciful and
Compassionate One, Who is absolutely Munificent, and the pleasant smells of the
numberless different foods prepared by mercy, and their beautiful and various colours,
and their delicious and differing tastes, and the organs and members of all living
creatures which assist their pleasure and enjoyment; and see the exceedingly pleasant,
sweet beauty of dominical bestowal and munificence.
Then consider the meaningful forms of foremost man and of all living creatures,
which are opened up from droplets of fluid through the manifestation of the Names of
Opener and Giver of Form, and the attractive faces of the flowers of spring opened up
from seeds and tiny nuclei; and see the miraculous beauty of Divine ‘opening’ and
giving of form.
Thus, by analogy with these examples, each of the Divine Names has a sacred
beauty particular to it a single manifestation of which makes beautiful the vast world
and innumerable species of beings. You may see the manifestation of a Name’s beauty
in a single flower; the spring is also a flower; Paradise is a flower yet unseen. If you
can visualize the whole of spring and see Paradise with the eye of belief, you may
understand the utter majesty of everlasting Beauty. If you respond to that Beauty with
the beauty of belief and worship, you will be a most beautiful creature.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
88
While if you meet it with the boundless ugliness of misguidance and loathsomeness of
rebellion, you will be both a most ugly creature and will in effect be loathed by all
beautiful creatures.
Fifth Point: In accordance with the law that all fine arts and crafts and
accomplishments want to display themselves and have themselves appreciated, a
master of hundreds of arts and crafts who possessed endless perfections and beauties
made a wondrous palace in order to describe and reveal all his arts, crafts and
accomplishments, and his hidden beauties. Anyone seeing the miraculous palace would
immediately think of the virtues, arts and perfections of its master and maker.
Believing in them and affirming them as though seeing them, he would declare: “One
who was not beautiful and skilled in every way could not be the source, creator and
originator of a work so beautiful. It is as though his immaterial beauties and
perfections are embodied in this palace.”
In exactly the same way, so long as his mind and heart are not corrupted, one who
sees the exhibition of wonders and beauties of the magnificent palace of this world,
that is, the universe, will realize that the palace is a mirror, decorated the way it is in
order to show the beauties and perfections of another. Yes, since there is nothing
similar to the palace of the world from which its beauties could have been imitated and
copied, certainly, its Maker possesses the necessary beauties in himself and in his
Names. It is from these that the universe is derived and according to them that it was
made. It was written like a book in order to express His beauties and Names.
The Third Proof consists of three Points:
First Point: This is a truth explained in detail with powerful proofs in the Third
Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second Word. Referring detailed discussion of it to that
Word, here we shall consider it only with a brief allusion.
We look at creatures, and especially animals and plants, and we see that governing
them are a constant adorning, which points to intention and will and makes known
knowledge and wisdom, and an ordering and beautifying it is impossible to attribute to
chance. There is in everthing an art so delicate, a wisdom so fine, an adornment so
elevated, an organization so compassionate, and situation so sweet that it is clearly
understood that behind the veil of the Unseen is a craftsman who wants to make his art
appreciated, attract the gazes of the attentive, and please his artefacts and observers;
who wants to make himself known and acquainted and loved through displaying
numerous skills and perfections in each work of his art, and to make himself praised
and applauded. He bestows on

--- Sayfa 77 ---
89
conscious creatures in order to please them and make them happy and friends of
himself, every sort of delicious bounty from unexpected places in a way it is impossible
to attribute to chance.
Also to be observed are a generous treatment, a mutual acquaintance and friendly
dialogue with the tongue of disposition, and a compassionate response to supplication
which make perceived a profound compassion and elevated mercy. That is to say, the
bestowal of bounty and giving of pleasure which are observed behind the making
known and loved, which are as clear as the sun, arise from a genuine wish to be
compassionate and powerful desire to be merciful. And this powerful desire in One
Absolutely Self-Sufficient Who has no need of anything demonstrates certainly an
utterly perfect pre-eternal, everlasting, peerless Beauty the nature and reality of which
necessitate its wanting to be manifested and to see itself in mirrors. In order to display
and see itself in various mirrors, this Beauty has taken on the form of compassion and
mercy; then in the mirrors of conscious beings has assumed the state of bestowal and
munificence; then has taken the form of making itself known and loved; and then
bestowed the light of adorning creatures and making them beautiful.
Second Point: Mankind’s genuine, intense, and powerful love of God, and
especially that of its elevated classes and of innumerable persons whose paths are all
different, points self-evidently to a peerless beauty; indeed it testifies to it. Yes, such a
love looks only to such a beauty and necessitates it; such passion demands such
loveliness. Indeed, all the praise offered by beings verbally and through the tongue of
disposition looks to that pre-eternal Beauty and goes to it. In the view of lovers like
Shams-i Tabrizi, all the attraction, captivation, ecstasy, and drawing truths in the
universe are signs of a pre-eternal and post-eternal truth of attraction. While the
ecstatic motion and rotations which cause the heavenly bodies and all beings to dance
and spin like moths and Mevlevi dervishes are the passionate and dutiful responses to
the imperious displays of the sacred beauty of that captivating truth.
Third Point: All the scholars who have researched into reality have agreed that
existence is pure good and light, while non-existence is pure evil and darkness. The
chiefs of the people of reason and the people of the heart have agreed that in the final
analysis all instances of good, beauty, and pleasure arise from existence, and that all
evils and bad, calamities, suffering, and even sins are attributable to non-existence.
I f   y o u   s a y : The source of all beauties is existence, yet also in existence are
disbelief and the egotism of the soul?
T h e   A n s w e r : Disbelief is non-existence because it is denial of

--- Sayfa 78 ---
90
the truths of belief. The existence of egotism, however, is a form of non-existence
which has acquired the colour and form of existence due to a wrongful claim to
ownership, not knowing the nature of man’s mirror-like being and assuming the
imaginary to be actual. Since the source of all beauties is existence and the source of
all evils is non-existence, a Necessary Existence and Pre-Eternal, Everlasting Being,
which is the firmest and most elevated and shining existence and the one most distant
from non-existence, will demand the beauty which is the most powerful, and the most
elevated and shining and free of any blemish; it will rather express such a beauty;
indeed, it will be such a beauty. Like all-encompassing light is necessitated by the sun,
so the Necessary Existent necessitates an eternal beauty; he gives light through it.
All praise be to God for the bounty of belief
Our Sustainer! Do not call us to task if we forget or do wrong.4
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.5
NOTE: Nine degrees of the luminous verse “For us God suffices” were going
to be written, but due to certain circumstances, three degrees have been
postponed.
REMINDER: Since the Risale-i Nur belongs to the Qur’an and is a
commentary based on proofs proceeding from it, it contains necessary,
purposeful, indeed, essential and beneficial repetitions, the same as the Qur’an
contains subtle, wise, and necessary repetitions which cause no boredom.
Also, since the Risale-i Nur consists of proofs of the profession of Divine
unity, which does not cause tedium but is repeated with pleasure and zeal, its
essential repetitions are not a fault, and do not and should not cause
boredom.

4 Qur’an, 2:286.
5 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
91
The Fifth Chapter
(of the Twenty-Ninth Flash)1
On the degrees of For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs! It consists of five ‘Points’.
FIRST POINT
This phrase is a well-tried remedy for the sickness of human impotence and
poverty: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!
The Giver of Existence is Eternally Existent, there is no harm therefore in the
passing of beings, for the things that are loved continue to exist through the
continuance of the One Who gave them existence, the Necessary Existent.
He is the Enduring Maker and Creator; the passing of creatures causes no sorrow,
then, for the means of love for them, their Maker, is Enduring.
He is the Eternal King and Lord, so there are no regrets on the passing of His
dominions, on their departing and being renewed.
He is the Eternal All-Knowing Witness; no grief is felt therefore at the
disappearance from this world of things that are loved, for they have perpetual
existence in the knowledge of that Pre-Eternal Witness, and in His view.
He is the Enduring Owner and Creator; there is no pain therefore at the passing of
beautiful things, for the source of their beauty, their Creator’s Names, are enduring.
He is the Enduring Inheritor and Raiser to Life; there should be no lamenting on
being parted from beloveds, for the One Who will resurrect them and return them to
Himself is Enduring.
He is Eternally All-Beauteous and Glorious; there should be no distress therefore
at the disappearance of beautiful things, for those beautiful things are the mirrors of
the Beautiful Names, which endure together with their beauties after the disappearance
of the mirrors.
He is the Eternal True Object of Love and Worship; so no sorrow should be felt
on the passing of ‘metaphorical’ beloveds, for the True Beloved is Eternal.
He is Eternally Merciful, Compassionate, Loving, and Clement; so the passing of
the apparent bestowers of bounties and compassion has no

1 The original of the Twenty-Ninth Flash is in Arabic. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 80 ---
92
importance, it should not cause sorrow or despair, for the One Whose mercy and
compassion encompass all things is Enduring.
He is Eternally Beauteous, Gracious, and Kind; the disappearance of gracious and
sympathetic beings, therefore, should neither cause pain, nor should importance be
given it, for the One Who takes the place of all of them and a single of Whose
manifestations they all together cannot replace, is Enduring.
Since He is Enduring and possesses these attributes, He takes the place of every
sort of transient, ephemeral beloved in this world. For us God suffices, and He is the
Best Disposer of Affairs!
Yes, enough for the immortality of this world and all it contains is the enduring
existence of its Owner, Maker, and Creator.
SECOND POINT
Sufficient for my immortality is God, for He is my Eternal God and my Eternal
Creator, the Eternal Giver of my existence, my Eternal Maker, my Eternal Owner, my
Eternal Witness, the Eternal True Object of my Worship, my Eternal Resurrector.
There is therefore no harm in the disappearance of my being; there should be no
sorrow, regret, or grief. For the Giver of my existence is Enduring, and His creation
through His Names is also Enduring. The attributes of my person are nothing but the
rays of one of His Names. They exist permanently in their Creator’s knowledge and
within His view, and do not therefore cease to exist on their passing and
disappearance.
Likewise, sufficient for me in respect of immortality and the pleasure of it, are my
knowledge, understanding, consciousness, and belief that the rays in my being of an
Enduring Name of my God are Enduring, and that the reality of my being is nothing
other than a shadow of that Name, and that through the mystery of its reflection or
image in the mirror of my being, my reality is not itself lovable, but lovable on account
of the immortality of the various enduring things reflected in it.
THIRD POINT
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! For He is the
Necessary Existent, and these transitory beings are nothing other than places reflecting
the renewal of the manifestations of His existence and giving of existence. Through
Him and through being connected to Him and through knowledge of Him, are endless
lights of existence; while without Him, there are the endless darkness of non-existence
and the limitless pains of separation.
These transitory beings are mere mirrors, and with the changing of

--- Sayfa 81 ---
93
their relative determinations, they are renewed in six aspects in their transience,
disappearance, and permanence:
The First: The permanent existence of their beautiful meanings and identities in
the World of Similitudes.
The Second: The permanent existence of their forms in the tablets of the World of
Similitudes.
The Third: The permanent existence of their results and fruits which look to the
hereafter.
The Fourth: The permanent existence of their dominical glorifications,
represented [in the Preserved Tablet], which is a sort of existence.
The Fifth: The permanent existence in the exhibitions of knowledge and eternal
vistas.
The Sixth: The permanent existence of their spirits, if they have them. For their
various functions and states in their death, transience, disappearance, annihilation, and
their appearance and extinction, is nothing other than what is demanded by the Divine
Names. It is due to the mystery of this that beings flow like a rushing torrent on the
waves of life and death, existence and non-existence. And from this function arises
perpetual activity and continuous creation. I, and everyone, therefore, are compelled
to say: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! That is, as regards
existence, it is sufficient for me that I am the work of the Necessary Existent; to
receive this illumined existence for a passing instant is preferable to millions of years of
apparent, fruitless existence.
Yes, through the mystery of being related to God through belief, a minute of this
existence is the equivalent of thousands of years without the relation of belief; the
degrees of existence of that minute, even, are more complete and extensive than those
thousands of years.
Likewise, sufficient for me for existence and the value of existence is my being the
art of the One Whose grandeur is in the heavens and signs are on the earth, and Who
created the heavens and earth in six days.
Likewise, sufficient for me for existence and its perfection is my being the artefact
of the One Who adorned and lit up the heavens with lamps, and made dazzling the
earth with flowers.
Likewise, sufficient for me for pride and honour is my being the creature and
totally-owned slave and servant of the One in relation to Whose perfection and beauty
all the beauties and perfections of the universe are merely dim shadows, and signs of
His perfection and indications of His beauty.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
94
Likewise, sufficient for me for everything is He Who stores up in tiny containers
between the kaf and the nun2 incalculable numbers of bounties, and preserves through
His power tons in a single handful of the subtle containers called seeds and grains.
Likewise, sufficient for me in place of all possessors of beauty and beneficence is
the All-Beauteous and Compassionate One. For all these beautiful creatures are merely
ephemeral mirrors for the renewal of the lights of His beauty in the course of the
seasons, the centuries, and the ages. And all these recurring bounties and successive
fruits of the spring and summer are places of manifestation for the renewal of His
continuous bestowal in the passage of creatures, days, and years.
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its true nature is my being a map, index,
summary, balance, and measure of the manifestations of the Names of the Creator of
life and death.
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its functions is my being a word inscribed
with the pen of power, pointing to and making understood the Names of the
Absolutely Powerful One, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent; by my life receiving the
manifestations of my Creator’s essential attributes, and His are the Most Beautiful
Names.
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its rights is my displaying it among my
brother creatures and proclaiming it to them, and exhibiting in the view of the Creator
of the universe my being decked out in the manifestations of My Creator’s Names,
Who has adorned me with the bejewelled dress of my being, the gown of my inborn
nature, and the necklace of my well-ordered life, which is ornamented with the gifts of
His mercy.
Likewise, sufficient for me for the rights of my life are my understanding the
salutations of living creatures to the Granter of Life and my observation of them, and
my testifying to them.
Likewise, sufficient for me for the rights of my life is my being adorned and made
beautiful with the embossed jewels of His bounties, to present them consciously,
because of my belief to the view of the Pre-Eternal Monarch.
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its pleasures is my knowledge, realization,
awareness, and belief that I am His slave, artefact, and creature, needy and wanting for
Him; and He is my Creator, Compassionate to me, Who nurtures and raises me
munificently, graciously, through His bestowal, as befits His wisdom and mercy.
Likewise, sufficient for me for life and its value is my being a measure

2 That is, the creative command “Be! (Kun!).” See, Qur’an, 36:82, etc. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 83 ---
95
through my absolute impotence, poverty, and weakness to the degrees of the power of
the Absolutely Powerful One, the degrees of mercy of the Absolutely Compassionate
One, and the levels of strength of the Possessor of Absolute Strength.
Likewise, sufficient for me for perfection is my knowledge that my God is
Absolutely Perfect, and whatever things there are in the universe which are perfect,
they are signs of His perfection and indications of it.
Likewise, sufficient for me for perfection in myself is belief in God, because for
man, belief is the source of all perfections.
Likewise, sufficient for me for all my needs sought through the tongues of my
various faculties, is my God, Sustainer, and Creator, the Giver of my form; His are the
Most Beautiful Names; He feeds me and gives me to drink; He nurtures, raises,
administers, and perfects me; He is limitless in glory, and His favours are
comprehensive.
FOURTH POINT
Sufficient for me for all my wishes is He Who opened up from a fluid through His
subtle art, subtle power, wisdom, and His subtle dominicality, my form and that of all
my fellow living creatures.
Likewise, sufficient for me for all my aims is He Who made me, opened my ears
and eyes, included in my body my tongue and my heart, and placed in them and in my
other faculties innumerable precise scales to weigh up the contents of the treasuries of
His mercy. Similarly, He placed in my tongue, heart, and nature, countless sensitive
instruments to gauge the varieties of the treasures of His Names.
Likewise, sufficient for me is He Who, through His glorious Godhead, beautiful
mercy, grand dominicality, munificent clemency, vast power, and subtle wisdom,
included in my insignificant, lowly person and weak and wanting being, all these
members and faculties, limbs and systems, senses and feelings, inner faculties and
spiritual powers, to allow me to know all the varieties of His bounties and comprehend
most of the manifestations of His Names.
FIFTH POINT
I and all men should declare thankfully and proudly:
Sufficient for me is the One Who created me and took me out of the darkness of
non-existence, bestowing on me light of being.
Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who bestowed on me the bounty of life,
which gives all things to those who possess it and stretches out its hands to all things.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
96
Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a human being and bestowed
on me the bounty of humanity, which makes man the microcosm, greater in meaning
than the macrocosm.
 Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a believer and bestowed on
me the bounty of belief, which makes this world and the hereafter two tables laden
with bounties, and offers them to the believer with the hand of belief.
Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a member of the community
of His Beloved, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) and bestowed on me
love of God and being loved by Him, which are found in belief and are the highest
degrees of human perfection; and through this love springing from belief, expanded the
extent to which believers could benefit, to the infinite contents of the spheres of
contingency and necessity.
Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who, not making me inanimate, or an
animal, or leaving me in misguidance, gave me preference with regard to nature,
species, religion, and belief, over the majority of creatures; praise and thanks are
therefore due to Him alone.
Likewise, sufficient for me is the One Who made me a comprehensive place of the
manifestations of His Names, and in accordance with the meaning of the Hadith: “The
heavens and the earth contained me not; I was contained in the heart of my believing
servant,”3 bestowed on me a bounty which the universe could not contain; that is,
man’s essential nature is a comprehensive place of manifestation of all the Divine
Names manifested in the universe.
Likewise, sufficient for me is He Who bought from me the property of His I had
in order to preserve it and later return it to me, and give me Paradise as the price.
Praise and thanks be to Him to the number of particles of my being multiplied by the
number of atoms in existence.
Sufficient for me is my Sustainer; May God be exalted!
And the Light of Muhammad; God’s blessings be upon him!
There is no god but God!
Sufficient for me is my Sustainer; May God be exalted!
My heart’s inner life is the remembrance of God;
The remembrance of Ahmad; God’s blessings be upon him!
There is no god but God!

3 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 195.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
97
The Fifth Ray
 [Thirteen years ago,1 as an addendum to the discussion in Muhakemat-i
Bedi‘iye, which was published thirty years ago, the draft of twenty ‘Matters’
was written about the Barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog, and the
signs of the end of time. This has now been corrected for the sake of a dear
friend, and been made the Fifth Ray.]
(The Fifth Ray of The Thirty-First Flash of The Thirty-First Letter)
NOTE: So that the purpose of the Introduction may be understood, the
‘Matters’ following the Introduction should be read first.
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
A point about the verse,
But already have come some tokens thereof2
was written in order to protect the belief of the mass of believers and preserve it from
doubt. Like allegorical verses of the Qur’an, some Hadiths about the events of the end
of time have profound meanings. They cannot be expounded in the same way as
incontestable verses, and not everyone can understand them. Rather than being
expounded, they are interpreted. According to the verse,
But none save God knows its final meaning (ta’wil). And those who are
deeply rooted in knowledge,3

1 It is now more than forty years ago. [This corrected version, which Bediuzzaman designated
The Fifth Ray, was compiled in Kastamonu, most probably in 1938. Muhâkemat was published in
Istanbul in 1911. —Tr.]
2 Qur’an, 47:18.
3 Qur’an, 3:7.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
98
their meaning, interpretation and what is intended by them is understood only after the
event, so that those firmly grounded in knowledge say:
“We believe in it; the whole [of the divine writ] is from our Sustainer,4
and they disclose those hidden truths.
This Fifth Ray contains an Introduction and twenty-three ‘Matters.’ The
Introduction consists of five ‘Points.’
First Point: Since belief and accountability are a test, a trial, a competition within
the bounds of man’s will, matters that are obscure, profound, and in need of careful
study and experiment cannot be obvious. They should not be so compelling that
everyone has to affirm them willy-nilly. For in this way the Abu Bakr’s may rise to the
highest of the high and the Abu Jahl’s descend to the lowest of the low. If there were
no will, there would be no accountability. It is because of this mystery and wisdom
that miracles are displayed only rarely, and in this realm of accountability, like some
allegorical verses of the Qur’an, the signs of the end of the world, which will be visible
and seen, are obscure and open to interpretation. Since when the sun rises in the west
it will be so clear everyone will be compelled to affirm it, the door of repentance will
be closed and repentance and belief will no longer be accepted. For the Abu Bakr’s
and the Abu Jahl’s will be equal in their affirmation of it. In fact, although when Jesus
(Peace be upon him) comes he himself will know he is Jesus, not everyone will know.
Similarly, fearsome figures such as the Dajjal and Sufyan (Antichrist)5 will not know
themselves to be such.
Second Point: Some of the matters of the Unseen, outside the realm of man’s
perception, that were made known to the Prophet (PBUH) were made known in
detail. These he could in no way alter or interfere with, like the incontestable verses of
the Qur’an and Sacred Hadiths.6 Others, employing his eloquence, he would illustrate
and explain in detail or in allegorical form suitably to the wisdom of man’s
accountability. For example, one time when conversing with some people, a deep
rumbling was heard. He said: “That is the sound of a rock which has been rolling down
hill for seventy years and has at this moment come to rest in the very pit of Hell.”7 Five
minutes after he made this strange announcement, someone came and said: “Such-and-
such a dissembler has died. He was

4 Qur’an, 3:7.
5 There are numerous Hadiths about the Muslim Antichrist, known as ‘the Sufyan’ (al-Sufyani).
See, for example, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 520. [Tr.]
6 Hadith Qudsi: A saying of the Prophet (PBUH) imparted to him by revelation or inspiration,
the wording of which was his own. [Tr.]
7 Muslim, Janna, 31, No: 2844; Musnad, iii, 341.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
99
seventy years old, and has gone to Hell,” showing the meaning of the Prophet’s
eloquent words.
NOTE: Minor future events not included among the truths of belief were
considered unimportant by the Prophet (PBUH).
The Third Point  consists of two ‘Points’:
The First: Because in the course of time ordinary people attached literal
meanings to some Hadiths which had been narrated in the form of comparisons and
allegories, such Hadiths are apparently not conformable with reality. Although they are
pure truth, they appear not to be so. For example, two angels called Thawr and Hut,8
who are among the bearers of the earth and as though the bearers of the Throne, were
conceived of as a huge ox and a gigantic fish.
The Second: Some Hadiths refer to the majority of Muslims, or to the Islamic
State, or to the centre of the Caliphate, but they were understood to refer to all the
people in the world. Although being particular in some respect, they were supposed to
be universal and general. For instance, it says in a narration: “A time will come when
no one remains who says: Allah! Allah!”9 That is, “The places where God’s name is
mentioned will be closed, and the call to prayer and iqama will be recited in Turkish.”
Fourth Point:  Just as for numerous reasons and instances of wisdom hidden
matters of ‘the Unseen’ like death and the appointed hour remain secret, so the end of
the world, which is its death and the appointed hour of mankind and that of the animal
kingdom, has been left secret for many good reasons.
Yes, if the appointed hour of death were specified, the first half of life would be
passed in absolute heedlessness, and the second half in absolute terror, as every day a
further step was taken towards the gallows. This would destroy the wise and beneficial
balance of hope and fear. Similarly, if the end of the world, its death and appointed
hour, had been specified, the Early and Middle Ages would have been virtually
unaffected by the idea of the hereafter, and the later ages would have been passed in
terror. No pleasure or value would have remained in worldly life, nor, as an act of will,
would the worship of God, between hope and fear, have held any importance or
purpose. Also, if the death of the world had been specified, some of the truths of belief
would have been clearly obvious and everyone would have affirmed them willy-nilly.
The mystery of man’s

8 See, Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, 403; Zahabi, Mizan al-I’tidal, iv, 352; Suyuti, al-Durr al-
Manthur, i, 329.
9 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 494; Ibn Hibban, al-Sahih, viii, 299.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
100
accountability and the wisdom and purpose of belief, which are tied to man’s choice
and will, would have been negated.
It is for numerous benefits such as these that matters related to the Unseen remain
secret. Everyone therefore continually bears in mind both his death and his continued
life, and he works both for this world and the hereafter. He is also aware that the end
of the world may occur in any age, or that it may continue, and so works for eternal
life within the transitoriness of this world, and strives to build the world as though he
was never going to die.10
Also, if the occurrence of calamities had been specified, the man who expected
one would suffer a calamity perhaps ten times greater than the actual calamity. Divine
wisdom and mercy have therefore veiled the time of their occurrence and left it secret,
so that the man does not suffer the misfortune. It is because most hidden cosmic
events are tied to such instances of wisdom that to give news of the Unseen or to
foretell events has been prohibited. In order not to be disrespectful and disobedient in
the face of the principle None knows the Unseen save God, those who with dominical
leave even, give news of the Unseen other than concerning man’s accountability and
the truths of belief, have done so only allusively and indirectly. In fact, the good tidings
about the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) in the Torah, Gospels, and Psalms, are veiled
and obscure, in consequence of which some of the adherents of those scriptures put
various meanings on those passages and did not believe them. However, since the
wisdom in man’s accountability necessitates that the questions included among the
tenets of belief are communicated explicitly and repeatedly, the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition and its Glorious Interpreter (Peace and blessings be upon him) tell of the
matters of the hereafter in detail, and of future worldly events only in summary
fashion.
Fifth Point:  Also, since the wonders of both the Antichrists (Dajjal), which are
related to their centuries, have been narrated in connection with them, those wonders
have been imagined to proceed from their persons and this has led to the narrations
becoming allegorical and their true meanings being concealed. Like, for example, his
travelling by aeroplane and railway train.
And, for example, it is well-known that when the Islamic Antichrist dies, the satan
who serves him will shout out the news to the whole world11 from ‘Dikili Tas,’ the
obelisk in Istanbul, and everyone will hear

10 Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, i, 190, 202; al-Manawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 532, No: 1068; ii, 12, No:
1201.
11 Muslim, Fitan, 34.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
101
its voice saying that he is dead. That is to say, the news will be broadcast by radio,
which is wonderful and leaves even satans in amazement.
Also, since the strange circumstances and fearsome activities of the Antichrist’s
regime, and the covert organization and government that he founds, have been
narrated as referring to his person, their true meaning has remained obscure. For
example, “He will be so powerful and long-lived that only Jesus (PUH) will be able to
kill him; nothing else will be able to.”12 That is, it will only be a revealed, elevated,
pure religion that will be able to overturn his way and rapacious regime, and eliminate
them. Such a religion will emerge among the true followers of Jesus (PUH), and it will
follow the Qur’an and become united with it. On the coming of Jesus (PUH) and
emergence of the true Christian religion, the Antichrist’s irreligious way will be wiped
out and will cease. The Antichrist’s person could otherwise be killed by a mere germ
or by influenza.
Also, the explanations and statements of some narrators, made through their own
exertions and interpretations, which are open to error, have been mixed up with the
words of the Hadith. Their words have been supposed to be part of the Hadith, and
the meaning has been obscured. It does not appear to be conformable with reality and
in a way has become allegorical.
Also, in early times the social collectivity and its collective personality had not
developed as it has at the present and the idea of the isolated individual was
predominant, the extensive attributes and widescale actions of the community,
therefore, were ascribed to the persons who led them. In order to be worthy and fitting
for superhuman, universal attributes, those persons had to have gigantic bodies and be
of vast stature and have colossal power and strength a hundred times surpassing their
own, so that is how they were depicted. This was not conformable with reality, and the
narration became allegorical.
Also, although the circumstances and attributes of the two Antichrists differ from
each other, they have been confused in narrations that have come down to us in
absolute form; one has been supposed to be the other. Also, the circumstances of the
Great Mahdi do not fit the narrations alluding to the earlier Mahdis, and these have
become allegorical Hadiths. Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) mentions only
the Islamic Antichrist.
This marks the end of the Introduction. Now we embark on the ‘Matters’.

12 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 226; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iv, 529-30.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
102
 [Now, with Divine assistance, out of hundreds of examples of those hidden
events of ‘the Unseen’, twenty-three ‘Matters’ will be explained extremely
concisely, since they have been spread by atheists with the idea of corrupting
the beliefs of the ordinary people. I beseech dominical mercy that these
‘Matters’ will cause no harm, as the atheists surmised, but that when it is
seen that each is a miraculous prophetic utterance and their true
interpretations are proved and made clear, they will be an important means
of strengthening the belief of the ordinary people. And I entreat my
Compassionate Sustainer to forgive my faults and errors.]

--- Sayfa 91 ---
103
The Second Station
of the Fifth Ray
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
FIRST MATTER
There is a narration which says: “The hand of the Sufyan, one of the prominent
figures of the end of time, will be pierced.”
God knows best, an interpretation of this is as follows: if a person is very
extravagant, indulging in dissipated amusements, he cannot hold onto his possessions;
they are poured away with his wastefulness. It is said in the proverb: “So-and-so has a
hole in his hand.” That is, he is very extravagant and wasteful.
Thus, this Hadith infers that the Sufyan will bind people to himself by encouraging
them to be wasteful. And by arousing in them an intense greed and ambition, he will
hold them in subjection through that weak vein of character. It predicts that the
extravagant will become captive to him, and fall into his trap.
SECOND MATTER
It says in a narration: “A fearsome person at the end of time will rise in the
morning and on his forehead will be written ‘This is a disbeliever.’”13
God knows what is right, this may be interpreted as follows: the Sufyan will wear
the headgear of non-believers, and make everyone else wear it. However, since it will
be generally adopted under compulsion and the force of the law, when that headgear is
taken into prostration [in worship], it will become rightly-guided, God willing, so that
those who wear it —unwillingly— will not become unbelievers.

13 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Muslim, Fitan, 101, 102; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iii, 115, 211, 228,
249, 250; v, 38, 404-5; vi, 139-40.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
104
THIRD MATTER
There is a narration: “The despotic rulers of the end of time, especially the
Antichrist (Dajjal), will have false paradises and hells.”14
The knowledge is with God, an interpretation is this: it is an indication that of the
prison and high school which are situated opposite the government offices and are
facing each other, one will become an ugly imitation of a huri and youth of Paradise,
and the other become a dungeon and torture-chamber.
FOURTH MATTER
There is a narration which says: “At the end of time no one will remain who will
say: Allah! Allah!”15
None knows the Unseen save God, an interpretation of this must be as follows: the
sufi meeting-places, the places where God’s Name is recited, and the religious schools
(medrese) will be closed, and a name other than ‘Allah’ will used in the marks of
Islam, such as the call to prayer and iqama. It does not mean that all mankind is going
to fall into absolute disbelief, for denial of God is as irrational as denying the universe.
It is not reasonable to suppose it should be thus even with the majority of people, let
alone all of them. The unbelievers do not deny God, they are in error only concerning
His attributes.
Another interpretation is this: so that they do not experience its terror, the spirits
of the believers will be seized a little previously to the end of the world. Doomsday
will erupt over the heads of the unbelievers.
FIFTH MATTER
There is a narration: “At the end of time, certain persons such as the Antichrist
(Dajjal) will claim godhead and force others to prostrate before them.”16
God knows best, an interpretation is this: just as a nomad chieftain who denies the
king imagines in himself and in other chieftains a small rulership proportionate to their
power; so those who come to lead the school of Naturalists and Materialists, imagine
in themselves a sort of lordship proportionate to their power, and to demonstrate their
power, make their subjects bow down worshipfully before themselves and their
statues, and incline their heads.

14 Muslim, Fitan, 104, 109; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, v, 397.
15 Muslim, Iman, 234; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 35; Musnad, iii, 107, 201, 259.
16 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 508; Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 125-6;
Musnad, iv, 20; v, 372.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
105
SIXTH MATTER
There is a narration: “The dissension of the end of time will be so terrible that no
one will be able to restrain themselves.”17 It is because of this that for one thousand
three hundred years, on the command of the Prophet (PBUH), all the Umma has
sought refuge with God from that dissension —“from the dissension of the Antichrist
and from the dissension of the end of time”— after seeking refuge from the torments
of the grave.18
God knows what is best, it may be interpreted like this: the dissension of the end
of time will draw souls to itself, captivating them. People will join it voluntarily,
indeed, eagerly. For example, in Russia, men and women bathe naked together in the
public baths. And because by nature women have a strong propensity to show off their
beauty, they willingly throw themselves into that dissension and are led astray. The
men too, being naturally enamoured of beauty, are defeated by their instinctual souls,
and with drunken joy, fall into the fire and are burnt. Holding a fascination, the
amusements, grievous sins, and innovations of the times such as dancing and the
theatre, draw the pleasure-seekers around them like moths, intoxicating them. But if
this occurs through absolute compulsion, the will is negated and it is not even a sin.
SEVENTH MATTER
There is a narration: “The Sufyan will be an eminent scholar; he will fall into
misguidance through his learning. Numerous other scholars will follow him.”
The knowledge is with God, an interpretation is this: although he has no means of
sovereignty such as strength and power, tribes and peoples, courage and riches, like a
king, he will win that position through his cleverness, science, and political acumen,
and through his intelligence he will bewitch the minds of many other scholars, making
them dictate his wishes. He will attract numerous teachers to support him, and
pointing out to them the way to an education system stripped of religious instruction,
will work for its widespread enforcement.

17 Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, i, 315; ii, 185; iii, 9; al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa, ii, 217; Abu ‘Abdullah
Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, i, 266.
18 Bukhari, Da’wat, 37, 39, 44, 45, 46; Adhan, 149; Jana’iz, 88; Fitan, 26; Muslim, Masajid,
127-8, 130-4; Musnad, vi, 139.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
106
EIGHTH MATTER
Narrations state that the terrible dissension of the Antichrist (Dajjal) will occur
among Muslims, so that all the Umma have sought refuge with God from it.
None knows the Unseen save God, an interpretation is this: the Muslims’
Antichrist is different. In fact, like Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), some
investigative scholars said that the Muslims’ Antichrist (Dajjal) is the Sufyan. He will
appear from among the Muslims and will carry out his work through deception. The
Great Dajjal of the unbelievers is different.19 For those who do not bow to the absolute
force and compulsion of the Great Dajjal are martyrs, and those who submit
unwillingly are not unbelievers, and not sinners, even.
NINTH MATTER
In narrations, the events associated with the Sufyan and those of the future are
depicted as occurring in the region of Damascus and in Arabia.
God knows best, an interpretation is this: since in early times the centres of the
Caliphate were in Iraq, Damascus, and Medina, on their own interpretations, the
narrators showed these events as occurring close to the centre of Islamic government,
as though it was always going to remain thus, and said Aleppo and Damascus. They
added their own details to the succinct predictions of the Hadith.
TENTH MATTER
Narrations mention the extraordinary power of the figures of the end of time.
The knowledge is with God, its interpretation is this, that it is an allusion to the
vast collective personality those figures represent. At one time, the Commander-in-
Chief of the Japanese Army, which had defeated Russia, was shown in a picture with
one foot in the Pacific Ocean and the other foot in the fort of Port Arthur. The
vastness of its collective personality was depicted in the representation of his person,
and in the gigantic form of the representation. As for their extraordinarily vast power,
since most of the affairs they carry out are destructive and related to the appetites,
they appear to have extraordinary power, for destruction is easy; one match can burn
down a village. As for the satisfying the animal appetites, since it is what the
instinctual soul wants, it is much sought after.

19 Suyuti, al-‘Urf al-Wardi fi Akhbar al-Mahdi (al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa), ii, 234; Ahmad Zayni
Dahlan, al-Futuhat al-Islamiyya, 294; al-Barzanji, al-Isha’a fi Ashrat al-Sa’a, 95-9; Ibn Hajar al-
Haythami, al-Fatawa al-Hadithiyya, 36; al-Qurtubi, Mukhtasar al-Tadhkira, 133-4.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
107
ELEVENTH MATTER
There is a narration which says: “At the end of time, one man will look after forty
women.”20
God knows what is best, this may be interpreted in two ways:
Firstly: Lawful marriage will decrease at that time, or like in Russia, it will
disappear. Someone who flees from being tied to one woman, will remain at a loose
end, and become a shepherd to forty unfortunate women.
The Second: It is an allusion that at that time of dissension, most of the men will
perish in wars, and for some reason most of the children born will be girls. Perhaps as
well, the total freedom of women will so inflame their lust that they will acquire innate
superiority over their menfolk. This will result in their causing their children to take
after them, and through the Divine command, girl children will be more numerous.
TWELFTH MATTER
It says in narrations : “The Dajjal’s first day will be a year, his second day a
month, his third day a week, and his fourth day a day.”21
None knows the Unseen save God, this may be interpreted in two ways:
The First: It is an allusion and sign that the Great Dajjal will appear near the
North Pole or towards the north. For close to the North Pole the whole year is one
day and one night. If he comes a day’s journey in this direction by train in the summer,
for a month the sun never sets. If he comes a day further in this direction, the sun is
visible for a whole week. When I was a prisoner-of-war in Russia I was close to this
region. That means it foretells miraculously that the Great Dajjal will attack from the
North in this direction.
The Second Interpretation: The three days refer to both the Great Dajjal and the
Islamic Dajjal having three periods of despotism. With elevated eloquence it informs
the Umma that “in his first day; in his first period of government, he will perform
works so great they could not be performed in three hundred years. On his second day,
that is, in his second period, he will carry out such works as could not be carried out in
thirty years. In his third day and period, the transformations he will bring

20  Bukhari, Nikah, 110. For Hadiths stating that one man will look after fifty women, see,
Bukhari, ‘Ilm, 21; Ashriba, 1; Muslim, ‘Ilm, 9; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 34; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 25; Musnad, iii,
98, 176, 202, 213-4, 273, 289.
21 Muslim, Fitan, 110; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 59; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33;
Musnad, iv, 181.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
108
about could not be brought about in ten years. While in his fourth day and period he
will be reduced to the ordinary and do nothing, only try to maintain his position.”
THIRTEENTH MATTER
There is a definite, sound narration which says: “Jesus (Peace be upon him) will
kill the Great Dajjal.”22
The knowledge is with God, there are two aspects to this:
The First Aspect: It could only be a wondrous person with the power of miracles
who could kill and change the way of the awesome Dajjal, who will preserve himself
through wonders, bestowed on him by God in order to lead him astray, such as magic,
hypnotic powers, and spiritualism, and will spellbind everyone. And that person will be
Jesus (Peace be upon him), who is the prophet of the majority of mankind, and whom
most people follow.
The Second Aspect is this: It will be the truly pious followers of Jesus who will
kill the gigantic collective personality of materialism and irreligion which the Dajjal
will form —for the Dajjal will be killed by Jesus’ (PUH) sword— and destroy his ideas
and disbelief, which are atheistic. Those truly pious Christians will blend the essence of
true Christianity with the essence of Islam and rout the Dajjal with their combined
strength, in effect killing him. The narration: “Jesus (Peace be upon him) will come and
will perform the obligatory prayers behind the Mahdi and follow him,”23 alludes to this
union, and to the sovereignty of the Qur’an and its being followed.
FOURTEENTH MATTER
It says in a narration: “The Dajjal will draw his main strength from the Jews. The
Jews will follow him willingly.”24
God knows best, we can say that in part this narration’s meaning was fulfilled in
Russia, for the Jews, who have been persecuted by every state, gathered in large
numbers in Germany in order to take their revenge. Then, due to the important role he
played in the founding of the revolutionary communist party, the terrible Trotsky, who
was a Jew, took over the leadership of the Russian Army, then the government after
the famous Lenin, who had trained him, and they set fire to Russia and laid waste

22 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 226; al-Hakim, al-
Mustadrak, iv, 529-30.
23 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 49; Muslim, Iman, 244-5, 247; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, ii, 336; iii,
368.
24 Muslim, Fitan, 124; Musnad, iii, 224, 292; iv, 216-7.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
109
whatever it had achieved over a thousand years. They showed that they were the
secret revolutionary committee of the Dajjal and they carried out some of his works.
They caused serious upheavals in other countries as well, and fomented much trouble.
FIFTEENTH MATTER
The events involving Gog and Magog are mentioned concisely in the Qur’an, and
there are some details of them in narrations. Those details are not firmly established
like the concise but incontrovertible matters of the Qur’an, and may be considered
allegorical. They require interpretation. Indeed, they need to be interpreted, for the
narrators’ interpretations have been mixed in with them.
Yes, None knows the Unseen save God, one interpretation is this: it is an allusion
and indication that just as the Manchurian and Mongol tribes, which in the heavenly
tongue of the Qur’an are called “Gog and Magog,”25 together with some other tribes,
several times overturned Asia and Europe; so will they again cause chaos in the world
in the future. In fact even now some of them are famous anarchists, and anarchy is
born of communism.
Yes, socialism sprang up in the French Revolution from the seed of libertarianism.
Then since socialism destroyed certain sacred matters, the ideas it inculcated turned
into bolshevism. And because bolshevism corrupted even more sacred moral and
human values, and those of the human heart, of course the seeds it sowed will produce
anarchy, which recognizes no restrictions whatsoever and has respect for nothing. For
if respect and compassion quit the human heart, those with such hearts become
exceedingly cruel beasts and can no longer be governed through politics. Just the place
for the idea of anarchy will be those oppressed, numerous raiding tribes, which are
backward in respect of both civilization and government. The people who fit those
conditions are the Manchurian, Mongol, and some of the Kirghiz tribes, who caused
the building of the Great Wall of China, which is forty-days’ distance in length and is
one of the seven wonders of the world. Expounding the Qur’an’s concise statements
about them, Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) predicted their appearance
miraculously and precisely.
SIXTEENTH MATTER
It says in a narration in connection with Jesus (Peace be upon him) killing the
Dajjal: “The Dajjal will have a colossal form, he will be

25 See, Qur’an, 18:94, 21:96.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
110
extraordinarily big and taller than a minaret, while Jesus (PUH) will be very small in
comparison.”26
None knows the Unseen save God, one interpretation must be as follows: it is an
allusion and sign that quantitively the spiritual community of muja\hidên who will
recognize Jesus (Peace be upon him) and follow him, will be very few and small
comparatively to the ‘scientific’, physical armies of the Dajjal.
SEVENTEENTH MATTER
It says in a narration: “The day the Dajjal appears all the world will hear. He will
travel the world in forty days and have a wondrous ass.”27
God knows best, on condition such narrations are completely sound, they
miraculously predict that in the time of the Dajjal, the means of communication and
travel will have so advanced that an event will be heard by all the world in a day. It
will be shouted out by the radio and will be heard in east and west, and will be read
about in all the newspapers. One man will travel the whole world in forty days and see
the seven continents and seventy countries. These narrations thus miraculously
foretold the telegraph, telephone, radio, railway, and aeroplane ten centuries before
they appeared.
Moreover, the Dajjal will be heard not in his capacity as the Dajjal, but as a
despotic king. And his travelling everywhere will not be to occupy those places, but to
create dissension and to seduce people away from the right path. His mount or ass is
either a railway train, one ear and head of which is an infernal firebox, and the other
ear of which is a false paradise gorgeously adorned and furnished. He sends his
enemies to its fiery head, and his friends to its feasting head. Or else his mount is an
awesome motor car, or a plane, or... (silence!)
EIGHTEENTH MATTER
There is a narration which says: “If my community advances on the straight path,
it will have one day.”28 That is, in accordance with the meaning of the verse,
On a day the space whereof will be [as] a thousand years of your
reckoning,29

26 Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 103-4; ‘Ala’ al-Din al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal,
xiv, 330; Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, v, 355; al-Hawi li’l-Fatawa, ii, 588; al-Haythami, Majma’ al-
Zawa’id, viii, 244.
27 Ibn Kathir, Nihayat al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, i, 106; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf, vii, 495-
500.
28 Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 18; Musnad, i, 170; iv, 193.
29 Qur’an, 32:5.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
111
it will have rule and splendour for a thousand years. If it does not proceed on the
straight path, it will have a day of five hundred years, and will be dominant and
victorious for only five hundred years.
God knows best, this narration is not giving news of the end of the world, but of
Islam’s victorious rule and the sovereignty of the Caliphate, for miraculously, that is
exactly how it turned out. For because towards the end of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate its
politicians lost their sense of direction, it continued only five hundred years. But
because the Umma in general did not deviate from the straight path, the Ottoman
Caliphate came to its assistance and it took over the rule of the Umma, which has
continued in existence for one thousand three hundred years. Then because the
Ottoman politicians were unable to maintain their direction, its Caliphate survived only
five hundred years (as the Caliphate), and with its demise it confirmed the Hadith’s
miraculous prediction. This Hadith has been discussed in other treatises, so we curtail
the discussion here.
NINTEENTH MATTER
In the narrations are various different prophecies about the Mahdi (May God be
pleased with him), who is one of the signs of the end of time and will be from the
Family of the Prophet. In fact, some scholars and saints stated long ago that he had
appeared.
God knows best what is right, one interpretation of these various narrations is this:
the Great Mahdi will have numerous functions. He will carry out duties in the world of
politics, the world of religion, the world of government, and in the many spheres of the
world of jihad. Similarly, since every century at a time of despair people are in need of
a sort of Mahdi to strengthen their morale or for the possibility of a Mahdi appearing
at that time to assist them, through Divine mercy, every age or perhaps every century a
sort of Mahdi has appeared from among the Prophet’s (PBUH) descendants, and
preserved his forefather’s Shari‘a and revived his Sunna. The narrations about the
Mahdi are various because Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) saw
persons who would perform some of the Great Mahdi’s works; for example, the
‘Abbasid Mahdi in the world of politics, and Gawth al-A‘zam,30 Shah Naqshband,31
the four spiritual poles,32 and Twelve Imams in the world of religion. For this reason
some of the people of reality said that he had already appeared. Anyway, since this
matter has been explained in the Risale-i Nur, we refer discussion of it to that and here
only say this:

30 Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani (Geylani) (470/1077-561/1166), founder of the Qadiri Order.
31 Shaykh Baha’ al-Din Naqshband (d. 791/1389), founder of the Naqshbandi Order.
32 Four spiritual poles: Ahmad al-Rufa’i, Ahmad al-Badawi, Ibrahim al-Dassuqi, and Abu’l
Hasan al-Shazali.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
112
There is no family in the world so mutually supportive, nor a tribe in such
agreement, nor so enlightened a community or society as the family, tribe, community
and society of the Prophet’s Family.
Yes, the Prophet’s Family has raised hundreds of sacred heroes, and produced
thousands of spiritual leaders of the Umma, and has been nurtured with the leaven of
the reality of the Qur’an and the light of belief and honour of Islam, and has thus been
perfected. It is therefore totally reasonable that through reviving the Shari‘a of
Muhammad (PBUH) and his Sunna and the reality of the Qur’an at the end of time,
and proclaiming them and putting them into practice, they should display to the world
the perfect justice and veracity of the Great Mahdi, their Commander-in-Chief. This is
also both necessary and essential and demanded by the principles of human society.
TWENTIETH MATTER
The sun rising in the west33 and the emergence from the earth of the Beast
(Dabbat al-Ard).34
The sun rising in the west will be a self-evident sign of the end of the world, and
because it is self-evident, it will be a heavenly event which closes the door of
repentance, which is tied to the will and reason. Its meaning is therefore clear, and is in
no need of interpretation. One may just say the following:
God knows best, its apparent cause will be this: with the disappearance from the
head of the earth of the Qur’an, which is like its intelligence, the earth will go mad.
With Divine permission, on another planet colliding with it, its rotation will be
reversed. Through Divine will, its journeying from west to east will be reversed to
from east to west, and the sun will start to rise in the west. Yes, the Qur’an is ‘the firm
cord of God’35 which binds the earth to the sun, and the ground to the Divine Throne.
If its gravity is broken, the string holding the earth would be undone, it would become
dizzy and deranged, and with its reversed uncontrolled motion, the sun would rise in
the west. There is another interpretation, which is that due to a collision, Doomsday
would break forth at the Divine command.

33 Bukhari, Fitan, 25; Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 9; Riqaq, 40; Musnad, Tawba, 31; Iman, 248-9; Fitan,
39, 40, 118, 128-9; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 2; Malahim, 11-2; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 21; Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 8-9;
Ibn Maja, Fitan, 25, 28, 32; Darimi, Siyar, 69; Musnad, i, 192; ii, 164, 201; iii, 31; iv, 6-7.
34 Muslim, Iman, 249; Fitan, 39-40, 118, 129; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 11-2; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 21;
Tafsir al-Sura, vi, 9; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 28, 31, 32; Musnad, ii, 164, 201, 295; iv, 6-7; v, 268, 357.
35 See, Qur’an, 3:103.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
113
As for the Beast (Dabbat al-Ard), in the Qur’an is an extremely concise
indication, a brief expression made by its tongue of disposition. As for its details, like
with some other matters, I do not know with any certainty for the present. I can only
say this much: None knows the Unseen save God, just as the people of Pharaoh were
visited by plagues of locusts and fleas, and the people of Abraha, who were trying to
destroy the Ka‘ba, were attacked by “flights of birds;”36 so too, for the purpose of
bringing to their senses those people who knowingly and willingly rebel due to the
dissension of the Sufyan and Dajjals, and through the anarchy of Gog and Magog
embark on corruption and savagery, and fall into irreligion, disbelief, and denial, a
beast will emerge from the earth and beset and rout them. God knows best, that beast
is a species. For even if huge, a single creature could not be everywhere. That means
there will be a truly terrible species of animal. Perhaps, as indicated by the verse,
Except a little worm of the earth, which kept [slowly] gnawing away at his staff,37
that creature will be a sort of termite, called “Dabbat al-Ard,” which will gnaw
away at the bones of men as though they were wooden, establishing themselves in
every part of their bodies, from their teeth to their finger-nails. By making the creature
speak on the question of belief, the verse38 indicates that through the blessing of belief
and their avoiding vice and abuses, the believers will be saved from it.
O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.39
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which you have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.40

36 See, Qur’an, 105:3-4.
37 Qur’an, 34:14.
38 See, Qur’an, 27:82.
39 Qur’an, 2:286.
40 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
114
Three Brief Matters
Complementing the Previous Twenty Matters
FIRST MATTER
Just as in some narrations, Jesus (Peace be upon him) is called “the Messiah” (al-
Masih), so are both Dajjals called Messiah, and in all the narrations it says: “... from
the dissension of the Messiah Antichrist (al-Masih al-Dajjal) ... from the dissension of
the Messiah Antichrist (al-Masih al-Dajjal).” What is the wisdom and meaning of
this?
The Answer: God knows best, the wisdom in it is this: just as at the Divine
command, Jesus (Peace be upon him) abrogated some of the burdensome ordinances
of the Mosaic Law, making lawful some things agreeable to the appetites like wine, so
too at the command of Satan and due to his temptations, the Great Dajjal will abrogate
the injunctions of the Christian Law, and destroying the bonds in accordance with
which the life of Christian society is administered, he will prepare the ground for
anarchy and Gog and Magog. Similarly, the Sufyan, the Islamic Dajjal, due to the
devices of Satan and the evil-commanding soul, will try to abrogate some of the
eternal injunctions of the Shari‘a of Muhammad (PBUH), and destroying the material
and spiritual bonds of human life, and leaving headstrong, drunken, giddy souls
without restriction, he will unfasten the luminous chains of respect and compassion.
By giving people a freedom which is pure despotism so they fall on one another in a
swamp of putrid lust, he will open up the way to a terrible anarchy. There will then be
no way those people can be kept under control other than by the most repressive
despotism.
SECOND MATTER
Mentioned in the narrations are the wondrous achievements of the two Dajjals,
and their superhuman power and majesty. It is foretold even that some unfortunates
will ascribe a sort of godhead to them. What is the reason for this?
The Answer: The knowledge is with God, their achievements being so great and
extraordinary is because since they mostly consist of destruction and exciting the
appetites, they carry out those works easily, so that it says in one narration: “A single
of their days is a year.” That is, the works they carry out in one year would not
normally be carried out in three hundred. There are four aspects of and reasons for
their power appearing to be superhuman:
• The First: Since, as the result of a Divine scheme permitting them to

--- Sayfa 103 ---
115
do so, the good things and advances which are achieved through the strength of brave
armies and active nations in their despotic, huge states, are unjustly attributed to them,
it leads to their persons being imagined to have the power of a thousand men. But
rightfully and according to the rules, the positive good, honour, and booty won
through the actions of a community should be divided among the community and
given to its members. And any evils, destruction, and losses should be ascribed to its
leader’s lack of precautions and faults. For example, if a batallion conquers a citadel,
the booty and honour is due to their bayonets. While if there are any losses due to
faulty planning, they are the commander’s.
Thus, entirely contrarily to this fundamental principle of truth and reality, since
positive progress and all things good are ascribed to those fearsome leaders, and
negative developments and evils are attributed to their unfortunate peoples, as the
result of a Divine scheme, those persons, who deserve to be abominated by everyone,
are loved by all the heedless and neglectful.
• The Second Aspect and Reason: Because both Dajjals employ the severest
despotism, the greatest tyranny, and the maximum violence and terror, they appear to
have vast power. Yes, a despotism so extraordinary that under the cloak of laws, they
intervene in everyone’s consciences and religious beliefs, and even their clothes. It is
my guess that with a premonition of the future the lovers of freedom at the end of the
last century perceived this awesome despotism, and letting fly their arrows at it,
attacked it. But they were sorely misled and attacked on the wrong front. It is tyranny
and coercion so great that it wipes out a hundred villages because of one man,
punishing hundreds of innocent people and ruining them by forced migrations.
• The Third Aspect and Reason: Because both Dajjals will win the assistance of a
secret Jewish society which nurtures a terrible desire for revenge on Islam and
Christianity, and that of another secret society which uses women’s liberation as a
screen, and because the Islamic Dajjal will deceive even the Masonic lodges and win
their support, they will be supposed to possess tremendous power. Also, it is
understood from the divinations of some of the saints that the Dajjal called Sufyan
who will come to lead the Islamic world will be a leading politician who is extremely
capable, intelligent, and active, does not like ostentation and gives no importance to
personal rank and glory; he will be a military leader who is extremely bold, forceful,
energetic, and resolute, and does not condescend to fame-seeking, and he will
captivate the Muslims. Taking advantage of their lack of hypocrisy, he will have their
extraordinarily brilliant works ascribed to himself, as well as the progress they have

--- Sayfa 104 ---
116
achieved driven by the severe need arising from the transformation and renewal of the
large army and state and the upheavals of the First World War, and he will have it
bruited everywhere by eulogists that he possesses a wondrous and extraordinary
power.
• The Fourth Aspect and Reason: The Great Dajjal will have spellbinding,
charismatic qualities. While the Islamic Dajjal will have fascinating, hypnotic powers in
one eye. It even says in narrations: “The Dajjal will be blind in one eye.”41 By drawing
attention to this and pointing out that one of the Great Dajjal’s eyes will be blind, and
one eye of the other Dajjal will be blind in comparison with his other eye, the Hadith is
indicating that since they will be absolute unbelievers, they will have only one eye and
their sight will be restricted to this world, and they will have no eyes that see the
hereafter and consequences of actions.
I too saw the Islamic Dajjal in a spirit world. I observed with my own eyes that he
possessed a spellbinding hypnotic power in one of his eyes, and I understood him to be
a total denier of God. He will attack religion and the sacred with a boldness and
insolence arising from his absolute denial. But since the ordinary people will not know
the truth of the matter, they will suppose it to be an extraordinary power and courage.
Also, because such a magnificent, lucky, successful, and cunning commander,
who is merely being led on by God, appears at the time of a heroic and glorious
nation’s defeat, with their love of heroism the people will applaud and fete him without
considering his hidden, terrible true nature, and will want to cover up his iniquities.
However, it is understood from narrations that through the light of belief and light of
the Qur’an in their spirits, the heroic, mujahid army and religious nation will see the
truth and will try to repair that commander’s terrible destruction.
THE THIRD BRIEF MATTER
This consists of three instructive incidents.
First Incident: One time, God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) pointed out to ‘Umar (May God be pleased with him) one of a group of Jewish
children, and said: “He is his very image!” ‘Umar said: “Then I shall kill him!” But
God’s Messenger (PBUH) replied: “If that is the Sufyan, the Islamic Dajjal, you
cannot kill him. And if it is not, he cannot be killed through his image.”42

41 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Anbiya’, 77; Muslim, Fitan, 100, 109; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Sunna,
25; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 56, 62; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Muwatta, Sifat al-Nabi, 1; Musnad, i, 176, 182, 240,
311; ii, 22, 27, 37, 39, 122, 124, 127, 131, 144, 154, 159; iii, 79, 103, 115, 173, 233, 333; iv, 139-40;
v, 13, 383, 397.
42 Bukhari, Jana’iz, 80; Jihad, 178; Muslim, Fitan, 85, 86, 95; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 63.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
117
This narration indicates that at the time of his rule, the Sufyan’s image will appear
on numerous things, and that he will be born a Jew. It is strange that although ‘Umar
(May God be pleased with him) was sufficiently angry and hostile towards him to be
able to kill a child resembling him, someone the Sufyan most admired and liked and
spoke off with praise and appreciation turned out to be ‘Umar.
Second Incident: Many people narrated that the Islamic Dajjal will be curious
about the meaning of the Sura, By the fig and the olive,43 and will ask about it.
It is strange but the verse Nay, but man transgresses all bounds44 in the following
Sura, Read! In the name of your Sustainer,45 according to jafr reckoning and its
meaning, also indicates his time and person, pointing out that he will overweeningly
aggress against the mosques and the people who perform the prayers. That is to say,
that man, who is being led on by God, perceives that a short Sura is concerned with
him, but makes a mistake and knocks on its neighbour’s door.
Third Incident: It says in a narration: “The Islamic Dajjal will appear in
Khorasan.”46
None knows the Unseen save God, an interpretation of it is this: the Turks, the
bravest and most numerous and powerful people of the east and the heroic army of
Islam, were at the time of the narration, around the region of Khorasan and had not
yet made their homeland in Anatolia. By mentioning the region they inhabited, it is
indicating that the Sufyan Dajjal would appear from among them.
It is strange, exceedingly strange, he will temporarily try to use the Turkish nation
and Turkism, which for seven hundred years has been a flashing diamond sword, a
mark of honour, in the hand of Islam and the Qur’an, against some of the marks of
Islam. But he will not be successful and will withdraw. It is understood from the
narrations that “The heroic army will save it, taking the reins from his hand.”
And God knows what is best  * None knows the Unseen save God.

43 Qur’an, 95:1.
44 Qur’an, 96:6.
45 Qur’an, 96:1.
46 Tirmidhi, Fitan, 57; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33; Musnad, i, 4, 7; al-Albani, Silsilat al-Ahadith, iv,
122.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
118
The Sixth Ray
 [This consists of only two Points]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
 [This Sixth Ray consists of two answers to two questions about two points
concerning the formulas in the ‘tashahhud’ section of the ritual prayers
(salat) which begin “Salutations, blessings, benedictions and supplications,
and good words—all are God’s.”1 Postponing to another time an explanation
of the other truths of the ‘tashahhud,’ here we shall explain only two points
out of hundreds.]
F i r s t   Q u e s t i o n : The blessed phrases of the tashahhud were spoken by
Almighty God and His Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) on the night of
his Ascension, so what is the reason for their being recited in the ritual prayers?
T h e   A n s w e r : For all believers, the five daily prayers are a sort of
Ascension. The words of the tashahhud, which were fitting for the Divine presence,
were spoken during the Supreme Ascension of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be
upon him), and by reciting them, believers recall that sacred conversation. Through the
recollection, the meanings of those blessed words cease being particular and become
universal; their sacred, comprehensive meanings are, or may be, conceived of.
Through such a conception, their value and light are enhanced and expanded.
For example, instead of giving the greeting of “peace” that night to Almighty
God, the Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him)

1 “al-tahiyyat al-mubarakat al-salawat al-tayyibat lillah.” Bukhari, Adhan, 148, 150; al-Amal
fi’l-salat, 4; Istidhan, 3, 28; Da’wat, 16; Tawhid, 5; Muslim, Salat, 56, 60, 62. Etc.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
119
said: “Salutations to God” (al-tahiyyatu lillah). That is, “O my Sustainer! All the vital
glorifications living beings display through their lives and the gifts they present to their
Maker through the manner of their creation are Yours alone. By visualizing them and
through my belief, I too offer them to You.”
Yes, with the word “salutations,” God’s Most Noble Messenger (PBUH)
intentionally offered to God all the worship living creatures perform through the mode
of their creation. Similarly, through the word “blessings,” (al-mubarakat) which is the
summary of “salutations,” he was representing the natural blessedness, plenty, and
worship of creatures, especially seeds, grains, and eggs, which are the means of
blessings and abundance, and cause one to exclaim: “How great are God’s blessings!”
For they are the essence of life and living beings. He said it with this broad meaning.
Through the word “benedictions” (al-salawat), which is a summary of
“blessings,” he was visualizing all the particular forms of worship performed by beings
with spirits, who are the essence of living beings, and offering it to the Divine Court
with that comprehensive meaning.
With the word “good things,” (wa’l-tayyibat) the summary of “benedictions,” he
intended the luminous, elevated worship of perfected human beings and the cherubim,
who are the summaries of beings with spirits, and offered this to the One he
worshipped.
Almighty God saying that night: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet!”, was an
indication and indirect command that in the future, hundreds of millions of people
would say at least ten times daily: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet!” The Divine
greeting afforded the words an extensive light and lofty meaning.
Similarly, the Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) replying to the
greeting by saying: “Peace be upon us and upon all God’s righteous servants”
expressed that he was requesting his Creator hopefully and beseechingly that in the
future his vast community and the righteous members of it would reflect Islam, which
represents the Divine greeting, and that all his community would greet each other:
“Peace be upon you!” “And peace be upon you!,” which, between believers, is a
universal mark of Islam.
Gabriel (Peace be upon him), who took part in the conversation, said that night at
the Divine command: “I testify that there is no god but God, and I testify that
Muhammad is God’s Messenger,” giving the happy news that all the Umma would
testify in that way until the Last Day.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
120
Recalling this sacred exchange, the meanings of the words gain in brilliance and
comprehensiveness.
A strange state of mind that assisted in the unfolding of the above truth
One time while in a dark exile, on a dark night, and in a dark state of heedlessness,
the mighty universe of the present appeared to my imagination as a lifeless, spiritless,
dead, empty, desolate, ghastly corpse. The past, too, appeared to be dead, empty,
deceased, and dreadful; that boundless space and limitless time took on the form of a
dark wilderness. I had recourse to the prayers in order to be saved from my state of
mind. When I said: “Salutations” in the tashahhud, the universe suddenly sprang to
life. It was resurrected taking on a living, luminous form, and became a shining mirror
of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. I saw that with all its living parts, it was
continuously offering the salutations of their lives and their vital gifts to the Ever-
Living and Self-Subsistent One; I understood this with ‘the knowledge of certainty,’
even with ‘absolute certainty.’
Then, when I declared: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet!,” that limitless vacant
time was transformed under the leadership of God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and
blessings be upon him) from being a desolate wilderness into a familiar place of
recreation filled with living spirits.
S e c o n d   Q u e s t i o n : The comparison at the end of the tashahhud: “O
God! Grant blessings to Muhammad and to the Family of Muhammad, as You granted
blessings to Abraham and to the Family of Abraham,”2 appears to be contrary to the
rules of comparisons, for Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) was greater
than Abraham (Peace be upon him), and the recipient of greater mercy; so what is the
reason for it? Since early times the same supplication has been repeated in all the ritual
prayers; whereas if a prayer is accepted once, that is enough. If those for whom
millions of prayers have been accepted are persistently prayed for, and especially if the
thing sought has been promised by God... For example, Almighty God has promised:
Soon will your Sustainer raise you to a station of praise and glory!,3 yet always after
the call to prayer and iqama the narrated prayer: “And raise him up to the station of
praise and glory that You have promised him”4 is repeated; the whole Umma pray for
that promise to be fulfilled. What is the reason for this too?

2 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 10.
3 Qur’an, 17:79.
4 ‘Station of Praise and Glory’ — al-Maqam al-Mahmud: Bukhari, Adhan, 8, 17; Tirmidhi,
Mawaqit, 43; Salat, 42; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 37; Nasa’i, Adhan, 38; Ibn Maja, Adhan, 4; Iqama, 25;
Musnad, iii, 354.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
121
T h e   A n s w e r : There are three aspects and three questions within this
question.
First Aspect: For sure Abraham (Peace be upon him) was not equal to
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), but his family or descendants were
prophets. Muhammad’s (Peace and blessings be upon him) family were saints, and
saints cannot reach the level of the prophets. Evidence that this prayer for his family
has been accepted in shining fashion is this:
The fact that the saints who, among three hundred and fifty million, emerged from
the progeny of only two of the Family of Muhammad (PBUH), that is, Hasan (May
God be pleased with him) and Husayn (May God be pleased with him), were in the
great majority of cases the spiritual guides and leaders of the sufi paths of reality, was
because they received the effulgence of the Hadith: “The learned of my community are
like the prophets of the Children of Israel.”5 Those who guided the greater part of the
Umma to the way of truth and reality of Islam —foremost Ja‘far al-Sadiq (May God
be pleased with him), Gawth al-A‘zam (May God be pleased with him), and Shah
Naqshband (May God be pleased with him)— were the fruits of the acceptance of this
prayer for Muhammad’s (Peace and blessings be upon him) Family.
Second Aspect: The reason for benedictions of this sort being restricted to the
ritual prayers is that they recall to one that he is on the way opened up and taken by
the great caravan of the prophets and saints, who are the most luminous, perfect, and
righteous of mankind and its eminent members. He has joined that vast congregation,
which acquires strength through its hundredfold consensus and cannot confuse its way,
and is accompanying it on the straight path. By recalling this, he is saved from satanic
doubts and delusions. Evidence that the members of this caravan are the friends and
acceptable creatures of the universe’s Owner, and its opponents and enemies are
rejected, is that from the time of Adam, succour has always arrived from the Unseen
for the caravan, while its opponents have always been visited by heavenly calamities.
Yes, just as opponents like the people of Noah, the Thamud and the ‘Ad, Pharaoh
and Nimrod have all received blows from the Unseen that tell of Divine wrath and
chastisement; so the sacred heroes of the mighty caravan, like Noah (Peace be upon
him), Abraham (Peace be upon him), Moses (Peace be upon him), and Muhammad
(Peace and blessings be upon him), have wondrously and extraordinarily manifested
miracles and

5 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 64; Tecrid-i Sarîh Tercemesi (Turk. trans.) Diyanet Isleri, i,
107.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
122
received dominical bounties from the Unseen. A single blow demonstrates anger, and a
single bestowal, love, so thousands of blows being visited on opponents and thousands
of favours and instances of assistance arriving for the caravan testify and prove self-
evidently, as clearly as daylight, the rightfulness of the caravan and that it is on the
straight path. The verse: The path of those whom You have blessed in Sura al-Fatiha
looks to the caravan, while the verses: Not those on whom Your anger has been
visited, nor those who have gone astray6 looks to their opponents. The point we have
explained here is clearer in the discussion about the end of Sura al-Fatiha.
Third Aspect: The reason for repeatedly asking for something which shall
certainly be given is this: the thing sought, for instance the ‘Station of Praise and
Glory’ is the tip of something. It is a branch of a vast truth that comprises lofty and
significant truths like thousands of Stations of Praise and Glory. It is a fruit of the most
important result of the universe’s creation. To seek through prayer the tip, branch, and
fruit is to seek indirectly the realization of that vast and general truth, and its finding
existence, and the coming and realization of the eternal realm, the largest branch of the
tree of creation, and the resurrection of the dead and Last Judgement and the opening
up of the Abode of Bliss, which are the supreme results of the universe. By asking for
these, one participates in the worship and prayers of all humanity, the most important
causes of the existence of Paradise and the Abode of Bliss. These innumerable prayers
are indeed few for an aim so unutterably vast. Moreover, Muhammad (Peace and
blessings be upon him) being awarded the Station of Praise and Glory points to his
supreme intercession for all his community. He is concerned also with the happiness of
all his community. It is therefore pure wisdom to seek endless benedictions and
prayers for mercy for him from all his community.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7

6 Qur’an, 1:7.
7 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
123
The Seventh Ray
The Supreme Sign1
AN  IMPORTANT WARNING
AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
Not everyone will be able to understand all the matters discussed in this most
significant treatise, but equally nobody will remain portionless. If somebody enters a
garden, he will find that his hands cannot reach all the fruit it contains, but the amount
that falls within his grasp will be enough for him. The garden does not exist for him
alone; it exists also for those whose arms are longer than his.
There are five causes making difficult the understanding of this book.
The First:  I have written down my own observations, according to my own
understanding, and for myself. I have not written according to the understanding and
conceptions of others, as is the case with other books.
The Second: Since the true affirmation of Divine unity is set forth in this book, in
the most comprehensive form, by virtue of a manifestation of the Supreme Name, the
subjects discussed are extremely broad, extremely profound and sometimes extremely
long. Not everyone can comprehend these matters all at once.
The Third: Since each matter constitutes a great and extensive truth, a single
sentence will sometimes stretch out over a whole page or more, in

1 This translation of the Seventh Ray was originally carried out by Hamid Algar, Prof. of Middle
Eastern Studies in the University of California, Berkeley, USA, and was first published in 1979. It has
been been in part amended to fit the present work. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 112 ---
124
order not to fracture the truth in question. A single proof requires copious
preliminaries.
The Fourth: Since most of the matters contained in the book have numerous
proofs and evidences, the discussion sometimes becomes prolix through the inclusion
of ten or twenty proofs by way of demonstration. Limited intelligences cannot
understand this.
The Fifth:  It is true that the lights of this treatise came to me from the effulgence
of Ramadan. Nonetheless, I was distraught in a number of respects, and I wrote the
book hastily at a time my body was wracked by several illnesses, without revising the
first draft. I felt, moreover, that I was not writing with my own will and volition, and it
seemed inappropriate to rearrange or correct what I had written, according to my own
thoughts. This, too, resulted in rendering the book difficult of comprehension. In
addition, a number of sections in Arabic crept in, and the First Station, written entirely
in Arabic, was removed and made into a separate work.
Despite the defects and difficulties arising from these five causes, this treatise has
such an importance that Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) miraculously
foresaw its composition and gave it the names “Supreme Sign” and “Staff of Moses.”
He looked upon this part of the Risale-i Nur with special favour, and directed man’s
gaze toward it.2 The Supreme Sign is a true exposition of the Supreme Verse,3 and it
constitutes at the same time the Seventh Ray, designated by the Imam as the Staff of
Moses.
This treatise consists of an Introduction and two Stations. The Introduction sets
forth four important matters; the First Station contains the Arabic portion of the
exposition of the Supreme Verse; and the Second Station consists of the translation of
that expostion together with the accompanying proofs.
Too much has been explained in the following Introduction, but it was not my
intention to lengthen it thus. The fact that it was written at this length indicates the
existence of a need. Indeed, some people may regard it as too short, despite its length.
                                                                            S a i d   N u r s i

2 The events that took place in Denizli fully confirmed the prediction of Imam ‘Ali concerning
The Supreme Sign. For the secret printing of this book was the cause of our imprisonment, and the
triumph of its sacred and most powerful truth was the main cause of our acquittal and deliverance.
Thus did Imam ‘Ali make manifest his miraculous prediction, and prove the acceptance of the prayer
he had uttered on our behalf: “By  means of the Supreme Sign, secure me against sudden death!”
3 See page 130, footnote 7.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
125
Introduction
I created not jinn and mankind except that they might worship me.4
According to the meaning of this mighty verse, the purpose for the sending of man
to this world and the wisdom implicit in it, consists of recognizing the Creator of all
beings and believing in Him and worshipping Him. The primordial duty of man and the
obligation incumbent upon him are to know God and believe in Him, to assent to His
Being and unity in submission and perfect certainty.
For man, who by nature desires permanent life and immortal existence, whose
unlimited hopes are matched by boundless afflictions, any object or accomplishment
other than belief in God, knowledge of God  and  the  means  for  attaining these,
which are the fundament and key of eternal life — any such object or accomplishment
must be regarded as lowly for man, or even worthless in many cases.
Since this truth has been proven with firm evidence in the Risale-i Nur, we refer
exposition of it to that, setting forth here, within the framework of four questions, only
two abysses that shake certainty of faith in this age and induce hesitation.
The means for salvation from the first abyss are these two Matters:
The First Matter: As proven in detail in the Thirteenth Flash of the Thirty-First
Letter, in general questions denial has no value in the face of proof and is extremely
weak. For example, with respect to the sighting of the crescent moon at the beginning
of Ramadan the Noble, if two common men prove the crescent to have emerged by
their witnessing it, and thousands of nobles and scholars deny it, saying: “We have not
seen it,” their negation is valueless and without power to convince. When it is a
question of proof each person strengthens and supports the other, and consensus
results. But when it is a question of negation, there is no difference between one man
and a thousand. Each person remains alone and isolated. For the one who affirms
looks beyond himself and judges the matter as it is. Thus in the example we have
given, if one says “The moon is in the sky,” and his friend then points his finger at the
moon, the two of them unite and are strengthened.

4 Qur’an, 51:56.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
126
The one who engages in negation and denial, however, does not regard the matter
as it is, and is even unable to do so. For it is a well-known principle that “a non-
particularized denial, not directed to a particular locus, cannot be proven.”
For example, if I affirm the existence of a thing in the world, and you deny it, I
can easily establish its existence with a single indication. But for you to justify your
negation, that is to establish the non-existence of the thing — it is necessary to hunt
exhaustively through the whole world, and even to examine every aspect of past ages.
Only then can you say, “It does not exist, and never has existed.”
Since those who negate and deny do not regard the matter as it is but judge rather
in the light of their own souls, and their own intelligence and vision, they can in no
way strengthen and support each other. For the veils and causes that prevent them
from seeing and knowing are various. Anyone can say, “I do not see it; therefore, in
my opinion and belief, it does not exist.” But none can say, “It does not exist in
actuality.” If someone says this —particularly in questions of belief, which look to all
the universe— it is a lie as vast as the world itself, and he who utters it will be
incapable both of speaking the truth and of being corrected.
In Short: The result is one and single in the case of affirmation, and every
instance of affirmation supports all other instances.
Negation by contrast is not one, but multiple. Multiplicity arises through each
person’s saying concerning himself, “In my opinion and view,” or “In my belief,” and
leads to multiplicity of result. Hence each separate instance cannot support all other
instances.
Therefore, with respect to the truth with which we began, there is no significance
in the multiplicity and apparent predominance of the unbelievers and deniers who
oppose belief. Now it is necessary to refrain from introducing any hesitation into the
certainty and faith of a believer, but in this age the negations and denials of the
philosophers of Europe have induced doubt in a number of unfortunate dupes and thus
destroyed their certainty and obliterated their eternal felicity. Death and the coming of
one’s appointed hour, which afflict thirty thousand men each day, are deprived of their
meaning of dismissal from this world and presented as eternal annihilation. The grave
with its ever-open door, constantly threatens the denier with annihilation and poisons
his life with the bitterest of sorrows. Appreciate then how great a blessing is faith, and
the very essence of life.
The Second Matter: With respect to a problem subject to discussion in science
or art, those who stand outside that science or art cannot speak

--- Sayfa 115 ---
127
authoritatively, however great, learned and accomplished they may be, nor can their
judgements be accepted as decisive. They cannot form part of the learned consensus of
the science.
For example, the judgement of a great engineer on the diagnosis and cure of a
disease does not have the same value as that of the lowliest physician. In particular, the
words of denial of a philosopher who is absorbed in the material sphere, who becomes
continually more remote from the non-material or spiritual and cruder and more
insensitive to light, whose intelligence is restricted to what his eye beholds — the
words of such a one are unworthy of consideration and valueless with respect to non-
material and spiritual matters.
On matters sacred and spiritual and concerning the Divine unity, there is total
accord among the hundreds of thousands of the People of Truth, such as Shaykh
Gilani (May his mystery be sanctified), who beheld God’s Sublime Throne while still
on the earth, who spent ninety years ad-vancing in spiritual work, and who unveiled
the truths of belief in all three stations of certainty. This being the case what value have
the words of philosophers, who through their absorption in the most diffuse details of
the material realm and the most minute aspects of multiplicity are choking and dazed?
Are not their denials and objections drowned out like the buzzing of a mosquito by the
roaring of thunder?
The essence of the unbelief that opposes the truths of Islam and struggles against
them is denial, ignorance, and negation. Even though it may appear to be an
affirmation of some kind and a manifestation of being, it is in reality negation and non-
being. Whereas belief is knowledge and a manifestation of being; it is affirmation and
judgement. Every negating aspect of belief is the gate to a positive truth or the veil
covering it. If the unbelievers who struggle against faith attempt, with the utmost
difficulty, to affirm and accept their negative beliefs in the form of acceptance and
admission of non-being, then their unbelief may be regarded in one respect as a form
of mistaken knowledge or erroneous judgement. But as for non-acceptance, denial,
and non-admission —something more easily done— it is absolute ignorance and total
absence of judgement.
In Short: The convictions underlying unbelief are then of two kinds:
The First pays no regard to the truths of Islam. It is an erroneous admission, a
baseless belief and a mistaken acceptance peculiar to itself; it is an unjust judgement.
This kind of unbelief is beyond the scope of our discussion. It has no concern with us,
nor do we have any concern with it.
The Second Kind opposes the truths of belief and struggles against them. It
consists in turn of two varieties.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
128
The First is non-acceptance. It consists simply of not consenting to affirmation.
This is a species of ignorance; there is no judgement in-volved and it occurs easily. It
too is beyond the scope of our discussion.
The Second variety is acceptance of non-being. It is to consent to non-being with
one’s heart, and a judgement is involved. It is a conviction and a taking the part of
something. It is on account of this partiality that it is obliged to affirm its negation.
The negation comprises two types:
The First Type says: “A certain thing does not exist at a certain place or in a
particular direction.”  This kind of denial can be proved, and it lies outside of our
discussion.
The Second Type consists of negating and denying those doctrinal and sacred
matters, general and comprehensive, that concern this world, all beings, the hereafter,
and the succession of different ages. This kind of negation cannot in any fashion be
substantiated, as we have shown in the First Matter, for what is needed to substantiate
such negations is a vision that shall encompass the whole universe, behold the
hereafter, and observe every aspect of time without limit.
The Second Abyss and the means for escaping from it: This too consists of
two matters.
The First: Intelligences that become narrowed by absorption in neglect of God
and in sin, or the material realm, are unable to comprehend vast matters in respect of
sublimity, grandeur, and infinity; hence taking pride in such knowledge as they have,
they hasten to denial and negation. Since they cannot encompass the extremely vast,
profound and comprehensive questions of faith within their straitened and dessicated
intellects, their corrupt and spiritually moribund hearts, they cast themselves into
unbelief and misguidance, and choke.
If they were able to look at the true nature of their unbelief and the essence of
their misguidance they would see that, compared to the reasonable, suitable and indeed
necessary sublimity and grandeur that is present in belief, their unbelief conceals and
contains manifold absurdity and impossibility. The Risale-i Nur has proven this truth
by hundreds of comparisons with the same finality that “two plus two equals four.”
For example, one who does not accept the Necessary Being, the pre-eternity, and the
comprehensiveness of attribute of God Almighty, on account of their grandeur and
sublimity, may form a creed of unbelief by assigning that necessary being, pre-eternity,
and the attributes of Godhead to an unlimited number of beings, an infinity of atoms.
Or like the foolish

--- Sayfa 117 ---
129
Sophists, he can abdicate his intelligence by denying and negating both his own
existence and that of the universe.
Thus, all the truths of belief and Islam, basing their matters on the grandeur and
sublimity which are their requirement, deliver themselves from the awesome
absurdities, the fearsome superstitions, and the tenebrous ignorance of unbelief that
confront them, and take up their place in sound hearts and straight intellects, through
utmost submission and assent.
The constant proclamation of this grandeur and sublimity in the call to prayer, in
the prayers themselves and in most of the rites of Islam,
Allahu akbar, God is Most Great!
God is Most Great! God is Most Great!
the declaration of the Sacred Tradition that “Grandeur is My shield and Sublimity My
cloak;”5 and the statement of the Prophet (Peace and blessings be upon him) — his
most inspiring communing with God, in the eighty-sixth part of Jawshan al-Kabir:6
O You other than Whose Kingdom no kingdom exists;
O You Whose Praise cannot be counted by His slaves;
O You Whose Glory cannot be described by His creatures;
O You Whose Perfection lies beyond the range of all vision;
O You Whose Attributes exceed the bounds of all understanding;
O You Whose Grandeur is beyond the reach of all thought;
O You Whose Qualities man cannot fittingly describe;
O You Whose Decree His slaves cannot avert;
O You Whose Signs are manifest in everything
—Be You glorified; there is no god other than You—
Protection, protection, deliver us from the Fire!
— all these show that  grandeur and sublimity constitute a necessary veil.

5 Muslim, Birr, 136; Abu Da’ud, Libas, 25; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 16; Musnad, ii, 248, 376, 414, 427,
442; iv, 416; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, i, 272; vii, 473; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iii, 534.
6 The famous supplication revealed to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) which, consisting of the
Divine Names, is related to possess many merits. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 118 ---
130
The Supreme Sign
The Observations of a Traveller Questioning
the Universe Concerning His Maker
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
The seven heavens and the earth and all that is in them extol and glorify
Him, and there is nothing but glorifies Him with praise, but you understand
not their glorifying; indeed, He is Most Forebearing, Most Forgiving.7
 [This Second Station, in addition to explaining the above sublime verse, sets
out the proofs, arguments, and meaning of the First Station, which has been
skipped.]
Since this sublime verse, like many other Qur’anic verses, mentions first the
heavens —that brilliant page proclaiming God’s unity, gazed on at all times and by all
men with wonder and joy— in its pronouncement of the Creator of this cosmos, let us
too begin with a mention of the heavens.
Indeed, every voyager who comes to the hospice and the realm of this world,
opens his eyes and wonders who is the master of this fine hospice, which resembles a
most generous banquet, a most ingenious exhibition, a most impressive camp and
training ground, a most amazing and wondrous place of recreation, a most profound
and wise place of instruction. He asks himself too who is the author of this great book,
and who is the monarch of this lofty realm. There first presents itself to him the
beautiful

7 Qur’an, 17:44.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
131
face of the heavens, inscribed with the gilt lettering of the stars. That face calls him
saying, “Look at me, and I shall guide you to what you seek.”
He looks then and sees a manifestation of dominicality performing various tasks in
the heavens: it holds aloft in the heavens, without any supporting pillar, hundreds of
thousands of heavenly bodies, some of which are a thousand times heavier than the
earth and revolve seventy times faster than a cannon-ball; it causes them to move in
harmony and swiftly without colliding with each other; it causes innumerable lamps to
burn constantly, without the use of any oil; it disposes of these great masses without
any disturbance or disorder; it sets sun and moon to work at their respective tasks,
without those great bodies ever rebelling; it administers within infinite space —the
magnitude of which cannot be measured in figures should they stretch from pole to
pole— all that exists, at the same time, with the same strength, in the same fashion,
manner and mould, without the least deficiency; it reduces to submissive obedience to
its law all the aggressive powers inherent in those bodies; it cleanses and lustrates the
face of the heavens, removing all the sweepings and refuse of that vast assembly; it
causes those bodies to manoeuvre like a disciplined army; and then, making the earth
revolve, it shows the heavens each night and each year in a different form, like a
cinema screen displaying true and imaginative scenes to the audience of creation.
There is within this dominical activity a truth consisting of subjugation,
administration, revolution, ordering, cleansing, and employment. This truth, with its
grandeur and comprehensiveness, bears witness to the necessary existence and unity of
the Creator of the Heavens and testifies to that Existence being more manifest than
that of the heavens. Hence it was said in the First Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in
Unity the heavens and all they contain testify, through the testimony of the
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of subjugation, administration,
revolution, ordering, cleansing, and employment, a truth vast and perfect, and to
be observed.
Then that wondrous place of gathering known as space or the atmosphere begins
thunderously to proclaim to that traveller come as a guest to the world, “Look at me!
You can discover and find through me the object of your search, the one who sent you
here!” The traveller looks at the sour but kind face of the atmosphere, and listening to
the awesome but joyous thunderclaps perceives the following.
The clouds, suspended between the sky and the earth, water the garden of the
world in the most wise and merciful fashion, furnish the inhabitants

--- Sayfa 120 ---
132
of the earth with the water of life, modify the natural heat of life, and hasten to bestow
aid wherever it is needed. In addition to fulfilling these and other duties, the vast
clouds, capable of filling the heavens sometimes hide themselves, with their parts
retiring to rest so that not a trace can be seen, just like a well-disciplined army showing
and hiding itself in accordance with sudden orders.
Then, the very instant the command is given to pour down rain, the clouds gather
in one hour, or rather in a few minutes; they fill the sky and await further orders from
their commander.
Next the traveller looks at the wind in the atmosphere and sees that the air is
employed wisely and generously in such numerous tasks that it is as if each of the
inanimate atoms of that unconscious air were hearing and noting the orders coming
from that monarch of the universe; without neglecting a single one of them, it
performs them in ordered fashion and through the power of the monarch. Thereby it
gives breath to all beings and conveys to all living things the heat, light, and electricty
they need, and transmits sound, as well as aiding in the pollination of plants.
The traveller then looks at the rain and sees that within those delicate, glistening
sweet drops, sent from a hidden treasury of mercy, there are so many compassionate
gifts and functions contained that it is as if mercy itself were assuming shape and
flowing forth from the dominical treasury in the form of drops. It is for this reason that
rain has been called “mercy.”
Next the traveller looks at the lightning and listens to the thunder and ses that
both of these, too, are employed in wondrous tasks.
Then taking his eyes off these, he looks to his own intellect and says: “The
inanimate, lifeless cloud that resembles carded cotton has of course no knowledge of
us; when it comes to our aid, it is not because it takes pity on us. It cannot appear and
disappear without receiving orders. Rather it acts in accordance with the orders of a
most powerful and compassionate commander. First it diasppears without leaving a
trace, then suddenly reappears in order to begin its work. By the command and power
of a most active and exalted, a most magnificent and splendid, monarch, it fills and
then empties the atmosphere. Inscribing the sky with wisdom and erasing the pattern,
it makes of the sky a tablet of effacement and affirmation, a depiction of the gathering
and the resurrection. By the contriving of a most generous and bountiful, a most
munificent and solicitous sustainer, a ruler who regulates and disposes, it mounts the
wind and taking with it treasuries of rain each as heavy as a mountain, hastens to the
aid of the needy. It is as if it were weeping over them in pity, with

--- Sayfa 121 ---
133
its tears causing the flowers to smile, tempering the heat of the sun, spraying gardens
with water, and washing and cleansing the face of the earth.”
That wondering traveller then tells his own intellect: “These hundreds of
thousands of wise, merciful and ingenious tasks and acts of generosity and mercy that
arise from the veil and outer form of this inanimate, lifeless, unconscious, volatile,
unstable, stormy, unsettled, and inconstant air, clearly establish that this diligent wind,
this tireless servant, never acts of itself, but rather in accordance with the orders of a
most powerful and knowing, a most wise and generous commander. It is as if each
particle were aware of every single task, like a soldier understanding and hearkening to
every order of its commander, for it hears and obeys every dominical command that
courses through the air. It aids all animals to breathe and to live, all plants to pollinate
and grow, and cultivates all the matter necessary for their survival. It directs and
administers the clouds, makes possible the voyaging of sailing ships, and enables
sounds to be conveyed, particularly by means of wireless, telephone, telegraph and
radio, as well as numerous other universal functions.
“Now these atoms, each composed of two such simple materials as hydrogen and
oxygen and each resembling the other, exist in hundreds of thousands of different
fashions all over the globe; I conclude therefore that they are being employed and set
to work in the utmost orderliness by a hand of wisdom.
“As the verse makes clear,
And the disposition of the winds and the clouds, held in disciplined order
between the heavens and the earth,8
the one who through the disposition of the winds employs them in countless dominical
functions, who through the ordering of the clouds uses them in infinite tasks of mercy,
and who creates the air in this fashion — such a one can only be the Possessor of
Necessary Existence, the One Empowered over All Things and Knowledgeable of All
Things, the Sustainer endowed with Glory and Generosity.” This is the conclusion our
traveller now draws.
Then he looks at the rain and sees that within it are contained benefits as
numerous as the raindrops, and dominical manifestations as multiple as the particles of
rain, and instances of wisdom as plentiful as its atoms. Those sweet, delicate and
blessed drops are moreover created in so beautiful and ordered a fashion, that
particularly the rain sent in the summertime, is despatched and caused to fall with such
balance and regularity

8 Qur’an, 2:164.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
134
that not even stormy winds that cause large objects to collide can destroy its
equilibrium and order; the drops do not collide with each other or merge in such
fashion as to become harmful masses of water. Water, composed of two simple
elements like hydrogen and oxygen, is employed in hundreds of thousands of other
wise, purposeful tasks and arts, particularly in animate beings; although it is itself
inanimate and unconscious. Rain which is then the very embodiment of Divine Mercy
can only be manufactured in the unseen treasury of mercy of One Most Compassionate
and Merciful, and on its descent expounds in physical form the verse:
And He it is Who sends down rain after men have despaired, and thus
spreads out His Mercy.9
The traveller next listens to the thunder and watches the lightning. He understands
that these two wondrous events in the atmosphere are like a material demonstration of
the verse,
The thunder glorifies His praise,10
The brilliance of His lightning almost robs them of their sight.11
They also announce the coming of rain, and thus give glad tidings to the needy.
Yes, this sudden utterance of a miraculous sound by the atmosphere; the filling of
the dark sky with the flash and fire of lightning; the setting alight of the clouds that
resemble mountains of cotton or pipes bursting with water and snow — these and
similar phenomena are like a blow struck on the head of the negligent man whose gaze
is directed down at the earth. They tell him:
“Lift up your head, look at the miraculous deeds of the most active and powerful
being who wishes to make himself known. In the same way that you are not left to
your own devices, so too, these phenomena and events have a master and a purpose.
Each of them is caused to fulfil a particular task, and each is employed by a Most Wise
Disposer.”
The wondering traveller hears then the lofty and manifest testimony to the truth
that is composed of  the disposition of the winds, the descent of the rains and the
administration of the events of the atmosphere, and says: “I believe in God.” That
which was stated in the Second Degree of the First Station expresses the observations
of the traveller concerning the atmosphere:

9 Qur’an, 42:28.
10 Qur’an, 13:13.
11 Qur’an, 24:43.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
135
There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in
Unity the atmosphere and all its contains testifies, through the testimony of the
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of subjugation, disposal, causing
to descend, and regulation, a truth vast and perfect, and to be observed.
Next the globe addresses that thoughtful traveller, now growing accustomed to
his reflective journey:
“Why are you wandering through the heavens, through space and the sky? Come,
I will make known to you what you are seeking. Look at the functions that I perform
and read my pages!” He looks and sees that the globe, like an ecstatic Mevlevi dervish
with its twofold motion, is tracing out around the field of the Supreme Gathering a
circle that determines the succession of days, years, and seasons. It is a most
magnificent dominical ship, loaded with the hundreds of thousands of different forms
of food and equipment needed for all animate beings, floating with the utmost
equilibrium in the ocean of space and circling the sun.
He then looks at the pages of the earth and sees that each page of each of its
chapters proclaims the Sustainer of the Earth in thousands of verses. Being unable to
read the whole of it, he looks at the page dealing with the creation and deployment of
animate beings in the spring, and observes the following:
The forms of the countless members of hundreds of thousands of species emerge,
in the utmost precision, from a simple material and are then nurtured in most merciful
fashion. Then, in miraculous manner, wings are given to some of the seeds; they take
to flight and are thus dispersed. They are most effectively distributed, most carefully
fed and nurtured. Countless tasty and delicious forms of food, in the most merciful and
tender fashion, are brought forth from dry clay, and from roots, seeds and drops of
liquid that differ little among each other. Every spring, a hundred thousand kinds of
food and equipment are loaded on it from an unseen treasury, as if onto a railway
waggon, and are despatched in utmost orderliness to animate beings. The sending to
infants of canned milk in those food packages, and pumps of sugared milk in the form
of their mothers’ affectionate breasts, is in particular such an instance of solicitousness,
mercy and wisdom that it immediately establishes itself as a most tender manifestation
of the mercy and generosity of the Merciful and Compassionate One.
In short: this living page of spring displays a hundred thousand examples and
samples of the Supreme Gathering, and is a tangible demonstration of this verse,

--- Sayfa 124 ---
136
So look to the signs of God’s mercy: how He gives life to the earth after its
death, for verily He it is Who gives life to the dead, and He has power over
all things.12
Moreover, this verse may be said to express in miraculous fashion the meanings of
the page that is spring. The traveller thus understood that the earth proclaims through
all its pages, in fashion proportionate to their size: “There is no god but He.”13
In expression of the meaning beheld by the traveller through the brief testimony of
one of the twenty aspects of a single page out of the more than twenty pages of the
globe, it was said in the Third Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Being, to Whose Necessary Existence in
Unity the earth with all that is in it and upon it testifies, through the testimony of
the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of subjugation, disposition,
nurturing, opening, distribution of seeds, protection, administration, the giving
of  life to  all  animate beings, compassion and mercy universal and general, a
truth vast and perfect, and to be observed.
Then that reflective traveller read each page of the cosmos, and as he did so his
faith, that key to felicity, strengthened; his gnosis, that key to spiritual progress,
increased; his belief in God, the source and foundation of all perfection, developed one
degree more; his joy and pleasure augmented and aroused his eagerness; and while
listening to the perfect and convincing lessons given by the sky, by space and the earth,
he cried out for more. Then he heard the rapturous invocation of God made by the
tumult of the seas and the great rivers, and listened to their sad yet pleasant sounds. In
numerous ways they were saying to him: “Look at us, read also our signs!” Looking,
our traveller saw the following:
The seas, constantly and vitally surging, merging and pouring forth with an
inclination to conquest inherent in their very nature, surrounded the earth, and
together with the earth, revolved, extremely swiftly, in a circle of twenty-five thousand
years in a single year. Yet the seas did not disperse, did not overflow or encroach on
the land contiguous to them. They moved and stood still, and were protected by the
command and power of a most powerful and magnificent being.
Then looking to the depths of the sea, the traveller saw that apart from the most
beautiful, well-adorned and symmetrical jewels, there were

12 Qur’an, 30:50.
13 A phrase repeated many times in the Qur’an.

--- Sayfa 125 ---
137
thousands of different kinds of animal, sustained and ordered, brought to life and
caused to die, in so disciplined a fashion, their provision coming from mere sand and
salt water, that it established irresistibly the existence of a Powerful and Glorious, a
Merciful and Beauteous Being administering and giving life to them.
The traveller then looks at the rivers and sees that the benefits inherent in them,
the functions they perform, and their continual replenishment, are inspired by such
wisdom and mercy as indisputably to prove that all rivers, springs, streams and great
waterways flow forth from the treasury of mercy of the Compassionate One, the Lord
of Glory and Generosity. They are preserved and dispensed, indeed, in so
extraordinary a fashion that it is said “Four rivers flow forth from Paradise.”14 That is,
they transcend by far apparent causes, and flow forth instead from the treasury of a
non-material Paradise, from the superabundance of an unseen and inexhaustible
source.
For example, the blessed Nile, that turns the sandy land of Egypt into a paradise,
flows from the Mountains of the Moon in the south without ever being exhausted, as if
it were a small sea. If the water that flowed down the river in six months were
gathered together in the form of a mountain and then frozen, it would be larger than
those mountains. But the place in the mountains where the water is lodged and stored
is less than a sixth of their mass. As for the water that replenishes the river, the rain
that enters the reservoir of the river is very sparse in that torrid region and is quickly
swallowed up by the thirsty soil; hence it is incapable of maintaining the equilibrium of
the river. A tradition has thus grown up that the blessed Nile springs, in miraculous
fashion, from an unseen Paradise. This tradition has profound meaning and expresses a
beautiful truth.
The traveller saw, then, a thousandth part of the truths and affirmations contained
in the oceans and rivers. The seas proclaim unanimously with a power proportionate to
their extent, “There is no god but He,” and produce as witnesses to their testimony all
the creatures that inhabit them. This, our traveller preceived.
Expressing and conveying the testimony of the seas and the rivers, we said, in the
Fourth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, to the necessity of Whose
Existence in Unity point all the seas and the rivers, together with all they
contain, by the testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth
of subjugation, preservation, storing up, and administration, vast and well-
ordered, and to be observed.

14 See, Muslim, Janna, 26. (The rivers, Sayhan, Jayhan, Euphrates, and Nile). [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 126 ---
138
Then the traveller is summoned, on his meditative journey, by the mountains and
the plains. “Read too our pages,” they say. Looking he sees that the universal function
and duty of mountains is of such grandeur and wisdom as to stupefy the intelligence.
The mountains emerge from the earth by the command of their Sustainer, thereby
palliating the turmoil, anger, and rancour that arise from disturbances within the earth.
As the mountains surge upward, the earth begins to breathe; it is delivered from
harmful tremors and upheavals, and its tranquillity as it pursues its duty of rotation is
no longer disturbed. In the same way that masts are planted in ships to protect them
from turbulence and preserve their balance, so too mountains are set up on the deck of
the ship that is the earth, as masts and stores, as is indicated by verses of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition such as these:
And the mountains as pegs,15
And We have cast down anchors,16
And the mountains He anchored them.17
Then, too, there are stored up and preserved in the mountains all kinds of springs,
waters, minerals and other materials needed by animate beings, in so wise, skilful,
generous and foreseeing a fashion that they prove that they are the storehouses and
warehouses and servants of One possessing infinite power, One possessing infinite
wisdom. Deducing from these two examples the other duties and instances of wisdom
—as great as mountains— of the mountains and plains, the traveller sees through the
general instances of wisdom in them and particularly in regard to the fashion in which
all manner of things are stored up in them providentially, the testimony they give and
the Divine unity they proclaim declaring “There is no god but He,” —a declaration as
powerful and firm as the mountains and vast and expansive as the plains— and he too
says, “I believe in God.”
In expression of this meaning, it was said in the Fifth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to the Necessity of Whose Existence point all the
mountains and plains together with what is in them and upon them, by the
testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of the storing up,
administration, dissemination of seed, preservation, and regulation, a truth
providential, dominical, vast, general, well-ordered, and perfect, and to be
observed.

15 Qur’an, 78:7.
16 Qur’an, 50:7.
17 Qur’an, 79:32.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
139
Then, while that traveller was travelling in his mind through the mountains and
plains, the gate to the arboreal and vegetable realm was opened before him. He was
summoned inside: “Come,” they said, “Inspect our realm and read our incriptions.”
Entering, he saw that a splendid and well-adorned assembly for the proclamation of
God’s unity and a circle for the mentioning of His Names and the offering of thanks to
Him, had been drawn up. He understood for the very appearance of all trees and plants
that their different species were proclaiming unanimously, “There is no god but He.”
For he perceived three great and general truths indicating and proving that all fruit-
giving trees and plants with the tongue of their symmetrical and eloquent leaves, the
phrases of their charming and loquacious flowers, the words of their well-ordered and
well-spoken fruits, were testifying to God’s glory and bearing witness that “There is
no god but He.”
The First:  In the same way that in each of the plants and trees a deliberate
bounty and generosity is to be seen in most obvious fashion, and a purposive liberality
and munificence, so too it is to be seen in the totality of the trees and plants, with the
brilliance of sunlight.
The Second: The wise and purposive distinction and differentiation, one that
cannot in any way be attributed to chance, the deliberate and merciful adornment and
giving of form — all this is to be seen as clearly as daylight in the infinite varieties and
species; they show themselves to be the works and embroideries of an All-Wise
Maker.
The Third: The opening and unfolding of all the separate members of the hundred
thousand species of that infinite realm, each in its own distinct fashion and shape, in
the utmost order, equilibrium and beauty, from well-defined, limited, simple and solid
seeds and grains, identical to each other or nearly so — their emerging from those
seeds in distinct and separate form, with utter equilibrium, vitality and wise purpose
without the least error or mistake, is a truth more brilliant than the sun. The witnesses
proving this truth are as numerous as the flowers, fruits and leaves that emerge in the
spring. So the traveller said, “Praise be to God for the blessing of belief.”
In expression of these truths and the testimony given to them, we said in the Sixth
Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to the Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity points the
consensus of all the species of trees and plants that are engaged in glorifying
God and speak with the eloquent and well-ordered words of their leaves, their
loquacious and comely flowers, their well-ordered and well-spoken fruits, by the
testimony of the

--- Sayfa 128 ---
140
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of bestowal, bounty, and
generosity, done in purposive mercy, and the truth of differentiation, adornment,
and decoration, done with will and wisdom. Definite, too, is the indication given
by the truth of the opening of all their symmetrical, adorned, distinct, variegated
and infinite forms, from seeds and grains that resemble and approximate each
other, that are finite and limited.
As this traveller through the cosmos proceeded on his meditative journey, with
increased eagerness and a bouquet of gnosis and faith, itself like a spring, gathered
from the garden of the spring, there opened before his truth-perceiving intellect, his
cognitive reason, the gate to the animal and bird realm. With hundreds of thousands of
different voices and various tongues, he was invited to enter. Entering, he saw that all
the animals and birds, in their different species, groups and nations, were proclaiming,
silently and aloud, “There is no god but He,” and had thus turned the face of the earth
into a vast place of invocation, an expansive assembly for the proclamation of God’s
glory. He saw each of them to be like an ode dedicated to God, a word proclaiming
His glory, a letter indicating His mercy, each of them describing the Maker and
offering Him thanks and encomium. It was as if the senses, powers, members and
instruments of those animals and birds were orderly and balanced words, or perfect
and disciplined expressions. He observed three great and comprehensive truths
indicating, in decisive form, their offering of thanks to the Creator and Provider and
their testimony to His unity.
The First: Their being brought into existence with wisdom and purpose and their
creation full of art in a fashion that in no way can be attributed to chance, to blind
force or inanimate nature; their being created and composed in purposive and
knowledgeable manner; their animation and being given life in a way that displays in
twenty aspects the manifestation of knowledge, wisdom, and will — all of this is a
truth that bears witness to the Necessary Existence of the Eternally Living and Self-
Subsistent, His seven attributes and unity, a witness repeated to the number of all
animate beings.
The Second:  There appears from the distinction made among those infinite
beings and from their adornment and decoration in a fashion by which their features
are different, their shapes adorned, their proportions measured and symmetrical, and
their forms well-ordered — there appears from this a truth so vast and powerful that
none other than the One Powerful over all things, the One Knowledgeable of all
things, could lay claim to it, this comprehensive act which displays in every respect
thou

--- Sayfa 129 ---
141
sands of wonders and instances of wisdom; it is impossible and precluded that anything
other than such a one could lay claim to it.
The Third: The emergence and unfolding of those countless creatures, in their
hundreds of thousands of different shapes and forms, each of which is a miracle of
wisdom, their emergence from eggs and drops of water called sperm that are identical
with each other or closely resemble each other, and are limited and finite in number, all
this in the most orderly, symmetrical and unfailing fashion, is so brilliant a truth as to
be illumined with proofs and evidences as numerous as the animals themselves.
By the consensus of these three truths, all the species of animals are engaged
together in testifying that “There is no god but He.” It is as if the whole earth, like a
great man, were saying “There is no god but He” in a manner befitting its vastness,
and conveying its testimony to the dwellers of the heaven. The traveller saw this and
understood it perfectly. In expression of these truths, we said in the Seventh Degree of
the First Station:
There is no god but God, to Whose Necessary Existence in Unity points the
consensus of all animals and birds, that praise God and bear witness to Him with
the words of their senses, their faculties and powers, words well-balanced,
ordered and eloquent; with the words of their limbs and members, words perfect
and persuasive; by the testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the
truth of bringing into being, making, and creating, according to will, the truth of
distinction and decoration according to purpose, and the truth of proportioning
and forming according to wisdom. Definite too is the indication given by the
truth of the opening of all of their orderly, distinct, variegated and infinite forms,
out of identical or similar eggs and drops of sperm, that are finite and limited.
That meditative voyager, in order to advance farther in the infinite degrees and
countless luminous stages of knowledge of God, then wished to enter the world of
men, the realm of humanity. Humanity, headed by the prophets, invited him, and he
accepted the invitation. Looking first at the stopping-place of the past, he saw that all
of the prophets (Peace and blessings be upon him), the most luminous and perfect of
human kind, were reciting in chorus, “No god but He,” and making remembrance of
God. With the power of their brilliant, well-attested and innumerable miracles, they
were proclaiming God’s unity, and in order to advance man from the animal state to
angelic degree, they were instructing men and summoning them to belief in God.
Kneeling down in that school of light, he too paid heed to the lesson.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
142
He saw that in the hand of each of those teachers, the most exalted and renowned
of all celebrated human beings, there were numerous miracles, bestowed on them by
the Creator of All Being as a sign confirming their mission. Further, a large group of
men, a whole community, had confirmed their claims and come to belief at their hands;
a truth assented to and confirmed by these hundreds of thousands of serious and
veracious individuals, unanimously and in full agreement, was bound to be firm and
definitive. He understood, too, that the people of misguidance, in denying a truth
attested and affirmed by so many veracious witnesses, were committing a most
grievous error, indeed crime, and were therefore deserving of a most grievous
punishment. He recognized, by contrast, those who assented to the truth and believed
in it, as being the most true and righteous, and a further degree of the sanctity of belief
became apparent to him.
Yes, the infinite miracles bestowed by God on the prophets (Peace be upon them)
each one being like a confirmation of their mission; the heavenly blows dealt to their
opponents, each being like a proof of their truthfulness; their individual perfections,
each one being like an indication of their righteousness; their veracious teachings; the
strength of their faith, a witness to their honesty; their supreme seriousness and
readiness to self-sacrifice; the sacred books and pages held by their hands; their
countless pupils who through following their paths attain truth, perfection and light,
thus proving again the truthfulness of the teachings; the unanimous agreement of the
prophets  —those most earnest warners— and their followers in all positive matters;
their concord, mutual support and affinity — all of this constitutes so powerful a proof
that no power on earth can confront it, and no doubt or hesitation can survive it.
Our traveller understood further that inclusion of belief in all the prophets (Peace
be upon them) among the pillars of belief, represents another great source of strength.
Thus he derived great benefit of faith from their lessons, in expression of which we
said in the Eighth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to the Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity points the
unanimity of all the prophets, through the power of their luminous miracles, that
both affirm and are affirmed.
That questing traveller, having derived a lofty taste of truth from the power of
belief, found himself invited, while coming from the assembly of the prophets (Peace
be upon them) to the classroom of those profound, original, exacting scholars who
affirm the claims of the prophets (Peace be upon them) with the most decisive and
powerful proofs and who are known as the purified and most veracious ones.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
143
Entering their classroom, he saw thousands of geniuses and hundreds of
thousands of exact and exalted scholars proving all the affirmative matters connected
with faith, headed by the necessity of God’s existence and His unity, with such
profound demonstrations as to leave not the least room for doubt. Indeed, the fact that
they are agreed in the principles and pillars of belief, despite their differences in
capacity and outlook, and that each of them relies on a firm and certitudinous proof, is
in itself such evidence that it can be doubted only if it is possible for a similar number
of intelligent and perspicuous men to arrive at a single result. Otherwise the only way
for the denier to oppose them is to display his ignorance —his utter ignorance— and
his obstinacy with respect to negative matters that admit neither of denial nor
affirmation. He will in effect be closing his eyes but the one who closes his eyes is able
to turn day into night only for himself.
The traveller learned that the lights emitted in this vast and magnificent classroom
by these respected and profound scholars had been illumining half of the globe for
more than a thousand years. He found in it moral and spiritual force that the combined
strength of all the people of denial would be unable to shake or destroy. In brief
allusion to the lesson learned by the traveller in this classroom we said in the Ninth
Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to Whose Necessary Existence in Unity points the
agreement of all of the purified scholars, with the power of their resplendent,
certain and unanimous proofs.
Our contemplative traveller came forth from the classroom, ardently desiring to
see the lights that are to be observed in the continuous strengthening and development
of faith, and in advancing from the degree of the knowledge of certainty to that of the
vision of certainty. He then found himself summoned by thousands or millions of
spiritual guides who were striving toward the truth and attaining the vision of certainty
in the shade of the highway of Muhammad (PBUH) and the ascension of Muhammad
(PBUH). This they were doing in a meeting-place, a hospice, a place of remembrance
and preceptorship, that was abundantly luminous and vast as a plain, being formed
from the merging of countless small hospices and convents. Upon entering, he found
that those spiritual guides —people of unveiling and wondrous deeds— were
unanimously proclaiming, “No god but He,” on the basis of their witnessing and
unveiling of the Unseen and the wondrous deeds they had been enabled to perform;
they were proclaiming the necessary existence and unity of God. The traveller
observed how manifest and clear must be a truth to which unanimously subscribe these
sacred geniuses and luminous

--- Sayfa 132 ---
144
gnostics. For, like the sun is known through the seven colours in its light, the saints’
luminous colours, their light-filled hues, their true paths and right ways and veracious
courses are manifested from the light of the Pre-Eternal Sun through seventy colours,
indeed, through colours to the number of the Divine Names, and are all different. He
saw that the unanimity of the prophets and the agreement of the purified scholars and
accord of the saints forms a supreme consensus, more brilliant than the daylight that
demonstrates the existence of the sun.
In brief allusion to the benefit derived by our traveller from the Sufi hospice, we
said in the Tenth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to Whose Necessary Existence in Unity points the
unanimity of the saints in their manifest, well-affirmed and attested divinations
of the truth and wondrous deeds.
Now our traveller through the world, aware that the most important and greatest
of all human perfections, indeed the very source and origin of all such perfections, is
the love of God that arises from belief in God and the knowledge of God, wished with
all of his powers, outer and inner, to advance still farther in the strengthening of his
faith and the development of his knowledge. He therefore raised his head and gazing at
the heavens said to himself:
“The most precious thing in the universe is life; all things are made subordinate to
life. The most precious of all living beings is the animate, and the most precious of the
animate is the conscious. Each century and each year, the globe is engaged in
emptying and refilling itself, in order to augment this most precious substance. It
follows, then, without doubt, that the magnificent and ornate heavens must have
appropriate people and inhabitants, possessing life, spirit and consciousness, for events
relating to seeing and speaking with the angels —such as the appearance of Gabriel
(Peace be upon him) in the presence of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him)
and in the view of the Companions— have been transmitted and related from the most
ancient times. Would, then, that I could converse with the inhabitants of the heavens,
and learn their thoughts on this matter. For their words concerning the Creator of the
cosmos are the most important.”
As he was thus thinking to himself, he suddenly heard a heavenly voice: “If you
wish to meet us and hearken to our lesson, then know that before all others we have
believed in the articles of faith brought by means of us to the prophets, headed by the
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), who brought the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
145
“Then too all of the pure spirits from among us that have appeared before men
have, unanimously and without exception, born witness to the necessary existence, the
unity, and the sacred attributes of the Creator of this cosmos, and proclaimed this with
one accord. The affinity and mutual correspondence of these countless proclamations
is a guide for you as bright as the sun.” Thus the traveller’s light of faith shone, and
rose from the earth to the heavens.
In brief allusion to the lesson learned by the traveller from the angels,  we said in
the Eleventh Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to Whose Necessary Existence in Unity points the
unanimity of the angels that appear to human gaze, and who speak to the elect
among men, with their mutually corresponding and conforming messages.
Then, that ardent and inquisitive traveller, having learned from the tongues of
various realms of creation in the Manifest Realm in their material and corporeal
aspects, and from the utterance of their modes of being, desired to study and journey
through the World of the Unseen and the Intermediate Realm, and thus to investigate
reality. There opened to him the gate of upright and luminous intellects, of sound and
illumined hearts, that are like the seed of man, who is the fruit of the universe, and
despite their slight girth can expand virtually to embrace the whole of the cosmos.
He looked and saw a series of human isthmuses linking the realm of the Unseen
with that of the Manifest, and the contacts between those two realms and the
interchanges between them insofar as they affect man, taking place at those points.
Addressing his intellect and his heart he said:
“Come, the path leading to truth from these counterparts of yours is shorter. We
should benefit by studying their qualities, natures and colours concerning faith that we
find here, not by listening to the lessons given by the tongues of disposition as was
previously the case.”
Beginning his study, he saw that the belief and firm conviction concerning the
Divine unity that all luminous intellects possessed, despite their varying capacities and
differing, even opposing, methods and outlooks, was the same, and that their steadfast
and confident certainty and assurance was one. They had, therefore, to be relying on a
single, unchanging truth; their roots were sunk in a profound truth and could not be
plucked out. Their unanimity concerning faith, the necessary existence and unity of
God, was an unbreakable and luminous chain, a brightly lit window opening onto the
world of the truth.
He saw also that the unanimous, assured and sublime unveilings and

--- Sayfa 134 ---
146
witnessings of the pillars of belief enjoyed by all those sound and luminous intellects,
whose methods were various and outlooks divergent, corresponded to and agreed
with each other on the matter of the Divine unity. All those luminous hearts, turned
and joined to the truth and manifesting it, each a small throne of dominical knowledge,
a comprehensive mirror of God’s Eternal Besoughtedness, were like so many windows
opened onto the Sun of the Truth. Taken together, they were like a supreme mirror,
like an ocean reflecting the sun. Their agreement and unanimity concerning the
necessary existence and unity of God was an unfailing and reliable most perfect guide,
most elevated preceptor. For it is in no way possible or conceivable that a supposition
other than the truth, an untrue thought, a false attribute, should so consistently and
decisively be able to deceive simultaneously so many sharp eyes, or to induce illusion
in them. Not even the foolish Sophists, who deny the cosmos, would agree with the
corrupt and dissipated intellect that held such a thing possible. All of this our traveller
understood, and he said, together with his own intellect and heart, “I have believed in
God.”
In brief allusion to the benefit derived from upright intellects and luminous hearts
by our traveller, for knowledge of belief, we said in the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Degrees of the First Station:
There is no god but God, to Whose Necessary Existence in Unity points the
consensus of all upright intellects, illumined with congruent beliefs and
corresponding convictions and certainties, despite differences in capacity and
outlook. There also points to His Necessary Existence in Unity the agreement of
all sound, luminous hearts, with their mutually corresponding unveilings and
their congruent witnessings, despite differences in method and manner.
Then that traveller looking closely at the World of the Unseen, and voyaging in it
with his intellect and his heart, knocked inquisitively on the door of that world,
thinking to himself, “What does this world have to say?” The following occurred to
him: it is to be clearly understood that behind the veil of the Unseen is one who wants
to make himself known through all these numerous finely adorned artefacts full of art
in this corporeal Manifest World, and to make himself loved through these infinite
sweet and decorated bounties, and to make known his hidden perfections through
these innumerable miraculous and skilful works of art, and who does this by act rather
than speech and by making himself known by the tongue of disposition. Since this is
so, of a certainty he will speak and make himself known and loved through speech and
utterance just as he does through deed and state. In which case, from his
manifestations we must know him in respect to the World of the Unseen. Whereupon
he

--- Sayfa 135 ---
147
entered that world with his heart and saw the following with the eye of his intellect:
The truth of revelations prevails at all instants over all parts of the World of the
Unseen, with a most powerful manifestation. There comes with the truths of revelation
and inspiration proceeding from the One All-Knowing of the Unseen, a testimony to
His existence and unity far stronger than testimony of the universe and created beings.
He does not leave Himself, His existence and His unity, only to the testimony of His
creatures. Rather, He speaks with a pre-eternal Speech consonant with His own being.
The Speech of the One Who is all-present and all-seeing everywhere with His
Knowledge and Power is also endless, and just as the meaning of His Speech makes
Him known, so does His discourse make Himself known together with His attributes.
The traveller recognized that the truth, reality, and existence of revelation has
been made plain to the point of being self-evident by the consensus of one hundred
thousand prophets (Peace be upon them), by the agreement among their proclamations
concerning the manifestion of Divine revelation; by the evidences and miracles
contained in the sacred books and heavenly pages, which are the guides and exemplars
of the overwhelming majority of humanity, confirmed and assented to by them, and are
the visible fruits of revelation. He understood further that the truth of revelation
proclaims five sacred truths.
The First: To speak in accordance with men’s intellects and understandings,
known as ‘Divine condescension to the minds of men,’ is a form of Divine descent. It
is a requirement of God’s dominicality that He endows all of his conscious creatures
with speech, understands their speech, and then participates in it with His own speech.
The Second: The One Who, in order to make Himself known, fills the cosmos
with His miraculous creations and endows them with tongues speaking of His
perfections, will necessarily make Himself known with His own words also.
The Third: It is a function of His being Creator to respond in words to the
supplications and offerings of thanks that are made by the most select, the most needy,
the most delicate and the most ardent among His beings — true men.
The Fourth: The attribute of Speech, an essential concomitant and luminous
manifestation of both Knowledge and Life, will necessarily be found in a
comprehensive and eternal form in the being Whose Knowledge is comprehensive and
Whose Life is eternal.
The Fifth:  It is a consequence of Divinity that the Being Who endows

--- Sayfa 136 ---
148
men with impotence and desire, poverty and need, anxiety for the future, love and
worship, should communicate His own existence, by way of His speech, to His most
loved and lovable, His most anxious and needy creatures, who are most desirous of
finding their Lord and Master.
The evidences for the existence in unity of the Necessary Existent offered in
unanimity by universal and heavenly revelations, which contain the truths of Divine
descent, dominical self-proclamation, compassionate response, Divine conversation,
and eternal self-communication, constitute a proof more powerful than the testimony
for the existence of the sun brought by the rays of sunlight.
Our traveller understood this then looked in the direction of inspiration and saw
that veracious inspiration indeed resembles revelation in some respects and is a mode
of dominical speech. There are, however, two differences:
THE FIRST: Revelation, which is much higher than inspiration, generally comes
by the medium of the angels, whereas inspiration generally comes directly.
So too a king has two modes of speech and command. The first consists of his
sending to a governor a lieutenant equipped with all the pomp of monarchy and the
splendour of sovereignty. Sometimes, in order to demonstrate the splendour of his
sovereignty and the importance of his command, he may meet with the intermediary,
and then the decree will be issued.
The second consists of his speaking privately in his own person, not with the title
of monarch or in the name of kingship, concerning some private matter, some petty
affair, using for this purpose a trusted servant, some ordinary subject, or his private
telephone.
In the same way the Pre-Eternal Monarch may either, in the name of the Sustainer
of All the Worlds, and with the title of Creator of the Universe, speak with revelation
or the comprehensive inspiration that performs the function of revelation, or He may
speak in a different and private fashion, as the Sustainer and Creator of all animate
beings, from behind the veil, in a way suited to the recipient.
THE SECOND DIFFERENCE: Revelation is without shadow, pure, and
reserved for the elect. Inspiration, by contrast, has shadow, colours intermingle with it,
and it is general. There are numerous different kinds of inspiration, such as the
inspiration of angels, the inspiration of men, and the inspiration of animals; inspiration
thus forms a field for the multiplication of God’s words, that are as numeous as the
drops in the ocean. Our traveller understood that this matter is, indeed, a kind of
commentary on

--- Sayfa 137 ---
149
the verse,
Were the sea to become ink for the words of my Sustainer, verily the sea
would be exhausted before the words of my Sustainer.18
Then he looked at the nature, the wisdom, and the testimony of inspiration and
saw that its nature, wisdom and result were composed of four lights.
The first: it is the result of God’s Lovingness and Mercifulness that He makes
himself loved through word, presence and discourse, in the same way that He makes
Himself loved to His creatures through His deeds.
The second: it is a requirement of His Compassionateness that just as He answers
His servants’ prayers in deed, He should also answer them in word, from behind veils.
The third: it is a concomitant of dominicality that just as He responds in deed to
the cries for help, supplications, and pleadings of those of His creatures who are
afflicted with grievous misfortunes and hardships, so too He should hasten to their
help with words of inspiration, which are like a form of speech.
The fourth: God makes His existence, presence and protection perceptible in
deed to His most weak and indigent, His most poor and needy, conscious creatures,
that stand in great need of finding their Master, Protector, Guardian, and Disposer. It
is a necessary and essential consequence of His Divine solicitousness and His
dominical compassion that He should also communicate His presence and existence by
speech, from behind the veil of veracious inspiration —a mode of dominical
discourse— to individuals, in a manner peculiar to them and their capacities, through
the telephone of their hearts.
He then looked to the testimony of inspiration and saw that if the sun, for
example, had consciousness and life, and if the seven colours of sunlight were the
seven attributes, in that respect it would have a form of speech through the rays and
manifestations found in its light. And in this situation both its similitudes and
reflections would be present in all transparent objects, and it would speak with all
mirrors and shining objects and fragments of glass and bubbles and droplets of water,
indeed with all transparent particles, in accordance with the capacity of each; it would
respond to the needs of each, and all these would testify to the sun’s existence; and no
task would form an obstacle to any other task, and no speaking obstruct any other
speaking. This is self-evident.

18 Qur’an,18:109.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
150
In the same way, the Speech of the Glorious Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity, the Beauteous and Exalted Creator of All Beings, Who may be described as
the Pre-Eternal Sun, manifests itself to all things, in general and comprehensive
fashion, in a manner appropriate to their capacity, as do also His Knowledge and
Power. No request interferes with another, no task prevents the fulfilment of another,
and no address becomes confused with another. All of this our traveller understood as
self-evident. He knew that all of those manifestations, those discourses, those
inspirations, separately and together, evidenced and bore witness unanimously to the
presence, the necessary existence, the unity and the oneness of that Pre-Eternal Sun
with a knowlege of certainty that approached a vision of certainty.
In brief allusion to the lesson in knowledge of God from the World of the Unseen
gained by our inquisitive traveller, we said in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Degrees of
the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the One, the Single, to Whose
Necessary Existence in Unity points the consensus of all true revelations,
containing Divine descent, glorious discourse, dominical self-revelation,
compassionate response to the invocations of men, and eternal indications of His
existence to his creatures. There points also to His Necessary Existence in Unity
the agreement of all veracious inspirations, containing expressions of God’s
love, compassionate responses to the prayers of God’s creatures, dominical
responses to the appeals of His servants for aid, and glorious intimations of His
existence to His creatures.
Then that traveller through the world addressed his own intellect saying: “Since I
am seeking my Master and Creator by means of the creatures of the cosmos, I ought
before all else to visit the most celebrated of all these creatures, the greatest and most
accomplished commander among them, according to the testimony even of his
enemies, the most renowned ruler, the most exalted in speech and the most brilliant an
intellect, who has illuminated fourteen centuries with his excellence and with his
Qur’an, Muhammad the Arabian Prophet (May God’s peace and blessings be upon
him).” In order thus to visit him and seek from him the answer to his quest, he entered
the blessed age of the Prophet in his mind, and saw that age to be one of true felicity,
thanks to that being. For through the light he had brought, he had turned the most
primitive and illiterate of peoples into the masters and teachers of the world.
He said too to his own intellect, “Before asking him concerning our Creator, we
should first learn that value of this extraordinary being, the

--- Sayfa 139 ---
151
veracity of his words and the truthfulness of his warnings.” Thus he began
investigating, and of the numerous conclusive proofs that he found we will briefly
indicate here only nine of the most general ones.
THE FIRST: All excellent qualities and characteristics were to be found in that
extraordinary being, according to the testimony even of his enemies. Hundreds of
miracles were made manifest at his hands, according to explicit Qur’anic verses or
traditions enjoying the status of tawatur.19 Examples of these miracles are his splitting
of the moon, And the moon split,20 with a single indication of his finger; his casting of
a handful of dust into the eyes of his enemies, causing them to flee, It was not your act
when you threw, but God’s,21 and his giving his thirsting army to drink from the water
that flowed forth from his five fingers like the Spring of Kawthar. Since some of those
miracles, numbering more than three hundred, have been set forth with decisive proofs
in the remarkable and wondrous work known as The Miracles of Muhammad (The
Nineteenth Letter), we leave discussion of the miracles to that work, and permit the
traveller to continue speaking:
“A being who in addition to noble characteristics and perfections has all these
luminous miracles to demonstrate, must certainly be the most truthful in speech of all
men. It is inconceivable that he would stoop to trickery, lies and error, the deeds of the
vile.”
THE SECOND: He holds in his hand a decree from the lord of the universe, a
decree accepted and affirmed in each century by more than three hundred million
people. This decree, the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, is wondrous in seven different
ways. The fact that the Qur’an has forty different aspects of miraculousness and that it
is the word of the Creator of all beings has been set forth in detail with strong proofs
in the Twenty-Fifth Word, The Miraculousness of the Qur’an, a celebrated treatise
that is like the sun of the Risale-i Nur. We therefore leave such matters to that work
and listen to the traveller as he says,“There can never be any possibility of lying on the
part of the being who is the conveyor and proclaimer of this decree, for that would be
a violation of the decree and treachery toward the One Who issued it.”
THE THIRD: Such a Sacred Law, an Islam, a code of worship, a cause, a
summons, and a faith did that being bring forth that the like of them does not exist, nor
could it exist. Nor does a more perfect form of them

19 Tawatur is the kind of report transmitted by numerous authorities, about which there is no
room for doubt. [Tr.]
20 Qur’an, 54:1.
21 Qur’an, 8:17.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
152
exist, nor could it exist. For the Law appearing with that unlettered being has no rival
in its administration of one fifth of humanity for fourteen centuries, in a just and
precise manner through its numerous injuctions. Moreover the Islam that emerged
from the deeds, sayings, and inward states of that unlettered being has no peer, nor can
it have, for in each century it has been for three hundred million men a guide and a
refuge, the teacher and educator of their intellects and the illuminator and purifier of
their hearts, the cause for the refinement and training of their souls, and the source of
progress and advancement of their spirits.
The Prophet is similarly unparalleled in the way in which he was the foremost in
practising all the forms of worship found in his religion, and the first in piety and the
fear of God; in his observing the duties of worship fully and with attention to their
profoundest dimensions, even while engaged in constant struggle and activity; in his
practice of worship combining in perfect fashion the beginning and end of worship and
servitude to God without imitation of anyone.
With the Jawshan al-Kabir, from among his thousands of supplicatory prayers
and invocations, he describes his Sustainer with such a degree of gnosis that all the
gnostics and saints who have come after him have been unable, with their joint efforts,
to attain a similar degree of gnosis and accurate description. This shows that in prayer
too he is without peer. Whoever looks at the section at the beginning of the Treatise
On Supplicatory Prayer which sets forth some part of the meaning of one of the
ninety-nine sections of the Jawshan al-Kabir will say that the Jawshan too has no
peer.
In his conveying of the message and his summoning men to the truth, he displayed
such steadfastness, firmness and courage that although great states and religions, and
even his own people, tribe and uncle opposed him in the most hostile fashion, he
exhibited not the slightest trace of hesitation anxiety or fear. The fact that he
successfully challenged the whole world and made Islam the master of the world
likewise proves that there is not and cannot be anyone like him in his conveying of the
message and summons.
In his faith, he had so extraordinary a strength, so marvellous a certainty, so
miraculous a breadth, and so exalted a conviction, illumining the whole world, that
none of the ideas and beliefs then dominating the world, and none of the philosophies
of the sages and teachings of the religious leaders, was able, despite extreme hostility
and denial, to induce in his certainty, conviction, trust and assurance, the slightest
doubt, hesitation, weakness or anxiety. Moreover, the saintly of all ages, headed by

--- Sayfa 141 ---
153
the Companions, the foremost in the degrees of belief, have all  drawn on his fountain
of belief and regarded him as representing the highest degree of faith. This proves that
his faith too is matchless. Our traveller therefore concluded, and affirmed with his
intellect, that lying and duplicity have no place in the one who has brought such a
unique sacred law, such an unparalleled Islam, such a wondrous devotion to worship,
such an extra-ordinary excellence in supplicatory prayer, such a universally acclaimed
summons to the truth and such a miraculous faith.
THE FOURTH: In the same way that the consensus of the prophets is a strong
proof for the existence and unity of God, so too it is a firm testimony to the
truthfulness and messengerhood of this being. For all the sacred attributes, miracles
and functions that indicate the truthfulness and messengerhood of the prophets (Peace
be upon them) existed in full measure in that being according to the testimony of
history. The prophets have verbally predicted the coming of that being and given good
tidings thereof in the Torah, the Gospels, the Psalms, and the pages; more than twenty
of the most conclusive examples of these glad tidings, drawn from the scriptures, have
been set forth and proven in the Nineteenth Letter. Similarly, through all the deeds and
miracles associated with their prophethood they have affirmed and, as it were, put
their signature to the mission of that being which is the foremost and most perfect in
the tasks and functions of prophethood. Just as through verbal consensus they indicate
the Divine unity, through the unanimity of their deeds they bear witness to the
truthfulness of that being. This too was understood by our traveller.
THE FIFTH: Similarly, the thousands of saints who have attained truth, reality,
perfection, wondrous deeds, unveiling and witnessing through the instruction of this
being and following him, bear unanimous witness not only to the Divine unity but also
to the truthfulness and messengerhood of this being. Again, the fact that they witness,
through the light of sainthood, some of the truths he proclaimed concerning the World
of the Unseen, and that they believe in and affirm all of those truths through the light
of belief, either with knowledge of certainty, or with the vision of certainty, or with
absolute certainty. He saw that this too demonstates like the sun the degree of
truthfulness and rectitude of that great being, their master.
THE SIXTH: The millions of purified, sincere, and punctilious scholars and
faithful sages, who have reached the highest station of learning through the teaching
and instruction contained in the sacred truths brought by that being, despite his
unlettered nature, the exalted sciences he invented and Divine knowledge he
discovered — they not only prove

--- Sayfa 142 ---
154
and affirm, unanimously and with the strongest proofs, the Divine unity which is the
foundation of his mission, but also bear unanimous witness to the truthfulness of this
supreme teacher and great master, and to the veracity of his words. This is a proof as
clear as daylight. The Risale-i Nur too with its one hundred parts is but a single proof
of his truthfulness.
THE SEVENTH: The Family and Companions of the Prophet —who with their
insight, knowledge, and spiritual accomplishment are the most renowned, the most
respected, the most celebrated, the most pious and the most keensighted of men after
the prophets— examined and scrutinized, with the utmost attention, seriousness and
exactitude, all the states, thoughts and conditions of this being, whether hidden or
open. They came to the unanimous conclusion that he was the most truthful, exalted,
and honest being in the world, and this, their unshakeable affirmation and firm belief, is
a proof like the daylight attesting the reality of the sun.
THE EIGHTH: The cosmos indicates its Maker, Inscriber, and Designer, Who
creates, administers, and arranges it, and through determining its measure and form
and regulating it, has disposal over it as though it was a palace, a book, an exhibition,
a spectacle. And so too it indicates that it requires and necessitates an elevated herald,
a truthful unveiler, a learned master, and a truthful teacher who will know and make
known the Divine purposes in the universe’s creation, teach the dominical instances of
wisdom in its changes and transformations, give instruction in the results of its dutiful
motions, proclaim its essential value and the perfections of the beings within it, and
express the meanings of that mighty book; it indicates that he is certain to exist. Thus,
the traveller knew that it testified to the truthfulness of this being, who performed
these functions better than anyone, and to his being a most elevated and loyal official
of the universe’s Creator.
THE NINTH: There is behind the veil One Who wishes to demonstrate with
these ingenious and wise artefacts the perfection of His talent and art; to make Himself
known and loved by means of these countless adorned and decorated creations; to
evoke praise and thanks through the unnumbered pleasurable and valuable bounties
that he bestows; to cause men to worship Him with gratitude and appreciation in the
face of His dominicality, through His solicitous and protective sustenance of life, and
His provision of nurture and bounty in such manner as to satisfy the most delicate of
tastes and appetites; to manifest His Divinity through the change of seasons, the
alternation of night and day, and through all His magnificent and majestic deeds, all
His awe-inspiring and wise acts and creativity, and thereby to cause men to believe in
his Divinity, in submission, humility and obedience; and to demonstrate His justice and
truthful

--- Sayfa 143 ---
155
ness by at all times protecting virtue and the virtuous and destroying evil and the evil,
by annihilating with blows from heaven the oppressor and the liar. There will of a
certainty be at the side of this Unseen Being His most beloved creature and most
devoted bondsman, who, serving the purposes that have just been mentioned,
discovers and unravels the talisman and riddle of the creation of the universe, who acts
always in the name of that Creator, who seeks aid and success from Him, and who
receives them from Him — Muhammad of Quraysh (Peace and blessings be upon
him!)
The traveller further said, addressing his own intellect: “Since these nine truths
bear witness to the truthfulness of this being, he must be the source of glory of
mankind and the source of honour for the world. If we therefore call him the Pride of
the World and Glory of the Sons of Adam, it will be fitting. The fact that the awesome
sovereignty of that decree of the Compassionate One, the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition that he holds in his hand, has conquered half the world, together with his
individual perfections and exalted virtues, shows that he is the most important
personage in the world. The most important word concerning our Creator is that
which he utters.”
Now see: the foundation of the summons of this extraordinary being and the aim
of all his life, based on the strength furnished by his hundreds of decisive and evident
and manifest miracles, and the thousands of exalted, fundamental truths contained in
his religion, was to prove and bear witness to the existence of the Necessary Existent,
His Unity, attributes and Names, to affirm, proclaim and announce Him. He is
therefore like a sun in the cosmos, the most brilliant proof of our Creator, this being
whom we call the Beloved of God. There are three forms of great and infallible
consensus each of which affirms, confirms, and puts its signature to the witness he
bears.
The First: the unanimous affirmation made by that luminous assembly known and
celebrated throughout the world as the Family of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be
upon him) including thousands of poles and supreme saints of penetrating gaze and
ability to perceive the Unseen, such as Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), who
said, “Were the veil to be lifted, my certainty would not increase,” and ‘Abd al-Qadir
al-Gilani, the Ghawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), who saw the Supreme
Throne and the awesome form of Israfil while yet on the earth.
The Second: the confirmation made with a strong faith that permitted men to
sacrifice their lives and their property, their fathers and tribes, by the renowned
assembly known as the Companions, who found themselves among a primitive people
and in an unlettered environment, devoid

--- Sayfa 144 ---
156
of all social life and political thought, without any scripture and lost in the darkness of
a period between prophets; and who in a very brief time came to be the masters,
guides, and just rulers of the most civilized and politically and socially advanced
peoples and states, and to rule the world from east to west in universally approved
fashion.
The Third: the confirmation provided with unanimous and certain knowledge by
that lofty group of punctilious and profound scholars of whom in each age thousands
spring forth, who advance in wondrous fashion in every science and work in different
fields.
Thus, the testimony brought by this being to the Divine unity is not particular and
individual, but general and universal and unshakeable. If all the demons that exist were
to unite, they could not challenge it. Such was the conclusion reached by the traveller.
In reference to the lesson learned in the School of Light by that traveller from the
world, that wayfarer in life, when he visited in his mind the blessed age of the Prophet,
we said at the end of the Sixteenth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the One, the Unique, the
Necessity of Whose Existence in Unity is indicated by the Pride of the World and
the Glory of the Sons of Adam, through the majesty of the sovereignty of his
Qur’an, the splendour of the expanse of his religion, the multiplicity of his
perfections, and the exaltedness of his characterisitics, as confirmed even by the
testimony of his enemies. He bears witness and brings proof through the strength
of his hundreds of manifest and evident miracles, that both testify to truth and
are themselves the object of true testimony; and through the strength of the
thousands of luminous and conclusive truths contained in his religion, according
to the consensus of all the possessors of light, the agreement of his illumined
Companions, and the unanimity of the scholars of his community, the possessors
of proofs and luminous insight.
The tireless and insatiable traveller, who knew the aim of life in this world and the
essence of life to be faith, addressed his own heart and said: “Let us examine the book
known as the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, which is said to be the word and
utterance of the Being Whom we are seeking, the most famous, the most brilliant and
wisest book in the world, that issues a challenge in every age to whoever refuses to
submit to it. Let us see what it says. But first, we must establish that this book is from
our Creator,” and he began to search.
Since the traveller lived in the present age, he looked first at the Risale-i Nur,
flashes from the miraculousness of the Qur’an; he saw its

--- Sayfa 145 ---
157
one hundred and thirty parts to consist of luminous points drawn from that Book of
Discernment, or well-founded explanations of its contents. Even though the Risale-i
Nur is valiantly struggling to diffuse the truths of the Qur’an in all directions, in this
obstinate and atheistic age, no one can defeat it, which proves that its master, its
source, its authority and its sun, is the Qur’an, heavenly not human speech. Among the
hundreds of proofs in the different parts of the Risale-i Nur, the single proof contained
in the Twenty-Fifth Word and the end of the Nineteenth Letter, establishes forty
aspects of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in such a way that whoever sees it, far from
uttering any criticism or objection, admires its arguments, and utters appreciative
praise. The traveller left it to the Risale-i Nur to prove that the Qur’an is miraculous
and the true Word of God, turning only to a brief indication of a few points showing
its greatness.
F i r s t  P o i n t : Just as the Qur’an, with all its miracles and truths indicating its
veracity is a miracle of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) so too,
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) with all his miracles, proofs of
prophethood and perfections of knowledge, is a miracle of the Qur’an and a decisive
proof of the Qur’an’s being the Word of God.
S e c o n d  P o i n t : The Qur’an, in this world, brought about in so luminous,
felicitous and truthful a fashion, a revolution in the social life of man, as well as in the
souls, hearts, spirits, and intellects of men, in their individual, social, and political lives,
and having caused this revolution perpetuated it in such a fashion, that for fourteen
centuries at every moment its six thousand, six hundred and sixty-six verses have been
read by the tongues of more than a hundred million men, training them, refining their
souls and purifying their hearts. To spirits, it has been a means of development and
advancement; to intellects, an orientation and light; to life, it has been life itself and
felicity. Such a book is of a certainty unparalleled; it is a wonder, a marvel, and a
miracle.
T h i r d  P o i n t : The Qur’an, from that age down to the present, has
demonstrated such eloquence that it caused the value attached to the odes known as
“Seven Hanging Poems” that were written in gold on the walls of the Ka‘ba to
descend to such a point that the daughter of Labid, when taking down her father’s
poem from the Ka‘ba, said, “Compared with the verses of the Qur’an, this no longer
has any value.”
A bedouin poet heard this verse being recited,
Therefore expound openly what you are commanded,22

22 Qur’an, 15:94.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
158
and immediately prostrated. They asked him: “Have you become a Muslim?” “No,” he
replied, “I was prostrating before the eloquence of this verse.”
Thousands of scholars and litterateurs, like geniuses of the science of rhetoric
such as ‘Abd al-Qahir Jurjani, Sakkaki, and Zamakhshari, have unanimously decided
that the eloquence of the Qur’an is beyond human capacity and is unattainable.
The Qur’an has also from that time forward invited to the field of combat all
arrogant and egoistic litterateurs and rhetoricians, and said to them in a manner
calculated to break their arrogance: “Come, produce a single sura like it, or else accept
perdition and humiliation in this world and the hereafter.” Despite this challenge, the
obstinate rhetoricians of that age abandoned the short path of producing a single sura
like the Qur’an, and instead chose the long path of casting their persons and property
into danger. This proves that the short path cannot be taken.
Millions of Arabic books are in circulation, some written by friends of the Qur’an
in order to resemble and imitate it, others written by its enemies in order to confront
and criticize it. Not one of them has been able to attain the level of the Qur’an. Should
a common man even listen to them, he is sure to say: “The Qur’an does not resemble
these other books, nor is it in the same class as they. It must be either below them or
above them.” No one —no unbeliever or fool— in the world can say that it is below
them. Hence its degree of eloquence is above all of them. Once a man read the verse,
All that is in the heavens and the earth extols and glorifies God.23
He said: “I cannot see any miraculous eloquence in this verse.” He was told: “Go back
to that age like the traveller, and listen to the verse as recited there.” Imagining himself
to be there before the revelation of the Qur’an, he saw that all the beings in the world
were living in an unstable, transient world in  empty, infinite and unbounded space, in
confusion and darkness, lifeless and without consciousness and purpose. Suddenly he
heard this verse proclaimed by the tongue of the Qur’an and the verse removed a veil
from in front of the universe and illumined the face of the globe; this pre-eternal
speech, this eternal decree, gave instruction to all conscious beings, drawn up in the
ranks of succeeding centuries, in such fashion that the cosmos became like a vast
mosque. All of creation headed by the heavens and the earth, was engaged in vital
remembrance of God and proclamation of His glory, was joyously and contentedly
fulfilling its function.

23 Qur’an, 57:1.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
159
All of this our traveller observed. Thus tasting the degree of the eloquence of the
Qur’an, and comparing the other verses to it by analogy, he understood one of the
many thousands of wise reasons for the conquest of half the globe and a fifth of
humanity by the eloquent murmuring of the Qur’an, for the uninterrupted continuance
of its respected and magnificent monarchy for fourteen centuries.
F o u r t h  P o i n t : The Qur’an has demonstrated such a veracious sweetness
that whereas the repetition of even the sweetest thing induces disgust, it has from
earliest times been accepted by everyone and even become proverbial that repeated
recitation of the Qur’an, far from inducing disgust and weariness in men of sound heart
and pure taste, on the contrary increases its sweetness.
The Qur’an demonstrates, moreover, such a freshness, youth and originality, that
even though it has lived for fourteen centuries and passed through many hands, it
retains its freshness as if it had only just been revealed. Every century sees the Qur’an
enjoying a new youth, as if it were addressing that century in particular. Similarly,
scholars of every branch of learning, even though they keep the Qur’an constantly at
their side in order to benefit from it, and perpetually follow its method of exposition,
see that the Qur’an maintains the originality of its style and manner of explanation.
F i f t h  P o i n t : One wing of the Qur’an is in the past, and one is in the future,
and like its root and one wing are the agreed truths of the former prophets, and it
confirms and corroborates them, and they too confirm it with the tongue of unanimity,
so too all the true Sufi paths and ways of sainthood whose fruits like the saints and
purified scholars, who receive life from the Qur’an, show through their vital spiritual
progress that their blessed tree is living, effulgent, and the means to truth, and who
grow and live under the protection of its second wing, testify that the Qur’an is pure
truth and the assembly of truths and in its comprehensiveness, a matchless wonder.
S i x t h  P o i n t : The Qur’an’s truthfulness and veracity show that its six
aspects are luminous. Indeed, the pillars of argument and proof beneath it; the flashes
of the stamp of miraculousness above it; the gifts of happiness in this world and the
next before it, its goal; the truths of heavenly revelation, the point of support behind it;
the assent and evidence of innumerable upright minds to its right; and the true
tranquillity, sincere attraction, and submission of sound hearts and clean consciences
on its left all prove that the Qur’an is a wondrous, firm, unassailable citadel of both the
heavens and the earth.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
160
So too from these six levels, the Disposer of the universe has set His seal on its
being sheer truth and right, and not being man’s word, and its containing no error —
the Disposer, Who has made it His practice to always exhibit beauty in the universe,
protect good and right, and eliminate imposters and liars, has confirmed and set His
seal on the Qur’an by giving it the most acceptable, highest, and most dominant place
of respect and degree of success in the world.
And so too the one who is the source of Islam and interpreter of the Qur’an — his
believing in it and holding it in greater respect than everyone else, and being in a sleep-
like state when it was revealed,24 and other words and speeches not resembling or
coming near it, and that Interpreter’s describing without hesistation and with complete
confidence through the Qur’an true cosmic events of generally the past and the future
from behind the veil of the Unseen, and no trickery or fault being observed in him
while being under the gazes of the sharpest eyes, and his believing and affirming every
pronouncement of the Qur’an with all his strength and nothing shaking him, is a stamp
confirming that the Qur’an is revealed and true and the blessed Word of his own
Compassionate Creator.
Also a fifth of mankind, indeed the greater part of it, being drawn to the Qur’an
and bound to it in religion and giving ear to it eagerly desirous of the truth, and
according to the testimony of many indications and events and illuminations, the jinn,
angels, and spirit beings also gathering around it in truth-worshipping fashion like
moths whenever it is recited25 is a stamp confirming the Qur’an’s acceptance by all
beings and that it occupies a most high position.
Also, all the classes of mankind from the most stupid and lowly to the cleverest
and most learned taking their full share of the Qur’an’s instruction and their
understanding its most profound truths, and all branches of scholars like the great
interpreters of the Greater Shari‘a in particular, and hundreds of Islamic sciences and
branches of knowledge, and the brilliant and exacting scholars of theology and the
principles of religion extracting from the Qur’an all the needs and answers for their
own sciences is a stamp confirming that the Qur’an is a source of truth and mine of
reality.
Also, although the Arab literary figures, who were the most advanced in regard to
literature, —those of them who were not Muslims— had the greatest need to dispute
the Qur’an, their avoiding producing the like of

24 Muslim, iv, nos: 1816, 1817; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 392; Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih,
No: 4844.
25 Bukhari, vi, 234; al-Mustadrak, i, 553, 554.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
161
only a single sura and its eloquence, eloquence being only one aspect of the seven
major aspects of the Qur’an’s miraculousness, as well as the famous orators and
brilliant scholars up to the present who have wanted to gain fame through disputing it
being unable to oppose a single aspect of its miraculousness and their remaining silent
in impotence, is a stamp confirming that the Qur’an is a miracle and beyond the
powers of man.
Yes, the value, superiority, and eloquence of a speech or word is apparent
through knowing, “from whom it has come and to whom, and for what purpose;” the
Qur’an then can have no like, and none can reach it. For the Qur’an is a speech and
address of the Sustainer of all the worlds and Creator of the whole universe and a
dialogue in no way hinting of imitation and artificiality. It is addressed to the one sent
in the name of all men, indeed of all beings, the most famous and renowned of
mankind, the strength and breadth of whose belief gave rise to mighty Islam and raised
its owner to the level of the “Distance of Two Bow-strings” and returned him as the
addressee of the Eternally Besought One. It describes and explains the matters
concerning happiness in this world and the next, the results of the creation of the
universe, and the dominical purposes within it. It expounds also the belief of the one it
addresses, which was the highest and most extensive of belief and bore all the truths of
Islam. It turns and shows every side of the huge universe like a map, a clock, or a
house, and teaches and describes it in the manner of the Craftsman Who made them —
to produce the like of this Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is not possible; the degree
of its miraculousness cannot be attained to.
Also, thousands of precise and learned scholars of high intelligence have each
written commentaries expounding the Qur’an, some of which are of thirty, forty, or
even seventy volumes, showing and proving through evidence and argument the
innumerable qualities, fine points, characteristics, mysteries, elevated meanings, and
numerous indications concerning every sort of hidden and unseen matter in the Qur’an.
And the one hundred and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur in particular, each of which
proves with decisive arguments one quality, one fine point of the Qur’an. Each part of
it — like The Miraculousness of the Qur’an, and the Second Station of the Twentieth
Word, which deduces many things from the Qur’an concerning the wonders of
civilization like the railway and the aeroplane, and the First Ray, called Signs of the
Qur’an, which makes known the indications of verses alluding to the Risale-i Nur and
electricity, and the eight short treatises called The Eight Symbols, which show how
well-ordered, full of meaning, and mysterious are the words of the Qur’an, and the
small treatise proving in five aspects the miraculousness of the verses

--- Sayfa 150 ---
162
at the end of Sura al-Fath in regard to their giving news of the Unseen — each part of
the Risale-i Nur shows one truth, one light of the Qur’an. All this forms a stamp
confirming that the Qur’an has no like, is a miracle and a marvel, and that it is the
tongue of the World of the Unseen in the Manifest World and the Word of One All-
Knowing of the Unseen.
Thus, due to these qualities and characteristics of the Qur’an indicated above in
six points, six aspects, and six levels, its sublime, luminous sovereignty and sacred,
mighty rule has continued with perfect splendour illuminating the faces of the centuries
and the face of the earth for one thousand three hundred years. And also on account of
these qualities of the Qur’an, each of its letters has gained the sacred distinction of
yielding at least ten rewards, ten merits, and ten eternal fruits, and the letters of certain
verses and suras yielding a hundred or a thousand fruits, or even more, and at blessed
times the light, reward, and value of each letter rising from ten to hundreds. The
traveller through the world understood this and said to his heart:
“The Qur’an, which is thus miraculous in every respect, through the consensus of
its suras, the agreement of its verses, the accord of its lights and mysteries, and the
concurrence of its fruits and works, so testifies with its evidences in the form of proofs
to the existence, unity, attributes, and Names of a Single Necessarily Existent One that
it is from its testimony that the endless testimony of all the believers has issued forth.”
Thus, in brief allusion to the instruction in belief and Divine unity that the traveller
received from the Qur’an, it was said in the Seventeeth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the One and Unique Necessary Existent, to Whose
Necessary Existence in Unity points the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, the
book accepted and desired by all species of angel, men and jinn, whose verses
are read each minute of the year, with the utmost reverence, by hundreds of
millions of men, whose sacred sovereignty over the regions of the earth and the
universe and the face of time is permanent, whose spiritual and luminous
authority has run over half the earth and a fifth of humanity, for more than
fourteen centuries, with the utmost splendour. Testimony and proof is also given
by the unanimity of its sacred and heavenly suras, the agreement of its luminous,
divine verses, the congruence of its mysteries and lights, the correspondence of
its fruits and effects, by witnessing and clear vision.
Our traveller, our voyager through life, knew now that faith is the most precious
capital man can have, for it bestows on indigent man not some transient and ephemeral
field or dwelling, but a palace, indeed an eternal

--- Sayfa 151 ---
163
kingdom as vast as the whole cosmos or the world itself. Faith also bestows on
ephemeral man all he will need for life eternal; delivers from eternal annihilation
wretched man who waits on the gallows for the arrival of fate; and opens to man an
eternal treasury of everlasting felicity. The traveller then said to himself:
“Onward! In order to gain a further degree from among the infinite degrees of
faith, let us refer to the totality of the cosmos, and listen to what it says. We will then
be able to perfect and illumine the lessons we have received from its components and
parts.”
Looking through the broad and comprehensive telescope he had taken from the
Qur’an, he saw the cosmos to be so meaningful and well-ordered that it took on the
shape of an embodied book of the Glorious One, an incarnate dominical Qur’an, a
finely adorned palace of the Eternally Besought One, an orderly city of the Most
Merciful. All the suras, verses, and words of that book of the universe, even its very
letters, chapters, divisions, pages, and lines, through their constant meaningful
effacement and reaffirmation, their wise changes and alternations, gave unanimous
expression to the existence and presence of One Who has Knowledge of all things and
Power over all things as the author of the book, of a Glorious Inscriber and a Perfect
Scribe seeing all things in all things and knowing the relationship of all things with all
things.
So too all the species and particles of the cosmos, all its inhabitants and contents,
all that enters it and leaves it, all the providential changes and the wise processses of
rejuvenation that occur in it — these proclaim in unison the existence and unity of an
exalted craftsman, a peerless Maker Who sets to work with limitless power and infinite
wisdom. The testimony of two great and vast truths, of a piece with the immensity of
the cosmos, affirms this supreme witness of the cosmos.
FIRST TRUTH: These are the truths of ‘createdness’ and ‘contingency’
established with countless proofs by the gifted scholars of the principles of religion and
the science of theology, as well as the sages of Islam. They said that since change and
mutation are to be observed in the world and all things, the world must be ephemeral
and created; it cannot be uncreated. If it is created, then there must be a Maker who
created it. And if there is no cause to be found in the essence of a thing either for its
being or for its non-being, so that these two are equally possible, that thing cannot be
necessary and eternal.
It has further been proven with decisive arguments that it is not possible for things
to create each other, since that would involve the absurd and false notion of causality
and never-ending causal sequences. Hence

--- Sayfa 152 ---
164
the existence of a Necessary Existence becomes necessary, whose like cannot exist,
whose similitude is impossible, all other than whom is contingent and created by him.
Yes, the truth of createdness has permeated the whole of the cosmos, and many
instances of it are visible to the eye; the rest can be seen only by the intellect. For in
front of our eyes a whole world dies every autumn, and together with it die hundreds
of thousands of different kinds of plants and small animals, each member of each
species being like a small cosmos unto himself. It is, however, so orderly and
disciplined a death that all things leave behind in their places seeds and eggs that in the
spring shall be the means of resurrection and rebirth, miracles of mercy and wisdom,
miracles of power and knowledge. They hand to the seeds and eggs their book of
deeds and plan of action, entrusting them to the wisdom of the Glorious Preserver and
under His protection, and only then do they die.
In spring, the dead trees, roots and animals come to life again exactly as they
were, thus providing hundreds of thousands of examples, specimens and proofs of the
supreme resurrection. In the place of others, plants and animals resembling them
exactly are brought into being and life, thus publishing the pages of the beings of the
preceding spring, together with their deeds and functions, just like an advertisement.
Thus they demonstrate one meaning of the verse,
When the pages are spread out.26
Then also, with respect to the whole, each autumn a great world dies, and each
spring a fresh world comes into being. That death and creation proceed in so orderly a
manner, and so many separate deaths and creations occur within them, in such orderly
and regular fashion, that it is as if the world were a traveller’s lodge where animate
beings reside for a time, where travelling worlds and migrant realms come, fulfil their
duties, and then go on their way. So there is apparent to all intellects, with the clarity
of the sun, the necessary existence, infinite power and unending wisdom of a Glorious
Being Who creates and brings into being in this world vital realms and purposive
universes, with perfect wisdom, knowledge, and equilibrium, with balance, order and
regularity, and Who then employs them for dominical purposes, Divine aims and
Merciful goals, with full power and compassion. We leave to the Risale-i Nur and the
books of the theologians the further discussion of matters related to createdness.
As for contingence, it prevails over and surrounds all of the cosmos. For we see
that all things, universal or particular, big or small, from

26 Qur’an, 81:10.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
165
God’s Throne down to the ground, from the atom to the planet, all are sent to the
world with a particular essence, a specific form, a distinct identity, particular
attributes, wise qualities, and beneficial organs. Now to bestow on that particular
essence and quiddity its peculiarities, from amongst the infinite possibilities available;
to clothe it in its specific, distinctive and appropriate form, from among the
possibilities and probabilities that are as numerous as the forms that may be conceived;
to distinguish that being with the identity suited to it, from among the possibilities as
numerous as the other members of its species; to endow with special, suitable and
beneficial attributes the created object that is formless and hesitant midst the
possibilities and probabilities that are as numerous as the varieties of attribute and
degree; to affix to that aimless creature, perplexed and distraught amidst the
innumerable possibilities and probabilities that result from the infinitude of conceivable
paths and modalities —to affix to it wise qualities and beneficial organs and equip it
with them— all of these are indications, proofs, and affirmations to the number of the
innumerable possibilities of the necessary existence, infinite power and unlimited
wisdom of the Necessary Existent Who creates, chooses, specifies, and distinguishes
the quiddity and identity, the form and shape, the attribute and situation of all
contingent beings, whether they be universals or particulars.
They indicate, too, that no object and no matter is hidden from Him, that nothing
is difficult for Him, that the greatest task is as easy for Him as the smallest, that He can
create a spring as easily as a tree, and a tree as easily as a seed. All this, then, pertains
to the truth of contingence, and forms one wing of the great testimony borne by the
cosmos.
Since the testimony of the cosmos, with its two wings and two truths, is fully
established and explained in various parts of the Risale-i Nur, and particularly the
Twenty-Second and Thirty-Second Words, as well as the Twentieth and Thirty-Third
Letters, we refer our readers to those writings, and cut short an extremely long story.
SECOND TRUTH: As for the Second Truth that proceeds from the total scheme
of the cosmos, which is also the second wing of its great and universal testimony, it is
as follows:
There is to be seen a truth of co-operation among these beings that are attempting
to maintain their existence, and if they are animate, their life, and fulfil their functions
in the midst of constantly stirring changes and revolutions, a truth that lies far beyond
their capacities.
For example, the elements hasten to aid animate beings; the clouds to help the
vegetable kingdom; the vegetable kingdom, to help the animal

--- Sayfa 154 ---
166
kingdom; the animal kingdom, to help the human kingdom. Milk gushes forth from the
breast, like the spring of Paradise, to succour the infant; the fact that animate beings
are given their needs and sustenance in a manner that transcends their capacity, from
unexpected places; the replenishing of the cells of the body with particles of food,
through their being subjugated by their Sustainer and their employment at His merciful
hands — all of these and numerous other examples of the truth of co-operation
demonstrate the universal and compassionate dominicality of the Sustainer of All the
Worlds, Who administers the cosmos like a palace.
Solid, inanimate and unfeeling objects, that nonetheless co-operate with each
other in a sensitive and conscious fashion, must of necessity be caused to rush to each
other’s aid by the power, mercy, and command of a Compassionate, Wise, and
Glorious Sustainer.
The universal co-operation visible throughout the cosmos; the comprehensive
equilibrium and all-embracing preservation prevailing with the utmost regularity in all
things, from the planets to the members, limbs and bodily particles of animate beings;
the adorning whose pen ranges over the gilded face of the heavens, the decorated face
of the earth, and the delicate faces of flowers; the ordering that prevails over all things,
from the Milky Way and solar system down to fruits such as corn and pomegranates;
the assigning of duties to all things, from the sun and the moon, the elements and the
clouds, down to honey-bees — all of these great truths offer a testimony of
proportionate greatness, and their testimony forms the second wing of the testimony
offered by the cosmos.
Since the Risale-i Nur has established and clarified this great testimony, we will
content ourselves here with this brief indication.
In brief allusion to the lesson of faith learned by our traveller from the cosmos, we
said in the Eighteenth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the like of Whom cannot exist,
other than Whom all things are contingent, the One, the Unique, to the Necessity
of Whose Existence in Unity points the cosmos, the great book incarnate, the
supreme Qur’an personified, the ornate and orderly palace, the splendid and
well-arranged city, with all of its suras, verses, letters, chapters, parts, pages,
and lines, with the agreement of its fundaments, species, parts and particles, its
inhabitants and contents, what enters it and what leaves it; with the testimony of
the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of createdness, change and
contingency; with the consensus of all scholars of the science of theology; with
the testimony of the truth of the changing of its form and its contents, with
wisdom and regularity, and

--- Sayfa 155 ---
167
the renewal of its letters and words with discipline and equilibrium; and with the
testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of co-operation,
mutual response and solidarity, reciprocal care, balance and preservation,
among all its beings, as is to be clearly observed.
Then the ardent and inquisitive traveller, who was seeking the Creator of the
world, had advanced by gaining knowledge of God indirectly through eighteen degrees
and approached, at the end of an ascension in belief to the throne of truth, a station
where in the presence of God, he addressed Him directly. He said to his own spirit:
“In the noble opening sura of the Qur’an, the verses that extend from the
beginning to the word iyyaka (You alone) are like a form of praise and encomium
uttered indirectly; but the word iyyaka signifies a coming into His presence and
addresssing Him directly. So too we should abandon this indirect seeking and ask for
the object of search from the object of our search. For one must ask the sun, that
shows all things, concerning the sun, since that which shows all things will show itself
even more clearly. Just as we perceive and know the sun by its rays, so too we can
strive to know our Creator, in accordance with our capacities, through His Most
Beautiful Names and Sacred Attributes.”
We will set forth here, with the utmost brevity and concision, two of the countless
paths that lead to this goal; two of the infinite degrees of those two paths; and two of
the abundant truths and details of those two degrees.
THE FIRST TRUTH: There appears visible to our eye a comprehensive,
permanent, orderly and awesome truth, one that changes, transforms, and renews all
beings in heaven and on earth, with imperious and incessant activity. Within the truth
of that in every way wise activity, there is immediately perceived the truth of the
manifestation of dominicality, and in turn, within the truth of that in every way
merciful manifestation of dominicality, is recognizable the truth of the epiphany of
Divinity.
From this continuous, wise and imperious activity, the deeds of an All-Powerful
and All-Knowing Doer can be discerned, as if from behind a veil. And from behind the
veil of these nurturing and administering deeds of dominicality, the Divine Names,
manifest in all things, can be immediately perceived. Then behind the veil of the
Beautiful Names, manifest with Glory and Beauty, can be deduced the existence and
reality of the seven sacred attributes, according to the testimony of all creation, in a
life-giving, powerful, knowledgeable, all-hearing, all-seeing, volitional and speech-
endowed form, there appears to the eye of faith in the heart,

--- Sayfa 156 ---
168
self-evidently, necessarily, and with full certainty, the existence of a Necessary Existent
that is described by these attributes, a Single One of Unity known by these Names, a
Peerless and Eternal Doer, in a form more evidential and brilliant than the sun.
For a beautiful and profound book necessarily presupposes the act of writing and
a well-built house presupposes the act of building; and the acts of writing beautifully
and building well presuppose the names of writer and builder; and the titles of writer
and builder obviously imply the arts and attributes of writing and building; and these
arts and attributes self-evidently necessitate one who will be qualified by the names
and attributes, and be the artist and craftsman. For just as it is impossible for there to
be a deed without a doer, or a name without one designated by the name, so too it is
not possible for there to be an attribute without one qualified by the attribute, and for
there to be a craft without a craftsman.
On the basis, then, of this truth and principle, the universe with all the beings it
contains resembles a collection of profound books and letters written by the pen of
Divine Determining, and countless buildings and palaces constructed with the hammer
of Divine Power.  Each of these singly in thousands of ways and together in
uncountable ways utters the following testimony:
These innumerable dominical and merciful deeds, and the endless manifestations
of the thousand and one Divine Names which are the source of the deeds, and the
infinite manifestations of the seven transcendent attributes which are the source of the
Beautiful Names, in endless and infinite ways point to and testify to the necessary
existence and unity of an All-Glorious Essence Which is the source of those all-
embracing, sacred seven attributes and is qualified by them. And so too all the
instances of beauty, loveliness, perfection, and exquisiteness found in those beings self-
evidently testify all together to the sacred beauties and perfections of the dominical
deeds, and the Divine Names, and attributes, and qualities, which are fitting and
worthy of them, and to the sacred beauty of the Most Pure and Holy Essence.
So the truth of dominicality that manifests itself within the truth of activity reveals
and makes itself known in qualities and acts such as creating, originating, fashioning
and bringing into being, with knowledge and wisdom; determining, forming,
administering and changing with regularity and balance; transforming, causing to
descend and perfecting, with purpose and will; and feeding, nurturing, and bestowing
generosity and bounty, with tenderness and mercy. And within the truth of the
manifestation of dominicality, the truth of the immediately perceived revelation of

--- Sayfa 157 ---
169
Divinity makes itself known and recognized through the compassionate and munificent
manifestations of the Beautiful Names and through the Glorious and Beauteous
manifestations of the seven affirmative attributes: Life, Knowledge, Power, Will,
Hearing, Sight, and Speech.
Just as the attribute of Speech makes the Most Sacred Essence known through
revelation and inspiration, so too the attribute of Power makes the Essence known
through its skilled works and effects, each of which is like a word assuming external
shape. Presenting the cosmos from end to end under the aspect of an incarnate book of
discernment, it describes and makes known a Powerful Possessor of Glory.
As for the attribute of Knowledge, it makes known a single Most Sacred Essence,
through each of the wise, well-ordered and balanced objects of creation, through each
creature administered, directed, adorned, and made distinct by God’s Knowledge.
As for the attribute of Life, it is proven not only by its own evidences, but also by
all the works that proclaim God’s Power, by all the well-ordered, wise, balanced and
adorned forms and states that indicate God’s Knowledge, as well as by all proofs of all
other attributes. Thus Life, showing as witnesses all animate beings, which act as
mirrors reflecting those abundant proofs, makes known an Eternally Living and Self-
Subsistent Essence.
It is also this attribute that constantly changes the cosmos, in order to produce in
it ever-fresh and various manifestations and designs, and turns it into a supreme mirror
composed of countless smaller mirrors. Similarly, the attributes of Seeing and Hearing,
Willing and Speaking, each reveal and make known the Most Sacred Essence, just as
the cosmos does.
Then, too, just as the attributes point to the existence of the Possessor of Glory,
they also indicate in most manifest fashion the existence and reality of life, and the
livingness and permanence of that Essence. For Knowing is a sign of Life; Hearing is
an indication of Life; Seeing belongs only to the living; Will takes place only with Life.
Purposive Power is found only in living beings, and Speech is a task for those
endowed with Knowledge and Life.
It follows from the foregoing that the attribute of Life has proofs seven times as
numerous as the cosmos, and evidences that proclaim its existence and the existence of
the One Whom it qualifies. Thus it comes to be the foundation and source of the
attributes, the origin and support of the Supreme Name. Since the Risale-i Nur
establishes this first truth with powerful proofs and clarifies it, we will content
ourselves now with a drop from this ocean.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
170
THE SECOND TRUTH: Divine discourse, which proceeds from the attribute of
Speech.
Were the sea to become ink for the words of my Sustainer...27
According to the inner sense of this verse, Divine discourse is infinite. The clearest
sign demonstrating the existence of a being is his speech. This truth, therefore,
constitutes an infinite testimony to the existence and unity of the Pre-Eternal Speaker.
Since two powerful evidences of this truth are revelation and inspiration, set forth in
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Degrees of this treatise; another broad proof is provided
by sacred and heavenly Books, as indicated in the Tenth Degree; and a further most
brilliant and comprehensive proof is furnished by the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition,
as discussed in the Seventeenth Degree — for all these reasons we refer our readers to
those Degrees for the exposition and affirmation of this truth. Enough for us and for
our traveller, who was unable to proceed beyond this point, are the lights and
mysteries contained in the sublime verse that proclaims this truth in miraculous fashion
and adds it own testimony to all of the preceding ones:
God bears witness that there is no god but He, as do the angels and the
possessors of knowledge; steadfast in equity; there is no god but He, the
Mighty, the Wise!28
In allusion to the core of the lesson learned by our traveller at this sacred Station,
we said, in the Nineteenth Degree of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the Necessary Existent, the One, the Unique; His are
the Beautiful Names, His are the Supreme Attributes, and His is the Most
Sublime Similitude. To His Necessary Existence in Unity points the necessarily
existent Essence, with the consensus of all its sacred and comprehensive
attributes and all of its Beautiful Names, manifested according to the consensus
of His dominant qualities and deeds. By the testimony of the sublimity of the
truth of the self-revelation of Divinity in the manifestation of dominicality, in the
permanence of imperious activity through the act of bringing into being,
creating, making and originating, in will and in power; and through the act of
determining, forming and regulating, in choice and in wisdom; through the act of
expending, preserving, ordering, administering, and nurturing in purposiveness
and mercy, in complete order and equilibrium; as too by the testimony of the
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of the mysteries of the verse: God
bears witness

27 Qur’an, 18:109.
28 Qur’an, 3:18.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
171
that there is no god but He, as do the angels and the possessors of knowledge;
steadfast in equity; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise!
NOTE
Each of the truths that offer their testimony in the Nineteen Degrees of the First
Chapter of the Second Station above not only indicate Necessary Existence through
existence and presence, but also through their comprehensiveness, attest God’s unity
and oneness. But since they prove existence most clearly and explicitly, we regarded
them first as proofs of Necessary Existence.
As for the Second Chapter of the Second Station, the truths in question will be
designated instead as proofs of Divine unity, insofar as they explicitly prove unity,
and implicitly necessity. In reality, each proves the other; unity proves necessity,
and necessity proves unity. In order to indicate the difference, we said repeatedly in
the First Chapter, “By the testimony of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of
the truth of....,” while in the Second Chapter we shall recurrently say, “By the
witnessing of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of...,” thus
indicating the evident visibility of Divine unity. I had the intention of explaining the
degrees of the Second Chapter, just as I did in the First Chapter, but on account of
various obstacles I am compelled to be summary and concise. I leave it to other
parts of the Risale-i Nur to expound these matters as they deserve to be expounded.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
172
Second Chapter
Concerning Proofs of the Divine Unity
 [The traveller who had been sent to the world in order to attain faith, who
journeyed through the whole cosmos in his mind in order to ask all things
concerning his Creator, to seek his Sustainer in every place and find his God,
with the utmost certainty, at the point of Necessary Existence — this traveller
said to his intellect: “Come, let us depart on a new journey in order to behold
the proofs of the unity of our Necessarily Existent Creator.”
They set out together. At the First Stopping-Place, they saw four sacred truths
prevailing over the whole cosmos, truths that self-evidently necessitated the
unity of God.]
THE FIRST TRUTH: Absolute Divinity
The absorption of each class of men in a mode of worship dictated by their innate
dispositions; the species of worship engaged in by other animate beings, as well as
inanimate beings, through the performance of their essential functions; the way in
which all material and immaterial bounties and gifts in the cosmos become means
inciting men to worship and thanks, to praise and gratitude; the fashion in which all the
manifestations of the Unseen and epiphanies of the spirit, revelation and inspiration,
unanimously proclaim the exclusive fitness of one God to receive worship — all of
this, in most evidential fashion, proves the reality and dominance of a single and
absolute Divinity. If the truth of such a Divinty exists, it can in no way accept
partnership. For those who respond to Divinity  —that is, the fitness to be
worshipped— with thanks and worship, are the conscious and animate fruits on the
highest branches of the tree of the cosmos. If others were able to gratify and place
under their obligation those conscious beings in such fashion as to make them turn
away from and forget their true object of worship —Who may, indeed, be swiftly
forgotten, because of his invisibility— this would be in such utter contradiction to the
essence of Divinty and its sacred purposes that it could in no way be allowed. It is for
this reason that the Qur’an so repeat

--- Sayfa 161 ---
173
edly and with such vehemence refutes polytheism and threatens the polytheists with
Hell-fire.
THE SECOND TRUTH: Absolute Dominicality
The ubiquitous workings of a wise and compassionate hidden hand throughout the
cosmos, especially in animate beings and their nurturing and development, everywhere
in the same fashion and yet in a totally unexpected form, must be, without doubt, the
emanation and light of an absolute dominicality and a decisive proof of its reality.
An absolute dominicality cannot accept any partnership for since the important
aims and purposes of dominicality, such as the manifestation of its beauty, the
proclamation of its perfection, the revelation of its precious arts and the display of its
hidden accomplishments, are combined and concentrated in particulars and animate
beings, the slightest attribution to God of a partner, when entering even the most
particular of things and the smallest of animate beings, will frustrate the attainment of
those purposes and destroy those aims. Averting the faces of conscious beings from
those purposes and the One Who conceived them toward causes will be totally
opposed and hostile to the essence of dominicality, and absolute dominicality cannot in
any way countenance it.
The abundant proclamations in the Qur’an of God’s sanctity and transcendence,
its verses and words, even its letters and their shapes, are constant guides to God’s
unity, made necessary by the mystery we have just expounded.
THE THIRD TRUTH: Perfections
The self-evident testimony to the existence of the truth of perfections given by all
the exalted instances of wisdom in the universe, all its wondrous beauties, its just laws,
its wise purposes, and in particular its testimony to the perfections of the Creator,
Who brought forth the cosmos out of the void and then administered it in every way
miraculously and beauteously, as well as the perfections of man, who is the conscious
mirror of the Creator — such testimony is extremely clear.
There exists then the truth of perfections, and the certainty that the Creator Who
fashioned the cosmos in perfection must Himself possess perfection. Further, the
perfections of man, the most important fruit of the universe, vicegerent of the earth,
the beloved and most valued object of His creation — these are also established as
true. Therefore, to assign partners to God would be unacceptable and false, for it
would condemn to destruction and perdition all of the perfect and wise beings we
behold with our eyes; it would turn the cosmos into a vain plaything of accident, a

--- Sayfa 162 ---
174
place of amusement for nature, a cruel slaughterhouse for the animate, an awesome
house of sorrows for the conscious; it would reduce man, whose perfections are visible
in his works, to the level of the most wretched, distraught and vile animal; and it
would draw a veil across the infinite perfections of the Creator that are reflected in the
mirror of all beings, thus nullifying the result of His activity and denying His creativity.
Since assigning partners to God contradicts Divine, human and cosmic perfections
and its denial of them has been established and explained in the First Station of the
Second Ray (devoted to three ‘Fruits’ of Divine unity) with strong and decisive
proofs, we refer our readers that work and cut short the discussion here.
THE FOURTH TRUTH: Sovereignty
Whoever looks at the cosmos with comprehensive attention, will see it to
resemble a most prosperous and active kingdom, a city administered most wisely and
ruled most firmly; he sees all things and all species obediently engaged in a particular
function.
According to the military metaphor contained in the verse,
God’s are the armies of the heavens and earth,29
the prevailing creative commands, imperious orders, and kingly laws enunciated in
those numerous armies, that extend from the hosts of the atom, the battalions of the
vegetable kingdom, the brigades of the animal kingdom, to the armies of the stars, and
embrace both the lowliest soldier and the loftiest commander — they all indicate self-
evidently the existence of an absolute sovereignty and a universal authority.
There is then a truth of absolute sovereignty, and there can be no truth of
assigning partners to God. For according to the decisive truth of the verse,
Were there to be in the heavens and earth gods other than God, verily they
would be corrupted,30
if numerous hands all engage assertively in the same task, the result will be confusion.
If there are two kings in one country, or even two headmen in one district, order will
disappear, and administration be replaced by anarchy. But on the contrary we see
everywhere such order, from the wing of the fly to the lamps of the heavens, from the
cells of the body to the signs of the planets, that there is no possibility for the
intervention of any partner in God’s affairs.

29 Qur’an, 48:4.
30 Qur’an, 21:22.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
175
Sovereignty is, moreover, a station of dignity; to accept a rival would flout the
dignity of sovereignty. The fact that man, who needs the assistance of many people on
account of his impotence, will kill his brothers and offspring in the cruellest fashion for
the sake of some petty, apparent and temporary sovereignty, shows that sovereignty
rejects all notion of partnership. If so feeble a one acts thus for the sake of so petty a
sovereignty, it follows that the Possessor of Absolute Power, the Master of All
Creation, will never permit one other than Himself to participate in His sacred
sovereignty, the means to His real and universal dominicality and Divinity.
Since this truth has been established with firm proofs in numerous places
throughout the Risale-i Nur and especially the Second Station of the Second Ray, we
refer the reader to those pages for further discussion of it.
Through witnessing these four truths, our traveller came to know Divine unity
with the degree of certain and clear witnessing. His faith shone, and with all his power
he said, “There is no god but God, He is One, He has no partner.” In brief allusion to
the lesson he derived from this station, we said in the Second Chapter of the First
Station:
There is no god but God, the One, the Unique, to Whose Unity and the Necessity
of Whose Existence point the witnessing of the sublimity of the truth of the
manifestation of absolute Divinity, as well as the witnessing of the sublimity of
the comprehensiveness of the truth of the manifestation of absolute dominicality
that requires Unity, the witnessing of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of
the truth of the perfections that arise from unity, and the witnessing of the
sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the truth of absolute sovereignty, that
prevents and contradicts the existence of any partnership.
Then that restless traveller addressed his heart and said: “The fact that the people
of faith, and particularly those affiliated with a sufi order, are constantly repeating the
words, ‘no god but He,’ and recalling and proclaiming God’s unity, is an indication
that the affirmation of God’s unity comprises many degrees. Such affirmation is
moreover a most enjoyable, most valuable, and most exalted sacred duty, instinctive
function, and act of worship. Let us then in order to attain a further degree, open the
door of another stopping-place in this abode of instruction. For the true affirmation of
God’s unity we seek is not some imaginary species of knowledge. It is rather an
affirmation that in terms of logic is deemed the opposite of imagination, that is far
more valuable than cognition based on imagination, that is the result of proof, that is
designated a knowledge.”

--- Sayfa 164 ---
176
The true affirmation of God’s unity is a judgement, a confirmation, an assent and
acceptance that can find its Sustainer present with all things, that sees in all things a
path leading to its Creator, and does not regard anything as an obstacle to His
presence. For otherwise it would always be necessary to tear and cast aside the veil of
the cosmos in order to find its Sustainer.  “Onward, then,” said the traveller to himself,
as he knocked at the door of God’s Sublimity and Grandeur. He entered the Stopping-
Place of God’s deeds and workings, the world of creation and origination, and there
he saw that five comprehensive truths were prevailing over the entire cosmos, and
offering self-evident proof of the Divine unity.
THE FIRST TRUTH: that of Grandeur and Sublimity.
Since this truth is explained with different proofs in the Second Station of the
Second Ray and various other places in the Risale-i Nur, we restrict ourselves here to
the following:
The Being that creates and then administers at a single time and in a single fashion
the stars that are thousands of years distant from each other; that creates at a single
time and in a single form the countless members of the same species of flower,
distributed over the east and the west, the north and south of the globe; that
administers, nurtures, quickens, distinguishes and adorns more than two hundred
thousand different types of plant and species of animal in five or six weeks, with the
utmost regularity and equilibrium, without any confusion, defect or error, in order to
provide every spring on the face of the earth more than a hundred thousand specimens
of the supreme resurrection, and thus prove before man’s eyes a remarkable event,
now belonging to the past and the realm of the Unseen, namely the creation of the
heavens and the earth in six days, as indicated in the verse,
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days;31
the Being that causes the earth to revolve, as evidenced in the verse,
He merges night with day, and day with night,32
and turns the night into the page on which the events of the day are written — this
same Being knows and administers according to His own will, all at the same time, the
most secret and obscure thoughts that occur to men’s hearts. Since each of the
aforementioned acts is in reality one act, it follows that their Glorious Doer is a
Unique and Powerful Being, enjoying such grandeur and sublimity that nowhere, in
nothing, in no

31 Qur’an, 57:4.
32 Qur’an, 3:27.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
177
way, does it leave the slightest possibility for the acceptance of partnership; on the
contrary, it uproots all such possibility.
Since such sublime power and grandeur exist and since that grandeur is at the very
apex of perfection and comprehends everything, it is certainly in no way possible to
permit or allow any attribution of partners to that Unique and Powerful Being, for so
doing would ascribe impotence or need to that power, fault to that grandeur, defect to
that perfection, and impose restriction on that comprehensiveness. No sound intellect
could deem this possible.
The assignment of partners to God, is then by virtue of the offence it causes to
God’s Grandeur, the dignity of his Glory and His Sublimity, so grave a crime that the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition decrees with an earnest threat,
God does not pardon the assignment to Him of a partner; He pardons
whatever is lesser than that.33
THE SECOND TRUTH: The absoluteness, the comprehensiveness, and
appearance in infinite form of the dominical deeds seen at work in the cosmos.
It is only God’s wisdom and will that limits and restricts those deeds, as well as
the inherent capacities of the objects and places in which they manifest themselves.
Stray chance, dumb nature, blind force, unconscious causality and the elements that
without restriction are scattered in every direction — none of these can have any part
in the most balanced, wise perspicacious, life-giving, orderly and firm deeds of the
Creator. They are used, rather, by the command, will, and power of the Glorious Doer
as an apparent veil to conceal His power.
Three out of innumerable examples:
We will set forth three from among the numerous subtle points that relate to the
three deeds indicated in three continuous verses in Sura al-Nahl.
The First:
Your Sustainer inspired in the bee that it should seek a dwelling-place in the
mountains.34
The bee is, with respect to its disposition and function, such a miracle of God’s power
that a whole sura, Sura al-Nahl, has been named after it. For to inscribe in the minute
head of that little honey-machine a complete

33 Qur’an, 4:48.
34 Qur’an, 16:68.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
178
programme for the fulfilment of its important task; to place in its diminutive stomach
the most delicious of foods and to ripen it there; to place in its sting poison capable of
destroying and killing animate beings, without causing any harm to its own body or the
member in question — to do all this without the utmost care and knowledge, with
exceeding wisdom and purposiveness, partakes of a perfect orderliness and
equilibrium, and hence unconscious, disorderly, disequilibriated nature and accident
could never interfere or participate in any of this.
The appearance and comprehensiveness of this Divine craft, this dominical deed,
which is miraculous in three separate respects, in the countless bees that are found
scattered over the earth, with the same wisdom, the same care, the same symmetry, at
the same time and in the same fashion — this is a self-evident proof of God’s unity.
The Second Verse:
There is for you a lesson in cattle. From what is within their bodies, between
excretions and blood, we produce for your drink, milk, pure and agreeable
to those who drink it.35
This verse is a decree overflowing with useful instruction. To place in the nipples of
cows, camels, goats and sheep, as well as human mothers, in the midst of blood and
excrement but without being polluted by them, a substance the exact opposite, pure,
clean, pleasant, nutritive and white milk, and to inspire in their hearts tenderness
toward their young that is still more pleasant, sweeter and more valuable than milk —
this requires such a degree of mercy, wisdom, knowledge, power, will and care that it
cannot in any way be the work of turbulent chance, of the tangled elements, or of blind
forces.
The manifestation, workings and comprehensiveness of so miraculous a dominical
art and so wise a Divine deed, all over the face of the globe and in the countless hearts
and breasts of innumerable mothers of hundreds of thousands of species, in the same
instant, the same fashion, with the same wisdom and the same care — this too
constitutes a self-evident proof of God’s unity.
The Third Verse:
From the fruits of the date-palm and the vine you take sugar and fine
nourishment; verily therein is a sign for a people possessing intelligence.36
This verse invites our attention to the date and to grapes, saying, “For

35 Qur’an, 16:66.
36 Qur’an, 16:67.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
179
those of intelligence, there is great proof, argument and evidence of the Divine unity in
these two fruits. These two fruits yield nurture and sustenance, fresh and dry fruit, and
give rise to most delicious forms of food; yet the trees that bear them stand in
waterless sand and dry soil, and are thus miracles of power and wonders of wisdom.
They are each of them like a factory producing sweet sugar, a machine manufacturing
honeylike syrup, a work of art created with perfect order and sensitive balance,
wisdom and care; hence anyone with a grain of intelligence will say on contemplating
them, ‘The one who made them in this fashion may very well be the Creator of the
whole cosmos.’”
For in front of our eyes each vine branch the thickness of a finger will hold twenty
bunches of grapes, and each bunch will in turn contain hundreds of sugary grapes,
each like a litle pump emitting syrup. To clothe the surface of each grape with a fine,
delicate, thin, and colourful protection; to place in its delicate and soft heart seeds with
their hard shells, which are like its retentive faculty, programme, and the story of its
life; to manufacture in its stomach a sweetmeat like the helva of Paradise, a honey like
the water of Kawthar; to create an infinite number of such grapes over the face of the
entire earth, with the same care and wisdom and wonderful art, and at the same time
and in the same fashion — this proves in self-evident fashion that the one who fulfils
these tasks is the Creator of the whole cosmos, and this deed, requiring as it does
infinite power and limitless wisdom, can be only His deed.
Yes, blind and stray, disorderly and unconscious, aimless, aggressive, and anarchic
forces, nature and causality, cannot have anything to do with this most sensitive
balance, this most skilful art, this most wise scheme. They cannot even stretch out
their hands toward it. It falls to them only to be employed through the dominical
command as passive objects, as curtainholders.
Just like the three points proving Divine unity contained in the three truths
indicated in the three verses, the countless manifestations and workings of infinite
dominical deeds attest unanimously the unity of a Single One of Unity, the All-
Glorious One.
THE THIRD TRUTH: The creation of beings, particularly plants and animals,
with absolute speed and absolute orderliness; with absolute ease and extreme skill,
talent, ability, and order; with great value and distinction, despite extreme abundance
and intermingling.
Yes, to produce with extreme swiftness and in extreme abundance, most skilfully
and artistically, with great ease and facility combined with the utmost care and
orderliness, with great value and distinction despite

--- Sayfa 168 ---
180
abundance and intermingling, without any form of confusion or deficiency — this can
be achieved only by a Unique Being Whose power is such that nothing appears
difficult to it.
For that power it is as easy to create stars as atoms, the greatest as the smallest, a
whole species as a single member of a species, a sublime and comprehensive universal
as a restricted and petty particular; it is as easy for Him to revivify and quicken the
whole earth as to do the same with a tree or to erect a tree as tall as a mountain as it is
to produce a seed no bigger than a fingernail. All of these deeds He performs in front
of our eyes.
So the exposition, the solution, the uncovering and proof of the mystery of this
degree of the assertion of the Divine unity, this Third Truth, this word of unity — the
mystery that the greatest universal is like the smallest particular without the slightest
difference between them —this beneficial wisdom, this supreme talisman, this riddle
beyond the reach of the intellect, this most significant foundation of Islam, this most
profound source of faith, this greatest basis of the Divine unity— the setting forth of
all this opens the talisman of the Qur’an, and makes it possible to know the most
secret and unknowable riddle of the creation of all beings, a riddle that reduces
philosophy to impotence.
Thanks and praise one hundred thousand times the letters of the Risale-i Nur be
to the Compassionate Creator that the Risale-i Nur has solved, uncovered and
established this wondrous talisman, this wondrous riddle. It has been proven with
decisive arguments, to the same degree of certainty that twice two is four, particularly
in the discussion of “He is powerful over all things” toward the end of the Twentieth
Letter; in the section concerning God’s being an all-powerful agent in the Twenty-
Ninth Word, one devoted to the resurrection; and in the section proving the Divine
power in the degrees of “God is Most Great” in the Twenty-Ninth Flash, written in
Arabic. For that reason we assign to those parts of the Risale-i Nur the exposition of
this matter, wishing, however, to set out briefly the foundations and proofs that solve
this mystery and to allude to thirteen mysteries that resemble thirteen steps, or a list of
contents. I have indeed written the first and second mysteries, but unfortunately two
powerful obstacles, material and immaterial, have caused me to abandon the
remainder.
T h e  F i r s t  M y s t e r y : If something be essential, its opposite cannot have
access to the essence defined by that thing. For that would be equivalent to the union
of opposites, which is an absurdity. Now with regard to this principle, since God’s
power is related to His Essence and

--- Sayfa 169 ---
181
is an essential concomitant of His Most Sacred Essence, impotence —the opposite of
power— cannot in any way gain access to that All-Powerful Essence.
Moreover, the existence of degrees within a thing comes about through the
intervention in it of its opposite. For example, strong and weak degrees of light result
from the intervention of darkness; high and low degrees of heat proceed from the
admixture of coldness; and greater and lesser amounts of strength are determined by
the intervention and opposition of resistance. It is therefore impossible that degrees
should exist in that power of the Divine Essence. He creates all things as if they were
but a single thing. And since degrees do not exist in the power of the Divine Essence
and it does not admit of weakness or deficiency, no obstacle can in any way obstruct it
nor can the creation of anything cause it difficulty.
Since, then, nothing is difficult for God’s power, He creates the supreme
resurrection with the same ease as spring; spring with the same facility as a tree; and a
tree with as little trouble as a flower. Further, He creates a flower as artistically as a
tree; a tree as miraculously as a spring; and a spring as comprehensively and
wondrously as a resurrection. All of this He accomplishes in front of our eyes.
It has been proved in the Risale-i Nur with decisive and strong proofs that if there
were no Divine unity, the making of a flower would be as difficult as a tree or even
more difficult; the making of a tree would be as hard a spring or even more difficult;
and creation would even lose its value and artistic quality. An animate being that now
takes a minute to produce would be produced with difficulty in one year, or maybe
never at all.
It is then on account of this mystery that these fruits, flowers, trees and animals,
that are extremely valuable despite their ubiquitousness and abundance, and extremely
artistic despite the swiftness and ease of their fashioning, emerge in regular fashion
onto the plain of being and assume their functions. Proclaiming God’s glory, they
accomplish their duties and depart, leaving behind their seed in their stead.
S e c o n d  M y s t e r y : Through the mystery of luminosity, transparency, and
obedience, just as through the manifestation of its essential power, a single sun reflects
it light in a single mirror, so too, through the Divine command and due to the
extensive activity of that unrestricted power, it can easily bestow the same reflection
—together with its light and heat— on innumerable mirrors, shining objects, and
droplets. Great and small are the same, there is no difference between them.
Similarly, like a single word can enter the ear of one man without

--- Sayfa 170 ---
182
trouble, so too due to the infinite breadth of boundless creativity, it may enter a million
ears, with dominical permission. And a single light like an eye, or a single luminous
spirit being like Gabriel, through the infinite breadth of dominical activity within the
manifestation of mercy, may be present in, or look at, or enter thousands of places
through Divine power, as easily as they look at or enter a single place. There is no
difference between many and few.
The pre-eternal power of God’s essence is the most subtle and choicest of lights,
the light of all lights; the quiddities, essences and inner dimensions of all things are
luminous and lustrous as mirrors; all things, from the atom, the plant, and the animate
creature to the stars, the suns and the moons, are extremely obedient and submissive
to the command of that power of the Divine Essence and subordinate to the orders of
that pre-eternal power. It is for all of these reasons entirely natural that innumerable
things should be created with the same ease as a single thing and placed side by side
with each other. No concern or task interferes with another. Great and small, many
and few, particular and universal — all are the same for that power, for which nothing
is difficult.
As was said in the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words, through the mysteries of
order, equilibrium, obedience to command and submission to order, that power causes
a great ship as big as a hundred houses, to move and advance as a child’s finger pushes
his toy.
As a commander will send a single infantryman into battle with an order from his
throne, so too he may throw a whole obedient army into the fray with the same single
order.
Let us suppose that two mountains are in a state of equilibrium in a large and
sensitive balance. In the same way that a single walnut would cause one pan to rise
and the other to fall if placed on one side of a balance containing two eggs, it would
produce the same result with the scale containing the mountains; through a wise law it
would cause one pan with its mountain to rise to the mountain-top, and the other to
descend with its mountain to the bottom of the valley.
Since there is to be found in God’s absolute, infinite, luminous, essential and
eternal power a Divine justice and unending wisdom that is the origin, source,
fundament and beginning of all order, regularity and equilibrium in creation; and since
all things, particular and universal, small and great, are obedient to the command of
that power and submissive to its workings — it follows that God causes the stars to
revolve and to move, through the wisdom of His order, as easily as He rotates and
moves the atoms.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
183
In spring, just as He brings to life a single fly with a single order, so too He
bestows life with the same ease and the same command on the whole species of fly, as
well as all the hosts of plants and animals, through the mystery of the wisdom and
equilibrium inherent in His power, and then sends them forth onto the plain of life.
In the same way that he swiftly gives life to a tree in spring and infuses vitality in
its bones, with His wise and just absolute power, He also resurrects in the spring the
corpse of the vast earth and brings into being hundreds of thousands of different
specimens of resurrection similar to the tree, all this with the greatest of ease.
With His creative command, He brings the earth back to life. By the decree of,
There will be but a single cry, then they shall all be brought nigh unto Us;37
that is, “all men and jinn, with a single cry and command shall be brought to Us and
made present at the plain of resurrection.” Again, by His command,
The hour shall be but a blinking of the eye, or even closer;38
that is, the bringing about of resurrection and the gathering that follows upon it shall
take no longer than the opening and closing of an eye, or even less. Then there is the
verse,
Your creation and resurrection is as a single soul,39
meaning the following: “O men! To create you and to bring you to life, to resurrect
and gather you, is as easy for me as bringing one soul to life; it presents no problem to
My power.” According to the inner sense of these three verses, God will bring all men
and jinn, all animals, spirit beings and angels to the field of the Supreme Gathering and
the great balance with a single command and with great ease. One concern does not
interfere with another.
The remaining Mysteries, from the third and fourth as far as the thirteenth, have
been postponed to another time in a fashion disagreeable to me.
THE FOURTH TRUTH: The existence and appearance of all beings proclaim
the Divine unity in a self-evident fashion through their numerous points of unity and
convergence, such as being simultaneously

37 Qur’an, 36:53.
38 Qur’an, 16:77.
39 Qur’an, 31:28.

--- Sayfa 172 ---
184
together and yet separate and unique; resembling one another; being the miniature or
magnified versions of each other; being some, universals and species, and some,
particulars and individuals; resembling each other in the stamp of innate disposition;
having affinity in the impress of artistry; and aiding and complementing each other
with respect to their innate functions. They establish the unity of their Maker. And
with respect to dominicality, make it clear that the cosmos is a universal and a whole
that may not be divided or fragmented.
For example, in each spring, to create, order and sustain the innumerable members
of the four hundred thousand different species of plants and animals, together and
intermingled, in a single moment and in the same fashion, without any error or
mistake, with the utmost wisdom and perfection of artistry; to create all the different
species of bird, from flies, which are like birds in miniature, to eagles which are the
supreme specimens of the species, then to equip them with the means of flight and
subsistence and to cause them to journey through the realm of the air; to imprint on
the countenances of each of the birds in miraculous fashion a stamp of artistry, on the
body of each of them a seal of wisdom, and in the quiddity of each of them, in
sustaining fashion, a sign of God’s unity; to cause wisely and mercifully particles of
food to hasten to the aid of the cells of the body, plants to rush to the assistance of
animals, and all mothers to go swiftly to the help of their powerless infants; to work on
all things, particular and universal, from the Milky Way, the solar system and the
elements of the earth, down to the veils of the pupil of the eye, the petals of the rose,
the husk of the corn, the seeds of the melon, like a series of intersecting circles, with
the same regularity, perfection of artistry, the same deed, and plenitude of wisdom —
to do all this establishes the following with self-evident certainty:
He who performs these deeds is One and unique; His imprint is on all things. In
the same way that He is not in any place, he is present in every place. Like the sun, all
things are distant from Him, but He is close to all things. Just as the greatest objects,
such as the Milky Way and the solar system, are not difficult for Him, so too the cells
in man’s blood and the thoughts that pass across his heart are not secret from Him nor
beyond the reach of His power.
However great and multitudinous a thing may be, it is as easy for Him as the
smallest and scarcest thing, for He creates with ease a fly on the model of an eagle, a
seed in the form of a tree, a tree in the shape of a garden, a garden with the artistry of
a spring, and a spring on the scale of a resurrection. Things most valuable in their
artistry He gives to us and bestows upon us most cheaply. The price that He asks of us
is merely to

--- Sayfa 173 ---
185
say “In the name of God” and “Praise be to God.” In other words, the accepted price
for all those numerous precious bounties is to say at the beginning of all things, “In the
Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,” and at their end, “Praise be to God.”
Since this Fourth Truth is explained and proved elsewhere in the Risale-i Nur, we
content ourselves here with this brief allusion.
THE FIFTH TRUTH perceived by our traveller at the second stage: the
existence in the entirety of the cosmos, its pillars and parts and all the beings contained
in it, of the most perfect order and regularity; the sameness of the substances and
purposive beings that are the means of the rotation and administration of that vast
kingdom and are connected to its general scheme; the fact that the Divine Names and
deeds that are at work in that magnificent city, that vast exhibition, encompass and
comprehend all things or most things, despite their being one within the other, and of
the same nature, and the same, and their being the same Name and deed in every place;
the fact that the elements and species that are the means for the administration,
inhabiting, and construction of that well-adorned palace, cover the whole face of the
earth in their diffusion, despite their being one within the other, of the same nature,
and the same element and the same species being found everywhere — all of this
demands, proves, and affirms, necessarily and self-evidently, the following:
The Maker and Disposer of this cosmos, the Monarch and Nurturer of this realm,
the Master and Builder of this palace, is one, unique, sole. He has neither like nor peer,
neither minister nor aide. He has neither partner nor opposite, he has neither inability
nor deficiency. Yes, order is in itself a perfect expression of unity; it demands a single
orderer. It leaves no place for the assignment of partners to God, the source of dispute
and dissension.
There is a wise and precise order inherent in all things, whether universal or
particular, from the total scheme of the cosmos and the daily and annual rotation of the
earth down to the physiognomy of man, the complex of senses in man’s head and the
circulation of white and red cells in man’s blood. Nothing other than One Absolutely
Powerful and Absolutely Wise can stretch out its hand intentionally and creatively
toward any thing, nor interfere with it. On the contrary, all things are recipients, means
of manifestation, and passive.
Now, ordering, the pursuit of certain purposes and the bestowal of regularity with
a view to certain benefits, can be done only by means of knowledge and wisdom and
performed only with will and choice.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
186
Certainly and in all events, this wisdom-nurturing regularity, this infinitely varied
ordering of the cosmos that before our very eyes assures various benefits, proves and
affirms to a self-evident degree that the Creator and Disposer of all beings is one, an
agent possessing will and choice. Everything comes into being through His power,
assumes a particular state through His will, and takes on a particular form through His
choice.
The heat-giving lamp of this hospice that is the world is one; its candle that is the
basis for the reckoning of time is one; its merciful sponge is one; its fiery cook is one;
its life-giving beverage is one; its well-guarded field is one, as well as a thousand and
one other instances of oneness. It follows from all of these instances of oneness that
the Maker and Master of this hospice is also one, that He is extremely generous and
hospitable, for He employs numerous high-ranking and great officials to serve the
animate guests of His hospice.
Names such as All-Wise, Compassionate, Giver of Forms, Disposer, Quickener,
and Nurturer, the impresses and manifestations of which are to be seen at work in
every corner of the world, attributes such as wisdom, mercy, and grace, and acts such
as formation, disposition and nurturing, are all one. They embrace every place in the
utmost degree, each Name and act being present there.
They also complement the imprint of each other in such a way that it is as if those
Names and deeds were uniting in such fashion that power becomes identical with
wisdom and mercy, and wisdom becomes identical with grace and life. For example, as
soon as the activity of the Name of Quickener appears in a thing, the activity of
numerous other Names such as Creator, Giver of Form, and Provider, also appears at
the same instant, everywhere, and in the same system. This of a certainty and self-
evidently establishes and proves that that which is designated by the Names and the
Doer of the comprehensive deeds that appear everywhere in the same fashion must
also be one, single and unique. In this we believe and to this we give our assent!
The elements that are the substance and material of creation encompass the whole
earth. Each of the species of creation that bears an imprint attesting unity is diffused
throughout the earth in unity and, so to speak, conquers it. This also proves to the
degree of being self-evident that those elements together with what they embrace, and
those species, together with their separate members, are the product and property of a
single being. They are the products and servants of so Unique and Powerful a One that
He employs those vast and and imperious elements as obedient servants and those
species diffused throughout the earth as well-

--- Sayfa 175 ---
187
disciplined soldiers. Since this truth also has been established and explained in other
places in the Risale-i Nur, we content ourselves here with this brief indication.
In summary of the witnessings that he derived from these Five Truths, through the
superabundance of faith and the joy of Divine unity, and in expression of his feelings,
our traveller said to his heart:
Look upon the coloured page of the cosmic book;
See what forms the golden pen of power has traced.
No dark point remains for the gaze of the heart’s eye;
It is as if God has inscribed His signs with light.
Know too that:
The leaves in the world’s book are dimensions infinite;
The lines of time’s events are works innumerable.
Written on the workbench of the Preserved Tablet of reality,
A meaningful embodied word, is every being in this world.
Listen also to this:
When all things proclaim, “No god but God,” they will in unison say, “O
Truth and Reality!” and beseech in harmony, “O Living One!” Yes, in all
things there is a sign pointing to the fact that He is One.
Hearkening to this his heart and soul affirmed the truth of what they heard and said,
“Yes, indeed!”
In brief allusion to the Five Truths of Unity observed by our traveller through the
world, our voyager through the cosmos, at this Second Stopping-Place, it was said in
the Second Chapter of the First Station:
There is no god but God, the One, the Unique, to Whose Unity in Necessary
Existence points the witnessing of the truth of Grandeur and Sublimity, its
perfection and comprehensiveness; the witnessing of the truth of the appearance
of deeds in absolute fashion, in infinitude, without any limitation except that of
God’s will and wisdom; the witnessing of the truth of the creation of beings in
absolute multiplicity with absolute swiftness, the creation of creatures in absolute
ease with absolute perfection, the origination of things made in absolute
plenitude with utter perfection of artistry and value; the witnessing of the truth of
the existence of beings in universal and comprehensive fashion, joined,
interconnected and interrelated; the witnessing of the truth of universal order, an
order incompatible with the assignation of partners to God; the witnessing of the
unity of the sources of cosmic order, a unity that clearly attests the unity of their
Maker; the unity of the Names and deeds that comprehend and permeate the
universe; and the

--- Sayfa 176 ---
188
unity of the elements and species dispersed over the face of the earth in
imperious fashion.
That world traveller voyaging through different ages chanced upon the school of
the Renewer of the Second Millenium, Imam-i Rabbani, Ahmad Faruqi. He entered
and listened to the lesson being taught by the Imam:
“The most important result yielded by all the Sufi paths is the unfolding of the
truths of belief. The unfolding in clarity of a single truth of belief is preferable to a
thousand miraculous deeds and mystical visions.”
The Imam said too:
“In former times, great persons said that someone will arise from among the
theologians and the scholars of the science of theology. He will prove all the truths of
belief and Islam with rational proofs and the utmost clarity. I wish to be that man and
maybe I am.”40
He continued his instruction by saying that belief and the assertion of Divine unity
were the foundation, substance, light and life of all human perfection; that the Hadith
“An hour’s reflective thought is better than a year’s worship”41 refers to reflection on
belief; and that the silent mode of invocation practised in the Naqshbandi Order is a
form of this most excellent reflection.
The traveller listened with utmost care. He turned and addressed himself as
follows: “It is thus that this heroic Imam speaks. To increase the strength of one’s
belief by as much as an atom is worth more than a ton of gnosis or other form of
perfection and sweeter than the honey of a hundred visionary experiences.
“On the other hand, the philosophers of Europe have leagued together for a
thousand years to invent objections and doubts in their hostility to faith and the
Qur’an, and to attack the believers. They wish to shake the pillars of belief that are the
key, the source, the foundation of everlasting felicity, of life immortal, of eternal
Paradise. We ought therefore to strengthen our belief by making it one of realization
instead of one of imitation. So come, let us advance! In order to bring the twenty-nine
degrees of faith that we have found, each as powerful as a mountain, to the blessed
number of thirty-three, the number of litanies that follow upon

40 Time has proven that the man referred to here is not in fact an individual, but the Risale-i Nur
itself. It maybe that the people of unveiling happened to notice the insignificant interpreter and
proclaimer of the Risale-i Nur and hence came to speak of “a man.”
41 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 310.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
189
prayer, and in order to see a third stopping-place in this realm of instruction, let us
knock at the door of the dominical sustenance of the animate world and open it with
the key of ‘In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.’” Speaking thus he
beseechingly knocked at the gate of this Third Stopping-Place, a compendium of
wonders, and a spectacle of marvels.
Saying, “In the Name of God, the Opener,” he opened the gate. The Third
Stopping-Place became visible to him. He entered and saw that it was illumined by
four great and encompassing truths that demonstrated the Divine unity as brightly as
the sun.
THE FIRST TRUTH: the Truth of Opening
That is, the opening up from a single simple substance of innumerable varied and
separate forms, together, everywhere, in a single instant and by a single deed, through
the manifestation of the Name of Opener.
Yes, in the same way that God’s creative power has opened up innumerable beings
like flowers in the garden of the cosmos, and endowed each with an orderly form and
distinct identity, through the manifestation of the Name of Opener, so too, although in
more miraculous fashion, he has given to the four hundred thousand species of animate
beings in the garden of the earth each its symmetrical, adorned and distinct form.
He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation in
three darknesses. That is God, your Sustainer. His is the sovereignty; there is
no god other than He. Where, then, will you turn?42
Nought is hidden from God, neither on earth nor in the heavens. He it is
Who forms you in the wombs as He wills; there is no god but He, the Mighty,
the Wise.43
As these two verses indicate, the strongest proof of Divine unity and the most
remarkable miracle of Divine Power is God’s opening up of forms. Because the
opening of forms is repeatedly established and expounded in different ways elsewhere
in the Risale-i Nur, and particularly in the Sixth and Seventh Degrees of the First
Chapter of the Second Station of this treatise, we refer the discussion of this matter to
those places and restrict ourselves here to the following:
According to the testimony of botany and biology, based on profound research, there
is in the opening and unfolding of forms, such comprehen

42 Qur’an, 39:6.
43 Qur’an, 3:5-6.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
190
siveness and artistry that other than a Single and Unique One, One Absolutely
Powerful, able to see and do all things in all things, no one could undertake this
comprehensive and all-embracing deed. For this deed of the unfolding of forms
demands a wisdom, an attention and a comprehensiveness that are present at all times
and are contained within an infinite power. This power, in turn, can be found only in
that Unique Being Who administers the whole cosmos.
As is decreed in the above-quoted verses, God’s attribute of ‘opening’ expressed
in the opening and creation of the forms of men from their mother’s wombs, within
three darknesses, separately, with equilibrium, distinctness, and order, without any
error, confusion, or mistake; this truth of the unfolding of the forms of all men and
animals, all over the earth, with the same power, the same wisdom and the same
artistry, is a most powerful proof of God’s unity. For to comprehend and embrace all
things is itself a form of unity that leaves no room for the assignation of partners to
God. Just as the nineteen Truths of the First Chapter bearing witness to the necessary
existence of God also attest the existence of the Creator through their own existence,
so too they bear witness to His unity through their comprehensiveness. Our traveller
then saw the following  Second Truth in the Third Stopping-Place:
THE SECOND TRUTH: the Truth of Mercifulness
We see with our own eyes that there is one who has covered the face of the earth
with thousands of gifts of mercy, and made it into a feasting-place. He has laid out a
spread of hundreds of thousands of the different delicious foods of Mercifulness, and
made the inside of the earth a storehouse containing thousands of precious bounties of
compassionateness and wisdom. That Being sends to us also the earth, in its yearly
rotation, like a ship or a train, laden with the finest of the hundreds of thousands of
vital human necessities, proceeding from the World of the Unseen; and He sends to us
too the spring, like a waggon carrying food and clothing for us. Thus does he nurture
us, with utmost compassion. In order for us to profit from those gifts and bounties, He
has moreover given us hundreds and thousands of appetities, needs, feelings,
sensations and senses.
As was set forth in the Fourth Ray concerning the verse on the sufficiency of God,
He has given us a stomach that can take pleasure in infinite varieties of food.
He has given us such a life that through the senses associated with it we can
derive benefit from the innumerable bounties of the vast corporeal world, just as if it
were some bounteous spread.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
191
He has favoured us with the human state so that we delight in the boundless gifts
of both the spiritual and material worlds, through instruments such as the intellect and
the heart.
He has conveyed Islam to us so that we derive light from the boundless treasuries
of the Unseen and Manifest Realms.
He has guided us to faith so that we are illumined by the innumerable lights and
gifts of this world and the hereafter. This cosmos is like a palace fitted out and
adorned by the Divine quality of mercy with innumerable antiques and valuable items,
which then gives to man’s hands the keys to open all the chests and chambers in that
palace, as well as bestowing on man’s nature all the needs and senses that will enable
him to make use of them.
This mercy that embraces this world and the hereafter, and indeed all things, is
without doubt a manifestation of oneness within unity.
Just as the light of the sun is a parable of unity, through its comprehending all
things that face it, every bright and transparent object that receives the reflection of the
light, heat, and seven colours of the sun, is also a parable and a symbol of oneness.
Hence, whoever sees its all-embracing light will conclude that the sun of this earth is
one and unique. Witnessing the warm and luminous reflection of the sun in all bright
objects, and even in drops of water, he will say that the oneness of the sun, or the sun
itself, is present with its attributes close to all things; it is at the mirrorlike heart of all
things.
So too the encompassing of all things by the extensive mercy of the Merciful One
of Beauty, like a light, demonstrates the unity of that Merciful One and that He in no
way has any partner. Similarly, the fact that under the veil of that all-embracing mercy
the lights of most of the Merciful One’s Names and a sort of manifestation of His
essence are found in everything, and especially in all living beings, and in man in
particular, and the fact that this gives each individual a comprehensiveness arising from
life which causes him to look to and be related to the whole universe, proves the
oneness of the Merciful One and that He is present with all things and does all things
in all things.
Yes, the Merciful One shows the splendour of His glory in the whole of the
cosmos and all over the earth through the unity and comprehensiveness of His mercy.
With the manifestation of His oneness, He gathers together in every member of all
animate species, and particularly man, specimens of all His bounties, orders the tools
and instruments of animate beings, and proclaims the special solicitude of His beauty
to each individual, this without shattering the wholeness of the universe. As for man, it

--- Sayfa 180 ---
192
is in him that God makes known in concentrated form the various forms of His bounty.
Similarly, a melon can be said to be concentrated in its seed; the being that makes
the seed must necessarily be he who makes the melon. Then, with the special balance
of his knowledge and the particular law of his wisdom, he draws the seed out from it,
gathers it together and clothes it in a body. Nothing other than the one and unique
master craftsman who makes the melon is able to make its seed. That would be
impossible.
Since through the manifestation of Mercifulness the cosmos becomes like a tree or
a garden, the earth becomes like a fruit or a melon, and man becomes like a seed, of a
certainty the Creator and Sustainer of the smallest animate being must be the Creator
of all the earth and all the cosmos.
In Short: just as the making and unfolding from a simple substance of the regular
and orderly forms of all beings through the truth of Opening, which is comprehensive,
proves unity to the point of being self-evident, so too the truth of Mercifulness, which
encompasses all things, through its nurturing of all animate beings that come into
existence and enter the life of this world, particularly the newly arrived, with the
utmost order and regularity, causing all necessities to reach them, forgetting none of
them, this same mercy reaching all individuals everywhere at the same instant
demonstrates both unity, and oneness within unity.
Since the Risale-i Nur is a manifestation of the name of All-Wise and the name of
Compassionate, and the various points and manifestations of the essence of mercy are
explained and established in numerous places throughout the Risale-i Nur, we will be
content here with this indication of a drop from the ocean, and cut short an extremely
long story.
Our traveller then witnessed the following Third Truth in the Third Stopping-
Place
THE THIRD TRUTH: the Truth of Disposing and Administering
That is, to administer with complete order and equilibrium both the awesome and
swift-moving heavenly bodies and imperious, interfering elements, and the needy,
weak denizens of earth; to cause them to aid each other; to administer them jointly
with each other; to take all necessary measures concerning them; and to make this vast
world like a perfect kingdom, a magnificent city, a well-adorned palace.
Leaving side the vast spheres of this imperious and merciful administration, since
it is explained and proved in important sections of the Risale-i Nur such as the Tenth
Word, we will show, by means of a comparison, a single page and stage of that
administration as it manifests itself in the spring on the face of the earth.
Let us suppose, for example, that some wondrous world conqueror assembled an
army from four hundred thousand different groups and nationalities, and supplied the
clothes and weapons, the instructions and dismissals and salaries of every group and
nationality, separately and variously, without any defect or shortcoming, without error
or mistake, at the

--- Sayfa 181 ---
193
proper time, without any delay or confusion, with the utmost regularity and in most
perfect form, no cause other than the extraordinary power of that wondrous
commander could stretch out is hand to attempt that vast, complex, subtle, balanced,
multitudinous and just administration. Were it to stretch out its hand, it would destroy
the equilibrium and cause confusion.
 So too we see with our own eyes that an unseen hand creates and administers
every spring a magnificent army composed of four hundred thousand different species.
In the autumn —an example of the day of resurrection— it dismisses three hundred
thousand out of those four hundred thousand species of plants and animals from their
duties, and they go on leave through the activity of death and in the name of decease..
In spring —a sample of the gathering that follows resurrection— it constructs
three hundred thousand examples of raising from the dead in the space of a few weeks,
with the utmost order and discipline. In the case of the tree, four such resurrections
take place with respect to the tree itself, its leaves, its flowers, and its fruits. After
showing spring to our eyes exactly like the preceding one, it gives each species and
group in that army of glory that contains four hundred thousand different species its
appropriate sustenance and provision, its defensive weapons and distinctive garments,
its orders and dismissals, and all the tools and instruments it needs, with the utmost
order and regularity, without error or slip, without confusion or omission, in
unexpected fashion and at the proper time. It thus proves its unity, oneness,
uniqueness, and infinite power and boundless mercy within perfection of dominicality,
sovereignty and wisdom, and writes with the pen of Divine Determining this
proclamation of Divine unity on the face of the earth, on the page of every spring.
After reading only a single page of this proclamation of one spring, our traveller
said to himself:
“The torment of Hell-fire is pure justice for those who commit the error of
denying resurrection. For such denial would be to refute the numerous promises and to
deny the power of One Powerful and Compelling, a Wrathful One of Glory, Who has
promised and assured all of His prophets thousands of times and set forth in thousands
of verses of the Qur’an, explicity and by way of allusion, that He will bring about a
resurrection and gathering far easier for Him than the thousands of miraculous
gatherings that occur every spring, each more wondrous than the Supreme Gathering.”
His soul responded: “We believe in what you say.”

--- Sayfa 182 ---
194
THE FOURTH TRUTH, which forms the Thirty-Third Degree:
the Truth of Compassionateness and Bestowal of Provision
That is, the giving, over the whole face of the globe, within the earth, in the air
above it and the ocean around it, to all animate beings, especially those endowed with
spirit, and among them especially the impotent, the weak and the young, all of their
necessary sustenance, material and immaterial, in the most solicitous manner, deriving
it from dry and rude soil, from solid, bonelike dry pieces of wood, and in the case of
the most delicate of all forms of sustenance, from between blood and urine, at the
proper time, in orderly fashion, without any omission or confusion, in front of our
eyes, by an unseen hand.
Yes, the verse,
God is the Provider, the firm possessor of strength,44
restricts to God the task of sustaining and providing, and the verse,
There is no moving thing on earth but depends on God for its sustenance; He knows
its resting-place and storage-place; all is in a book perspicuous45
provides a dominical guarantee and pledge to furnish provision for all men and
animals. Similarly, the verse,
The beasts do not carry their sustenance; God sustains them and you, and He is All-
Hearing, All-Knowing,46
establishes and proclaims that it is God Who guarantees and provides for all impotent,
powerless, weak and wretched creatures that are unable to secure their own
sustenance, in an unexpected fashion, indeed from the Unseen or even out of nothing;
it is He for example Who provides for insects on the ocean bed and their young. This
proclamation is directed in particular to those men who worship causes and are
unaware that it is He Who bestows provision from behind the veil of causality.
Numerous other verses of the Qur’an and innumerable pieces of cosmic evidence
unanimously demonstrate that it is the compassionateness of a single Glorious
Provider that nurtures all animate beings.
Now the trees require a certain form of sustenance but have neither power nor will.
They remain therefore in their places, trusting in God, and their provision comes
hastening to them. So too the sustenance of infants flows to their mouths from
wondrous small pumps, aided by the solici

44 Qur’an, 3:5-6.
45 Qur’an, 11:6.
46 Qur’an, 29:60.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
195
tude and tenderness of their mothers. Then when the infants acquire a little power and
will, the milk ceases. These various instances clearly prove that licit sustenance is not
proportionate to will and power, but comes in relation to weakness and impotence,
which induce trust in God.
Will, power and cleverness frequently incite greed, which is a source of loss, and
often push certain learned men toward a form of beggary, whereas by contrast the
trusting weakness of the boorish, crude and common man may cause him to attain
riches.
The proverb, “How many a learned man has striven in vain, and how many an
ignoramus gained rich provision,” establishes that licit provision is not won by power
and will, but by a mercy that finds working and striving acceptable; it is bestowed by a
tenderness that takes pity on need.
Now provision and sustenance is of two kinds:
The First is true and natural provision, that required for life; this is guaranteed by
the Sustainer. It is indeed so regular and well-ordered that this natural provision,
stored in the body in the form of fat and other things, is enough to ensure survival for
at least twenty days, even if nothing is eaten. Those who apparently die of hunger
before the twenty or thirty days are up and before the provision stored up in their body
is exhausted, die in reality not from a lack of provision, but from a disease arising from
lack of caution and the disturbance of fixed habit.
The Second Form of Provision: metaphorical and artifical provision, arising due
to addiction from habit, wastefulness and misuse, but acquiring the appearance of
necessity. This form is not guaranteed by the Sustainer, but depends on His generosity:
sometimes He may give it, sometimes He may not give it.
With respect to this second form of provision and sustenance, happy is he who
regards his frugality —a source of happiness and pleasure— contentment and licit
striving, as a form of worship and active prayer for sustenance. He accepts God’s
bounty gratefully and appreciatively, and passes his life in happpy fashion.
Wretched is he who on account of prodigality —the source of wretchedness and
loss— and greed, abandons licit striving, knocks at every door, passes his life in sloth,
oppression and wretchedness, and indeed puts his own life to death.
In the same way that a stomach requires sustenance, so too the subtle capacities
and senses of man, his heart, spirit, intelligence, eye, ear and mouth, also request their
sustenance from the Compassionate Provider and gratefully receive it. To each of them
separately and in appropriate

--- Sayfa 184 ---
196
form is presented such provision from the treasury of mercy as will rejoice them and
give them pleasure. Indeed, the Compassionate Provider, in order to give to them
provision in more generous measure has created each of man’s subtle capacities —eye
and ear, heart, imagination, and intellect— in the form of a key to His treasury of
mercy. For example, the eye is a key to the treasury containing such precious jewels as
the fairness and beauty to be seen on the face of the universe, and the same holds true
of all the others mentioned; they all benefit through faith. To resume after our
digression:
The All-Powerful and Wise One Who created this cosmos created also life as a
comprehensive summary of the cosmos, and concentrated all of His purposes and the
manifestations of His Names therein. So too, within the realm of life, he made of
provision a comprehensive centre of activity and created within animate beings the
taste for provision, thus causing animate beings to respond to His dominicality and
love with a permanent and universal gratitude, thankfulness, and worship that is one of
the significant purposes and instances of wisdom inherent in the creation of the
universe.
For example, it is one of the activities of dominicality to cause every area of the
broad realm of dominicality to rejoice — the heavens are caused to rejoice with the
angels and spirit beings, the World of the Unseen with spirits, and the material world,
particularly the air and the earth, with the existence of all animate beings, particularly
birds, great and small, at all times and places. Through the wisdom of this causing to
rejoice and the infusion of life and spirit, animals and men are, as it were, whipped by
the need for provision and the pleasure they take therein to pursue their provision and
sustenance, thus being delivered from sloth. This too is one of the wise activities of
dominicality. Were it not for such significant instances of wisdom, the provision
destined for animals would be caused instinctively to hasten toward them to satisfy
their needs, without any effort on their part, just as provision and sustenance is caused
to hasten toward the tree.
Were there to be an eye capable of witnessing and comprehending the whole
surface of the earth at one time, in order to perceive the beauties of the Names of
Compassionate and Provider and the witness they bear to Divine unity, it would see
what sweet beauty is contained in the tender and solicitous manifestation of the
Compassionate Provider Who sends to the caravans of animals at the end of winter,
when their provision is about to be exhausted, extremely delicious, abundant and
varied foods and bounties, drawn exclusively from His unseen treasury of mercy, as

--- Sayfa 185 ---
197
succour from the unseen and Divine generosity, placed in the hands of plants, the
crowns of trees, and the breasts of mothers. The possessor of that all-seeing eye would
realize the following:
The making of a single apple, and the generous giving of it to a man as true
sustenance and provision, can be accomplished only by a Being Who causes the
seasons, the nights and the days to rotate, Who causes the globe to revolve like a
cargo ship, and thus brings the fruits of the seasons within reach of those needy guests
of the earth who stand waiting for them. For the stamp of its nature, the seal of
wisdom, the imprint of eternal besoughtedness, the signet of mercy that is to be found
on the surface of the apple, is to be found also on all apples and other fruits, plants and
animals. Hence the true Master and Maker of the apple is bound to be the Glorious
Sovereign, the Beauteous Creator of all the inhabitants of the world, who are the
peers, the congeners and the brothers of the apple; of the vast earth that is the garden
of the apple; of the tree of the cosmos that is its factory; of the seasons that are its
workshop; and of the spring and summer that are its place of maturing.
In other words, every fruit is a seal of unity that makes known the Writer and
Maker of the earth, its tree, and of the book of the universe, its garden; it
demonstrates His unity, and shows to the number of fruits, the seal affixed to the
decree of unity.
Since the Risale-i Nur is a manifestation of the Names of All-Compassionate and
All-Wise, and numerous flashes and mysteries of the truth of Compassionateness have
been expounded and proved in many parts of the Risale-i Nur, we leave further
discussion of the matter to those parts and content ourselves with this brief indication,
out of a vast treasury, on account of the unfavourable circumstances from which we
are now suffering.
Our traveller now says: “Praise be to God! I have seen and heard Thirty-Three
Truths bearing witness to the necessary existence and unity of the Creator and
Sovereign I was everywhere seeking and enquiring after. Each of the truths is bright as
the sun and leaves no darkness behind. It is as strong and unshakeable as a mountain.
Each of them, with its verifications, bears decisive witness to His existence, and with
its comprehensiveness proves His unity in manifest fashion. While proving implicitly all
the pillars of faith, the totality and consensus of these truths causes our belief to
advance from imitation to realization, from realization to knowledge of certainty, from
knowledge of certainty to vision of certainty, and from vision of certainty to absolute
certainty. Praise be to God; this is from the bounty of my Sustainer.”

--- Sayfa 186 ---
198
Praise be to God Who guided us to this; verily we would not have been
guided unless God had guided us. The messengers of God have come to us
with the truth.47
In extremely brief allusion to the lights of belief derived by our inquisitive traveller
from the four sublime truths he witnessed at the Third Stopping-Place, it was said in
the Second Chapter of the First Station, concerning the truths of the Third Stopping-
Place:
There is no god other than God, the One, the Unique, to Whose Unity
in Necessary Existence points the witnessing of the sublimity of the
comprehensiveness of the truth of opening, through the unfolding of
different forms of four hundred thousand species of living beings,
perfect and without defect, according to the testimony of biology and
botany; the witnessing of the sublimity of the comprehensiveness of the
truth of  mercifulness, all-embracing and regular, without any
deficiency, as the eye can see; the witnessing of the sublimity of the
truth of administering, that encompasses in orderly fashion all living
beings, without error or defect; the witnessing of the sublimity of the
comprehensivness of the truth of compassionateness and sustaining,
embracing all consumers of sustenance, at every time of need, without
any mistake or forgetfulness; Glory be unto Him, the Provider, the
Merciful, the Compassionate, the Solicitous, the Generous; His gifts
are universal, and His Generosity is all-embracing; there is no god but
He!
Glory be unto You; we have no knowledge save that which You have
taught us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.48
O our Sustainer! For the sake of ‘In the name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate,’ O God, O Merciful One, O Compassionate One!
Bestow peace and blessings upon our master Muhammad, his Family
and all his Companions, to the number of all the letters in the Risale-i
Nur, multiplied by ten times the number of minutes in all of our lives in
this world and the hereafter, and then by the number of particles in my
body throughout the course of my life. Forgive me, and those who aid
me in sincerity in the copying and distribution of the Risale-i Nur, and
our fathers, our masters, our shaykhs, our sisters, our brothers, and
the sincere students of the Risale-i Nur, particularly those who write
and copy this treatise; by Your Mercy, O Most Merciful of the
Merciful, Amen. The conclusion of our prayer is, ‘Praise be to God,
the Sustainer of All The Worlds!’

47 Qur’an, 7:43.
48 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
199
NOTE

Since the other parts of the Risale-i Nur were not available in the place that saw
the composition of the foregoing treatise, which was of necessity written down here,
certain important matters of The Words and The Flashes have been mentioned also in
The Supreme Sign, in what is an apparent repetition. In order to have the students of
the Risale-i Nur in this area write a complete Risale-i Nur in miniature, we
nonetheless had them write down all the present treatise.
The revised copy of this rough draft was written by a certain blessed person. Even
though he was ignorant of such matters, we saw in the copy prepared by him a subtle
and profound correspondence of the letters: there were six hundred and sixty-six
alifs49 written at the beginning of the lines in his copy. This number corresponds fully
with the value according to the abjad of the title given to this treatise by Imam ‘Ali
(May God be pleased with him), Ayat al-Kubra (The Supreme Sign), and thus
demonstrates the suitability of this title for the treatise. We also understood this
numerical correspondence to be an indication that this treatise is a flash derived from
the light of the verses of the Qur’an for they are six thousand six hundred and sixty-
six in number.
                                                                                 S a i d   N u r s i

49 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke, and the numerical value
of which is one. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 188 ---
200
ON THE PURPOSE OF
THE RISALE-I NUR
Today, I listened to an imaginary exchange of question and answer. Let me set
forth for you a summary of it.
Someone said: “The great mobilization and complete preparedness of the Risale-i
Nur for the sake of belief and the proving of the Divine unity is constantly increasing.
One hundredth part of its contents is enough to silence the most obstinate atheist; why
then this further feverish mobilization and preparation?”
They answered him: “The Risale-i Nur is not only repairing some minor damage
or some small house; it is repairing vast damage and the all-embracing citadel which
contains Islam, the stones of which are the size of mountains. And it is not striving to
reform only a private heart and an individual  conscience; it is striving to cure with the
medicines of the Qur’an and belief and the Qur’an’s miraculousness the collective
heart and generally-held ideas, which have been breached in awesome fashion by the
tools of corruption prepared and stored up over a thousand years, and the general
conscience, which is facing corruption through the destruction of the foundations,
currents, and marks of Islam which are the refuge of all and particularly the mass of
believers.
“Certainly, for such universal breaches and awesome wounds, proofs and
equipment of the utmost certitude and the strength of mountains, and well-proven
medicines and numberless drugs of the effectiveness of a thousand remedies are
necessary. Emerging at this time from the miraculousness of the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition, the Risale-i Nur performs this function, and is also the means of advancing
and progressing through the infinite degrees of belief.”
A long discussion ensued to which I listened, offering infinite thanks. I curtail the
matter here.
                                                                          S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 189 ---
201
The Ninth Ray
 [The first part of an important addendum to the Tenth Word]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
So [give] glory to God, when you reach eventide and when you rise in the
morning; Yea, to Him be praise, in the heavens and on earth; and in the late
afternoon and when the day begins to decline.
It is He Who brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the dead
from the living, and Who gives life to the earth after it is dead: and thus
shall you be brought out [from the dead].
Among His Signs is this, that He created you from dust; and then,— behold,
you are men scattered [far and wide]!
And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from among
yourselves, that you may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put love
and mercy between your [hearts]: verily in that are Signs for those who
reflect.
And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
variations in your languages and your colours: verily in that are Signs for
those who know.
And among His Signs is the sleep that you take by night and by day, and the
quest that you [make for livelihood] out of His bounty: verily in that are
Signs for those who hearken.
And among His Signs, He shows you the lightning, by way both of fear and
of hope, and He sends down rain from the sky and with it gives life to the
earth after it is dead: verily in that are Signs for those who are wise.
And among His Signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command:
then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth,

--- Sayfa 190 ---
202
behold, you [straightway] come forth.
To Him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on earth: all are
devoutly obedient to Him.
It is He Who begins [the process of] creation; then repeats it; and for Him it
is most easy. To Him belongs the loftiest similitude [we can think of] in the
heavens and the earth; for He is Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom.1
In this Ninth Ray will be expounded a supreme point of these sublime heavenly
verses, which demonstrate one of the ‘poles’ of belief; these mighty sacred proofs of
the resurrection of the dead will be explained. It is a subtle instance of dominical grace
that thirty years ago at the end of his work entitled Muhâkemat (Reasonings), which
was written to set out the principles of Qur’anic exegesis, the Old Said wrote:
“Second Aim: Two Qur’anic verses alluding to the resurrection of the dead will be
expounded and explained. In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.”
There he stopped and could write no further. Now, praise and thanks be to my
Compassionate Creator to the number of signs and indications of the resurrection, that
thirty years later He gave me success. Yes, nine or ten years ago, He bestowed the
Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words, two brilliant and powerful proofs expounding the
Divine decree of:
So look to the signs of God’s mercy, how He raises to life the earth after its
death; He it is who will raise the dead to life, for He is Powerful Over All
Things,2
which was the first of the two verses. They silenced the deniers of resurrection. Now,
nine or ten years after those two impregnable bastions of belief in the resurrection of
the dead, He bestowed with the present treatise a commentary on the second of the
above two sublime verses. This Ninth Ray, then, consists of nine elevated ‘Stations’,
indicated by the above-mentioned verses, and an important Introduction.

1 Qur’an, 30:17-27.
2 Qur’an, 30:50.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
203
Introduction
[Two Points comprising a concise explanation of one comprehensive result of
the numerous spiritual benefits of belief in resurrection and of its vital
consequences; a demonstration of how essential it is for human life and
especially for the life of society; a summary of one universal proof out of
numerous proofs of the tenet of belief in the resurrection of the dead; and a
statement of how indubitable and self-evident is that tenet of belief.]
FIRST POINT
We shall indicate, as a measure, only four out of hundreds of proofs that belief in
the hereafter is fundamental to the life of society and to man’s personal life, and is the
basis of his happiness, prosperity, and achievement.
T h e   F i r s t :  It is only with the thought of Paradise that children, who form
almost a half of mankind, can endure all the deaths around them, which appear to them
to be grievous and frightening, and strengthen the morale of their weak and delicate
beings. With the thought of Paradise they find hope in their vulnerable spirits, prone to
weeping, and may live happily. For example, thinking of Paradise, a child may say:
“My little brother or friend has died and become a bird in Paradise. He is flying around
Paradise and living more happily than us.” The frequent deaths before their unhappy
eyes of other children like themselves or of grown-ups will otherwise destroy all their
resistance and morale, making their subtle faculties, such as their spirits, hearts, and
minds, weep together with their eyes; they will either decline utterly or become crazy,
wretched animals.
S e c o n d   P r o o f :  It is only through the life of the hereafter that the elderly,
who form half of mankind, can endure the proximity of the grave, and be consoled at
the thought that their lives, to which they are firmly attached, will soon be
extinguished and their fine worlds come to an end. It is only with the hope of eternal
life that they can respond to the grievous despair they feel in their emotional child-like
spirits at the thought of death. Those worthy, anxious fathers and mothers, so
deserving of compassion and in need of tranquillity and peace of mind, will otherwise
feel a terrible spiritual turmoil and distress in their hearts, and this world will become a
dark prison for them, and life even, grievous torment.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
204
T h i r d  P r o o f : It is only the thought of Hell-fire that checks the turbulent
emotions of youths, the most vigorous element in the life of society, and their violent
excesses, restraining them from aggression, oppression, and destruction, and ensuring
that the life of society continues tranquilly. If not for fear of Hell, in accordance with
the rule ‘Might is right,’ in pursuing their desires, those drunken youths would turn the
worlds of the wretched weak and powerless into Hell, and elevated humanity into base
animality.
F o u r t h   P r o o f : The most comprehensive centre of man’s worldly life, and
its mainspring, and a paradise, refuge, and fortress of worldly happiness, is the life of
the family. Everyone’s home is a small world for him. And the life and happiness of his
home and family are possible through genuine, earnest, and loyal respect and true,
tender, and self-sacrificing compassion. This true respect and genuine kindness may be
felt due to the idea of the members of the family having an everlasting companionship
and friendship and togetherness, and their parental, filial, brotherly, and friendly
relations continuing for all eternity in a limitless life, and their believing this. One says,
for example: “My wife will be my constant companion in an everlasting world and
eternal life. It does not matter if she is now old and ugly, for she will have an immortal
beauty.” He will tell himself that he will be as kind and devoted as he can for the sake
of that permanent companionship, and treat his elderly wife lovingly and kindly as
though she was a beautiful houri. A companionship that was to end in eternal
separation after an hour or two of brief, apparent friendship would otherwise afford
only superficial, temporary, feigned, animal-like feelings, and false compassion and
artificial respect. As with animals, self-interest and other overpowering emotions
would prevail over the respect and compassion, transforming that worldly paradise
into Hell.
Thus, one of the hundreds of results of belief in resurrection is connected with the
life of society. If a comparison is made between the above four proofs out of the
hundreds of aspects and benefits of this single consequence and the rest, it will be
understood that the realization of the truth of resurrection and its occurrence, are as
certain as the elevated reality of humanity and its universal need. It is clearer even than
the evidence for the existence of food offered by the existence of need in man’s
stomach, and tells of its existence more clearly. It proves too that if the consequences
of the truth of resurrection were to quit humanity, whose nature is extremely
significant, lofty, and living, it would descend to being a corrupt corpse fed on by
microbes.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
205
The sociologists, politicians, and moralists who govern mankind and are
concerned with its social and moral questions should be aware of this! How do they
propose to fill this vacuum? With what can they cure these deep wounds?
SECOND POINT
This explains in summary form a proof —one of many— proceeding from the
testimony to the truth of resurrection of the other pillars of belief. It is as follows:
All the miracles indicating the messengership of Muhammad (Peace and blessings
be upon him) and the evidences for his prophethood, and all the proofs of his veracity,
together testify to the occurrence of the resurrection and prove it. For after Divine
unity, everything he claimed throughout his life was centred on the resurrection of the
dead. Also, all his miracles and proofs affirming, and making affirmed, all the previous
prophets attest to the same truth. Also, the testimony of the phrase “and in His
Scriptures,” which makes completely clear the testimony of the phrase “and in His
Prophets,” testifies to the same truth. Like this:
All the miracles, truths, and proofs proving foremost the veracity of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition, testify to and prove the realization and occurrence of
resurrection. For almost a third of the Qur’an is about resurrection, and at the
beginning of most of its short suras are powerful verses about it. It expresses the same
truth explicitly and implicitly with thousands of its verses, and proves and
demonstrates it. For example:
When the sun is folded up.3 * O men, fear your Sustainer; the trembling of
the Hour is an awesome event;4 * When the earth is convulsed;5 * When the
heavens are torn asunder;6 * When the heavens are torn apart;7 *
Concerning what they dispute;8 * Has the story reached you, of the
overwhelming event?9
Besides demonstrating with complete certainty at the beginning of thirty or forty
suras that resurrection is the most important and necessary truth in the universe, it sets
forth various persuasive evidences for that truth in others of its verses.

3 Qur’an, 81:1.
4 Qur’an, 22:1.
5 Qur’an, 99:1.
6 Qur’an, 82:1.
7 Qur’an, 84:1.
8 Qur’an, 78:1.
9 Qur’an, 88:1.

--- Sayfa 194 ---
206
Is there any possibility that belief in the hereafter should be false, which emerges
like the sun from the thousands of declarations and statements of a Book a single
indication of one of the verses of which has yielded before our eyes the fruits of
numerous learned and cosmic truths in the Islamic sciences? Is there any possibility of
denying the sun, or the existence of the universe? Would it not be impossible and
absurd? Is it at all possible that although an army may sometimes be plunged into
battle so that a mere sign of the king should not be given the lie, to show as false the
thousands of words, promises, and threats of that most serious, proud monarch? Is it
possible that they should be false?
Although a single sign of that glorious spiritual monarch who for thirteen
centuries without break has ruled over innumerable spirits, minds, hearts, and souls
within the bounds of truth and reality, and trained and educated them, would be
sufficient to prove the truth of resurrection, it has demonstrated it with thousands of
explicit statements. Is the torment of Hell-fire not necessary then for the compounded
idiot who does not recognize this fact? Is it not pure justice?
Moreover, by their definite acceptance of the truth of resurrection, which the
Qur’an —prevailing over the future and all times— repeatedly proves in detail and
elucidates, all the revealed scriptures and sacred books, each of which dominated a
particular period, proved it according to their own times and centuries, but in
undetailed, veiled, and summary manner, confirming with a thousand signatures what
the Qur’an teaches.
Included here since it is related to this discussion is the testimony at the end of the
Third Ray of the other pillars of faith, and particularly “the Prophets” and “Holy
Scriptures,” to “belief in the Last Day.” It forms a convincing proof of resurrection,
and is in the form of a powerful yet succinct supplication which dispels all doubts. It
says in the supplication:
“O My Compassionate Sustainer!
“I have understood from the instruction of Your Noble Messenger (PBUH) and
the teaching of the Qur’an, that foremost the Qur’an and the Messenger, and all the
sacred scriptures and prophets, have unanimously testified and pointed out that the
manifestations of the Names related to Your beauty and glory, examples of which are
to be seen in this world, will continue even more radiantly for all eternity, and that
Your bounties, samples of which are to be observed in this transitory world, will
persist in the abode of bliss in still more glittering fashion, and that those who long for
them in this world will accompany them for all eternity.
“Also, relying on hundreds of evident miracles and decisive signs, foremost Your
Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him)

--- Sayfa 195 ---
207
and the All-Wise Qur’an, and the prophets with their luminous spirits, and the
saints, who are spiritual poles with their light-filled hearts, and the purified scholars
with their enlightened intellects, relying on Your repeated threats and promises in all
the sacred scriptures, and trusting in Your sacred attributes such as power, mercy,
favour, wisdom, glory, and beauty, and on Your qualities, and the dignity of Your
glory, and the sovereignty of Your dominicality, and in consequence of their
illuminations and visions and beliefs at the degree of ‘the knowledge of certainty,’ give
the glad tidings to men and jinn of eternal happiness and inform them of Hell for the
people of misguidance; they firmly believe this and testify to it.
“O All-Powerful and Wise One! O Most Merciful and Compassionate! O
Munificent One True to His Promise! O All-Compelling One of Glory, One of
Dignity, Grandeur, and Wrath!
“You are utterly exempt from and exalted above giving the lie to so many loyal
friends, and so many promises, and attributes and qualities, and denying the certain
demands of the sovereignty of Your dominicality and the endless prayers and
supplications of Your innumerable acceptable servants, whom You love and who
attract Your love by assenting to You and obeying You; and You are exempt from
confirming the denial of resurrection by the people of misguidance and unbelief, who
through their disbelief and rebellion and denial of Your promises, offend the
magnificence of Your grandeur and affront Your dignity and glory and the honour of
Your Godhead, and sadden the compassion of Your dominicality. We declare Your
justice, beauty, and mercy to be exempt from such infinite tyranny, such ugliness. We
believe with all our strength that the testimony of the prophets, purified scholars, and
saints, who are those truthful envoys of Yours, those heralds of Your sovereignty, at
the degrees of ‘absolute certainty,’ ‘knowledge of certainty,’ and ‘the vision of
certainty,’ to the treasuries of Your mercy in the hereafter and the stores of Your
bounties in the everlasting realm, and to the wondrously beautiful manifestations of
Your Beautiful Names, which will be manifested totally in the abode of bliss, are
absolutely true and veracious, and what they have indicated conforms absolutely with
reality, and that what they have given glad tidings of is true and will occur. Believing
that the supreme ray of Your Name of Truth, which is the source, sun, and protector
of all realities, is this truth of the resurrection and Great Gathering, they teach it to
Your servants.”
O God! For the sake of what they teach and in veneration of it, grant us and all
students of the Risale-i Nur perfect belief and a happy death. And allow us to receive
their intercession. Amen!

--- Sayfa 196 ---
208
Moreover, just as all the proofs demonstrating the veracity of the revealed
scriptures, and all the miracles and evidences proving the prophethood of God’s
Beloved (PBUH) and of all the prophets, indirectly prove the reality of the hereafter,
which is what they teach above all else; so most of the evidences for the existence and
unity of the Necessary Existent testify indirectly to the existence and opening up of an
eternal realm of bliss, which will be the supreme manifestation of dominicality and
divinity. For as is explained and proved in the following paragraphs, both the existence
of the Necessarily Existent One, and most of His attributes, qualities and Names, such
as dominicality, Godhead, mercy, grace, wisdom, and justice, necessitate the hereafter
with the utmost certainty, and demand an eternal realm and the resurrection of the
dead and Last Judgement for the granting of reward and punishment.
Since there is a pre-eternal and post-eternal God, most certainly there is the
hereafter, the everlasting sphere of the sovereignty of His Godhead.
And since there is in the universe and in living beings a most majestic and wise, a
most compassionate and absolute dominicality, and it is apparent; there is certain to be
an eternal realm of happiness which will save the majesty of that dominicality from
abasement, its wisdom from purposelessness, and its compassion from cruelty; and
that realm shall be entered.
And since the unlimited bestowals, bounties, favours, gifts, and instances of grace
and mercy which are to be seen, show to minds that are not extinguished and hearts
that are not dead that behind the veil of the Unseen is One All-Merciful and
Compassionate; surely there is an immortal life in an eternal realm which will save the
bestowal from mockery, the bounties from deception, the favours from enmity, the
mercy from torment, the grace and gifts from treachery, and will make the bounties
bounty and the bestowal bestowal.
And since in the springtime on the narrow page of the earth, a pen of power
writes a hundred thousand books without error tirelessly before our eyes; and since the
Holder of the pen has promised a hundred thousand times: “I am going to write a fine,
immortal book in a broad realm, easier than this book of the spring written in this
narrow realm, confused and intermingled, and I shall allow you to read it;” — since He
mentions the book in all his decrees; certainly, the main part of the book has been
written, and with the resurrection and Last Judgement its footnotes shall be added, and
all the notebooks of people’s actions shall be recorded in it.
And since, with its multiplicity of creatures, the earth is the dwelling, source,
factory, exhibition, and gathering place of hundreds of thousands of constantly
changing species of living beings and beings with spirits,

--- Sayfa 197 ---
209
and is the heart, centre, summary, and result of the universe, and the reason for its
creation; it has supreme importance, and is held equal to the mighty heavens despite its
smallness; in the heavenly decrees, it is always said: Sustainer of the Heavens and
Earth...
And since there is man, who rules over the earth, which is thus, has disposal over
most creatures, and subjects most living beings gathering them around himself; and
since he so orders, displays, and gathers each remarkable species together in one place
like a list, adorning them, that he attracts not only the attention and admiration of men
and jinn, but of the dwellers of the heavens and the universe, and the appreciative gaze
of the universe’s Owner, thus gaining great importance and high worth; and since he
shows through his sciences and arts that he is the purpose of the universe’s creation,
and its most important result, and most precious fruit, and the Divine vicegerent on
earth; and since because with respect to this world, he has ordered and displayed
excellently the miraculous arts of the world’s Maker, he is left in this world despite his
rebellion and disbelief, and his punishment is postponed, and because of this work of
his, his term is prolonged and is allowed success...
And since there is an extremely powerful, wise, and compassionate Disposer Who
makes the mighty globe into a treasury of every sort of metal and mineral that man
needs in a way entirely beyond his strength and will —who despite being weak,
impotent, and wanting by nature and creation, has innumerable needs and is subject to
innumerable pains— and since He makes it into a store of every sort of food, and a
shop stocking goods of every kind that pleases man, and looks to man in this way, and
nurtures him, and gives him what he wants...
And since there is a Sustainer Who is thus, Who both loves man and causes man
to love Him, and Who is enduring and has eternal worlds, and Who performs every
work with justice and carries out everything with wisdom; and since the splendour of
that Pre-Eternal Sovereign’s rule and His eternal dominion cannot be contained in this
brief worldly life, and in man’s fleeting span, and in the temporary and transient earth;
and since the excessive wrongdoing and rebellion that occur among men, which are
contrary to and opposed to the universe’s order, justice, balance, and beauty, and their
denial, treachery, and disbelief towards their Benefactor, Who nurtures them tenderly,
— since they are not punished in this world, and the cruel oppressor passes his life in
ease while the unhappy oppressed live in hardship; and since the absolute justice
whose traces are to be seen throughout the universe is entirely opposed to the cruel
tyrant and despairing oppressed being equal in death, and would in no way permit it...

--- Sayfa 198 ---
210
And since just as the universe’s Owner has chosen the earth from the universe,
and man from the earth and bestowed on him a high rank and importance; so out of
mankind He has chosen the prophets, saints, and purified ones, true human beings who
conform to the aims of His dominicality and through their belief and submission make
Him love them; He has taken them as friends and addressees, and bestowed miracles
and success on them and punished their enemies with heavenly blows. And out of
these worthy and lovable friends He has chosen their leader and source of pride,
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and for long centuries has illuminated
with his Light half the globe and a fifth of humanity; as though the universe was
created for him, all its purposes become apparent through him and his religion and the
Qur’an. And although he deserved to live for an infinite time in recompense for his
infinitely valuable service, for millions of years, he only lived a brief sixty-three years
of great hardship and striving. Is there any possibility then that he should not be
resurrected together with all his peers and friends? That they should not now be living
in the spirit? That they should have been annihilated eternally? God forbid, a hundred
thousand times! Yes, all the universe and the reality of the world demand that he
should be resurrected and they beseech the universe’s Owner that he should be living...
And since in the Seventh Ray, The Supreme Sign, each with the strength of a
mountain, the thirty-three powerful consensuses have proved that the universe
emerged from a single hand and is the property of a single being; and have
demonstrated self-evidently His unity and oneness, the means of the Divine
perfections; and through unity and oneness all beings become like soldiers under
orders and subservient officials; and with the coming of the hereafter, perfections are
saved from decline, absolute justice from mocking cruelty, universal wisdom from
foolish absurdity, all-embracing mercy from jeering torment, and the dignity of power
from abased impotence, and they are exonerated from this...
Certainly and without any doubt, as necessitated by the truths in these six ‘sinces’
—six out of hundreds of points of belief in God— the end of the world shall come and
the resurrection of the dead occur. Abodes of reward and punishment shall be thrown
open so that the above-mentioned importance of the earth, and its centrality, and
man’s importance and value shall be realized, and the above-mentioned justice,
wisdom, mercy, and sovereignty of the All-Wise Disposer, Who is the Creator of the
earth and of man, and their Sustainer, shall be established; and the true and yearning
friends of that eternal Sustainer shall be saved from eternal annihilation; and the most
eminent and worthy of those friends receive the

--- Sayfa 199 ---
211
recompense for his sacred services, which have made all beings pleased and indebted;
and the perfections of the Eternal Sovereign should be exempted and exonerated from
all fault and deficiency, and His power from impotence, and His wisdom from
foolishness, and His justice from tyranny.
In Short: Since God exists, so does the hereafter certainly exist.
Moreover, just as with all the evidences that prove them, the above three pillars of
belief testify to and indicate resurrection; so do the two pillars “and in the angels, and
in Divine Determining, that both the good of it and the evil of it are from God
Almighty” also necessitate resurrection and testify in powerful fashion to the eternal
realm. It is like this:
All the evidences proving the existence of the angels and their duties of worship,
and innumerable observations of them and conversations with them, prove indirectly
the existence of the Spirit World, and the World of the Unseen, and the eternal realm
and world of the hereafter, and the existence of an abode of happiness and Paradise
and Hell, which in the future shall be populated with men and jinn. For with Divine
permission, the angels can see these worlds and enter them. And all the high-ranking
angels who meet with humans, like Gabriel, tell unanimously of the existence of these
worlds and of their travelling round them. Just as we are certain, due to the
information of those coming from there, that the continent of America exists, although
we have not seen it, so due to information about the angels, which has the strength of
a hundredfold consensus, we should believe with the same certainty in the existence of
the world of eternity, the realm of the hereafter, and Paradise and Hell. And so we do
believe in it.
Furthermore, all the evidences proving the pillar of “belief in Divine Determining,”
included in the Treatise On Divine Determining, the Twenty-Sixth Word, prove
indirectly the resurrection of the dead, the balancing of deeds on the supreme scales,
and the publishing of the pages of deeds. For the recording before our eyes of the
appointed courses of all things on the tablets of order and balance, and the inscribing
of the life-stories of all living beings in their faculties of memory, and the transcribing
of the notebooks of deeds of all beings with spirits, and especially men, on the
Preserved Tablet, such a comprehensive determining and wise apportioning and
precise recording and preserving inscription could surely only be the result of a general
judgement in a supreme tribunal set up to deal out permanent reward and punishment.
That comprehensive and precise recording and preservation would otherwise be
completely meaningless and purposeless, and contrary to wisdom and reality.

--- Sayfa 200 ---
212
Also, if there were no resurrection, all the certain meanings of the book of the
universe, written with the pen of Divine Determining, would be nullified, which is
completely impossible. It is as impossible as denying the universe’s existence, indeed,
is a delirium.
In Short: With all their evidences the five pillars of belief demand the occurrence
of the resurrection and Last Judgement, and their existence, and the existence and
opening up of the realm of the hereafter, and they testify to these and necessitate them.
Thus, it is because there are such vast and unshakeable supports and proofs of the
resurrection, completely in conformity with its vastness, that almost one third of the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is formed by resurrection and the hereafter, and it
makes it the basis and foundation stone of all its truths, and constructs everything on
it.
(The end of the Introduction)
The Tenth Ray
This consists of detailed descriptions of the contents of The Flashes
Collection, from The Fifteenth to the Thirtieth Flashes and The Rays
Collection from the First to the Ninth Rays.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
213
The Eleventh Ray
A Fruit of Denizli Prison
[This is a defence of the Risale-i Nur against atheism and absolute
disbelief. It is our true defence in this imprisonment of ours, for it is only
this we are working at. This treatise is a fruit and souvenir of Denizli
Prison, and the product of two Fridays.]
                                                       S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 202 ---
214
The Fruits of Belief
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And he languished in prison for a number of years more.1
According to an inner meaning of this verse, Joseph (Peace be upon him) is
the patron of prisoners and prison is a sort of ‘School of Joseph.’ Since this is
the second time the Risale-i Nur students have been sent to prison in large
numbers, it is necessary to study and teach in this school, which has been
opened to give this training, the brief summaries of a number of matters
connected with prison that the Risale-i Nur proves, and to benefit from them
thoroughly. We shall explain five or six of those summaries.
The First Topic
As is explained in the Fourth Word, everyday our Creator bestows on us the
capital of twenty-four hours of life so that with it we may obtain all the things
necessary for our two lives. If we spend twenty-three hours on this fleeting worldly life
and neglect to spend the remaining one hour, which is sufficient for the five obligatory
prayers, on the very lengthy life of the hereafter, it may be understood what an
unreasonable error it is, and what a great loss to suffer distress of the mind and spirit
as the penalty for the error, and to behave badly because of the distress, and to fail to
rectify one’s conduct due to living in a state of despair, indeed, to do the opposite. We
may make the comparison.
We should think of what a profitable ordeal it is —if we spend the one hour on
the five obligatory prayers— each hour of this calamitous term of imprisonment
sometimes becoming a day’s worship and one of its transient hours becoming many
permanent hours, and our despair and distress of the spirit and heart in part
disappearing, and its being atonement for the mistakes that led to the imprisonment
and the cause of their being

1 Qur’an, 12:42.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
215
forgiven, and being trained and improved, which is the purpose of imprisonment; we
should think of its being instruction and a pleasant and consoling meeting with our
companions in disaster.
As is said in the Fourth Word, it may be understood how contrary it is to a
person’s interests to give five or ten liras out of his twenty-four to a lottery in which a
thousand people are taking part in order to win the thousand-lira prize, and not give a
single lira out of the twenty-four for a ticket for an everlasting treasury of jewels, and
to rush to the fomer and flee from the latter, —although the chance of winning the
thousand liras in the worldly lottery is one in a thousand because there are a thousand
people taking part, while in the lottery of man’s destiny which looks to the hereafter
the chance of winning for the people of belief, who experience happy deaths, is nine
hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand, as has been stated by one hundred and
twenty-four thousand prophets and confirmed by incalculable numbers of truthful
informers from among the saints and purified scholars as a result of their illuminations.
Prison governors and chief warders, and indeed the country’s administrators and
the guardians of public order, should be grateful at this lesson of the Risale-i Nur, for
the government and disciplining of a thousand believers who constantly have in mind
the prison of Hell is far easier than that of ten who have no belief and do not perform
the obligatory prayers, only think of worldly prisons, do not know what is licit and
what is illicit, and are in part accustomed to living undisciplined lives.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
216
A Summary of the Second Topic
As is well explained in A Guide For Youth from the Risale-i Nur, it is as definite
and obvious that death will befall us as the night will follow today and winter, this
autumn. Just as this prison is a temporary guest-house for those who continuously
enter it and leave it; so the face of the earth is a hostel on the road of the swiftly
travelling caravans which alight for one night then pass on. Surely death, which has
emptied all the cities into the graveyard a hundred times over, has demands greater
than life. The Risale-i Nur has solved the riddle of this awesome truth and discovered
its answer. A short summary of it is this:
Since death cannot be killed nor the door of the grave be closed, if there is a way
of being saved from the executioner of the appointed hour and the solitary
confinement of the grave, it is a question, an anxiety, for man of greater importance
than anything. Yes, there is a solution, and through the mystery of the Qur’an, the
Risale-i Nur has proved it as certainly as two plus two equals four. A brief summary of
it is as follows:
Death is either eternal annihilation, a gallows on which will be hanged both man
and all his friends and relations; or it comprises the release papers to depart for
another, eternal, realm, and to enter, with the document of belief, the palace of bliss.
The grave is either a bottomless pit and dark place of solitary confinement, or it is a
door opening from the prison of this world onto an eternal, light-filled garden and
place of feasting. A Guide For Youth has proved this truth with a comparison.
For example; gallows have been set up in this prison yard, and behind the wall
immediately beyond them a huge lottery office has been opened in the lottery of which
the whole world has taken part. We five hundred people in this prison are certain to be
summoned one by one without exception to that arena; to avoid it is not possible.
Everywhere announcements are being made: “Come and receive your decree of
execution, and mount the gallows!”, or: “Take the note for everlasting solitary
confinement, and take that door!”, or: “Good news for you! The winning ticket worth
millions has come up for you. Come and receive it!” We see with our own eyes that
one after the other they are mounting the gallows. We observe that some are being
hanged, while others are making the gallows a step, and moving onto the lottery office
beyond the wall. Just at that point, which we know

--- Sayfa 205 ---
217
as though we have seen it from the certain information given by the high-ranking
officials there, two groups have entered our prison.
 One group are holding musical instruments, wine, and apparently sweet
confections and pastries which they are trying to make us eat. But the sweets are in
fact lethal, for satans in human form have laced them with poison.
The second group are carrying instructive writings, licit foods, and blessed drinks.
They present them to us and all together say to us with great earnestness: “If you take
and eat the gifts the first group gave you by way of testing you, you shall be hanged on
these gallows before us like the others you have seen. Whereas if you accept the gifts
we have brought you on the command of this country’s Ruler in place of them, and
recite the supplications and prayers in the instructive writings, you shall be saved from
execution. Believe as though you were seeing it that each of you shall receive the
winning ticket worth millions in the lottery office as a royal favour. These decrees say,
and we ourselves say the same thing, that if you eat those illicit, dubious, and
poisonous sweets, you shall suffer terrible pains from the poison until you go to be
hanged.”
Like this comparison, for the people of belief and worship —on condition they
have happy deaths— the ticket for an everlasting and inexhaustible treasury will come
up from the lottery of man’s destiny beyond the gallows of the appointed hour, which
we always see. For those who persist in vice, unlawful actions, unbelief, and sin,
however, there is a hundred per cent probability that on condition they do not repent,
they will receive the summons to either eternal annihilation (for those who do not
believe in the hereafter), or to permanent, dark solitary confinement (for those who
believe in the immortality of man’s spirit, but take the way of vice) and eternal
perdition. Certain news of this has been given by the hundred and twenty-four
thousand prophets2 with their innumerable miracles, which confirm them; and by the
more than one hundred and twenty-four million saints, who see in their illuminations
the traces and shadows —as though on a cinema screen— of what the prophets have
told, and put their signatures to it, affirming it; and by the more than thousands of
millions of investigative scholars,3 interpreters of the law, and veracious ones who,
with decisive proofs and powerful arguments, prove according to reason and
absolutely certainly the things told by those two eminent groups of mankind, and have
set their signatures to them. The situation

2 Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 122. See also, Zad al-Ma’ad (tahqiq: al-Arna’ut), i, 43-4.
3 One of those investigative scholars is the Risale-i Nur, which for twenty years has been
silencing the most obstinate philosophers and obdurate atheists. Its various parts are available;
everyone may read them, and no one can object to them.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
218
then of someone who does not heed the news given unanimously by the decrees of
these three vast and elevated communities and groups of the people of reality, who are
the suns, moons, and stars of mankind and the sacred leaders of humanity, and does
not take the straight path which they have pointed out, and disregards the awesome
ninety-nine per cent danger, and abandons that way due to one person saying there is
danger on it and takes another, lengthy, way — his situation is as follows:
The wretch who since he has abandoned, according to the certain news of
innumerable well-informed observers, the shortest and easiest of the two ways, which
with a hundred per cent certainty will lead to Paradise and eternal happiness, and has
chosen the roughest, longest way, which is most fraught with difficulties and is ninety-
nine per cent certain will lead to incarceration in Hell and everlasting misery, and
leaves the short way because, according to the false information of a single informer,
there is a one per cent chance of danger and the possibility of a month’s imprisonment,
and chooses the long way, which is without benefit, just because it holds no danger,
like drunken lunatics, —such a wretch has lost his humanity, mind, heart, and spirit to
the extent that he ignores the terrible dragons which are seen from afar and are
pestering him, and struggles against mosquitoes, attaching importance to them alone.
Since this is the reality of the situation, so that we avenge ourselves totally for this
calamity of prison, we prisoners should accept the gifts of the second, blessed, group.
That is to say, just as the pleasure of a minute’s revenge or a minute or two, or an
hour of two, of vice, or this calamity, has put us in this prison for fifteen, five, ten, or
two or three years, and made our worlds into a prison; so to spite it, we should avenge
ourselves on this calamity by transforming an hour or two of our prison lives into a
day or two of worship, and our two or three-year-sentences —through the gifts of the
blessed group— into twenty or thirty years of permanent life, and our prison sentences
of twenty or thirty years into a means of forgiveness from millions of years of
incarceration in the dungeons of Hell. In the face of our transitory worlds’ weeping,
we should make our everlasting lives smile. We should show prison to be a place of
training and education, and each of us try to be well-behaved, reliable, useful members
of our nation and country. While the prison officers, administrators, and governors
should see that the men they supposed to be criminals, bandits, layabouts, murderers,
depraved, and harmful to the country are students studying in this blessed place of
instruction, and should proudly offer thanks to God.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
219
The Third Topic
This is the summary of an instructive incident which is described in A Guide For
Youth.
One time, I was sitting by my window in Eskishehir Prison during the ‘Republic
Festival.’ Opposite me, the older girls of the High School were laughing and dancing
in the schoolyard. Suddenly their condition fifty years hence appeared to me, as though
on a cinema screen. I saw that of those fifty to sixty girl students, forty to fifty had
become earth in their graves, and were suffering torments. While ten were ugly
seventy to eighty-year-olds who were despised where they might have expected love
because they did not preserve their chastity when young. This I observed with
complete certainty and I wept at their piteable states. Some of my friends in the prison
heard my weeping, and came and asked me about it. I told them: “Leave me alone for
now, I want to be alone.”
Yes, what I saw was reality, not imagination. Just as the summer and autumn are
followed by winter, so the summer of youth and autumn of old age are followed by the
winter of the grave and Intermediate Realm. If there was a cinema which showed the
events of fifty years in the future, the same as those of fifty years ago are shown in the
present, and the people of misguidance and vice were to be shown their circumstances
of fifty or sixty years hence, they would weep in horror and disgust at their unlawful
pleasures and those things at which they now laugh.
When preoccupied with these observations in Eskishehir Prison, a collective
personality which spreads vice and misguidance was embodied before me like a human
satan. It said:
“We want to experience all the pleasures and joys of life, and to make others
experience them; don’t interfere with us!”
I replied: Since you do not recall death and plunge yourself into vice and
misguidance for pleasure and enjoyment, you should certainly know that due to your
misguidance, all the past is dead and non-existent; it is a desolate graveyard full of
rotted bodies. The suffering arising from those innumerable separations and the eternal
deaths of those numberless friends inflicted on your head through the concern of your
humanity and your misguidance, and on your heart if you have one and it is not dead,

--- Sayfa 208 ---
220
will soon destroy your insignificant drunken pleasure of the present. The future too,
due to your unbelief, is a non-existent, black, dead, and desolate wasteland. And since
the heads of the unfortunates who appear from there, sticking them out into existence
while stopping by in the present, are struck off by the executioner’s sword of the
appointed hour and thrown into non-existence, due to the concern of your intellect, it
continuously rains down grievous worries on your unbelieving head, completely
overturning your petty, dissolute pleasure.
If you give up vice and misguidance and enter the sphere of certain, verified
belief4 and righteousness, you will see through the light of belief that the past is not
non-existent and a graveyard that rots everything, but an existent, light-filled world
which is transformed into the future and into a waiting-room for the immortal spirits
who will enter palaces of bliss in the future. Since it appears thus, it affords not pain,
but according to the strength of belief, a sort of paradaisical pleasure. The future, too,
appears to the eye of belief not as a dark wasteland, but where banquets and
exhibitions of gifts have been set up in palaces of everlasting bliss by the Most
Merciful and Compassionate One of Glory and Bestowal, Whose mercy and
munificence are infinite and Who makes the spring and summer into tables laden with
bounties. Since, knowing he will be despatched there, a person observes this on the
cinema screen of belief, he may experience in a way the pleasures of the eternal realm.
All may do this according to their degree. That is to say, true, painfree pleasure is
found only in belief in God, and is possible only through belief.
Being related to our discussion, we shall explain here by means of a comparison,
which is included in A Guide For Youth as a footnote, only a single benefit and
pleasure out of the thousands that belief produces in this world too. It is as follows:
For example, your beloved only child is suffering the pangs of death and you are
thinking despairingly of your being eternally parted from him. Then suddenly a doctor
like Khidr or Luqman the Wise arrives with a wondrous medicine. Your lovely and
lovable child opens his eyes, delivered from death. You can understand what joy and
happiness it would give you.
Now, like the child, millions of people whom you earnestly love and are
concerned for are —in your view— rotting in the graveyard of the past and are about
to be annihilated, when suddenly the reality of belief, like Luqman the Wise, shines a
light from the window of heart onto the

4 For ‘certain, verified belief’ (iman-i tahkikî), see, page 488 footnote 71, and page 568 footnote
1. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 209 ---
221
graveyard, which is imagined to be a vast place of execution. Through it, all the dead
spring to life. On their declaring through the tongue of disposition: “We had not died
and shall not die; we shall meet with you again,” you feel an endless joy, which belief
gives in this world too, proving that belief in God is a seed that were it to be
embodied, a private paradise would emerge from it, becoming the Tuba-tree of that
seed. I told the collective personality this, and in its stubbornness, it said:
“At least we can live like animals, passing our lives in pleasure and enjoyment, and
by indulging in amusement and dissipation not thinking about these difficult matters.”
I told it by way of an answer:
“You cannot be like an animal, for animals have no past and future. They feel
neither sorrows or regrets at the past, nor anxiety and fear at the future. It receives
perfect pleasure; it sleeps and rises and thanks its Creator. An animal held down to be
slaughtered, even, does not feel anything. It wants to feel it as the knife cuts, but that
feeling disappears as well, and it is saved from the pain. This means that a great
instance of Divine mercy and compassion is not making known the Unseen, and veiling
the things that will befall one. It is more complete for innocent animals. But, O man,
your past and future emerge from the Unseen to an extent because of your reason, so
you are entirely deprived of the unconcern of the animals due to the Unseen being
concealed from them. The regrets and painful separations coming from the past, and
the anxieties coming from the future reduce to nothing your insignificant pleasure; they
make it a hundred times less than that which the animals receive. Since the reality is
this, either throw away your intellect, become an animal and be saved, or come to your
senses through belief; listen to the Qur’an, and receive pure pleasure a hundred times
greater than that of the animals in this transitory world too.” Saying this, I silenced it.
Yet, that obdurate collective personality still turned to me and said: “At least we
can live like those Westerners who are without religion.”
I replied: “You cannot be like the irreligious people of Europe, either. For even if
they deny one prophet, they can believe in the others. If they do not know the
prophets, they may believe in God. And even if they do not know God, they may
possess certain personal qualities through which they find fulfilment. But if a Muslim
denies the Prophet of the End of Time (Peace and blessings be upon him), who was
the final and greatest of the prophets and whose religion and cause are universal, and if
he abandons his religion, he will accept no other prophet and perhaps not even God.
For he knows all the prophets and God and all perfections

--- Sayfa 210 ---
222
through the Prophet of the End of Time (Peace and blessings be upon him); they can
have no place in his heart without him. It is for this reason that since early times people
have entered Islam from all other religions, but no Muslim has become a true Jew,
Magian, or Christian. Muslims who abandon their religion rather become irreligious,
their characters are corrupted, and they become harmful for the country and nation.” I
proved this, and the obstinate collective personality could find no further straw to
clutch at, so it vanished and went to Hell.
My friends who are studying together with me in this School of Joseph! Since the
reality is this and the Risale-i Nur proves it so clearly and decisively, like sunlight, that
for twenty years it has broken the obstinacy of the obdurate and brought them to
believe; we should therefore follow the way of belief and right conduct, which is easy
and safe and beneficial for both our own worlds, and our futures, and our lives in the
hereafter, and our country and nation; and spend our free time reciting the suras of the
Qur’an that we know instead of indulging in distressing fancies, and learn the meaning
from friends who teach them; and make up for the prayers we have failed to perform in
the past, when we should have done; and taking advantage of one another’s good
qualities, transform this prison into a blessed garden raising the seedlings of good
character. With good deeds like these, we should do our best to make the prison
governor and those concerned not torturers like the Angels of Hell standing over
criminals and murderers, but righteous masters and kindly guards charged with the
duties of raising people for Paradise in the School of Joseph and supervising their
training and education.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
223
The Fourth Topic
Again, there is an explanation of this in A Guide For Youth. One time, I was asked
the following question by the brothers who assist me:
“For fifty days now —and now seven years have passed5 — you have asked
nothing at all about this ghastly World War, which has plunged the whole world into
chaos and is closely connected with the fate of the Islamic world, nor have you been
curious about it. Whereas some religious and learned persons are leaving the
congregation in the mosques and racing to listen to the radio. Is there some event
more momentous than the war? Or is it harmful in some way to be preoccupied with
it?”
I replied to them: Life’s capital is very little and the work to be done is much.
There are spheres one within the other like concentric circles, from the sphere of
man’s heart and stomach, and that of his home and body, and that of the quarter in
which he lives and his town, and his country and land, and the globe and mankind, to
the spheres of animate beings and the world. Each person may have duties in each of
those spheres, but the most important and permanent of these are those in the smallest
sphere. While his least important and temporary duties may be in the largest sphere.
According to this analogy, the largest and smallest are in inverse proportion. But
because of the attractiveness of the largest sphere, it causes the person to neglect his
important, necessary duties in the small sphere, busying him with unnecessary, trivial,
peripheral matters. It destroys the capital of his life for nothing. It kills his precious life
on worthless things. Sometimes, the one following curiously the struggles of the war
comes to earnestly support one side. He looks favourably on their tyranny, and
becomes a partner in it.
The Answer to the first point: Yes, an event more momentous than this World
War and a case more important than that of world supremacy has been opened over
the heads of everyone and especially Muslims, so that if everyone had the wealth and
power of the Germans and English and sense as well, they would unhesitatingly spend
all of it to win that single case. The case is this: relying on the thousands of promises
and pledges of the universe’s Owner, Who has disposal over it, hundreds of

5 This refers to 1946.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
224
thousands of the most eminent of mankind, and uncounted numbers of its stars and
guides, have unanimously given news —and some of them have actually seen— that
for everyone the case has opened by which they may either win, in return for belief, or
lose, eternal properties as broad as the earth set with palaces and gardens. If they do
not secure the document of belief, they will lose. And this age, many are losing the
case because of the plague of materialism. One of the diviners of reality and
investigators of truth observed in one place that out of forty people who died, only a
few won; the others lost. Can anything take the place of that lost suit, even rule over
the whole world?
Since we Risale-i Nur students know it would be pure lunacy to give up the duties
which will win the case and abandon the wondrous lawyer who saves ninety per cent
from losing it and the task which the lawyer employs us in, and become involved with
peripheral trivia as though we were going to remain in the world for ever, we are
certain that if each of us had intelligence a hundred times greater than what we have,
we still would use it only on this task.
My new brothers here in this calamity of prison! You have seen the Risale-i Nur
the same as my old brothers, who entered here together with me. Citing them and
thousands of students like them as witnesses, I say, I prove, and have proved, that it is
the Risale-i Nur that wins that supreme case for ninety people out of a hundred,
obtains for them certain, verified belief, which is the document and warrant that has
won the case for twenty thousand people in twenty years. It has proceeded from the
miraculousness of the All-Wise Qur’an and is the leading lawyer at this time. Although
these eighteen years my enemies and the atheists and materialists have duped some
members of the government with their exceedingly cruel plots against me, and have
had us sent to prison to have us done away with — in the past as now, they have been
able to cause harm to only two or three of the one hundred and thirty pieces of
equipment in the steel fortress of the Risale-i Nur. That means, to obtain it is sufficient
for those who want to engage a lawyer. Also, fear not, the Risale-i Nur cannot be
banned! With the exception of two or three, its treatises are circulating freely among
the deputies serving the Government of the Republic, and its leaders. God willing, at
some time happy governors and guards will distribute those lights to the prisoners, like
bread and medicine, and so make the prisons into truly effective places of reform.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
225
The Fifth Topic
As is described in A Guide For Youth, there is no doubt that youth will depart; it
will change into old age and death as certainly as the summer gives its place to autumn
and winter, and the day changes into evening and night. All the revealed scriptures
give the good news that if fleeting, transient youth is spent on good works, in chastity
and within the bounds of good conduct, it will gain for the person immortal youth.
If, on the other hand, youth is spent on vice, just as murder resulting from a
minute’s anger leads to millions of minutes of imprisonment, so quite apart from being
called to account in the hereafter, and the torments of the grave, and the regrets arising
from their passing, and sins, and the penalties suffered in this world, the unlawful
pleasures of youth contain more pain than pleasure; every youth with sense will
corroborate this from his own experience.
For example, the pains of jealousy, separation, and unreciprocated love transform
the partial pleasure to be found in illicit love into poisonous honey. If you want to
know how they end up in hospitals due to illnesses resulting from their misspent youth,
and in prison due to their excesses, and in bars and dens of vice and the graveyard due
to the distress arising from their unnourished hearts and spirits not performing their
right functions, go and ask at the hospitals, prisons, bars, and graveyards. More than
anything, you will hear the weeping and sighs of regret at the blows youths have
received as the penalty for abusing their youth, and their excesses, and illicit pleasures.
Foremost the Qur’an, with numerous of its verses, and all the revealed scriptures
and books, give the glad tidings that if spent within the bounds of moderation, youth is
an agreeable Divine bounty and sweet, powerful means to good works, which yields
the result of shining, immortal youth in the hereafter.
Since the reality is this, and since the bounds of the licit are sufficient for
enjoyment, and since an hour of unlawful pleasure leads sometimes to a punishment of
one, or ten, years’ imprisonment; surely it is absolutely necessary to spend the sweet
bounty of youth chastely, on the straight path, as thanks for the bounty.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
226
The Sixth Topic
 [This consists of a single, brief proof of the pillar of belief, ‘Belief in God,’
for which there are numerous decisive proofs and explanations in many places
in the Risale-i Nur.]
In Kastamonu a group of high-school students came to me, saying: “Tell us about
our Creator, our teachers do not speak of God.” I said to them: “All the sciences you
study continuously speak of God and make known the Creator, each with its own
particular tongue. Do not listen to your teachers; listen to them.
“For example, a well-equipped pharmacy with life-giving potions and cures in
every jar weighed out in precise and wondrous measures doubtless shows an extremely
skilful, practised, and wise pharmacist. In the same way, to the extent that it is bigger
and more perfect and better stocked than the pharmacy in the market-place, the
pharmacy of the globe of the earth with its living potions and medicaments in the jars
which are the four hundred thousand species of plants and animals shows and makes
known to eyes that are blind even —by means of the measure or scale of the science of
medicine that you study— the All-Wise One of Glory, Who is the Pharmacist of the
mighty pharmacy of the earth.
“To take another example; a wondrous factory which weaves thousands of sorts
of cloth from a simple material doubtless makes known a manufacturer and skilful
mechanic. In the same way, to whatever extent it is larger and more perfect than the
human factory, this travelling dominical machine known as the globe of the earth with
its hundreds of thousands of heads, in each of which are hundreds of thousands of
factories, shows and makes known —by means of the measure or scale of the science
of engineering which you study— its Manufacturer and Owner.
“And, for example, a depot, store, or shop in which has been brought together and
stored up in regular and orderly fashion a thousand and one varieties of provisions
undoubtedly makes known a wondrous owner, proprietor, and overseer of provisions
and foodstuffs. In just the same way, to whatever degree it is vaster and more perfect
than such a store or factory, this foodstore of the Most Merciful One known as the
globe of the earth, this Divine ship, this dominical depot and shop holding goods,

--- Sayfa 215 ---
227
equipment, and conserved food, which in one year travels regularly an orbit of twenty-
four thousand years, and carrying groups of beings requiring different foods and
passing through the seasons on its journey and filling the spring with thousands of
different provisions like a huge waggon, brings them to the wretched animate
creatures whose sustenance has been exhausted in winter, —by means of the measure
or scale of the science of economics which you study— this depot of the earth makes
known and makes loved its Manager, Organizer, and Owner.
“And, for example, let us imagine an army which consists of four hundred
thousand nations, and each nation requires different provisions, uses different
weapons, wears different uniforms, undergoes different drill, and is discharged from its
duties differently. If this army and camp has a miracle-working commander who on his
own provides all those different nations with all their different provisions, weapons,
uniforms, and equipment without forgetting or confusing any of them, then surely the
army and camp show the commander and make him loved appreciatively. In just the
same way, the spring camp of the face of the earth in which every spring a newly
recruited Divine army of the four hundred thousand species of plants and animals are
given their varying uniforms, rations, weapons, training, and demobilizations in utterly
perfect and regular fashion by a single Commander-in-Chief Who forgets or confuses
not one of them —to whatever extent the spring camp of the face of the earth is vaster
and more perfect than that human army, —by means of the measure or scale of the
military science that you study— it makes known to the attentive and sensible, its
Ruler, Sustainer, Administrator, and Most Holy Commander, causing wonderment and
acclaim, and makes Him loved and praised and glorified.
“Another example: millions of electric lights that move and travel through a
wondrous city, their fuel and power source never being exhausted, self-evidently make
known a wonder-working craftsman and extraordinarily talented electrician who
manages the electricity, makes the moving lamps, sets up the power source, and brings
the fuel; they cause others to congratulate and applaud him, and to love him. In just
the same way, although some of the lamps of the stars in the roof of the palace of the
world in the city of the universe —if they are considered in the way that astronomy
says— are a thousand times larger than the earth and move seventy times faster than a
cannon-ball, they do not spoil their order, nor collide with one another, nor become
extinguished, nor is their fuel exhausted. According to astronomy, which you study,
for our sun to continue burning, which is a million times larger than the earth and a
million times older and is a lamp and stove in one guest-house of the Most

--- Sayfa 216 ---
228
Merciful One, as much oil as the seas of the earth and as much coal as its mountains or
as many logs and much wood as ten earths are necessary for it not to be extinguished.
And however much greater and more perfect than this example are the electric lamps
of the palace of the world in the majestic city of the universe, which point with their
fingers of light to an infinite power and sovereignty which illuminates the sun and
other lofty stars like it without oil, wood, or coal, not allowing them to be
extinguished or to collide with one another, though travelling together at speed, to that
degree —by means of the measure of the science of electricity which you either study
or will study— they testify to and make known the Monarch, Illuminator, Director,
and Maker of the mighty exhibition of the universe; they make Him loved, glorified,
and worshipped.
“And, for example, take a book in every line of which a whole book is finely
written, and in every word of which a sura of the Qur’an is inscribed with a fine pen.
Being most meaningful with all of its matters corroborating one another, and a
wondrous collection showing its writer and author to be extraordinarily skilful and
capable, it undoubtedly shows its writer and author together with all his perfections
and arts as clearly as daylight, and makes him known. It makes him appreciated with
phrases like, “What wonders God has willed!” and “Blessed be God!” Just the same is
the mighty book of the universe; we see with our eyes a pen at work which writes on
the face of the earth, which is a single of its pages, and on the spring, which is a single
folio, the three hundred thousand plant and animal species, which are like three
hundred thousand different books, all together, one within the other, without fault or
error, without mixing them up or confusing them, perfectly and with complete order,
and sometimes writes an ode in a word like a tree, and the complete index of a book in
a point-like seed. However much vaster and more perfect and meaningful than the
book in the example mentioned above is this compendium of the universe and mighty
embodied Qur’an of the world, which is infinitely full of meaning and in every word of
which are numerous instances of wisdom, to that degree —in accordance with the
extensive measure and far-seeing vision of the natural science that you study and the
sciences of reading and writing that you have practised at school— it makes known
the Inscriber and Author of the book of the universe together with His infinite
perfections. Proclaiming “God is Most Great!”, it makes Him known. Uttering phrases
like “Glory be to God!”, it describes Him. Acclaiming Him with words like “All praise
be to God!”, it makes Him loved.
“Thus, hundreds of other sciences like these make known the Glorious Creator of
the universe together with His Names, each through its broad

--- Sayfa 217 ---
229
measure or scale, its particular mirror, its far-seeing eyes, and searching gaze; they
make known His attributes and perfections.
“It is in order to give instruction in this matter, which is a brilliant and magnificent
proof of Divine unity, that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition teaches us about our
Creator most often with the verses, Sustainer of the Heavens and the Earth,6 and, He
created the Heavens and Earth.”7 I said this to the schoolboys, and they accepted it
completely, affirming it by saying: “Endless thanks be to God, for we have received an
absolutely true and sacred lesson. May God be pleased with you!” And I said:
“Man is a living machine who is grieved with thousands of different sorrows and
receives pleasure in thousands of different ways, and despite his utter impotence has
innumerable enemies, physical and spiritual, and despite his infinite poverty, has
countless needs, external and inner, and is a wretched creature continuously suffering
the blows of death and separation. Yet, through belief and worship, he at once
becomes connected to a Monarch so Glorious he finds a point of support against all
his enemies and a source of help for all his needs, and like everyone takes pride at the
honour and rank of the lord to whom he is attached, you can compare for yourselves
how pleased and grateful and thankful and full of pride man becomes at being
connected through belief to an infinitely Powerful and Compassionate Monarch, at
entering His service through worship, and transforming for himself the announcement
of the execution of the appointed hour into the papers releasing him from duty.”
I repeat to the calamity-stricken prisoners what I said to the schoolboys: “One
who recognizes Him and obeys Him is fortunate even if he is in prison. While one who
forgets Him is wretched and a prisoner even if he resides in a palace.” Even, one
wronged but fortunate man said to the wretched tyrants who were executing him: “I
am not being executed but being demobilized and departing for where I shall find
happiness. But I see that you are being condemned to eternal execution and am
therefore taking perfect revenge on you.” And declaring: “There is no god but God!”,
he happily surrendered up his spirit.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.8

6 Qur’an, 6:1.
7 Qur’an, 13:16.
8 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
230
The Seventh Topic
 [The fruit of a Friday in Denizli Prison]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
The command of the Hour [of resurrection] will be like the glance of an eye,
or briefer.9 * The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all is but
like that of a single soul.10 * So look to the signs of God’s mercy, how He
gives life to the earth after its death; He it is Who will raise the dead to life,
and He is Powerful over all things.11
The prisoners in Denizli Prison who were able to have contact with me, read the
lesson in the Sixth Topic I had at one time given in the tongues of the sciences to the
high school pupils in Kastamonu, who had asked me: “Tell us about our Creator,” and
having acquired a firm belief, they felt a longing for the hereafter. They requested of
me: “Teach us also about the hereafter so that we won’t be led astray by our souls and
the satans of these times, and they will not again be the cause of our being sent to
prison.” So in the face of this request of the Risale-i Nur students in Denizli Prison
and the readers of the Sixth Topic, need arose for an explanatory summary of the pillar
of belief in the hereafter, as well, and I offered them a brief summary of various
passages from the Risale-i Nur.
In the Sixth Topic we asked the heavens and the earth about our Creator, and
they described Him to us as clearly as the sun in the tongues of the sciences. Now, in
the same way, we shall ask firstly our Sustainer, Whom we have learnt about, about
the hereafter, then our Prophet, then the Qur’an, then the other prophets and holy
scriptures, then the angels, and then the universe.
In the first stage, we ask God about the hereafter. He replies through all the
envoys He has sent, and His decrees, and all His Names and attributes: “Yes, the
hereafter exists, and I shall send you there.” The Tenth Word has proved and
elucidated with twelve brilliant, decisive truths the

9 Qur’an, 16:77.
10 Qur’an, 31:28.
11 Qur’an, 30:50.

--- Sayfa 219 ---
231
answers about the hereafter of a number of Names. Deeming those explanations to be
sufficient, here we shall point them out briefly.
Yes, since there is no sovereignty that does not reward those who obey it and
punish the rebellious, an eternal sovereignty which is at the degree of absolute
dominicality rewarding those who form a relation with it through belief and submit to
its decrees, and its punishing rebellious disbelievers who deny its proud sovereignty
will be in a manner fitting for its mercy and beauty, its dignity and glory. Thus, the
Names Sustainer of All the Worlds and Just Monarch reply to our question.
Also, we see as clearly as the sun, as daylight, a general mercy and all-embracing
compassion and munificence on the face of the earth. For example, every spring that
mercy adorns all the fruit-bearing trees and plants like houris; it fills their hands with
every sort of fruit and they hold them out to us, saying: “Help yourselves, and eat!” So
does it give us sweet, healing honey to eat from the poisonous bee, and dresses us in
the softest silk by means of a handless insect. It deposits for us in a handful of tiny
seeds pounds of food, making those tiny stores into reserve supplies. Such a mercy
and compassion surely would not execute these lovable, grateful, worshipping
believers which they nurture so kindly. They rather dismiss them from their duties in
this worldly life to bestow on them still more brilliant instances of mercy, and in so
doing the Names of All-Compassionate and Munificent answer our question.
Also, we see before our eyes that a hand of wisdom works in all creatures on the
face of the earth and a justice is in force with its measures, nothing superior to which
the human mind can conceive of. For example, a pre-eternal wisdom inscribes in man’s
faculty of memory, which is one instance of wisdom in his thousands of faculties and
physical systems and is as tiny as a miniscule seed, his entire life-story and the
numerous events which touch on him, making it into a small library. He then places it
in the pocket of his mind as a note from the register of his actions which will be
published for his judgement at the Great Gathering, in order to continuously remind
him of this. And an eternal justice places on all creatures their members with the finest
balance, and makes all of them —from the microbe to the rhinoceros, and the fly to the
simurgh bird, and from a flowering plant to the flower of the spring, which opens
thousands of millions of flowers in the spring— with a beauty of art and balance with
no waste within a mutual proportion, equilibrium, order and beauty; it gives all living
creatures their rights of life with perfect balance, and makes good things produce good
results and bad things, bad results; and since the time of Adam it has made itself felt
forcefully through the blows

--- Sayfa 220 ---
232
it has dealt to rebellious and tyrannous peoples. Certainly and without doubt, just as
the sun cannot be without the day, so that pre-eternal wisdom and eternal justice
cannot be without the hereafter. The Names of All-Wise and Sapient, Just and
Equitable would never permit the awesome injustice, inequity, and unwisdom of
oppressed and oppressor being equal in death, and thus they decisively answer our
question.
Also, since whenever living creatures seek their natural wishes, which are beyond
their power, through the tongues of their innate abilities and essential needs, which is
supplication of a sort, all their needs are given to them by a most compassionate,
hearing, kind unseen hand; and since six or seven out of ten of human supplications,
which are voluntary, especially those of the prophets and the elect, are accepted in a
way contrary to the normal course of things; it is understood certainly that behind the
veil of the Unseen is one who listens and hears the sighs of the suffering and prayers of
the needy, and replies to them; he sees the least need of the smallest living being and
compassionately replying by action, gratifies it. There is no possibility of doubting
therefore that the one who includes in his supplication all the most important, general
supplications of man, the most important of creatures, which are connected with all the
Divine Names and attributes and are for immortality; and takes behind him all the other
prophets, who are the suns, stars, and leaders of mankind, making them exclaim:
“Amen! Amen!”; and for whom benedictions are recited several times every day; and
to whose supplication all the members of his community rejoin: “Amen! Amen!”,
indeed, in whose supplication all creatures take part, saying: “Yes, O Lord! Do give
what he asks! We too want what he seeks!” — of all the causes necessitating
resurrection under these irresistible conditions, only a single supplication of
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) for immortality in the hereafter and
eternal happiness would have been sufficient reason for the existence of Paradise and
creation of the hereafter, which are as easy for Divine power as the creation of the
spring — stating this, the Names of Answerer of Prayer, All-Hearing, and All-
Compassionate answer our question.
Also, since as clearly as the sun is shown by daylight, behind the veil is One Who
has disposal over the universal death and revivification in the alternation of the seasons
on the earth; and a pen of power inscribes the mighty globe with the ease and
orderliness of a garden or even a tree, and the splendid spring with the facility and
symmetrical adornment of a flower, and the species of plants and animals as though
they were three hundred thousand books displaying three hundred thousand samples of
resurrection, all one within the other and intermingled and mixed up

--- Sayfa 221 ---
233
together yet without disarrangement or disorder, all resembling each other yet without
confusion, error, or fault; perfectly, regularly, and meaningfully; and since despite this
vast profusion that One works with boundless mercy and infinite wisdom; and since
He has subjugated, decorated, and furnished the vast universe for man like a house,
and appointing him vicegerent of the earth, committing to him the supreme trust, from
the bearing of which the mountains, sky, and earth shrank, and has raised him to the
rank of commanding officer over other living beings, honoured him with the Divine
address and conversation, and since He has thus bestowed on man this supreme station
and in all the revealed decrees promised him eternal happiness and immortal life in the
hereafter; certainly and without doubt He will open up that realm of bliss for ennobled
and honoured man, which is as easy for His power as the spring, and bring about the
resurrection of the dead and Last Judgement —stating this, the Names of Granter of
Life and Dealer of Death, Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent, and All-Powerful and
Knowing reply to the question we asked of our Creator.
Yes, if one considers the power which every spring raises to life identically the
roots of all the trees and plants and creates the three hundred thousand plant and
animal samples of the resurrection of the dead, and if one visualizes the thousand year
period of each of the communities of Moses and Muhammad (Peace and blessings be
upon them), and they are pictured in the imagination, it will be seen that the two
thousand springs12 display a thousand samples of resurrection and a thousand
evidences. It is to be blind and unreasonable a thousand times over to consider bodily
resurrection difficult for such a power.
Also, just as relying on Almighty God’s thousands of promises, the twenty-four
thousand prophets, who are the most renowned of mankind, have unanimously
proclaimed and proved through their miracles that eternal happiness and immortality in
the hereafter are true; so innumerable people of sainthood have put their signature to
the same truth through their illuminations and unfoldings. Since this is so, surely this
truth is as clear as the sun, and those who doubt it are crazy.
Yes, the ideas and judgements of one or two experts in a science or art concerning
their science refute the opposing ideas of ten men who are not experts in it, even if
they are experts in their own fields. Similarly, two people making a positive statement
about a subject, for example, proving the crescent moon of Ramadan on the day it is
uncertain, or claiming: “there is a garden on the earth where coconuts resembling cans
of milk are grown” defeat a thousand deniers, and win the case. For the one

12 It is as though Doomsday has occurred in all past springs and they have died, while the
following springs have been their resurrections.

--- Sayfa 222 ---
234
making the positive statement has only to point out the place where the coconuts are
found to easily win. Whereas the one who denies it can prove his case only by
searching the whole face of the earth and demonstrating that the coconuts are not to
be found anywhere. So one who makes a report of Paradise and the realm of bliss and
asserts that they exist wins his case by only demonstrating through illumination a
shadow or distillation of it, like in the cinema, while those who deny it can only win by
proving their denial by seeing the whole universe and all time from pre-eternity to
post-eternity, and demonstrating it. It is because of this that the investigative scholars
have agreed on the rule “on condition they are not inherently impossible, denials which
are not specific but look to the whole universe like the truths of belief, cannot be
proved,” and have accepted it as a fundamental principle.
In consequence of this definite truth, while the opposing ideas of thousands of
philosophers should not cast the slightest doubt, or even suspicion, on even a single
truthful report concerning the questions of belief, you may understand what a lunacy it
is to fall into doubt at the denials of a handful of philosophers who concerning the
pillars of belief understand no further than their eyes see, have no heart, are blind, and
have grown distant from spiritual matters. For the pillars of faith have been agreed
upon by one hundred and twenty thousand expert scholars and truthful reporters with
their positive assertions, and innumerable specialists in the field of reality and
investigative scholars.
Also, we see with our own eyes as clearly as daylight both in ourselves and all
around us a comprehensive mercy and all-embracing wisdom and constant bestowal of
grace. We observe too the traces and manifestations of an awesome sovereignty of
dominicality, a precise and lofty justice, and a proud and glorious government. Indeed,
the wisdom which attaches instances of wisdom to a tree to the number of its fruits
and flowers; and the mercy which bestows bounties and favours on every human being
to the number of his faculties, members, and feelings; and the proud, yet gracious
justice which deals blows at rebellious peoples like those of Noah, Hud, and Salih
(Peace be upon them) and the ‘Ad, Thamud, and people of Pharoah, and protects the
rights of the least living being; and the verse:
And among His signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command;
then when He calls you, by a single call, from the earth, behold, you
[straightway] come forth13
all state the following with a majestic conciseness:
Just as at the summons of their commander and the sound of the bugle,

13 Qur’an, 30:25.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
235
the disciplined soldiers stationed in two barracks spring to arms and their duties; so
whenever the bugle-call of Israfil (Peace be upon him) summons those lying in death in
the vast heavens and in the earth, which are like two orderly barracks for the soldiers
of the Pre-Eternal Monarch, obedient to His command, they will immediately don the
uniforms of their bodies and rise up. Proving and demonstrating this is the same
situation displayed by the beings in the barracks of the earth in the spring at the
trumpet-blast of the Angel of Thunder, and from it is understood the infinite grandeur
of the sovereignty of dominicality. As is proved in the Tenth Word, it is certainly
therefore utterly impossible that the realm of the hereafter and arena of the
resurrection and Great Gathering, which are most definitely demanded by that mercy,
wisdom, grace, and justice, should not be inaugurated, and for that infinitely beautiful
mercy to be transformed into ugly cruelty, and for that boundless perfection of wisdom
to be turned into infinitely faulty futility and purposeless wastefulness, and that sweet
grace to be transformed into bitter treachery, and that finely balanced and equitable
justice to be turned into severe tyranny, and that utterly powerful and majestic eternal
sovereignty to decline, and with the resurrection not occuring for it to lose all its
splendour, and for the perfections of its dominicality to be marred by impotence and
defect. This would be completely unreasonable and a compounded impossibility,
outside the bounds of possibility and false and precluded.
For all those with intelligence would surely understand what a cruel unkindness it
would be, having nurtured man so solicitously and given him through faculties like the
heart and intellect a sense of longing for eternal happiness and everlasting life in the
hereafter, to despatch him to eternal non-being; and how contrary to wisdom it would
be, having attached hundreds of purposes and instances of wisdom to only his brain, to
waste through endless death all his faculties and his abilities with their thousands of
purposes thus making them devoid of all use, purpose and result; and how utterly
opposed to the splendour of that sovereignty and perfect dominicality it would be, by
not carrying out His thousands of promises, to demonstrate —God forbid!— His
impotence and ignorance. You may make an analogy with these for grace and justice.
Thus, the Names of Most Merciful, All-Just, All-Wise, Munificent, and Ruler
answer with the above truths the question we asked our Creator about the hereafter,
and prove it as indubitably and clearly as the sun.
Moreover, we observe that prevailing over everything is a vast and comprehensive
preservation which records in their seeds, on the tablets of the World of Similitudes, in
their memories, which are tiny samples of the Preserved Tablet, and particularly in the
faculty of memory, which is

--- Sayfa 224 ---
236
a tiny library in man’s brain which is at the same time very large, and in other mirrors,
physical and non-physical, in which they are reflected, the numerous forms of all living
creatures and all things, and the notebooks of the duties they perform in accordance
with their essential natures, and the pages of their deeds pertaining to the glorifications
they perform towards the Divine Names through the tongues of their beings; it
inscribes them in these, and records and preserves them. Then, when the time comes
—every spring, which is a flower of Divine power— they display to us all those
immaterial inscriptions in physical form, proclaim to the universe with millions of
tongues within that supreme flower, and with the strength of millions of examples,
evidences, and samples, the wondrous truth of resurrection expressed in the verse:
When the pages are spread out.14
It proves most cogently that foremost man, and all living beings and all things, were
created not to topple over into nothingness, to fall into non-existence, to be
annihilated, but to win immortality through progressing, and permanence through
being purified, and to take up the eternal duties required by their innate capacities.
Yes, we observe every spring that the innumerable plants which die in the
doomsday of the autumn, and all the trees, roots, seeds, and grains in the resurrection
of the spring recite the verse When the pages are spread out. Expounding each in its
own tongue one meaning of the verse, one facet of it, with examples of the duties it
performed in previous years, they all testify to that vast preservation. They display in
everything the four vast truths of the verse,
He is the First, and the Last, the Evident, and the Inward,15
and instruct us with the ease and certainty of the spring.
The manifestations of these four Names occur in all things from the most
particular to the most universal. For example, through manifesting the Name of First,
a seed, the source of a tree, is a precise programme of it and a small receptacle
containing the faultless systems of the tree’s creation and all the conditions of its
formation, thus proving the vastness of Divine preservation.
Then, together with the tree’s seeds, its fruit manifests the Name of Last; they are
coffers containing the indexes of all the duties the tree has performed in accordance
with its nature and the principles of its second life, thus testifying at a maximum level
to Divine preservation.

14 Qur’an, 81:10.
15 Qur’an, 57:3.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
237
The tree’s physical form, which manifests the Name of Evident, is a  finely
proportioned, skilfully decorated garment. Like a seventy-hued robe of the houris
which has been embroidered with gilded motifs, it demonstrates visibly the vast power,
perfect wisdom, and beautiful mercy within Divine preservation.
As for the machinery within the tree, which manifests the Name of Inward, it is a
regular, miraculous, faultless factory and workbench, a balanced cauldron of food
which leaves unnourished none of its branches, fruits, or leaves, thus proving as
brilliantly as the sun the perfect power, justice, and beautiful mercy and wisdom within
Divine preservation.
Similarly, in respect of the annual seasons the globe is a tree. Through the
manifestation of the Name of First, all the seeds and grains entrusted to Divine
preservation in the season of autumn are small collections of the Divine commands
concerning the formation of the tree of the face of the earth, which when it is enrobed
in the garment of spring, puts forth millions of branches and twigs, and fruits and
flowers. So too those seeds are lists of the principles proceeding from Divine
Determining, and the tiny pages of the tree’s deeds of the previous summer, and the
notebooks of its tasks, which demonstrate self-evidently that they function through the
infinite power, justice, wisdom, and mercy of a Glorious and Munificent Preserver.
Then the end of the annual tree of the earth is —in the second autumn, its
depositing in those tiny containers all the duties it has performed, all the glorifications
it has recited before the Divine Names in accordance with its creation, and all the
pages of its deeds that it will publish the following resurrection of spring,— its
handing them over to the hand of wisdom of the Glorious Preserver and reciting the
Name of He is the Last before the whole universe in innumerable tongues.
The evident face of the tree is, —by its opening three hundred thousand universal
sorts of blossoms, which demonstrate three hundred thousand examples and signs of
the resurrection of the dead; and its spreading out innumerable tables of mercifulness,
providence, compassionateness, and munificence; and its offering banquets to living
beings,— its reciting the Name of He is the Evident with tongues to the number of its
fruits, flowers, and foods, and offering praise and laudation, and showing as clearly as
daylight the truth of When the pages are spread out.
The inner face of this majestic tree is a cauldron and workbench running precisely
and in orderly fashion incalculable numbers of regular machines and finely balanced
factories, which cook thousands of pounds of food out of one ounce and offer it to the
hungry. It works with such

--- Sayfa 226 ---
238
precision and balance that it leaves no room for chance to interfere. Like some angels
who glorify God with a thousand tongues, with the inner face of the earth it proclaims
the Name of He is the Inward in a hundred thousand ways, and proves it.
Just as in respect of its annual life, the earth is a tree and makes the Divine
preservation within those four Names a key to the door of resurrection, so in respect
of its worldly life, it is again a well-ordered tree, whose fruits are sent to the market of
the hereafter. It is a place of manifestation of those four Names and mirror to them so
broad, and road leading to the hereafter so lengthy, our minds are incapable of
comprehending and describing it; we can only say this much:
As the hands of a weekly clock which count the seconds, minutes, hours, and days
resemble each other and prove each other, and one who sees the movement of the
second hand is bound to assent to the movement of the others; so the days, which
count the seconds of this world, which is a vast clock of the Glorious Creator of the
Heavens and Earth, and the years, which count its minutes, and the centuries, which
show its hours, and the ages, which make known its days, all resemble and prove each
other. So too the Name of Preserver and those of He is the First, and the Last, the
Evident, and the Inward inform us through innumerable signs that as certainly as the
morning of this night will come, and this winter’s spring, so will the everlasting spring
and eternal morning come of the dark winter of this transitory world, thus answering
with the above truths the question of resurrection concerning which we asked our
Creator.
Also, since we see with our eyes and understand with our minds that man is the
final and most comprehensive fruit of the tree of the universe.. and in respect of the
Muhammadan (Peace and blessings be upon him) Reality is its original seed.. and the
supreme sign of the Qur’an of the universe.. and he is its Throne Verse bearing the
Greatest Name.. and the most honoured guest in the palace of the universe.. the most
active functionary empowered over the other inhabitants of the palace.. the official
charged with overseeing the income and expenditure, and the planting and cultivation
of the gardens in the quarter of the earth in the city of the universe.. and is its most
noisy and responsible minister, equipped with hundreds of sciences and thousands of
arts.. and an inspector and sort of vicegerent of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity, under His close scrutiny, in the region of the earth in the country of the
universe.. and one with disposal over it whose actions, particular and universal, are all
recorded.. who has undertaken the Supreme Trust, from which the heavens and earth
and mountains shrank.. and before whom are two roads, on one of which he is the
most wretched of living beings, and on

--- Sayfa 227 ---
239
the other, the most fortunate.. and he is a universal bondsman charged with most
extensive worship.. the place of manifestation of the Greatest Name of the Monarch of
the universe and a comprehensive mirror of all His Names.. a special addressee of His,
with the best understanding of His Divine addresses and speech.. the most needy of the
living beings of the universe.. and is a wretched living creature who has innumerable
desires and goals, numberless enemies and things that harm him, despite his infinite
poverty and impotence.. is the richest in regard to abilities and potentialities.. the most
suffering in respect of the pleasures of life, whose enjoyment is marred by ghastly
pains.. and a wondrous miracle of the power of the Eternally Besought One and
marvel of Divine power who is the most needy and wanting, and worthy and deserving
of immortality, and seeks and beseeches eternal happiness with endless prayers, and if
all the pleasures of this world were given him, his desire for immortality would not be
satisfied, and who loves to the degree of worshipping Him the One Who bestows
bounties on him, and makes Him loved and is loved.. and all of whose faculties, which
encompass the universe, testify that he was created to go to eternity.. and through the
above twenty universal truths is bound to Almighty God’s Name of Truth; and whose
actions are continuously recorded by the All-Glorious Preserver’s Name of Preserver,
Who sees the most insignificant need of the tiniest animate being, hears it plaint and
responds in action; and being related to the whole universe whose deeds are written
down by the “noble scribes” of that Name and who more than anything else receives
its attention..
As required by the above twenty truths, most certainly and without any doubt
there will be a resurrection and judgement for man, and in accordance with the Name
of Truth, he will receive reward for his above duties and punishment for his faults,
and in accordance with the Name of Preserver, he will be questioned and called to
account for his actions, all of which have been recorded, and the doors will be opened
of the feasting halls of everlasting bliss in the eternal realm, and of the prison of eternal
misery; man, who has been an officer with command over numerous species of beings
in this world, and has intervened in them and sometimes thrown them into confusion,
will not enter the soil never to be questioned concerning his actions, nor lay down in
concealment not to be roused. For to hear the buzz of the fly and to answer it actively
by giving it its rights of life, and not to hear the prayers for eternity made through the
tongues of the above twenty truths of innumerable human rights which reverberate
through the heavens and earth like thunder, and to transgress all those rights, and for a
wisdom which as is testified to by the order of the fly’s wing wastes not even such a
wing, to waste utterly man’s abilities, which

--- Sayfa 228 ---
240
are bound by those truths, and his hopes and desires, which reach out to eternity, and
the many bonds and truths of the universe which nourish those abilities and desires,
would be such an injustice and so impossible and such a tyrannical ugliness that all
beings which testify to the Names of Truth, Preserver, All-Wise, All-Beauteous,
and All-Compassionate reject it, declaring it to be utterly impossible and precluded.
Thus, in reply to our question to our Creator about resurrection, the Names of Truth,
Preserver, All-Wise, All-Beauteous, and All-Compassionate, say: “Just as we are
truth and reality, and the beings that testify to us are true, so the resurrection of the
dead is true and certain.”
And since... I was going to write more, but since the above is as clear as the sun, I
have curtailed the discussion.
Thus, making an analogy with the matters in the above examples and “sinces,”
through their manifestations and reflections in beings, all Almighty God’s hundred,
indeed a thousand, Names which look to the universe prove self-evidently the one they
signify; so too do they demonstrate the resurrection of the dead and hereafter, and
prove them definitively.
Also, just as through all His decrees and the scriptures He has revealed and most
of His Names, by which he is described, our Sustainer gives us sacred and decisive
answers to the question we asked our Creator; so He causes it to be answered through
His angels, and in another fashion through their tongue:
“There have been hundreds of incidents unanimously attested to since the time of
Adam of your meeting both with spirit beings and with us, and there are innumerable
signs and evidences of our existence and worship and that of the spirit beings. In
agreement with each other, we have told your leaders when we have met with them
that we travel through the halls of the hereafter and in some of its apartments, and we
always say this. We have no doubt that the fine, eternal halls that we have wandered
through, and the well-appointed decorated palaces and dwellings beyond them await
important guests, in order to accommodate them. We give you certain news of this.”
They reply to our question thus.
Also, since our Creator appointed Muhammad the Arabian (Peace and blessings
be upon him) as the greatest teacher, best master, and truest guide, who is neither
confused nor confuses, and sent him as His last envoy, before anything, in order to
progress and advance from the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty’ to those of ‘vision
of certainty’ and ‘absolute certainty,’ we should ask this master the question we asked
of our Creator. For just as that Being, through his thousand miracles, which were a

--- Sayfa 229 ---
241
mark of our Creator’s confirmation, and as a miracle of the Qur’an, proved that the
Qur’an is true and God’s Word; so, through its forty aspects of miraculousness, as a
miracle of his, the Qur’an proves that he was true and God’s Messenger. The reality of
resurrection which they prove —one, the tongue of the Manifest World, claimed it
throughout his life, confirmed by all the prophets and saints, and the other, the tongue
of the World of the Unseen, claims it with thousands of its verses, confirmed by all the
revealed scriptures and truths of the universe,— is as certain as the sun and daylight.
Yes, a question like resurrection, which is the most strange and awesome matter
and beyond the reason, could only be solved through the instruction of two such
wondrous masters, and understood.
The reason the early prophets did not explain resurrection in detail like the Qur’an
was that at that time mankind was still at a primitive stage of nomadism. There is little
detailed explanation in preliminary instruction.
And since the angels inform us that they have seen the hereafter and the dwellings
of the eternal realm, evidences testifying to the existence and worship of the angels,
spirits, and spirit beings, are also indirect evidence for the existence of the hereafter.
And since after Divine unity the thing Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon
him) most constantly claimed and asserted throughout his life was the hereafter,
certainly all his miracles and proofs which point to his messengership and veracity in
one way testify indirectly to the existence of the hereafter and that it will come.
And since one quarter of the Qur’an is about resurrection and the hereafter and it
tries to prove it with thousands of its verses, and gives news of it, all the proofs and
evidences of the Qur’an’s veracity prove indirectly the existence of the hereafter, and
its being thrown open.
Now see how firm and certain is this pillar of belief!

--- Sayfa 230 ---
242
A Summary of the Eighth Topic
 [In the Seventh Topic, we questioned numerous levels of beings about the
resurrection of the dead, but curtailed the discussion because since the replies
given by the Creator’s Names afforded such powerful certainty, they left no
need for further questions. Now in this Topic are summarized a hundredth of
the benefits of belief in the hereafter, including those which result in
happiness in this world and in the next. The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition
leaves no need for further explanation concerning the happiness of the
hereafter, so we refer the subject to the Qur’an. And leaving the explanations
of worldly happiness to the Risale-i Nur, here we shall describe in summary
form three or four out of hundreds of results of belief in the hereafter which
look to man’s individual life and social life.]
The  First
Just as, contrary to other living beings, man has relations with his home, so he has
relations with the world, and just as he has relations with his relatives, so by nature he
has earnest relations with mankind. And just as he desires temporary permanence in
this world, so he passionately desires immortality in the realm of eternity. And just as
he strives to meet the need of his stomach for food, so he is by nature compelled to
strive to provide for the stomachs of his mind, heart, spirit, and humanity. He has such
hopes and desires that nothing apart from eternal happiness can satisfy them. As is
mentioned in the Tenth Word, even, when small, I asked my imagination: “Do you
want to live for a million years and rule the world but then cease to exist, or to live for
ever but have an ordinary and difficult existence?” I saw that my imagination wanted
the latter, feeling pain at the first, and said: “I want to live for ever, even if in Hell!”
Thus, since the pleasures of this world do not satisfy the imaginative faculty,
which is a servant of human nature, man’s comprehensive nature is certainly attached
to eternity. For man, therefore, who despite being afflicted with these boundless hopes
and desires as capital has only an insignificant faculty of will and absolute poverty,
belief in the hereafter is a treasury of such strength and sufficiency; is such a means of
pleasure and happiness, source of help, refuge, and means of consolation in the

--- Sayfa 231 ---
243
face of the endless sorrows of this world, and is such a fruit and benefit that if the life
of this world were to be sacrificed on the way of gaining it, it would still be cheap.
Its second fruit and benefit, which looks to man’s personal life
This is a consequence of great importance which is explained in the Third Topic,
and about which is a footnote in A Guide For Youth.
Man’s greatest and most constant anxiety is his entering the place of execution
that is the graveyard, the same as his friends and relations have entered it. Wretched
man, who is ready to sacrifice his very soul for a single friend, thinks of the thousands,
millions, or thousands of millions of friends who have been eliminated and have parted
for all eternity, and suffers torments worse than Hell. Just at that point belief in the
hereafter comes, opens his eyes, and raises the veil. It tells him: “Look!” He looks with
belief, and seeing that those friends have been saved from eternal death and decay and
are awaiting him happily in a luminous world, he receives a pleasure of the spirit that
intimates the pleasures of Paradise. Sufficing with the explanations and proofs of this
consequence in the Risale-i Nur, we cut this short here.
A third benefit pertaining to personal life
Man’s superiority over other living beings and his high rank are in respect of his
elevated qualities, comprehensive abilities, universal worship, and his extensive spheres
of existence. However, the virtues he acquires like zeal, love, brotherhood, and
humanity are to the extent of the fleeting present, which is squeezed between the past
and the future, which are both non-existent, and dead, and black.
For example, he loves and serves his father, brother, wife, nation, and country,
whom he formerly did not know and after parting from them, will never see again. He
would very rarely be able to achieve complete loyalty and sincerity, and his virtues and
perfections would diminish proportionately. Then, just as because of his intelligence,
he is about to fall headlong from being the highest of the animals to the lowest and
most wretched, belief in the hereafter comes to his assistance. It expands the present,
as constricting as the grave, so that it encompasses the past and future and is as broad
as the world, and shows the bounds of existence to stretch from pre-eternity to post-
eternity. Thinking of his father being in the realm of bliss and world of spirits and the
fraternity of his brothers continuing to eternity, and knowing that his wife will be a
beautiful companion in Paradise also, he will love and respect them, be kindly and
assist them. He will not exploit the important duties which are for

--- Sayfa 232 ---
244
relationships in that broad sphere of life and existence for the worthless matters of this
world, with its petty hatreds and interests. His good qualities and attainments will
advance to the degree he is successful in being earnestly loyal and truly sincere, and his
humanity will increase. Although he does not receive the pleasure from life that a
sparrow receives, he becomes the most eminent and happy guest in the universe,
superior to all the animals, and the best loved and most acceptable servant of the
universe’s Owner. This consequence has also been elucidated with proofs in the
Risale-i Nur, so here we suffice with this.
A fourth benefit of belief in the hereafter, which looks to man’s social life
A summary of this result is set forth in the Ninth Ray of the Risale-i Nur, it is as
follows:
Children, which form a quarter of mankind, can live a human existence only
through belief in the hereafter, and sustain their human capacity. They otherwise live
only childish, empty existences, blunting their grievous pains with trifling playthings.
For the effect of the constant deaths around them of children like themselves on their
sensitive minds, and weak hearts which in the future will nurture far-reaching desires,
and their vulnerable spirits, makes their minds and lives into instruments of torture.
But then, through instruction in belief in the hereafter, in place of their anxieties, and
the playthings behind which they hid so as not to see those deaths, they feel a joy and
expansion, and say: “My brother or my friend has died and become a bird in Paradise.
He is flying around and enjoying himself better than we are. And my mother has died,
but she has gone to Divine mercy. She will again take me into her embrace in Paradise
and I shall see her again.” They may live in a state befitting humanity.
It is only in belief in the hereafter that the elderly, who form another quarter of
mankind, can find consolation, in the face of the close extinction of their lives and their
entering the soil, and their fine and lovable worlds coming to an end. Those kindly,
venerable fathers and devoted, tender mothers would otherwise feel such a disturbance
of the spirit and tumult of the heart that the world would become a despairing prison
for them and life, a ghastly torture. But then belief in the hereafter says to them:
“Don’t worry! You have an immortal youth; a shining, endless life awaits you. You
will be joyfully reunited with the children and relatives you have lost. All your good
deeds have been preserved and you will receive your reward.” It affords them such
solace and joy that were they to experience old age a hundred times over all at the
same time, it would not cause them despair.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
245
One third of mankind is formed by the youth. With their turbulent emotions, the
youths are not always able to control their bold intelligences and are overcome by their
passions. If then they lose their faith in the hereafter and do not recall the torments of
Hell, it puts in danger the property and honour of the upright people in society, and
the peace and self-respect of the weak and elderly. One youth may destroy the
happiness of a contented home for one minute’s pleasure, then pay the penalty in
prison for four or five years, degenerating into a wild animal. If belief in the hereafter
comes to his assistance and he swiftly comes to his senses, saying: “It’s true the
government informers can’t see me and I can hide from them, but the angels of a
Glorious Monarch who has a prison like Hell see me and are recording all my evil
deeds. I am not free and independent; I am a traveller charged with duties. One day I
too will be old and weak.” He suddenly starts to feel a sympathy and respect for those
he wanted to cruelly assault. This too is explained with proofs in the Risale-i Nur, so
deeming that sufficient, we here cut it short.
Another important section of mankind are the sick, the oppressed, the disaster-
stricken like us, the poor and the life prisoners; if belief in the hereafter does not come
to their aid, death, of which they are continuously reminded by illness, unavenged
wrongs, the arrogant treachery of the oppressor, from whom they cannot save their
honour, the terrible despair of having lost their property or children in serious
disasters, the distress at having to suffer the torments of prison for five or ten years
because of a minute or two, or an hour or two, of pleasure — these surely make the
world into a prison for such unfortunates, and life into agonizing torment. But if belief
in the hereafter comes to their assistance, they suddenly breathe freely, and according
to the degree of their belief, their distress, despair, anxiety, anger, and desire for
vengeance abate, sometimes partially, sometimes entirely.
I can even say that if belief in the hereafter had not helped me and some of my
brothers in this fearsome calamity of our being imprisoned for no reason, to stand it
for one day would have been as grievous as death and driven us to resign from life.
But endless thanks be to God, despite suffering the distress of my brothers, whom I
love as much as my life, as well as my own, in addition to the weeping and sorrow of
thousands of copies of the Risale-i Nur and my gilded, decorated, valuable books,
which I love as much as my eyes, and although I could never stand the slightest insult
or to be dominated, I swear that the light and strength of belief in the hereafter
afforded me the patience, endurance, solace, and steadfastness; indeed, it filled me
with enthusiasm to gain greater reward in the profitable, instructive exertions of this
ordeal, for as

--- Sayfa 234 ---
246
I said at the beginning of this treatise, I knew myself to be in a good medrese or school
worthy of the title of ‘Medrese-i Yusufiye’ (School of Joseph). If it were not for the
occasional sickness and irritability arising from old age, I would have worked at my
lessons even better and with greater ease of mind. However, we have strayed from the
subject; I hope it will be forgiven.
Also, everyone’s home is a small world for him, and even a small Paradise. If
belief in the hereafter is not at the basis of the happiness of that home, the members of
the family will suffer anguish and anxiety to the extent of their compassion, love, and
attachment. Their paradise will either turn into Hell, or it will numb their minds with
amusements and dissipation. Like the ostrich, who sees the hunter but can neither fly
nor escape and sticks its head in the sand so as not to be seen, they plunge their heads
into heedlessness so that death, decline, and separation do not spot them. They find a
way out by temporarily blocking out their feelings in lunatic fashion. Because, for
example, the mother trembles constantly at seeing her children, for whom she would
sacrifice her soul, exposed to dangers. While the children all the time feel sorrow and
fear at being unable to save their father and brother from unceasing calamities. Thus,
in the upheavals of this worldly life, the supposedly happy life of the family loses its
happiness in many respects, and the relations and closeness in this brief life do not
result in true loyalty, heartfelt sincerity, disinterested service and love. Good character
declines proportionately, and is even lost. Whereas if belief in the hereafter enters that
home, it illuminates it completely, and its members have sincere respect, love, and
compassion for each other, are loyal and disregard each other’s faults, in the measure
not of their relations, closeness, kindness, and love in this brief life, but of their
continuation in the realm of the hereafter, in everlasting happiness, and their good
character increases accordingly. The happiness of true humanity starts to unfold in that
home. Since this too is elucidated with proofs in the Risale-i Nur, we cut this short
here.
Towns are also households for their inhabitants. If belief in the hereafter does not
govern among the members of that large family vices like malice, self-interest, false
pretences, selfishness, artificiality, hypocrisy, bribery, and deception will dominate,
displacing sincerity, cordiality, virtue, zeal, self-sacrifice, seeking God’s pleasure and
the reward of the hereafter, which are bases of good conduct and morality. Anarchy
and savagery will govern under the superficial order and humanity, poisoning the life
of the town. The children will become troublemakers, the youth will take to drink, the
strong will embark on oppression, and the elderly start to weep.

--- Sayfa 235 ---
247
By analogy, the country is also a household, and the fatherland, the home of the
national family. If belief in the hereafter rules in these broad homes, true respect,
earnest compassion, disinterested love, mutual assistance, honest service and social
relations, unhypocritical charity, virtue, modest greatness, and excellence will all start
to develop.
It says to the children: “Give up messing around; there is Paradise to be won!”,
and teaches them self-control through instruction in the Qur’an.
It says to the youth: “There is Hell-fire; give up your drunkenness!”, and brings
them to their senses.
It says to the oppressor: “There is severe torment; you will receive a blow!”, and
makes them bow to justice.
It says to the elderly: “Awaiting you is everlasting happiness in the hereafter far
greater than all the happiness you have lost here, and immortal youth; try to win
them!” It turns their tears into laughter.
It shows its favourable effects in every group, particular and universal, and
illuminates them. The sociologists and moralists, who are concerned with the social life
of mankind, should take special note. If the rest of the thousands of benefits and
advantages of belief in the hereafter are compared with the five or six we have alluded
to, it will be understood that it is only belief that is the means of happiness in this
world and the next, and in the lives of both.
Deeming sufficient the powerful replies to the frail doubts concerning bodily
resurrection described in the Twenty-Eighth Word of the Risale-i Nur and in others of
its treatises, we merely make the following brief indication:
The most comprehensive mirror of the Divine Names lies in corporeality. The
richest and most active centre of the Divine aims in the creation of the universe lies in
corporeality. The greatest variety of the multifarious dominical bounties lies in
corporeality. The greatest multiplicity of the seeds of the supplications and thanks man
offers to his Creator through the tongues of his needs again lies in corporeality. And
the greatest diversity of the seeds of the non-physical and spirit worlds also lies in
corporeality.
By analogy with this, since hundreds of universal truths are centred in
corporeality, in order to multiply corporeality and make it manifest the above truths on
the face of the earth, with awesome activity and speed, the All-Wise Creator clothes
the successive caravans of beings in existence and sends them to that exhibition. Then
he discharges them and

--- Sayfa 236 ---
248
sends others in their place, constantly making the factory of the universe run. Weaving
corporeal products, He makes the earth into a seed-bed of the hereafter and Paradise.
In fact, in order to gratify man’s physical stomach, he listens to and accepts the prayer
for immortality his stomach makes through the tongue of disposition, affording it the
greatest importance, and in order to answer it, prepares in corporeality incalculable
numbers of innumerable sorts and kinds of artistic foods and precious bounties, all
affording different pleasures. This demonstrates self-evidently and without doubt that
in the hereafter, the most numerous and various of the pleasures of Paradise will be
corporeal, and that the bounties of the eternal abode of bliss, which everyone wants
and is familiar with, will be corporeal.
Is it at all possible that the Most Compassionate All-Powerful One, the All-
Knowing and Munificent One, Who accepts the prayer offered through the tongue of
disposition by the common stomach, and gratifying it with infinitely miraculous
physical foods, always replies in fact, intentionally and without chance, would not
accept the numerous, general prayers of man —who is the most important result of the
universe, the Divine vicegerent on earth, and the Creator’s choice being and
worshipper— which he offers through the supreme stomach of humanity for universal,
elevated corporeal pleasures in the eternal realm, which he always desires and with
which he is familiar and which by nature he wants; that He should not respond in fact
with bodily resurrection, and not gratify him eternally? Should He hear the buzz of the
fly, and not hear the crashing thunder? Should He equip a common soldier to
perfection, and ignore the army, giving it no importance? To do so would be
impossible and absurd.
Yes, in accordance with the explicit statement of the verse:
There will be there all that the souls could desire, all that the eyes could
delight in,16
man will experience in Paradise in fitting form the physical pleasures with which he is
most familiar and samples of which he has tasted in this world. The rewards for the
sincere thanks and particular worship each of his members, like the tongue, eye, and
ear, offers, will be given through physical pleasures particular to those members. The
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition describes the physical pleasures so explicitly, it is
impossible not to accept the apparent meaning, and to make forced interpretations of
them.
The fruits and results of belief in the hereafter, then, show that just as the reality
and needs of the stomach, one of the human members, are

16 Qur’an, 43:71.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
249
decisive evidence for the existence of food; so the reality and perfections of man, and
his innate needs and desire for eternity, and his abilities and potentialities, which
demand the above-mentioned consequences and benefits of belief in the hereafter, are
certain evidence for the hereafter and Paradise and eternal physical pleasures, and they
testify to their certain existence. Similarly, the reality of the universe’s perfections and
its meaningful creational signs, and all its truths connected with the above human
truths are evidence for the certain existence of the realm of the hereafter, the
resurrection of the dead, and the opening up of Heaven and Hell. This has been proved
so brilliantly in the Risale-i Nur, and particularly in the Tenth, Twenty-Eighth (both
Stations), and Twenty-Ninth Words, and the Ninth Ray, and the Supplication of the
Third Ray, that they leave no room for doubt. Referring readers to them, we cut short
this long story here.
The Qur’anic descriptions of Hell are also so clear and explicit they leave no need
for further description. Only, referring to the Risale-i Nur detailed explanation of one
or two points which dispel one or two flimsy doubts, we shall set forth a very brief
summary.
F i r s t   P o i n t : The thought of Hell and the fear it induces does not dispel the
pleasures of the above fruits of belief. For boundless Divine mercy says to the fearful
man: Come to me! Enter the door of repentance, then the existence of Hell will not
frighten you, but make known completely the pleasures of Paradise, and avenge you
and all creatures whose rights have been transgressed, and give you enjoyment. If you
are so submerged in misguidance you cannot extricate yourself, the existence of Hell is
still immeasurably better than eternal annihilation, and is also a sort of kindness for the
disbelievers. For man, and even animals with young, receive pleasure at the pleasure
and happiness of their relatives, offspring, and friends, and in one respect are happy.
Therefore, O atheist! Because of your misguidance, you will either tumble into
non-being at your eternal execution, or you will enter Hell! As for non-existence,
which is absolute evil, since it consists of the annihilation together with yourself of all
your relatives, forbears and descendants, whom you love and at whose happiness you
are to an extent happy, it causes pain to your spirit, heart, and inner nature severer
than a thousand Hells. For if there was no Hell, there would be no Paradise. Through
your disbelief, everything falls into non-existence. If you go to Hell and remain within
the sphere of existence, those you love and your relatives will be happy in Paradise, or
will be the recipients of compassion in some respects within the spheres of existence.
This means you should support

--- Sayfa 238 ---
250
the idea of Hell existing. To oppose it is to support non-existence, which is to support
the elimination of innumerable friends’ happiness.
Yes, Hell is an awesome, majestic, existent land which performs the wise and just
function of being the place of incarceration of the Glorious Sovereign of the sphere of
existence, which is pure good. It performs numerous other functions, besides that of
prison, and fulfils many purposes and carries out many duties connected with the
eternal realm. It is also the awe-inspiring habitation of many living creatures like the
Angels of Hell.
S e c o n d   P o i n t : There is no contradiction between the existence and
ghastly torments of Hell, and infinite mercy, true justice, and wisdom with its balance
and absence of waste. Indeed, mercy, justice, and wisdom require its existence. For to
punish a tyrant who tramples the rights of a thousand innocents and to kill a savage
animal who tears to pieces a hundred cowed animals, is for the oppressed a
thousandfold mercy within justice. While to pardon the tyrant and leave the savage
beast free, is for hundreds of wretches a hundredfold pitilessness in place of that single
act of misplaced mercy.
Similarly, among those who will enter Hell is the absolute disbeliever. For through
his disbelief and denial he both transgresses the rights of the Divine Names, and
through denying the testimony of beings to those Names, he transgresses their rights,
and by denying the elevated duties of glorification of creatures before the Divine
Names he violates their rights, and through denying their being mirrors to and
responding with worship to the manifestation of Divine dominicality, which is the
purpose of the universe’s creation and a reason for its existence and continuance, he
transgresses their rights in a way. His disbelief is therefore a crime and wrong of such
vast proportions it may not be forgiven, and deserves the threat of the verse,
God forgives not [the sin of] joining other gods with Him.17
Not to cast him into Hell would comprise innumerable instances of mercilessness to
innumerable claimants whose rights had been transgressed, in place of a single
misplaced act of mercy. Just as those claimants demand the existence of Hell, so do
Divine dignity and majesty, and tremendousness and perfection most certainly demand
it.
Yes, if a worthless rebel who assaults the people says to the proud ruler of the
place: “You can’t put me in prison!”, affronting his dignity, if there is not a prison in
the town, the ruler will have one made just to throw the ill-mannered wretch into it. In
just the same way, through his

17 Qur’an, 4:48, 116.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
251
disbelief the absolute disbeliever affronts seriously the dignity of Divine glory, and
through his denial offends the splendour of His power, and through his aggression
disturbs the perfection of His dominicality. Even if there were not many things
necessitating the functions of Hell and many reasons for and instances of wisdom in its
existence, it is the mark of that dignity and glory to create a Hell for disbelievers such
as that, and to cast them into it.
Moreover, even the nature of disbelief makes known Hell. Yes, just as if the true
nature of belief was to be embodied, it could with its pleasures take on the form of a
private paradise, and in this respect gives secret news of Paradise; so, as is proved with
evidences in the Risale-i Nur and is also alluded to in the previous Topics, disbelief,
and especially absolute disbelief, and dissembling, and apostasy, are the cause of such
dark and awful pains and spiritual torment that if they were to be embodied, they
would become a private Hell for the apostate, and in this way tell of the greater Hell in
concealed manner. The tiny truths in the seed-bed of this world produce shoots in the
hereafter. Thus, this poisonous seed indicates that particular tree of Zaqqum, saying:
“I am its origin. For the unfortunate who bears me in his heart, my fruit is a private
sample of that Zaqqum-tree.”
Since disbelief is aggression against innumerable rights, it is certainly an infinite
crime and deserves infinite punishment. Human justice considers a sentence of fifteen
years imprisonment (nearly eight million minutes) to be justice for a one minute’s
murder, and conformable with general rights and interests. Therefore, since one
instance of disbelief is the equivalent of a thousand murders, to suffer torments for
nearly eight thousand million minutes for one minute’s absolute disbelief, is in
conformity with that law of justice. A person who passes a year of his life in disbelief
deserves punishment for close on two million million eight hundred eighty thousand
million minutes, and manifests the meaning of the verse,
They will dwell therein for ever.18
However...
The All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculous descriptions of Heaven and Hell, and the
proofs of their existence in the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary which proceeds
from the Qur’an, leave no need for others.
As is shown by numerous verses like,
They reflect on the creation of the heavens and earth, saying: “O our
Sustainer! Indeed You have not created this in vain; glory be

18 Qur’an, 93:8, etc.

--- Sayfa 240 ---
252
unto You; and protect us from the torment of the Fire!”19  * O our Sustainer!
Avert from us the torment of Hell; indeed its torment is a grievous affliction,
* And evil it is as a resting-place and abode,20
and indicated by foremost God’s Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon
him) and all the prophets and people of reality always repeating in their supplications,
“Preserve us from Hell-fire! Deliver us from Hell-fire! Save us from Hell-fire!”, which
due to their revelations and illuminations for them was certain, the most momentous
question facing mankind is to be saved from Hell. Hell is also a vast, awesome, and
supremely important truth of the universe which some of the people of illumination
and witnessing and those who investigate the realities have observed, and seeing some
of its distillations and shadows, have cried out in terror: “Preserve us from the Fire!”
Yes, the confrontation and interpenetration of good and evil in the universe, and
pain and pleasure, light and darkness, heat and cold, beauty and ugliness, and guidance
and misguidance are for a vast instance of wisdom. For if there were no evil, good
would not be known. If there were no pain, pleasure would not be understood. Light
without darkness would lack all importance. The degrees of heat are realized through
cold. Through ugliness, a single instance of beauty becomes a thousand in-stances, and
thousands of varying degrees of beauty come into existence. If there were no Hell,
many of the pleasures of Paradise would remain concealed. By analogy with these, in
one respect everything may be known through its opposite and a single truth produce
numerous shoots and become numerous truths. Since these intermingled beings pour
from this transitory realm into the eternal realm, surely just as things like good,
pleasure, light, beauty, and belief are poured into Paradise; so harmful matters like evil,
pain, darkness, ugliness, and disbelief flow into Hell, and the floods of this
continuously agitated universe are emptied into those two pools. Referring you to the
‘Allusive Points’ at the end of the wondrous Twenty-Ninth Word, we curtail this
discussion here.
My fellow students here in this School of Joseph! The easiest way to be saved
from that dreadful, everlasting prison is to profit from our worldly prison, and besides
being saved from the many sins we are bound to refrain from, by repenting for our
former sins and performing the obligatory worship, to make every hour of our prison
life here the equivalent of a day’s worship. This is the best opportunity we may have to
be saved from that eternal prison and to win luminous Paradise. If we miss

19 Qur’an, 3:191.
20 Qur’an, 25:65-6.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
253
this opportunity, our lives in the hereafter will weep the same as our lives here are
weeping, and we shall receive the slap of the verse,
He has lost this world and the hereafter.21
It was the Feast of Sacrifices while this ‘station’ was being written
One fifth of mankind, three hundred million people, together declaring: “God is
Most Great! God is Most Great! God is Most Great!”; and in relation to its size the
globe broadcasting to its fellow planets in the skies the sacred words of God is Most
Great!; and the more than twenty thousand pilgrims performing the Hajj, on ‘Arafat
and at the Festival, together declaring: “God is Most Great!” are all a response in the
form of extensive, universal worship to the universal manifestation of Divine
dominicality through God’s sublime titles of Sustainer of the Earth and Sustainer of
All The Worlds, and are a sort of echo of the God is Most Great! spoken and
commanded one thousand three hundred years ago by God’s Noble Messenger (Peace
and blessings be upon him) and his Family and Companions. This I imagined and felt
and was certain about.
Then I wondered if the sacred phrase has any connection with our matter. It
suddenly occurred to me that foremost this phrase and many others of these marks of
Islam like There is no god but God, All praise be to God!, and Glory be to God!,
which bear the title of “enduring good works,” recall particular and universal points
about the matter we are discussing, and infer its realization.
For example, one aspect of the meaning of God is Most Great! is that Divine
power and knowledge are greater than everything; nothing at all can quit the bounds
of God’s knowledge, nor escape or be saved from the disposals of His power. He is
greater than the things we fear most. This means He is greater than bringing about the
resurrection of the dead, saving us from non-existence, and bestowing eternal
happiness. He is greater than any strange or unimaginable thing, so that, as explicitly
stated by the verse,
Your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul,22
the resurrection of mankind is as easy for His power as the creation of a single soul. It
is in connection with this meaning that when faced by serious disasters or important
undertakings, everyone says: “God is Most Great! God is Most Great!”, making it a
source of consolation, strength, and support for themselves.

21 Qur’an, 22:11.
22 Qur’an, 31:28.

--- Sayfa 242 ---
254
As is shown in the Ninth Word, the above phrase and its two fellows, that is, God
is Most Great!, and Glory be to God!, and All praise be to God!, form the seeds and
summaries of the ritual prayers —the index of all worship— and in order to
corroborate the meaning of the prayers, are repeated in the tesbihat following them.
They provide the powerful answers to the questions arising from the wonderment,
pleasure, and awe man feels at the strange, beautiful, extraordinary things he sees in
the universe, which cause him to offer thanks and to feel awe at their grandeur.
Moreover, at the end of the Sixteenth Word, it is described how at the festival a
private soldier and a field marshal enter the king’s presence together, whereas at other
times the soldier has contact with the field marshal only through his commanding
officer. Similarly, somewhat resembling the saints, a person making the Hajj begins to
know God through His titles of Sustainer of the Earth and Sustainer of All the Worlds.
With its repetition, it is again God is Most Great that answers all the feverish
bewildered questions that overwhelm his spirit as the levels of grandeur unfold in his
heart. Furthermore, at the end of the Thirteenth Flash, it is described how it is again
God is Most Great that replies most effectively to Satan’s cunning wiles, cutting them
at the root, as well as answering succinctly but powerfully our question about the
hereafter.
The phrase All praise be to God also reminds us of resurrection. It says to us: “I
would have no meaning if there was no hereafter. For I say: to God is due all the
praise and thanks that have been offered from pre-eternity to post-eternity, whoever
they have been offered by and to whom, for the chief of all bounties and the only thing
that makes bounty true bounty and saves all conscious creatures from the endless
calamities of non-existence, is eternal happiness; it is only eternal happiness that can be
equal to that universal meaning of mine.”
Yes, every day all believers saying at least one hundred and fifty times after the
obligatory prayers: All praise be to God! All praise be to God!, as enjoined by the
Shari‘a, and its being the expression of praise and thanks which extend from pre-
eternity to post-eternity, can only be the advance price and immediate fee for Paradise
and eternal happiness. They offer thanks since bounties are not restricted to the
fleeting bounties of this world, which are tainted by the pains of transience, and see
them as the means to eternal bounties.
As for the sacred phrase, Glory be to God!; with its meaning of declaring God
free of all partner, fault, defect, tyranny, impotence, unkindness, need, and deception,
and all faults opposed to His perfection, beauty, and glory, it recalls eternal happiness
and the realm of the hereafter and Paradise within it, which are the means to His glory
and beauty and the

--- Sayfa 243 ---
255
majesty and perfection of His sovereignty; the phrase alludes to them and indicates
them. For, as has been proved previously, if there was no eternal happiness, both His
sovereignty, and His perfection, glory, beauty, and mercy would be stained by fault
and defect.
Like these three sacred phrases, In the Name of God and There is no god but God
and other blessed phrases are all seeds to the pillars of faith. Like the meat essences
and sugar concentrates that have been discovered recently, they are summaries of both
the pillars of belief, and the truths of the Qur’an. The three mentioned above are both
the seeds of the five daily prayers, and they are the seeds of the Qur’an, sparkling like
brilliants at the beginning of a number of shining suras. So too are they the true
sources and bases of the Risale-i Nur, many of whose inspirations first came while I
was reciting the tesbihat following the prayers; they are the seeds of its truths. In
respect of the sainthood and worship of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon
him), these phrases are the invocations of the Muhammadan (PBUH) way which,
following each of the five daily prayers, more than one hundred million believers
repeat together in a vast circle of remembrance. Their beads in their hands, they
declare Glory be to God! thirty-three times, All praise be to God! thirty-three times,
and God is Most Great! thirty-three times.
You have surely understood now the great value of reciting thirty-three times
after the five daily prayers, in such a splendid circle for the remembrance of God, each
of those three blessed phrases, which as explained above, are the summaries and seeds
of both the Qur’an, and belief, and the prayers. You have understood too the great
reward they yield.
[The First Topic at the beginning of this treatise forms an excellent lesson
about the obligatory five daily prayers. Then, although I did not think of it,
involuntarily the end here became an important lesson about the tesbihat
following the prayers.]
Praise be to God for His bounties.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.23

23 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
256
The Ninth Topic
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
The Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Sustainer.
As do the men of faith. Each one [of them] believes in God, His angels, His
Books, and His Messengers. “We make no distinction [they say] between one
and another of His Messengers...” [to the end of the verse]24
An awesome question and a state of mind arising from the unfolding of a vast
Divine bounty were the causes of my explaining a universal, lengthy point about this
comprehensive, elevated and sublime verse. It was like this: it occurred to my spirit:
why does one who denies a part of the truths of belief become a disbeliever, and one
who does not accept a part of them cannot be a Muslim? Surely belief in God and the
hereafter dispels the darkness like the sun. Also, why does a person who denies one of
the pillars and truths of belief become an apostate, falling into disbelief, and by not
accepting it, quit Islam? Whereas if he believes in the other pillars of belief, it should
save him from absolute disbelief?
T h e   A n s w e r :  Belief is a single truth, which, composed of its six pillars,
cannot be divided up. It is a universal that cannot be separated into parts. It is a whole
that cannot be broken up. For each of the pillars of belief proves the other pillars with
the proofs that prove itself. They are all extremely powerful proofs of each other. In
which case, an invalid idea that cannot shake all the pillars together with all their
proofs, cannot in reality negate any one of the pillars, or even a single of their truths,
and cannot deny them. Under the veil of non-acceptance one might only, by shutting
his eyes, commit ‘obstinate unbelief;’ he would by degrees fall into absolute disbelief
and lose his humanity, and go to Hell, both physically and mentally. In this station
then, with God’s grace, we shall explain this supreme matter in six Points in the form
of brief summaries, just as in the Fruits Of Belief when proving the resurrection of the
dead, the other pillars of belief’s proofs of resurrection were propounded in the form
of brief summaries.

24 Qur’an, 2:285.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
257
FIRST POINT
Belief in God proves with its own proofs both the other pillars and belief in the
hereafter, as is shown clearly in the Seventh Topic of the Fruits Of Belief. Yes, is it at
all possible and can reason accept that a pre-eternal everlasting sovereignty of
dominicality, a post-eternal Divine rule, which administers the boundless universe as
though it were a palace, a city, or a country; and makes it revolve in balanced and
ordered fashion; and changes it with wisdom; and equips and directs all together
particles, planets, flies, and stars as though each were a regular army, and continuously
drills them within the spheres of command and will in a lofty manoeuvre; and
employing them in duties makes them act, and causes them to roam and travel, and to
parade worshipfully; —is it at all possible that that eternal, everlasting, enduring rule
would not have an eternal seat, a permanent and everlasting place of manifestation;
that is, the hereafter? God forbid! That means the sovereignty of Almighty God’s
dominicality and —as is described in the Seventh Topic— most of His Names and the
proofs of His necessary existence, require the hereafter and testify to it. So see and
understand what powerful support this pole of belief has, and believe in it as though
seeing it!
Also, just as there could be no belief in God without the hereafter; so —as is
explained with brief indications in the Tenth Word— is it at all possible and could
reason accept that God, the True Object of Worship, should create the universe, in
order to manifest His Godhead and fitness to be worshipped, as an embodied book
every page of which expresses a book of meanings and every line of which states a
page of meanings, and as an embodied Qur’an all the creational signs and words, and
even points and letters of which are miracles, and as a magnificent mosque of His
mercy the inside of which is decorated with numberless inscriptions and adornments,
and in every corner of which are species of beings each preoccupied with the worship
dictated by its nature —is it at all possible He should create it in this way and not send
masters to teach the meanings of that vast book, and commentators to expound the
verses of that Qur’an, and not appoint prayer-leaders to that huge mosque to lead all
those worshipping in their myriad ways, and that He should not give decrees to those
masters, commentators, and leaders of worship? God forbid, a hundred thousand
times!
Also, is it at all possible and could reason accept that the Most Compassionate
and Munificent Maker, Who in order to display to conscious beings the beauty of His
mercy and the goodness of His compassion and the perfection of His dominicality, and
in order to encourage them to

--- Sayfa 246 ---
258
praise and thank Him, creates the universe as a banqueting hall, exhibition, and place
of excursion in which are displayed infinite varieties of delicious bounties and
priceless, wondrous arts, is it at all possible that He should not speak with those
conscious beings at the banquet and not inform them by means of envoys of their
duties of thanks for the bounties, and their duties of worship in the face of the
manifestations of His mercy and His making Himself loved? God forbid, a hundred
thousand times!
Also, is it at all possible that although the Maker loves His art and wants others to
love it, and as is shown by His having taken into account the thousand pleasures of the
mouth, wants it to be met with appreciation and approval, and has adorned the
universe with priceless arts in a way that shows He wants through all His arts both to
make Himself known, and loved, and to display a sort of His transcendent beauty, is it
at all possible that He should not speak to men, the commanders of living beings in the
universe, through some of the most eminent of them, and send them as envoys, and
that His fine arts should not be appreciated and the exquisite beauty of His Names not
be valued, and His making Himself known and loved be unreciprocated? God forbid, a
hundred thousand times!
Also, is it at all possible or reasonable that the All-Knowing Speaker Who
answers clearly by act and deed through His infinite bounties and gifts, which indicate
intention, choice, and will, at exactly the right time, all the supplications of living
beings for their natural needs, and their desires and recourse through the tongue of
disposition, that He should speak by deed and by state with the most insignificant
living creature and remedy its woes and heed its troubles with His bounties, and know
its needs and meet them, then not meet with the spiritual leaders of men, who are the
choicest result of the universe, vicegerents of the earth, and the commanders of most
of the creatures on the earth? Although He speaks with them and with all living beings,
should He not speak with men verbally and send them scriptures, books, and decrees?
God forbid, innumerable times!
That is to say, with its certainty and innumerable proofs, belief in God proves
belief in the prophets and sacred scriptures.
Also, is it at all possible or reasonable that in response to the One Who makes
Himself known and loved through all His creatures and seeks thanks by deed and state,
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) should have known and made known,
loved and made loved that Glorious Artist through the Qur’anic reality, which brings
the the universe to tumult, and with his declarations of “Glory be to God!” “All praise
be to

--- Sayfa 247 ---
259
God!” and “God is Most Great!” should have caused the globe to ring out so that it
could be heard by the heavens, and have brought the land and seas to ecstasy; and that
in one thousand three hundred years he should have taken behind him numerically a
fifth of mankind and qualitatively a half of it, and responded with extensive, universal
worship to all the manifestations of the Creator’s dominicality; that in the face of all
the Divine purposes he should have called out with the Qur’an’s suras to the universe
and the centuries, and taught them and proclaimed them; that he should have
demonstrated the honour, value, and duties of man; and that he should have been
confirmed through his thousand miracles — and that he should not have been the most
choice creature, the most excellent of envoys, and the greatest prophet? Is this at all
possible? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid!
That is to say, with all its proofs, the truth of “I testify that there is no god but
God” proves the truth of “I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of God.”
Also, is it at all possible that the universe’s Maker should cause creatures to speak
with one another in myriad tongues, and that He should listen to their speech, and
know it, and Himself not speak? God forbid!
Also, is it at all reasonable that He should not proclaim through a decree the
Divine purposes in the universe? That He should not send a book like the Qur’an
which will solve its riddles and provide the true answers to the three awesome
universally-asked questions: “Where do they come from?”, “Where are they going?”,
and “Why do they follow on caravan after caravan, stop by for a while, then pass on?”
God forbid!
Also, is it at all possible that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, which has
illuminated thirteen centuries; every hour is uttered with complete veneration by a
hundred million tongues; is inscribed through its sacredness in the hearts of millions of
hafizes; in effect governs through its laws the greater part of mankind and trains,
purifies, and instructs their souls, spirits, hearts, and minds; and forty aspects of whose
miraculousness is proved in the Risale-i Nur and explained in the wondrous
Nineteenth Letter, which demonstrates an aspect of its miraculousness towards each of
forty classes of men, and as one of the thousand miracles of Muhammad (Peace and
blessings be upon him) is proved decisively to be the true Word of God; —is it at all
possible that it should not be the word and decree of the Pre-Eternal Speaker and
Eternal Maker? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid!
That is to say, with all its proofs, belief in God proves that the Qur’an is the Word
of God.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
260
Also, is it all possible that the Glorious Monarch Who continuously fills and
empties the earth with living beings and inhabits this world of ours with conscious
creatures in order to make Himself known and worshipped and glorified, should leave
the heavens and earth empty and vacant, and not create inhabitants suitable to them
and settle them in those lofty palaces, that in His most extensive lands he should leave
the sovereignty of His dominicality without servants, functionaries, envoys, and
majesty; without lieutenants, supervisors, spectators, worshippers, and subjects? God
forbid! To the numbers of the angels, God forbid!
Also, is it at all possible that the All-Wise Ruler, the All-Knowing and
Compassionate One, should write the universe in the form of a book; inscribe the
entire life-stories of trees in all their seeds, and write in the seeds of grasses and plants
all their vital duties, and record precisely the lives of conscious beings in their
memories, as tiny as mustard seeds, and preserve with innumerable photographs all the
actions and events in all His dominions and all the eras of His sovereignty, and create
mighty Heaven and Hell and the supreme scales of justice for the manifestation and
realization of justice, wisdom and mercy, the basis of His dominicality, then not have
written down the acts of men connected with the universe, nor have their deeds
recorded so they may meet with reward or punishment, nor write their good and bad
deeds on the tablets of Divine Determining? God forbid! To the number of letters
inscribed on them.
That is to say, with its proofs, the truth of belief in God proves the truth of both
belief in the angels, and belief in Divine Determining. The pillars of belief prove each
other as clearly as the sun shows the daylight, and daylight shows the sun.
SECOND POINT
All the teachings and claims of foremost the Qur’an, and all the revealed books
and scriptures, and foremost Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and all
the prophets, are based on five or six points. They have continually striven to teach
and prove those basic teachings. All the proofs and evidences which testify to their
messengership and truthfulness look to those bases, corroborating their veracity. And
those fundamentals are belief in God and belief in the hereafter and in the other pillars
of belief. That is to say, it is not possible to separate the six pillars of belief. Each
proves all of them, and requires them, and necessitates them. The six are a whole, a
universal, which cannot be broken in parts and whose division is outside the bounds of
possibility. Like the Tuba-tree whose roots are in the heavens, each branch, fruit and
leaf of that mighty tree relies on its universal, inexhaustible life. A person

--- Sayfa 249 ---
261
unable to deny that powerful life which is as clear as the sun, cannot deny the life of a
single of its leaves, attached to it. If he does deny it, the tree will refute him to the
number of its branches, fruits, and leaves, and silence him. Belief, with its six pillars, is
similar to this.
At the beginning of this ‘Station,’ I intended to expound the six pillars of belief in
thirty-six points, as six ‘Points,’ each with five sub-sections. I also intended to reply to
and explain the awesome question at the beginning. But certain unforeseen
circumstances did not permit this. I reckon, the first Point being sufficient, for the
intelligent no need remained for further explanation. It was understood perfectly that if
a Muslim denies one of the pillars of belief, he falls into absolute disbelief. For in the
face of the summary explanations of other religions, Islam expounds and elucidates
them completely, and the pillars of belief are bound together. A Muslim who does not
recognize Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) and does not assent to him,
will also not recognize God, or His attributes, and will not know the hereafter. A
Muslim’s belief is based on such powerful, unshakeable and innumerable proofs that
there is no excuse for denial; they quite simply compel the reason to accept them.
THIRD POINT
One time, I said “All praise be to God!,” and searched for a bounty that would be
equal to its infinitely broad meaning. Suddenly, the following sentence occurred to me:
“All praise be to God for belief in God, and for His unity, and necessary existence,
and attributes, and Names, to the number of the manifestations of His Names from
pre-eternity to post-eternity.”
I looked and saw it was completely appropriate. As follows....

--- Sayfa 250 ---
262
The Tenth Topic
A Flower of Emirdag
 [An extremely powerful reply to objections raised against repetition in the
Qur’an.]
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Due to my wretched situation, this Topic is confused and graceless. But I
knew definitely that beneath the confused wording was a most valuable sort
of miraculousness, though unfortunately I was incapable of expressing it. But
however dull the wording, since it concerns the Qur’an, it is both worship in
the form of reflection, and the shell of a sacred, elevated, shining jewel. The
diamond in the hand should be looked at, not its torn clothes. Also, I wrote it
in one or two days during Ramadan while extremely ill, wretched, and
without food, of necessity very concisely and briefly, and including many
truths and numerous proofs in a single sentence. Its deficiencies, then, should
be overlooked!25
My True, Loyal Brothers! While reading the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition in
Ramadan, whichever of the thirty-three verses I came to that in the First Ray describe
the allusions to the Risale-i Nur, I saw that the page and story of the verse also look to
the Risale-i Nur and its students to some extent — in so far as they have a share in the
story. Particularly the Light Verses in Sura al-Nur, just as they point to the Risale-i
Nur with ten fingers, so the Darkness Verses following it point directly at those
opposing it; these afford a further share. Quite simply, I understood that this ‘station’
rises from particularity to universality and that one part of that universality is the
Risale-i Nur and its students.
Indeed, in regard to the breadth, exaltedness, and comprehensiveness that the
Qur’an’s address receives from firstly the extensive station of the universal
dominicality of the Pre-Eternal Speaker, and from the extensive station of the one
addressed in the name of mankind, indeed of all beings,

25 As the Tenth Topic of the Fruits of Denizli Prison, it is a small, shining flower of Emirdag and
of this month of Ramadan. By explaining one instance of wisdom in the repetitions in the Qur’an, it
dispels the poisonous, putrid illusions of the people of misguidance.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
263
and the most extensive station of all mankind’s guidance in all the centuries, and from
the station of the most elevated comprehensive expositions of the Divine laws
concerning the regulation of this world and the hereafter, and the heavens and the
earth, and pre-eternity and post-eternity, and the dominicality of the Creator of the
universe, and of all beings, this Address displays such an elevated miraculousness and
comprehensiveness that both its apparent and simple level, which flatters the simple
minds of ordinary people, the most numerous group the Qur’an addresses, and its
highest level, partakes of it.
Addressing every age and every class of people, in its stories and historical
narratives, it does not recount one part or one lesson from them, but points out
elements of a universal principle, as though it was newly revealed. Particularly its often
repeated threats of the wrongdoers, the wrongdoers, and its severe expositions of
calamities visited on the heavens and the earth, the punishment for their wrongdoing
—through these and the retribution visited on the ‘Ad and Thamud peoples and on
Pharaoh— it draws attention to the unequalled wrongs of this century, and through
the salvation of prophets like Abraham (PUH) and Moses (PUH) gives consolation to
the oppressed believers.
Indeed, all past time and the departed ages and centuries, which in the view of
heedlessness and misguidance form a fearsome place of non-existence and a grievous,
ruined graveyard, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition shows to every century and
class of people in the form of living instructive pages, strange worlds, living and
endowed with spirits, and existent realms of the Sustainer which are connected with
us. With an elevated miraculousness, it sometimes conveys us to those times, and
sometimes brings those times to us. Infusing with life the universe, which in the view
of misguidance is lifeless, wretched, dead, and a limitless wasteland revolving amid
separation and decease, with the same miraculousness this same Qur’an of Mighty
Stature raises to life those dead beings, makes them converse with one another as
officials charged with duties and hasten to the assistance of one another; it instructs
mankind, the jinn, and the angels in true, luminous, and pleasurable wisdom.
For sure, then, it acquires sacred distinctions, like there being ten merits in each of
its letters, and sometimes a hundred, a thousand, or thousands of merits; and if all men
and jinn were to gather together, their being unable to produce the like of it; and its
speaking completely appropriately with all mankind and all beings; and its all the time
being inscribed with eagerness in the hearts of millions of hafizes; and its not causing
weariness through its frequent and numerous repetitions; and despite its many obscure
passages and sentences, its being settled perfectly in the delicate

--- Sayfa 252 ---
264
and simple heads of children; and its being agreeable like Zamzam water in the ears of
the sick, the dying, and those distressed by a few words; and its gaining for its students
happiness in this world and the next.
Its smoothness of style, which, observing exactly its interpreter’s being unlettered,
allows for no bombast, artificiality, or affectedness, and its descending directly from
the heavens, demonstrate a fine miraculousness. So too it shows a fine miraculousness
in the grace and guidance of flattering the simple minds of ordinary people, the most
numerous of the classes of men, through the condescension in its expression, and
mostly opening the clearest and most evident pages like the heavens and earth, and
teaching the wondrous miracles of power and meaningful lines of wisdom beneath
those commonplace things.
By making known that it is also a book of prayer and summons, of invocation and
Divine unity, which require repetition, it demonstrates a sort of miraculousness
through making understood in a single sentence and a single story through its
agreeable repetitions numerous different meanings to numerous different classes of
people. Similarly, by making known that the most minor and unimportant things in
ordinary, commonplace events are within its compassionate view and the sphere of its
will and regulation, it demonstrates a sort of miraculousness in attaching importance to
even the minor events involving the Companions of the Prophet in the establishment of
Islam and codification of the Shari‘a, and both in those events being universal
principles, and, in the establishment of Islam and the Shari‘a, which are general, their
producing most important fruits, as though they had been seeds.
With regard to repetition being necessary due to the repetition of need, the
repetition of certain verses which, as answers to numerous questions repeated over a
period of twenty years, instructs numerous different levels of people is not a fault,
indeed, to repeat certain sentences so powerful they produce thousands of results and
a number of verses resulting from countless evidences, which describe an infinite,
awesome, all-embracing revolution that, by destroying utterly the vast universe and
changing its shape at Doomsday, will remove the world and found the mighty hereafter
in its place, and will prove that all particulars and universals from atoms to the stars
are in the hand and under the disposal of a single Being, and will show the Divine
wrath and dominical anger —on account of the result of the universe’s creation— at
mankind’s wrongdoing, which brings to anger the earth and the heavens and the
elements, to repeat such verses is not a fault, but most powerful miraculousness, and
most elevated eloquence; an eloquence and lucid style corresponding exactly to the
requirements of the subject.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
265
For example, as is explained in the Fourteenth Flash of the Risale-i Nur, the
sentence,
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,
which constitutes a single verse and is repeated one hundred and fourteen times in the
Qur’an, is a truth which binds the Divine Throne and the earth, and illuminates the
cosmos, and for which everyone is in need all the time; if it was repeated millions of
times, there would still be need for it. There is need and longing for it, not only every
day like bread, but every moment like air and light.
And, for example, the verse,
And verily your Sustainer is Exalted in Might, Most Compassionate,26
which is repeated eight times in Sura Ta. Sin. Mim. Repeating on account of the result
of the universe’s creation and in the name of universal dominicality, the salvation of
the prophets whose stories are told in the sura, and the punishments of their peoples,
in order to teach that that dominical dignity requires the torments of those wrongdoing
peoples while Divine compassion requires the prophets’ salvation, is a concise,
miraculous, and elevated miraculousness, for which, if repeated thousands of times,
there would still be need and longing.
And, for example, the verse,
Then which of the favours of your Sustainer will you deny?,27
which is repeated in Sura al-Rahman, and the verse,
Woe that Day to the rejecters of truth!,28
in Sura al-Mursalat shout out threateningly to mankind and the jinn across the
centuries and the heavens and the earth, the unbelief, ingratitude, and wrongdoing of
those who bring the universe and the heavens and earth to anger, spoil the results of
the world’s creation, and deny and respond slightingly to the majesty of Divine rule,
and violate the rights of all creatures. If a general lesson thus concerned with
thousands of truths and of the strength of thousands of matters is repeated thousands
of times, there would still be need for it and its awe-inspiring conciseness and
beautiful, miraculous eloquence.
And, for example, the repetition of the phrase,
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You: Mercy! Mercy! Save us, deliver
us, preserve us, from Hell-fire!

26 Qur’an, 26:9, etc.
27 Qur’an, 55:13, etc.
28 Qur’an, 77:15, etc.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
266
in the supplication of the Prophet (PBUH) called Jawshan al-Kabir, which is a true
and authentic supplication of the Qur’an and a sort of summary proceeding from it. It
contains the greatest truth and the most important of the three supreme duties of
creatures in the face of dominicality, the glorification and praise of God and declaring
Him to be All-Holy, and the most awesome question facing man, his being saved from
eternal misery, and worship, the most necessary result of human impotence. So if it is
repeated thousands of times, it is still few.
Thus, repetition in the Qur’an looks to principles like these. Sometimes on one
page, even, with regard to the requirements of the position and the need for
explanation and the demands of eloquence, it expresses the truth of Divine unity
perhaps twenty times, explicitly and by implication. It does not cause boredom, but
affords it a power, and eagerness. It has been explained in the Risale-i Nur with proofs
how appropriate, fitting, and acceptable in the eyes of rhetoric are the repetitions in
the Qur’an. The wisdom and meaning of the Meccan and Medinan Suras in the Qur’an
of Miraculous Exposition being different in regard to eloquence, miraculousness, and
detail and brevity is as follows:
In Mecca, the first line of those it was addressing and those opposed to it were the
idolators of the Quraysh and untaught tribesmen, so a powerful and elevated rhetorical
style was necessary, and a miraculous, convincing, persuasive conciseness. And in
order to establish it, repetition was required. Thus, in most of the Meccan suras,
repeating and expressing the pillars of belief and degrees in the affirmation of Divine
unity with a most powerful, elevated, and miraculous conciseness, it proved so
powerfully the first creation and the Resurrection, God and the hereafter, not only in a
single page, verse, sentence or word, but sometimes in a letter, through grammatical
devices like altering the positions of the words or sentences, making a word indefinite,
and omissions and inclusions, that the geniuses and leaders of the science of rhetoric
met it with wonder. The Risale-i Nur, and the Twenty-Fifth Word and its Addenda in
particular, which prove in summary forty aspects of the Qur’an’s miraculousness, and
the Qur’anic commentary, Isharat al-I’jaz, from the Arabic Risale-i Nur, which in
wondrous fashion proves the aspect of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in its word-order,
have demonstrated in fact that in the Meccan suras and verses are the highest styles of
eloquence and the most elevated, concise miraculousness.
As for the Medinan suras and verses, since the first line of those they were
addressing and who opposed them were the People of the Book, the Jews and
Christians who affirmed God’s existence, what was required by eloquence and
guidance and for the discussion to correspond to the

--- Sayfa 255 ---
267
situation, was not explanation of the high principles of religion and pillars of belief in a
simple, clear, and detailed style, but the explanation of particular matters in the Shari‘a
and its injunctions, which were the cause of dispute, and the origins and causes of
secondary matters and general laws. Thus, in the Medinan suras and verses, through
explanations in a detailed, clear, simple style, in the matchless manner of exposition
peculiar to the Qur’an, it mostly mentions within those particular secondary matters, a
powerful and elevated summary — a conclusion and proof, a sentence related to
Divine unity, belief, or the hereafter which makes the particular matter of the Shari‘a
universal and ensures that it conforms to belief in God. It illuminates the passage, and
elevates it. The Risale-i Nur has proved the qualities and fine points and elevated
eloquence in the summaries and conclusions, which express Divine unity and the
hereafter, and come mostly at the end of verses, like:
Indeed, God is powerful over all things.29 * Verily God has knowledge of all
things.30 * And He is the Mighty, the Wise.31 * And He is Exalted in Might,
Most Compassionate.32
Explaining in the Second Beam of the Second Light of the Twenty-Fifth Word, ten out
of the many fine points of those summaries and conclusions, it has proved to the
obstinate that they contain a supreme miracle.
Yes, in expounding those secondary matters of the Shari‘a and laws of social life,
the Qur’an at once raises the views of those it addresses to elevated, universal points,
and transforming a simple style into an elevated one and instruction in the Shari‘a to
instruction in Divine unity, it shows it is both a book of law and commands and
wisdom, and a book of the tenets of faith and belief, and of invocation and reflection
and summons. And through teaching many of the aims of Qur’anic guidance in every
passage, it displays a brilliant and miraculous eloquence different to that of the Meccan
suras.
Sometimes in two words, for example, in Sustainer of All the Worlds and Your
Sustainer, through the phrase, Your Sustainer, it expresses Divine oneness, and
through, Sustainer of All the Worlds, Divine unity. It expresses the Divine oneness
within Divine unity. In a single sentence even it sees and situates a particle in the pupil
of an eye, and with the same verse, the same hammer, it situates the sun in the sky,
making it an eye to the sky. For example, after the verse,

29 Qur’an, 2:20.
30 Qur’an, 29:62.
31 Qur’an, 30:27.
32 Qur’an, 30:5.

--- Sayfa 256 ---
268
Who created the heavens and the earth,
following the verse,
He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night,
it says:
And He has full knowledge of all that is in [men’s] hearts.33
It says: “Within the vast majesty of the creation of the earth and the skies, He knows
and regulates the thoughts of the heart.” Through an exposition of this sort, it
transforms that simple, unlettered level and particular discussion which takes into
account the minds of ordinary people, into an elevated, attractive, and general
conversation for the purpose of guidance.
A Question: “Sometimes an important truth is not apparent to a superficial view,
and in some positions the connection is not known when a concise phrase expounding
Divine unity or a universal principle is drawn out from a minor, ordinary matter, and it
is imagined to be a fault. For example, to mention the extremely elevated principle:
And over all endued with knowledge, One Knowing34
when Joseph (Peace be upon him) seized his brother through subterfuge, does not
appear to be in keeping with eloquence. What is its meaning and purpose?”
The Answer:  In most of the long and middle-length suras, which are each small
Qur’ans, and in many pages and passages, not only two or three aims are followed, for
by its nature the Qur’an comprises many books and teachings, such as being a book of
invocation, belief, and reflection, and a book of law, wisdom, and guidance. Thus,
since it describes the majestic manifestations of Divine dominicality and its
encompassing all things, as a sort of recitation of the mighty book of the universe, it
follows many aims in every discussion and sometimes on a single page. While
instructing in knowledge of God, the degrees in Divine unity, and the truths of belief,
with an apparently weak connection it opens another subject of instruction in the
following passage, joining powerful connections to the weak one. It corresponds
perfectly to the discussion and raises the level of eloquence.
A Second Question:  “What is the wisdom in and purpose of *the Qur’an proving
and drawing attention to the hereafter, Divine unity, and

33 Qur’an, 57:4-6.
34 Qur’an, 12:76.

--- Sayfa 257 ---
269
man’s reward and punishment thousands of times, explicitly, implicitly, and allusively,
and teaching them in every sura, on every page, and in every discussion?”
The Answer: In order to teach concerning the most momentous matters in the
sphere of contingency, and the revolutions in the universe’s history, and the most
important, most significant, most awesome matters related to man’s duties, which —
since he has undertaken the supreme trust and vicegerency of the earth— will lead to
either his perdition or everlasting happiness, and in order to remove his countless
doubts and to smash his violent denials and obduracy, indeed, to make man confirm
those awesome revolutions and submit to those most necessary essential matters which
are as great as the revolutions, if the Qur’an draws his attention to them thousands, or
even millions of times, it is not excessive, for those discussions in the Qur’an are read
millions of times, and they do not cause boredom, nor does the need cease.
For example, since the verse,
For those who believe and do righteous deeds are gardens beneath which
rivers flow; they will dwell there forever,35
announces the good news of eternal happiness, and “saves from the eternal extinction
of death, which every moment shows itself to wretched man, both himself, and his
world, and all those he loves, and gains for them an everlasting sovereignty,” if it is
repeated thousands of millions of times and given the importance of the universe, it
still is not excessive and does not lose its value. Thus, in teaching innumerable,
invaluable matters of this sort, and endeavouring to persuade, convince, and prove the
occurrence of the awesome revolutions which will destroy the present form of the
universe and transform it as though it was a house, the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition certainly draws attention to these matters thousands of times explicitly,
implicitly, and allusively, and this is not excessive, but renews the bounty which is like
an essential need, the same as the essential needs of bread, medicine, air, and light are
renewed.
And, for example, as is proved decisively in the Risale-i Nur, the wisdom in the
Qur’an repeating severely, angrily, and forcefully, threatening verses like,
For wrongdoers there is a grievous penalty.36 * But for those who reject
[God] — for them will be the Fire of Hell.37

35 Qur’an, 5:85, etc.
36 Qur’an, 14:22.
37 Qur’an, 35:36.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
270
is that man’s unbelief is such a transgression against the rights of the universe and
most creatures that it makes the heavens and earth angry and brings the elements to
anger so that they deal blows on those wrongdoers with tempest and storm. According
to the clear statement of the verses,
And when they are cast therein, they will hear the [terrible] drawing-in of its
breath as it blazes forth * Almost bursting with fury,38
Hell so rages at those iniquitous deniers that it almost disintegrates with fury. Thus,
through the wisdom of showing, not from the point of view of man’s smallness and
insignificance before such a general crime and boundless aggression, but the
importance of the rights of the Monarch of Universe’s subjects before the greatness of
the wrongful crime and the awesomeness of the unjust aggression, and the boundless
ugliness in the unbelief and iniquity of those deniers —in accordance with the wisdom
of showing this, if repeating in His decree most wrathfully and severely the crime and
its punishment, thousands, millions, or even thousands of millions of times, it still
would not be excessive and a fault, because for a thousand years thousands of millions
of people have read such verses every day, not with boredom, but with total eagerness
and need.
Indeed, every day, all the time, for everyone, one world disappears and the door
of a new world is opened to them. Through repeating There is no god but God a
thousand times out of need and with longing in order to illuminate each of those
transitory worlds, it makes There is no god but God a lamp for each of those changing
veils. In the same way, in accordance with the wisdom of appreciating through reading
the Qur’an the penalties of those crimes and the severe threats of the Pre-Eternal
Monarch, which smash their obduracy, and of working to be saved from the rebellion
of the soul, so as not to obscure in darkness those multiple, fleeting veils and renewed
travelling universes, and not to make ugly their images which are reflected in the
mirrors of their lives, and not to turn against them those guest views which may testify
in favour of them, the Qur’an repeats them in truly meaningful fashion. Even Satan
would shudder at imagining to be out of place these so powerful, severe, and repeated
threats of the Qur’an. It shows that the torments of Hell are pure justice for the deniers
who do not heed them.
And, for example, in repeating many times the stories of Moses (Peace be upon
him), which contain many instances of wisdom and benefits, like the story of his Staff,
and of the other prophets (Peace be upon them), it demonstrates that the
prophethoods of all the other prophets are a proof

38 Qur’an, 67:7-8.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
271
of the veracity of the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), and that one who does
not deny all of them cannot in truth deny his messengership. For this purpose, and
since everyone does not always have the time or capability to read the whole Qur’an, it
repeats those stories in the same way as the important pillars of belief, in order to
make all the long and middle-length suras each like a small Qur’an. To repeat them
then is not excessive, it is required by eloquence, and teaches that the question of
Muhammad (PBUH) is the greatest question of mankind and the most important
matter of the universe.
It has been demonstrated decisively in the Risale-i Nur with many proofs and
indications that through giving the highest position to the person of Muhammad in the
Qur’an and including him in four pillars of belief and holding Muhammad is the
Messenger of God equal to the pillar of There is no god but God, that the
messengership of Muhammad (PBUH) is the greatest truth in the universe, and that
the person of Muhammad is the most noble of creatures, and his universal collective
personality and sacred rank, known as the Muhammadan Reality, is the most radiant
Sun of the two worlds. His worthiness for this extraordinary position has also been
proved. One of these proofs is this:
According to the principle of ‘the cause is like the doer,’ with the equivalent of all
the good works performed by all his community at all times entering his book of good
works; and the light which he brought illuminating all the truths of the cosmos; and his
making grateful not only the jinn, mankind, and animate beings, but also the universe
and the heavens and earth; and the supplications of plants, offered through the tongue
of disposition, and the supplications of animals offered through the tongue of their
innate need, and the righteous of his (PBUH) community every day bequeathing to
him their benedictions and supplications for mercy and spiritual gains, whose millions
—and together with spirit beings, even, millions of millions— of unrejectable
supplications are accepted, as we actually witness with our eyes; and since each of the
three hundred thousand letters of the Qur’an yield from a hundred to a thousand
merits, only with regard to the recitation of the Qur’an by all his community, with
infinite numbers of lights entering the book of his deeds; — due to all these, the One
All-Knowing of the Unseen saw and knew that the Muhammadan (PBUH) Reality,
which is his collective personality, would in the future be like a Tuba-tree of Paradise,
and in accordance with that rank accorded him supreme importance in the Qur’an, and
in His Decree showed the following of him and receiving of his intercession through
adhering to his Illustrious Sunna to be one of the most important matters concerning
man. And from time to time He took into

--- Sayfa 260 ---
272
consideration his human personality and human state in his early life, which was a seed
of the majestic Tuba-tree.
Thus, since the truths repeated in the Qur’an are of this value, all sound natures
will testify that in its repetitions is a powerful and extensive miracle. Unless, that is to
say, a person is afflicted with some sickness of the heart and malady of the conscience
due to the plague of materialism, and is included under the rule,
A man denied the light of the sun due to his diseased eye,
His mouth denied the taste of water due to sickness.
TWO ADDITIONS, WHICH FORM A CONCLUSION
TO THE TENTH TOPIC
THE FIRST: Twelve years ago I heard that a fearsome and obdurate atheist had
instigated a conspiracy against the Qur’an, which was to have it translated. He said:
“The Qur’an should be translated so that everyone can know just what it is.” That is,
he hatched a dire plan with the idea of everyone seeing its unnecessary repetitions and
its translation being read in its place. However, the irrefutable proofs of the Risale-i
Nur proved decisively that “A true translation of the Qur’an is not possible, and other
languages cannot preserve the Qur’an’s qualities and fine points in place of the
grammatical language of Arabic. Man’s trite and partial translations cannot be
substituted for the miraculous and comprehensive words of the Qur’an, every letter of
which yields from ten to a thousand merits; they may not be read in its place in
mosques.” Through spreading everywhere, the Risale-i Nur made the fearsome plan
come to nothing. I surmise that it was due to the idiotic and lunatic attempts of
dissemblers to extinguish the Sun of the Qur’an on account of Satan by puffing at it
like silly children having taken lessons from that atheist, that I was inspired to write
this Tenth Matter while under great constraint and in a most distressing situation. But
I do not know the reality of the situation since I have been unable to meet with others.
SECOND ADDITION:  After our release from Denizli Prison, I was staying on
the top floor of the famous Shehir Hotel. The subtle and graceful dancing of the
leaves, branches, and trunks of the many poplar trees in the fine gardens opposite me
at the touching of the breeze, each with a rapturous and ecstatic motion like a circle of
dervishes, pained my heart, sorrow

--- Sayfa 261 ---
273
ful and melancholy at being parted from my brothers and remaining alone. Suddenly
the seasons of autumn and winter came to mind and a heedlessness overcame me. I so
pitied those graceful poplars and living creatures swaying with perfect joyousness that
my eyes filled with tears. With this reminder of the separations and non-being beneath
the ornamented veil of the universe, the grief at a world-full of deaths and separations
pressed down on me. Then suddenly, the Light the Muhammadan (PBUH) Reality had
brought came to my assistance and transformed my grief and sorrow into joy. Indeed,
I am eternally grateful to the Muhammadan Being (PBUH) for the assistance and
consolation which alleviated my situation at that time, only a single instance of the
boundless effulgence of that Light for me, like for all believers and everyone. It was
like this:
By showing those blessed and delicate creatures to be without function or
purpose, and their motion to be not out of joy, but as though trembling on the brink of
non-existence and separation and tumbling into nothingness, that heedless view so
touched the feelings in me of desire for immortality, love of beautiful things, and
compassion for fellow-creatures and life that it transformed the world into a sort of
hell and my mind into an instrument of torture. Then, just at that point, the Light
Muhammad (Peace and blessings by upon him) had brought as a gift for mankind
raised the veil; it showed in place of extinction, non-being, nothingness, purposeless,
futility, and separations, meanings and instances of wisdom to the number of the leaves
of the poplars, and as is proved in the Risale-i Nur, results and duties which may be
divided into three sorts:
The First Sort looks to the All-Glorious Maker’s Names. For example, if a
master craftsman makes a wondrous machine, everyone applauds him, saying: “What
wonders God has willed! Blessed be God!” Similarly, the machine congratulates the
craftsman through the tongue of its disposition, through displaying perfectly the results
intended from it. All living beings and all things are machines such as that; they
applaud their Craftsman through their glorifications.
The Second Sort of the Instances of Wisdom looks to the views of living
creatures and conscious beings. Beings each become an agreeable object of study, a
book of knowledge. They leave their meanings in the sphere of existence in the minds
of conscious beings and their forms in their memories, and on the tablets in the World
of Similitudes, and in the notebooks of the World of the Unseen, then they depart from
the Manifest World and withdraw to the World of the Unseen. That is, they leave
behind an apparent existence, but gain many existences pertaining to meaning, the
Unseen, and knowledge. Yes, since God exists and His knowledge encompasses
everything, in the view of reality, in the world of

--- Sayfa 262 ---
274
believers there is surely no non-being, extinction, nothingness, annihilation, and
transitoriness, while the world of unbelievers is full of non-existence, separation,
nothingness, and transience. This is taught by the saying, which is on everyone’s lips,
“For those for whom God exists, everything exists; and for those for whom He does
not exist, nothing exists; for them there is nothing.”
IN SHORT: Just as belief saves man from eternal extinction at the time of death,
so it saves everyone’s private world from the darknesses of annihilation and
nothingness. Whereas unbelief, and especially if it is absolute unbelief, both sends man
and his private world to non-existence with death, and casts him into infernal
darknesses. It transforms the pleasures of life into bitter poisons. Let the ears ring of
those who prefer the life of this world to that of the hereafter! Let them come and find
a solution for this, or else let them enter belief and be saved from these dreadful losses!
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.39
From your brother who is in much need
of your prayers and misses you greatly,
                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i

39 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 263 ---
275
A Letter From Husrev40 to Üstad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
Concerning the Tenth Topic
My Dear and Esteemed Master,
Endless thanks be to Almighty God that we have received ‘A Flower of Emirdag,’
the Tenth Topic of the Fruits of Denizli, which has ameliorated our grief at our two
months’ separation and our distress at having been unable to communicate, and
enumerates the virtues of the repetition of the Qur’an’s glorious, august, merciful and
compassionate verses, which infuse our hearts with fresh life and breathe into our
spirits a fresh breeze, and explains the necessity, significance, and reason for the
repetitions, and is too a brilliant defence of the Risale-i Nur. In truth, the more we
receive the scent of this flower, so deserving of praise and appreciation, the yearning
of our spirits for it increased. Just as how in the face of the difficulties of our nine
months’ imprisonment, the nine Topics of the Fruits Of Belief showed their beauty by
contributing to our being released, so through pointing out the wonders of the concise
miraculousness of the Qur’an, the Tenth Topic, their Flower, again exhibited their
beauty.
Yes, my beloved Master, like the superb, delicate beauty of the rose makes the
beholder forget the thorns on its stem, so this luminous Flower has made us forget the
distress of those nine months; it has made it as nothing. The manner of its writing does
not cloy those studying it; it astounds the mind. Of the many beauties it contains, by
showing fully the value of the repetitions in the face of the treachery of ‘simplifying’
the Qur’an in people’s eyes by translating it, it has set forth its universal loftiness. The
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition being proved to be as fresh as though it was newly
revealed, its followers adhering strongly to it every century and their perfect obedience
to its commands and prohibitions; and its severe, awesome, and repeated threats to the
oppressor in every century, and its compassionate and merciful regard for the
oppressed; and

40 Husrev Altinbasak (1899-1977). One of Bediuzzaman’s leading students, who wrote out
numerous copies of the Risale-i Nur with his exceptionally fine handwriting. He also wrote copies of
the Qur’an showing the ‘coincidences’ (tawafuqat) of the word ‘Alla\h’, an aspect of its
miraculousness which Bediuzzaman ‘discovered.’ He was together with Bediuzzaman in the prisons
of Eskishehir, Denizli, and Afyon. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 264 ---
276
among its threats which look to this century, the tyrants being made to cry out
continuously for the last six or seven years at the heavenly hell which recalls a sample
of deepest space; and the Risale-i Nur students being at the head of the oppressed this
century; and their being delivered from their plights, personal and general, truly like
the prophets of old found deliverance; and its pointing out the blows dealt to the
irreligious, its opponents, and Hellish torments; and the Flower being concluded with
two fine and subtle addenda; all these prompted this wanting student of yours, Husrev,
to joyfully offer endless thanks. As I have mentioned to my dear Master, I have never
experienced in my life the joy and happiness this beautiful Flower gives me, as I have
told my brothers on numerous occasions. Almighty God placed on their feeble
shoulders a great and heavy load. May God be pleased with our beloved Master, and
may He make them smile eternally by lightening their load. Amen!
Yes, my dear Master! We are forever pleased at God, the Qur’an, His Beloved,
the Risale-i Nur, and at you, our beloved Master, who is herald of the Qur’an. We in
no way regret our following you. We harbour absolutely no intention in our hearts to
do harm; we seek only God and His pleasure. As time passes, we increase our longing
to meet God within the bounds of His pleasure. To refer to Almighty God without
exception those who have done us evil and to forgive them, and to do good to
everyone including those tyrants is a mark of Islam established in the hearts of the
Risale-i Nur students. We offer endless thanks to God, Who proclaims this without
our asking.
                                                                 Your very faulty student,
                                                                            H u s r e v

--- Sayfa 265 ---
277
The Eleventh Topic
 [Hundreds of the innumerable fruits, particular and universal, of the sacred
tree of belief, one of which is Paradise, another, eternal happiness, and
another, the vision of God, have been set forth with proofs and explanations
in the Risale-i Nur. Referring further explanation of them to Siracü’n-Nur
(The Illuminating Lamp), therefore, here shall be set out a few examples of
its particular and special fruits, rather than its universal pillars.]
One of these: One day while reciting in a supplication: “O My Sustainer! In
veneration of Gabriel, Michael, Israfil, and Azra’il, and through their intercession,
preserve me from the evil of men and jinn,” I experienced an exceedingly pleasant and
consoling state of mind on mentioning the name of Azra’il, which generally makes
people tremble in fear. “All praise be to God!” I exlaimed, and began to feel earnest
love for him. I shall point out extremely briefly only one particular fruit of the many of
this particular aspect of the pillar of belief in the angels.
Another: Everyone’s most precious possession and the one over which they most
tremble, is their spirit. I felt sure that to surrender it to a strong and trustworthy hand
thereby preserving it from being lost and annihilated and from aimlessness, afforded a
profound joy. Then the angels who record men’s actions came to mind; I saw that they
yielded numerous sweet fruits like the previous one.
Another: Everyone tries earnestly to preserve through writing, poetry, or even
the cinema, a worthwhile saying or deed, in order to immortalize it. Particularly if the
deeds produce everlasting fruits in Paradise, they are even more anxious to preserve
them. The recording angels hovering over men’s shoulders so that they may show their
deeds in eternal vistas and continually gain their owners reward, seemed so agreeable
to me, I cannot describe it.
Then, when ‘the worldly’ had isolated me from everything to do with social life
and kept me from all my books, friends, assistants, and the things that console me, and
I was being crushed by the desolation of exile and my empty world was tumbling down
all around me, one of the many fruits of belief in the angels came to my assistance. It
cheered up the uni

--- Sayfa 266 ---
278
verse and my world, filling it with angels and spirit beings, and making my world laugh
for joy.41 It showed too that the worlds of the people of misguidance weep in
desolation, emptiness, and darkness. While enjoying the pleasures of this fruit, my
imagination plucked one of the numerous fruits of belief in the prophets, which
resembles it, and tasted it. Then suddenly my belief that all the prophets of the past
were as though living, and my assent to them, lit up those times and made my belief
universal and expanded it, and set thousands of signatures to their teachings
concerning belief in the Prophet of the End of Time (PBUH), silencing the Satans.
Then, a question occurred to me the decisive answer to which is included in the
Thirteenth Flash, about the wisdom in seeking refuge with God from Satan. In
meaning it asked me: “The people of guidance are assisted and strengthened by
innumerable sweet fruits and benefits like these, the fine results of good deeds, and the
Most Merciful of the Merciful’s compassionate succour and assistance, so why are
they frequently defeated by the people of misguidance, and sometimes twenty or a
hundred of them are routed?” While pondering over this, I recalled the mobilizations
and angels in the Qur’an in the face of Satan’s feeble machinations, and Almighty
God’s sending assistance to the people of belief. Since the Risale-i Nur has explained
the purpose and wisdom of this with decisive proofs, we shall here allude to it only
briefly.
Yes, sometimes in the face of a single vandal trying to set fire to a palace which a
hundred men have made, the palace can remain standing only through a hundred men
protecting it and by having recourse to the government and the king. For its existence
is possible only through the existence of all its conditions and causes, but its non-
existence and destruction may occur through the non-existence of a single condition.
Just as the palace may be burnt to the ground by a layabout with a single match, so
with some small actions, satans from among jinn and men cause vast destruction and
terrible non-physical conflagrations. Yes, the basis and origin of all bad, evils and sins
is non-existence, it is destruction. The non-existence and destruction are concealed
beneath apparent existence. Thus, relying on this point, satans from among jinn and
men and evil beings withstand an infinite force with an extremely weak force, driving
the people of truth and reality to continually seek refuge at the Divine Court, and to
flee to it. The Qur’an therefore mobilizes great forces for their protection. It gives for
their use ninety-nine Divine Names, and commands them sternly to withstand those
enemies.
From this answer became apparent the tip of a vast truth and basis of

41 Musnad, v, 173; al-Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 9; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 19.

--- Sayfa 267 ---
279
an awesome matter. It was like this: just as Paradise bears the crops of all the worlds
of existence and produces the eternal shoots of the seeds grown in this world; so in
order to display the grievous consequences of the innumerable terrible worlds of non-
existence and nothingness, Hell scorches up the products of that non-existence, and
among its other functions, that terrible factory cleanses the universe of existence of the
filth of the world of non-existence. For now we shall not open the door of this
awesome matter; God willing, it shall be elucidated later.
Another particular and example of the fruit of belief in the angels concerns the
questioning angels, Munkar and Nakir;42 it is this: in my imagination I entered my
grave, telling myself: “I am bound to enter here, the same as everyone else.” While
taking fright at the bleakness and despair of the lonely, dark, cold, narrow solitary
confinement of the grave, two blessed friends resembling Munkar and Nakir appeared.
They began to debate with me. My heart and grave were broadened, illumined, and
warmed; windows were opened up onto the world of spirits. I felt truly happy at that
situation which I saw in the imagination then, and will see in reality in the future, and I
offered thanks.
A medrese student who was studying Arabic grammar died and in replying to
Munkar and Nakir’s question of “Who is your Sustainer?”, thought he was in his own
medrese and said: “‘Who’ is the subject, ‘your Sustainer’ is its predicate; ask me
something difficult; that’s easy.” It made both the angels, and the spirits who were
present, and a diviner of graves who witnessed the incident, laugh, and brought a smile
to Divine mercy. Being delivered from torment, the late Hafiz Ali, a martyr hero of the
Risale-i Nur, died in prison while writing out and enthusiastically studying the treatise
of The Fruits of Belief. Just as he replied in the grave to the questioning angels with
the truths of The Fruits of Belief —as he had in court here—, so I and the Risale-i Nur
students shall reply to those questions with the brilliant and powerful proofs of the
Risale-i Nur, in the future in fact and now in meaning, and will cause the angels to
confirm them and appreciate them and congratulate them; God willing.
Another small example of belief in the angels leading to worldly happiness is this:
an innocent child who had learnt his lesson from the Ilm-i Hal, said to another child
who was wailing at the death of his little brother: “Don’t cry, be thankful, because
your brother has gone to heaven and is with the angels. He is enjoying himself there
and having a better time than us. He is flying around like the angels, and taking a look
at everything.” He turned his friend’s woeful tears into happy smiles.

42 al-Tirmidhi, Jana’iz, 70; Abu Da’ud (in meaning), ii, 540, 541; Ibn Maja, Jana’iz, 65; Musnad,
iii, 126; iv, 288.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
280
Exactly like that weeping child, in the grim situation of this sorrowful winter I
received news of two deaths. One was my nephew, the late Fuad, who had both come
first in advanced schools, and had published the truths of the Risale-i Nur. The second
was my late sister, called Hanim, a scholar who went on the Hajj and died while
circumambulating the Ka‘ba. These deaths of two relatives made me weep, like that of
the late Abdurrahman, which is described in the Treatise For The Elderly. Then,
through the light of belief I saw in my heart that the innocent Fuad and righteous
Hanim had as companions angels and houris in place of humans and had been saved
from the perils and sins of this world. Feeling overwhelming joy instead of that searing
sorrow, I congratulated both them, and Fuad’s father, Abdülmecid, and myself, and I
offered thanks to the Most Merciful of the Merciful. This has been included here as a
prayer for mercy for the two departed.
All the comparisons and allegories in the Risale-i Nur describe the fruits of belief
that have as their consequences happiness in this world and the next. In respect of the
happiness and pleasures of life they display in this world, those universal and extensive
fruits give news that they will gain for man everlasting happiness, indeed, that they will
produce shoots and develop in that way. Five of those numerous universal fruits have
been written at the end of the Thirty-First Word as fruits of the Ascension, and five are
included as examples in the Fifth Branch of the Twenty-Fourth Word.
We said at the beginning that each of the pillars of faith have numerous different
fruits, even innumerable fruits, and that similarly, a single fruit of the totality of the
fruits is vast Paradise, and another is eternal happiness, while another and perhaps the
sweetest is the vision of God. Also some of the fruits of belief yielding happiness in
both worlds, this world and the hereafter, have been well described in the comparison
at the end of the Thirty-Second Word.
Evidence that belief in Divine Determining yields precious fruits in this world is
the fact that the saying “those who believe in Divine Determining are saved from
unhappiness” is widely known as a proverb. Two universal fruits of belief in Divine
Determining are explained in the fine comparison at the end of the Treatise On Divine
Determining, which is about two men who enter the lovely garden of a palace, and I
myself in my own life have experienced thousands of times and understood that if one
does not believe in Divine Determining, it destroys the happiness of this worldly life.
But whenever, in grievous misfortunes, I looked from the point of view of Divine
Determining, I saw that they were greatly

--- Sayfa 269 ---
281
lightened, and I would be astonished at how those who do not believe it can continue
to live.
One of the universal fruits of the pillar of belief in the angels is alluded to in the
Second Station of the Twenty-Second Word like this: supplicating Almighty God,
Azra’il (Peace be upon him) said:
“Your servants will be vexed at me and complain about me when I carry out my
duty of seizing the spirits of the dying.”
He was told in reply: “I shall make illnesses and calamities a veil to your duties, so
my servants’ complaints will be directed at them and not at you.”
Azra’il’s duty is a veil in exactly the same way that the above are veils, so that
unjustified complaints are not directed at Almighty God. For not everyone can see the
aspects of wisdom, mercy, beauty, and advantage in death; they see its apparent face
and start to object and complain. Azra’il was made a veil so that these unjustified
complaints are not directed at the Absolutely Compassionate One. In exactly the same
way, the function of all the angels, indeed of all apparent causes, is to be veils to the
dignity of dominicality, so that the dignity and holiness of Divine power and
comprehensiveness of Divine mercy are preserved in things the beauty of which is not
apparent and the wisdom of which is not understood; and they are not the target of
objections, and so that in the superficial view Divine power does not appear to be in
contact with base, trivial, or cruel things. For the Risale-i Nur has proved definitively
with innumerable evidences that the stamps of Divine unity on all things show clearly
that no cause has an actual effect or the ability to create. Creation and the giving of
existence are particular to Him. Causes are merely a veil. Conscious beings like angels
can do nothing other than a sort of voluntary duty in accordance with their natures and
active worship which is called ‘acquisition,’ and is insignificant and not creative.
Yes, dignity and grandeur demand that in the view of the mind causes are veils to
the hand of power. While unity and oneness demand that causes abstain from having
any real effect.
Just as angels and the apparent causes employed in good works pertaining to
existence are all means of exonerating dominical power of fault and tyranny in things
the beauties of which are not known or seen, and of hallowing it and preserving it from
the ascription of fault; so too, satans from among jinn and men and harmful matters
being employed in evil matters pertaining to non-existence is to hallow and glorify God
by saving Divine power from being the target of complaint and wrongful accusations
of cruelty. It is to exonerate Him and declare Him free of all the

--- Sayfa 270 ---
282
faults in the universe. For all faults arise from non-existence, or lack of ability, or
destruction, or the failure to perform duties, which are all non-existence and acts
which are not existent and pertain to non-existence. The faults are ascribed to these
satanic and evil veils, the objections and complaints are deservedly directed at them,
and they are means of Almighty God being pronounced free of all defect.
In any event, strength or power are not necessary for evil destructive works
pertaining to non-existence; sometimes extensive non-existence or destruction may
occur through some petty act or insignificant power, or even the failure to perform a
duty. It is supposed those doers of evil possess power, but they have no effect other
than non-existence and no power other minor ‘acquisition.’ But since the evils arise
from non-existence, the doers of evil are the true agents. If they are intelligent beings,
they deservedly pay the penalty. That is to say, in evils the perpetrators are the true
‘doers,’ but since good deeds and acts are existent, those who ‘do’ them are not the
true ‘doers’ and do not have an actual effect. They are recipients rather, receiving the
Divine effulgence; the All-Wise Qur’an states that their reward too is purely a Divine
favour, and says:
Whatever good happens to you is from God but whatever evil befalls you is
from yourself.43
I n   S h o r t : While the universes of existence and the innumerable worlds of
non-existence clash, producing fruits like Paradise and Hell; and all the worlds of
existence declare: “All praise be to God! All praise be to God!” and all the worlds of
non-existence declare: “Glory be to God! Glory be to God!”; and while through an all-
encompassing law of contest angels and satans, and instances of good and instances of
evil, as far as the inspirations and satanic whisperings of the heart, all struggle against
each other; a fruit of belief in the angels is suddenly manifested, solving the matter and
illuminating the universe. Showing us one of the lights of the verse,
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth,44
it shows us just how sweet is this fruit.
The Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Ninth Word —the latter of which demonstrates
the marvels of the ‘alifs’45— point out a second universal

43 Qur’an, 4:79.
44 Qur’an, 24:35.
45 This refers to the non-intentional alignment in patterns (tawafuq) of alifs (the first letter of the
Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke) in handwritten copies of the Twenty-Ninth Word. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 271 ---
283
fruit, and prove in brilliant fashion the existence and functions of the angels. Yes, in
everything in the universe, particular and universal, in every realm of being, is a
compassionate, splendid dominicality which makes itself known and loved. Most
certainly it is necessary to respond to that splendour, that compassion, that making
known and loved, with thanks and comprehensive, conscious worship, declaring them
to be free of all fault. And it is only countless angels that can perform the duty on
behalf of unconscious inanimate creatures and the great elements, and can represent
the wise, majestic activity of the sovereignty of that dominicality everywhere on the
earth, on the Pleiades, in the foundations of the earth, and outside it.
Through this fruit, for example, the creation of the earth and its natural duties,
which the soulless laws of philosophy show to be dark and desolate, are placed in
luminous familiar fashion on the shoulders of, that is, under the supervision of, two
angels called Thawr (the Bull) and Hut (the Fish).46 And a truth, a substance of the
hereafter called sakhra is sent as an everlasting foundation stone of the transitory
earth, that is, as a sign that in the future part of it will be transformed into eternal
Paradise, and is made a point of support for the angels Thawr and Hut. This was
narrated by the old prophets of the Children of Israel, and also by Ibn ‘Abbas.
Unfortunately, in the course of time, this sacred meaning and allegory was taken
literally by the ordinary people and acquired a form outside the bounds of reason.
Since the angels travel through earth and rock and the centre of the earth the same as
they do through the air, they, and the earth, surely have no need of physical rocks and
a fish and ox to support them.
Also for example, since the globe utters Divine glorifications to the number of its
realms of beings, with tongues to the number of the members of those species, and to
the parts, leaves, and fruits of those members, surely there will be an appointed angel
with forty thousand heads and forty thousand tongues in each head, each of which will
utter forty thousand Divine glorifications, which will know that splendid, unconscious,
innate worship, represent it consciously, and offer it to the Divine Court, as the
Bringer of Sure News informed us absolutely correctly.
Also, the existence and extraordinary nature of angels like Gabriel (Peace be upon
him), who conveys and announces the dominical relations with man, the most
important result of the universe’s creation; and Israfil (Peace be upon him) and Azra’il
(Peace be upon him), who merely represent the Creator’s most awesome

46 Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, i, 329.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
284
actions in the world of animate beings, which are the raising to life and giving of life,
and the release from duties with death, and they supervise them in worshipful manner;
and Michael (Peace be upon him) who besides supervising the bounties of the Most
Merciful in food, which is the most extensive and most pleasurable mercy in the sphere
of life, consciously represents unconscious thanks — the existence and extraordinary
nature of angels like these, and the immortality of their spirits, are necessitated by the
sovereignty and splendour of dominicality. Their existence and that of their own
species is as certain and free of doubt as the existence of the sovereignty and
splendour that are to be seen in the universe as clearly as the sun. Comparisons may be
made with this for other matters concerning the angels.
Yes, the All-Powerful One of Glory and Beauty created four hundred thousand
species of living beings on the earth, and created beings with spirits in great
abundance, even out of common and rotting substances, filling everywhere with them.
In the face of the miracles of His art He causes them to declare: “What wonders God
has willed! How great are God’s blessings! Glory be to God!”, and before the gifts of
His mercy: “All praise be to God! All thanks be to God! God is Most Great!” Most
certainly and without doubt therefore He created inhabitants and spirit beings suitable
for the vast heavens, who never rebel and perform constant worship. Not leaving the
heavens empty, He populated them with these beings. He created too countless
different sorts of angels, far greater in number than the animal species. Some in tiny
form, mount raindrops and snowflakes and applaud the Divine art and mercy in their
own tongues. Others mount the travelling stars and on their journeys through space,
through their Divine exaltations and pronouncements of Divine Unity, proclaim to the
world their worship before the grandeur, splendour and dignity of dominicality.
The agreement of all the revealed scriptures and religions since the time of Adam
concerning the existence and worship of the angels, and the numerous unanimous
reports in all ages of conversations and meetings of men with the angels, proves that
their existence is as certain as the existence of the people of America, whom we have
never seen, and that they are concerned with us.
Now come and taste through the light of belief this second universal fruit; see how
it fills the universe from end to end, making it beautiful and transforming it into a vast
mosque and place of worship. In the face of science and philosophy showing it to be
cold, lifeless, dark, and desolate, it shows it to be full of life and light, conscious,
familiar, and agreeable, allowing the people of belief to experience a manifestation of
the pleasures of immortal life according to their degree, while still in this world.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
285
C o n c l u s i o n : Since through the mysteries of Divine unity and oneness, the
same power, the same Names, the same wisdom, and the same art are found in every
part of the universe, the Creator’s unity, disposal, giving of existence, dominicality,
creativity, and sacredness are proclaimed through the tongues of disposition of all
creatures, particular and universal. So too He created the angels, and caused the
glorifications which all creatures offer unconsciously through the tongues of their
beings to be offered consciously through the worshipful tongues of the angels. None
of the angels’ actions are in any respect contrary to the Divine command. Apart from
pure worship, they do nothing; they bring nothing into being, can intervene in nothing
unless commanded, and cannot intercede even, without permission. They manifest to
the utmost the meaning of:
They are [but] servants raised to honour. * They speak not before He
speaks, and they act [in all things] by His command.47

47 Qur’an, 21:26-7.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
286
Conclusion
 [This forms a brief indication to a lengthy truth concerning a subtle point of
miraculousness of great importance which was imparted to me after sunset
and demonstrates clearly miraculous predictions of Sura al-Falaq concerning
the Unseen.]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Say: I seek refuge with the Sustainer of the rising dawn * From the evil of
aught that He has created, * And from the evil of the black darkness
whenever it descends, * And from the evil of blowers on knots, * And from
the evil of the envious when he envies.48
Commanding God’s Messenger (PBUH) and his community to “Protect
yourselves from the evil beings and satans among jinn and men who strive in the
universe on account of the worlds of non-being,” this mighty, wondrous verse looks to
all ages, and through its allusive meaning looks to a greater degree to our strange age,
even explicitly, and calls on the Qur’an’s servants to seek refuge with God. This
miraculous prediction about the Unseen will be explained briefly in five signs, as
follows:
All the verses of this sura have numerous meanings. Only in respect of its allusive
meaning, its repeating the word “evil” four times in five sentences; and with a
powerful relation and in four ways its pointing the finger with the same date to the
four unparalleled, ghastly, stormy evils, material and immaterial, of this age, with its
revolutions and clashes, and its implicitly giving the command: “withdraw from these;”
is certainly guidance from the Unseen in a way befitting the Qur’an’s miraculousness.
For example, the sentence Say: I seek refuge with the Sustainer of the dawn
‘coincides’ with the date 1352 or 1354 according to abjad and jafr reckoning, alluding
to the Second World War, which was brewing up then erupted due to the prevalent
ambition and greed of mankind and the First War, and in effect saying to the
community of Muhammad (PBUH): “Do not enter this war, but seek refuge with your
Sustainer.” With another of its allusive meanings, as a special favour to the Risale-i
Nur students, who are servants of the Qur’an, it hints to them that they were to be
saved around the same date from Eskishehir Prison and an awesome evil, and that the
plans to eliminate them would come to nothing. It was as though commanding them
symbolically to seek refuge with God.

48 Qur’an, 113:1-5.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
287
And for example, the sentence “From the evil of aught that He has created”
makes 1361 —the doubled ra is not counted— and points the finger through both the
Rumi and Hijri dates at the cruel, tyrannical destruction of this unmatched war.
‘Coinciding’ too with the Risale-i Nur students, who work with all their strength to
serve the Qur’an, being delivered from an extensive plan to eliminate them and from a
grievous calamity and Denizli Prison, it looks with an allusive meaning to them too.
With a concealed sign it says: “Protect yourselves from the evil of creatures.”
And for example, making 1328 if the doubled letters are not counted and 1358 if
the doubled lam is counted, the sentence the blowers on knots ‘coincides’ with the
dates when due their ambition and greed the Europeans tyrants who caused the two
World Wars, instigated a change of Sultan and the Balkan and Italian Wars with the
idea of spoiling the consequences of the Constitutional Revolution, which favoured the
Qur’an; then with the outbreak of the First World War, through the political diplomats
blowing their evils, material and immaterial and their sorcery and poison into
everyone’s heads through the tongue of the radio and their inculcating their covert
plans into the heart of human destiny, they prepared the evils that would savagely
destroy a thousand years of the progress of civilization, which corresponds exactly
with the meaning of “the blowers on knots.”
And for example, the sentence And from the evil of the envious when he envies
makes 1347 —the doubled ra and tanwin are not counted— and coincides exactly,
and corresponds in meaning, with the significant upheavals which occurred in this
country due to the enforced European treaties, and the changes that took place in this
religious nation due to the oppression of philosophy, and the awesome envy, rivalry
and clashes in various countries which paved the way for the Second World War.
These are surely flashes of this sacred sura’s miraculous predictions concerning the
Unseen.
A Reminder
All Qur’anic verses have numerous meanings. And all the meanings are universal;
they have significations in every century. Those discussed here are only its level of
allusive meaning which looks to our century. Within that universal meaning our age is
one signification. But it has gained particularity, and looks to it and its date. Since
these last four years I have known neither the stages of the war, nor its results, nor
whether or not peace has been declared, and I have not asked, I have not knocked on
the door of this sacred sura to learn how many allusions it contains to this century and
its wars. It has however been proved and

--- Sayfa 276 ---
288
explained in various parts of the Risale-i Nur, and especially in Rumûzât-i Semaniye
(The Eight Symbols), that this treasury contains many more mysteries, so referring
readers to those, I am cutting this short.
The answer to a question that might occur to one
In this flash of miraculousness, in the From the evil of aught that He has created
at the beginning, both the from (min) and the evil (sharr) being counted, and in and
from the evil of the envious when he envies at the end, only the word evil (sharr)
being counted, and and from (wa min) not being counted, and in neither of these
words being counted in and from the evil of the blowers on knots (wa min sharr al-
naffathat fi’l-‘uqad) is a sign indicating an extremely subtle relationship. For there is
good as well as evil in people (khalq), and not all evil is visited on everyone. Alluding
to this, from (min) and evil (sharr), which are partitive, are counted. But the envier is
altogether evil when he envies, so there is no need for the partitive. And according to
the allusion of the blowers on knots, there is no need for the word evil to be counted
here, for all the works of those casters of spells and sorcerer diplomats who have set
the globe ablaze for their own benefits are pure evil.
An addendum to a point about the miraculousness of this sura
Just as with four of its five sentences, this sura looks with its allusive meaning to
the four largest evil revolutions and storms this century; so, with its allusive meaning
and according to jafr reckoning, by its repeating four times the phrase from the evil of
(min sharri) —the doubling is not counted, it looks to and points the finger at the
century of the dissension of Jenghiz Khan and Hulagu and the time of the fall of the
‘Abbasid dynasty, which was the most fearsome calamity experienced by the Islamic
world.
Yes, without doubling, the evil (sharri) makes 500, and from (min) is 90.
Numerous verses which look to the future, as well as Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with him) and Ghawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), who alluded to both
our century and those times in their predictions of the future, saw both our century and
that century and made predictions in exactly the same way. With ghasiq making 1161
and idha waqab making 810, the words (ghasiq idha waqab) look not to these times,
but to the significant material and immaterial evils of those times. If they are counted
together, they make 1971, and give news of some ghastly evil at that date. If the crops
of the seeds of the present are not rectified, the blows will certainly be terrible.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
289
A Supplement
to the Addendum of the Eleventh Topic
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
The verse, Let there be no compulsion (in religion; Truth stands out) from
error,49 which is the complement of the Throne Verse, makes 1350; whoever rejects
evil makes 1929 or 1928; and believes in God has grasped makes 946, corresponding
to the name ‘Risaletü’n-Nur;’ the most trustworthy handhold makes 1347; that never
breaks, and God is All-Seeing, All-Knowing * (God) (is the Protector of those who
have faith) if counted together makes 1012, and if not counted together 945, with one
doubling not being counted; from (the depths of darkness) He will lead them forth into
the light makes 1372, without doubling; while those who do not believe, their patrons
are (the evil ones) makes 1417; from the light (they will lead them forth into) the
depths of darkness makes 1338, the doubling is not counted; they will be the
companions of the Fire, to dwell therein for ever makes 1295, the doubling is
counted.
It was imparted to me that with their allusive meanings, these verses ‘coincide’
exactly and twice with both the name of the Risaletü’n-Nur and the form of its
striving; and with the date the people of unbelief were attempting to extinguish the
light of the World of Islam with the war of 1293 (1876-77); and with the date the
terrible treaties were signed in 1338 taking advantage of the First World War and in
order to cast it into darkness in fact. It was imparted to me too that light and darkness
are repeatedly contrasted in these verses, and in this immaterial struggle a Light
proceeding from the Qur’an’s light would become a point of support for the people of
belief. I was compelled to set this down in writing. Then I saw that the relationship of
its meaning with this century was so powerful that even had there been no sign
through the ‘coincidences,’ I would still have been certain that these verses were
speaking with us through their allusive meanings, just as they look to all centuries.
Yes, firstly, the sentence at the beginning, Let there be no compulsion (in
religion; Truth stands out) from error points through abjad and jafr reckoning to the
date 1350 [if Rumi, 1934, or if Hijri, 1931-2], and

49 Qur’an, 2:256-7.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
290
through its allusive meaning, says: By the matters of religion being separated from
those of this world on that date, freedom of conscience, which is opposed to force and
compulsion in religion, and to religious struggle and armed jihad for religion, was
accepted as a fundamental rule and political principle by governments, and this state
became a secular republic. In view of this, jihad will be a non-physical religious jihad
with the sword of certain, verified belief. Because it shows a flash of miraculousness
indicating that a light will emerge from the Qur’an which will make known and set
forth clearly proofs so powerful they will demonstrate almost visibly the guidance and
truths of religion.
Furthermore, as far as the word khalidun —to dwell therein for ever, by repeating
the contrast between light and darkness, and belief and darkness —the source and
origin of all the comparisons in the Risale-i Nur and just like them— is a concealed
sign that a great hero in the contest of the ‘mânevî jihad’ at that date is the Risale-i
Nur, which bears the name of light. For its immaterial sword has solved hundreds of
the mysteries of religion, leaving no need for physical swords.
Yes, countless thanks be to God, for twenty years the Risale-i Nur has
demonstrated this prediction and flash of miraculousness in fact. It is due to this
mighty mystery that Risale-i Nur students do not interfere in the politics and political
currents of the world and their material struggles, nor attach importance to them, nor
condescend to any involvement with them. Its true students say to their most fearsome
enemies in the face of their insults and aggression:
“You wretch! I am trying to save you from eternal annihilation and to raise you
from the basest and most grievous level of ephemeral animality to the happiness of
immortal humanity, while you are working for my death and execution. Your pleasures
in this world are very few and fleeting and the penalties and torments you will suffer in
the hereafter will be very great and very longlasting. For me, death will be a discharge
from duties. Go away! I am not going to bother with you, do whatever you like!”
They feel not anger at their enemies, but pity and compassion. They try to reform
them, in the hope they shall be saved.
Secondly: And believes in God has grasped has grasped the most trustworthy
handhold. These two sacred sentences have a powerful relationship, and according to
abjad and jafr reckoning the first corresponds exactly with the name Risaletü’n-Nur,
and the second corresponds in meaning, and according to jafr reckoning with its being
realized and perfected and its brilliant conquests. These correspondences are an
indication that this century at this date, the Risaletü’n-Nur is a most trustworthy
handhold. That

--- Sayfa 279 ---
291
is, it is an unbreakable chain of great strength and a “rope of God (hablullah).” They
inform through their allusive meanings that those who lay hold of it and cling onto it
will be saved.
Thirdly: Both in meaning and according to jafr reckoning, the sentence God is
the Protector of those who have faith makes an allusion to the Risaletü’n-Nur, as
follows....
(The curtain descended here and permission was not given to write it. It has been
postponed to another time.)
NOTE
The reason permission was not given to write the remainder of this point for now
is that it touches to an extent on politics and this world, and we are prohibited from
considering these. Yes, the verse, Man is indeed overweening50 looks to this ‘taghut’
and draws attention to it...
                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i

50 Qur’an, 96:6.

--- Sayfa 280 ---
292
Part of a letter from Husrev, the hero of the Risale-i Nur,
in connection with the Eleventh Topic of the Fruits of Belief
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
May the peace and mercy and blessings of God be upon you!
My Beloved and Esteemed Master!
With the great good it contains for this nation and country, with its Ninth Topic
The Fruits of Belief was not only the means of salvation of its students while in the
midst of their greatest enemies and the awesomely rebellious, but also with its Tenth
and Eleventh Topics, it applauded the Risale-i Nur students in particular on the ways
of reality. Moreover, concerning the circumstances of the grave, which we are certain
to enter, by making familiar that place under the earth, which makes everyone tremble
and is a source of terror for the heedless in particular, where we will meet and speak
with the angels; it made us happy at their companionship, and dispelled our terrible
fears about that first stopping-place, letting us breathe freely. In the hands of those like
me who have not seen that luminous life, it resembles an electric lamp whose rays
penetrate hundreds of thousands of years. It also resembles a model flower-garden, the
scents of which are ever a source of delight.
Yes, I suggest to our beloved Master that like students who everyday recite their
lessons to their teacher, we should always describe to our beloved Master the
effulgence we receive from the Risale-i Nur. But for now our beloved Master is
refraining from speaking.
My Dear Master! The reality of the Risale-i Nur, the beauty of the Fruits, and
effulgence of its flowers have driven me to utter a few words, gratefully, in the name
of my country, and have breathed life into many hearts which speak like mine. But
now, due to the “flower” of the Eleventh Fruit of Belief, the steps taken against the
Risale-i Nur in our area and the hands raised against it, have become harsher and
stronger, and have been stirred into action.
                                                                 Your humble student,
                                                                           H u s r e v

--- Sayfa 281 ---
293
A letter written in the name of all the Risale-i Nur students in Isparta to
offer congratulations for Ramadan, which has been amended
in thirteen sections
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
Our revered Master, who through the effulgence of the Qur’an and truths of the
Risale-i Nur and aspirations of his loyal students weeps tears of blood for the well-
being of the Islamic world in this world and the next...
Who in these stormy days of the end of time is beset with more woes and ills than
Job (Peace be upon him), and through the light of the Qur’an, the proofs of the Risale-
i Nur and efforts of his students works to cure the ills of the Islamic world like
Luqman the Wise, and has proved with thirty-three verses of the Qur’an and the
wondrous predictions of Imam ‘Ali and the Ghawth al-A‘zam that the Risale-i Nur
with its different parts is truth and reality...
Who although he is himself ill and elderly and weak and in a piteous condition,
more than anyone sacrifices his life for the World of Islam and responds to those
wrong him with the truths of the Qur’an and proofs of the Risale-i Nur, and through
the loyalty of the Risale-i Nur students, with prayers and good works...
Who together with his students was sent to prison because one of his important
works, The Supreme Sign, was printed, and through the guidance of the Qur’an and
teachings of the Risale-i Nur and enthusiasm of his students turned the prison in a
‘School of Joseph’ and place of learning, and was the cause of all the ignorant among
us there learning to read the whole Qur’an, and despite being elderly and weak,
through the sacred strength of the Qur’an and solace of the Risale-i Nur and
endurance of his brothers, took on himself the loads of all of us, and through the Fruits
of Belief and Defence Speeches which he wrote, the miraculousness of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition, and the powerful proofs of the Risale-i Nur, and sincerity of
his students, with Divine permission had the prison door opened and won our
acquittals, and made that day a festival for us and for the Islamic world, and proving
that in truth the Risale-i Nur is “Light upon light,” won the right for it to be read and
written out freely till the end of time...

--- Sayfa 282 ---
294
Who has proved with the sacred sustenance of the Qur’an of Mighty Stature and
other-worldly food of the Risale-i Nur and appetite of its students, that the World of
Islam has need for the Risale-i Nur as it does for water and air, and that thousands of
those who have read these treatises and written them out have entered the grave in a
state of belief, and has never defeated or embarrassed the students who follow him,
and through the heavenly teachings of the Qur’an, the principles of the Risale-i Nur,
the intelligence of its students, and the Tenth and Eleventh Topics of the Fruits of
Belief and its flowers quenches the fires of separation that night and day sear our
hearts, like the water of life and wine of Kawthar, filling them with joy and happiness...
Who, in accordance with the certain promises and threats of the Qur’an of Mighty
Stature and the certain discoveries of the Risale-i Nur and the observations of its late
students and those among them who divine the happenings of the grave, has for the
believers saved death —the thing most feared by all the world— from being eternal
annihilation and transformed it into a discharge from duties and shown that for the
unbelievers and dissemblers it is eternal annihilation; has proved in accordance with the
certain news of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, confirmed both by the thousand
miracles of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) and its forty aspects of
miraculousness, and endorsed by the proofs of the Risale-i Nur —which proceeds
from the Qur’an— which have defeated even its most obdurate enemies and are
submitted to by the Risale-i Nur students, and are corroborated too by many signs,
experiences, and convictions, that the terrifying, cold, dark and narrow grave is for the
believers a pit of Paradise and a door onto the gardens of Paradise, while for the
disbelievers and dissembling atheists is a pit of Hell full of snakes and scorpions; and
has made the angels called Munkar and Nakir, who will enter there, familiar
companions for the people of truth and those who have taken the way of reality; and
included the Risale-i Nur students among ‘students of the religious sciences,’ and
discovered on the death of the late heroic martyr Hafiz Ali that they reply to the
questions of Munkar and Nakir with the Risale-i Nur, and who beseeches Divine
mercy that those of us who are still living will also reply with the Risale-i Nur...
Who, through demonstrating an aspect of miraculousness pertaining to each of the
forty levels of the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, and through it being the pre-eternal Word
of God, and through the works The Miraculousness of the Qur’an and The Eight
Symbols from the Risale-i Nur, and the extraordinary efforts of the heroic brothers
and students of the Risale-i Nur like the chief writer of the ‘Rose Factory,’ and
through Husrev, one

--- Sayfa 283 ---
295
of the heroic scribes of the Risale-i Nur being commanded to “write!”, although no
one since the time of the Prophet (PBUH) had been able to write it in such miraculous
fashion, its being written like the Qur’an inscribed on the Preserved Tablet, — has
proved in beautiful and brilliant fashion, never before seen or heard, that the Qur’an of
Mighty Stature is the true Word of God, and the greatest of all the revealed books,
and that there are thousands of Sura al-Fatiha’s within one Sura al-Fatiha, and
thousands of Sura al-Ikhlas’s within one Sura al-Ikhlas, and that its letters yield ten, a
hundred, a thousand, and thousands of merits and good deeds...
Who has proved, through the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition demonstrating its
miraculousness for one thousand three hundred years and halting those who oppose it,
and through the proofs of the Risale-i Nur that are so clear as to be almost visible, and
through the diamond pens of the Risale-i Nur students, that the Twenty-Fifth Word
and its Addenda, which have challenged the world and silenced even the most
obdurate, are miracles of the Qur’an in forty aspects...
Who has proved in the treatise from the Risale-i Nur called The Miracles of
Muhammad (PBUH) thousands of miracles showing that Muhammad (Peace and
blessings be upon him) was a true Messenger, the lord of all the twenty-four thousand
prophets, and the most virtuous of them, and through the Qur’an of Mighty Stature
proclaiming to the universe that God’s Noble Messenger (PBUH) was sent as a Mercy
to All the Worlds, and the Risale-i Nur demonstrating from beginning to end that he
was a Mercy to All the Worlds, and showing even to the blind that the Messenger’s
deeds and conduct are the finest and best example to be followed in the world, and
through the testimony of calamities being lifted when the Risale-i Nur is disseminated
in Anatolia and other countries, and disasters occurring when it is silenced, and
through the firm and steadfast attachment to their work of the Risale-i Nur students
despite the extremely difficult circumstances, has shown how profitable it is to follow
the practices of that Being (PBUH) and that to follow a single of his practices at this
time gains the reward of a hundred martyrs, and has proved absolutely certainly that
for twenty years the Risale-i Nur has repulsed the calamities and disasters that would
otherwise have been visited on Anatolia, the same as alms-giving repels disaster!
Now, since the Risale-i Nur’s acquittal has filled with joy foremost our beloved
Master, then us impotent, faulty students, then the Islamic world, and occasioned a
second festival, we congratulate you on this great festival of yours, and offering our
congratulations for Ramadan and the Night

--- Sayfa 284 ---
296
of Power, the third festival, we beseech Almighty God we shall see many more, and
imploring forgiveness for our faults and the faulty among us, we send the greetings of
all here and kiss your blessed hands, and beseech your prayers, o our Master!
                                                             The Risale-i Nur students
                                                             in Isparta and its environs
* * *
To modestly reject this letter, which is a hundred times greater than my due,
would be ingratitude and an insult to the favourable opinions of all the students, while
to accept it exactly as it is would tell of pride, egotism, and conceit. Therefore, adding
thirteen sections, I am sending you a copy of this long letter written by the Risale-i
Nur’s scribe in everyone’s name, both by way of thanks and to be saved from pride
and ingratitude. It may be added at the end of the Eleventh Topic with the title: ‘A
letter from the Risale-i Nur students of Isparta and its environs.’ Although I have
amended the letter in this way, twice a pigeon alighted at my window. It was going to
enter, but saw Ceylan’s head and did not. Several minutes later, another alighted in
exactly the same way. It too saw the scribe’s head and did not come inside. I said:
“Most probably these are bearers of good news like the sparrow and ‘kuddüs’ bird
before. Or because we have written this letter like numerous other secret letters, they
came to congratulate us on amending the auspicious letter in this way.”
                                                                          S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 285 ---
297
The Twelfth Ray
[Part of the Defence Speeches Given in Denizli Court]1
... ... ...
Yes, we are a society and we are a society which every century has had three
hundred and fifty million [now one and a half thousand million] members. Every day
through the five obligatory prayers, its members demonstrate with complete veneration
their attachment to the principles of that sacred society. Through the sacred
programme of The believers are but a single brotherhood,2 they hasten to assist one
another with their prayers and spiritual gains. We are members of that sacred, vast
society, and our particular duty is to teach the believers in certain, verified fashion the
Qur’anic truths of belief, and save them and ourselves from eternal extinction and
everlasting solitary confinement in the Intermediate Realm. We have absolutely no
connection with any worldly, political, scheming society or clandestine group, or the
covert organizations concerning which on no grounds whatsover we have been
charged; we do not condescend to such things.
* * *
If we had had any desire to interfere in worldly affairs, it would not have been
with such buzzing like a fly, it would have exploded like the firing of a cannon. To
accuse someone who defended himself vehemently in the Military Court and in the
office of the Speaker of the National Assembly in the presence of an angry Mustafa
Kemal, of hatching plots

1 Since the matters were the same, our Master, Üstad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, presented the
same defence —skipping where necessary and adding where necessary— to Afyon Court as he had at
Denizli. He therefore put the greater part of the Denizli defence speeches together with those of
Afyon, and gave them the name of the Fourteenth Ray.  Signed, His Students.
2 Qur’an, 49:10.

--- Sayfa 286 ---
298
for eighteen years without allowing anyone to be aware of it, is certainly due to some
grudge or hatred.
In this question, the Risale-i Nur should not be attacked because of my personal
faults or those of some of my brothers. It is bound directly to the Qur’an, and the
Qur’an is bound to the Sublime Throne, so who could dare to stretch out his hand
there and unfasten those strong ropes?
Moreover, the Risale-i Nur, whose blessings —material and spiritual— for this
country, and its exceptional service, are alluded to by thirty-three of the Qur’an’s
verses, by three predictions of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), and the
certain news of Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), may not be held
responsible for our petty, personal faults; it cannot be and should not be. Irreparable
harm will otherwise come to this country, both material and spiritual.3
God willing, the aggression and plots against the Risale-i Nur of some evil-
minded atheists will be foiled, for its students cannot be compared with others; they
cannot be scattered or made to give it up; through God’s grace, they will not be
defeated. They have won the regard of this nation, as though they were vital for it, and
are found everywhere; even if the Qur’an had not prevented them from physical
defence, they still would not get involved in minor, fruitless incidents like those of
Shaykh Said and Menemen.4 If, God forbid, they were persecuted and the Risale-i Nur
was attacked to the extext they felt compelled, those atheists and dissemblers who
hoodwink the Government would certainly come to regret it a thousand times over.
In Short: We do not interfere in the world of the worldly, so they should not
interfere in our service of belief and in our lives of the hereafter.
                                                                                Prisoner
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Sirs!
I tell you with certainty that apart from those here who have no connection or
little connection with us and the Risale-i Nur, I have as many true brothers and loyal
friends on the way of truth as you could wish.

3 This petition was written twenty days before the Kastamonu earthquake. Through the blessings
of the Risale-i Nur, Kastamonu was preserved from the disasters more than any other province, but
now the disasters have begun and have confirmed what we said!
4 See page 385, footnotes 11, 12.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
299
Through the certain discoveries of the Risale-i Nur, we know with the unshakeable
certainty of twice two equalling four that through the mystery of the Qur’an for us
death has been transformed from eternal extinction into a discharge from duties, and
that for those who oppose us and follow misguidance certain death is either eternal
annihilation (if they do not have certain belief in the hereafter), or everlasting, dark
solitary confinement (if they believe in the hereafter and take the way of vice and
misguidance). Is there a greater or more important question for man in this world than
this that it can be a tool for it? I ask you! Since there is not and cannot be, why do you
strive against us? In the face of your greatest penalty, we receive our discharge papers
to go to the world of light, so we await it with complete fortitude. But we know as
clearly as seeing it, like we see you in this court, that those who reject us and condemn
us on behalf of misguidance will in a very short time be condemned to eternal
annihilation and solitary confinement and will suffer that awesome punishment, and
with our feelings of humanity we earnestly pity them. I am ready to prove this certain
and important fact and also to silence the most stubborn of them. If I could not prove
it as clearly as daylight, not to that unscholarly, prejuiced committee of scholars who
knew nothing of spiritual and moral matters, but to the greatest scholars and
philosophers, I should be content with any punishment!
Just as an example, I offer the treatise The Fruits of Belief, which was written for
the prisoners on two Fridays, and explaining the principles and bases of the Risale-i
Nur, is like a defence of it. We are working secretly under great difficulties to have this
written out in the new letters5 so as to give it to the departments of government in
Ankara. Read and study it carefully; if your heart (I cannot speak for your soul) does
not affirm me, I shall remain silent in the face of whatever insults and torment you
inflict on me in the solitary confinement in which I am now held!
In Short: Either leave the Risale-i Nur completely free, or smash this powerful
and irrefutable truth if you can! Up to now, I have not thought of you and your world.
And I was not going to think of it, but you forced me, and perhaps even Divine
Determining sent us on this way in order to warn you. As for us, we resolved to take
as our guide the sacred rule, ‘Whoever believes in Divine Determining is saved from
grief,’ and to meet all our difficulties with patience.
                                                                               Prisoner
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i

5 This refers to the Latin alphabet, which was adopted officially on the passing of a law in
December 1928. It replaced the Ottoman (Arabic) script, which was thereafter banned. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 288 ---
300
In His Name, be He glorified!
Saying that we are “corrupting religion,” they have censured us for compiling a
Hizb al-Qur’ani, like a large An‘am,6 out of hundreds of well-known verses which are
the particular sources of the Risale-i Nur, although this is an Islamic custom that has
been practised since the time of the Prophet.
They also want to convict us in connection with the Treatise On Islamic Dress, for
which I have already served a year’s sentence, and which was being treated as
confidential, and as recorded in the police report, was pulled out from under the
firewood — they want to show that it was written and published this year. Also, I said
strong words to the person (Mustafa Kemal) who was leader of the Government in
Ankara; I criticized him to his face and he did not respond but remained silent; yet the
natural, necessary, and confidential criticisms I made of him after his death while
explaining the meaning of a Hadith which indicated his error, were held to be a crime.
But what importance has the sake of someone who is dead and no longer has any
connection with the Government besides the sake of the nation and government and
the laws of justice, which are a manifestation of Divine sovereignty?
Moreover, freedom of conscience, which is one of the principles of the
Government of the Republic that we have most relied on and defended ourselves with,
has been made the basis of charges against us; as though we oppose the principle of
freedom of conscience.
Another thing is attributed to me in the police report, which has never ever
occurred to me, that since I criticize the evils and faults of modern civilization, I do
not accept the use of the radio,7 aeroplanes, and the railway; I am accused of opposing
modern progress.
God willing, the fair-minded, just Denizli public prosecutor and court will make
analogies with the above examples and show how unjust are these proceedings, and
attach no importance to the unfounded suspicions in those reports.
The most extraordinary of them is this, that the public prosecutor in another trial
asked me: “You said in the confidential Fifth Ray that the

6 See page 389, footnote 13.
7 I said, to encourage the offering of endless thanks for a supreme Divine bounty like the radio,
that the Qur’an should be recited on the radio so that people could hear it all over the world, and the
atmosphere of the globe would become a reciter of the Qur’an.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
301
army would save itself from the leadership of that fearsome person. Your intention
was to incite the army to rebel against the Government.” I replied: “What I meant was
that the commander would either die or would be transferred, and the army would be
saved from his domination.” How can a treatise that is both extremely confidential,
and copies of which have come into my possession only twice in eight years and then
been lost, and expounds a universal meaning of a Hadith about the end of time, and
was originally written long ago, and moreover one single soldier has not seen — how
can such a treatise be the reason for such charges?
The strangest of all was this, that I said in one place that Almighty God’s great
bounties of the aeroplane, railway, and radio should be responded to with great
thanks, yet mankind had not done this and had rained down bombs on men’s heads
with the planes. While thanks for the vast bounty of the radio would be shown by
making it a universal million-tongued reciter of the Qur’an which would allow people
all over the earth to listen to the Qur’an. And in the explanations in the Twentieth
Word of Qur’anic predictions about the wonders of civilization, I said concerning the
allusions of one verse that the unbelievers would defeat the Islamic world by means of
the railway. Although I urged Muslims to work towards these wonders, I am accused
at the end of the indictment because of the previous public prosecutor’s malice, of
“opposing modern advances like the railway, aeroplane, and radio.”
Also, although it has absolutely no connection, someone had said about the name
Risaletü’n-Nur, which is another name for the Risale-i Nur, that “it is ‘a message’
(risalet) inspired from the light of the Qur’an;” and attaching a wrong meaning from
another place in the indictment, they made it into another charge, as though I had said
“the Risale-i Nur is a Divine Messenger.”
Also, I have proved decisively in twenty places in my defence that we would not
make religion, the Qur’an, and the Risale-i Nur tools of anything, even in the face of
the whole world, and we could not, and that we would not change a single of their
truths for all the world, and that is how we are in fact. Over these last twenty years
there are thousands of evidences of this. Since it is thus, we declare with all our
strength:
                              For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.8
                                   S a i d  N u r s i

8 Qur’an, 3:173.

--- Sayfa 290 ---
302
In His Name, be He glorified!
A Supplement to My Objections to the Indictment
[Those addressed by these objections are not Denizli Court and the public
prosecutor, but the malicious, suspicious officials, chiefly the Isparta and
Inebolu prosecutors, who with their false and inaccurate records, were the
cause of the extraordinary indictment against us here.]
F i r s t l y : The Risale-i Nur students, who are innocent and not in any way
involved in politics, have unimaginably and on no grounds whatsoever been called a
political society, and the unfortunates who have joined that circle and have no aim
other than belief and the hereafter, have been considered guilty of being disseminators
of that society, or active officers or members of it, or of reading the Risale-i Nur or
teaching it or writing it out, and have been sent to trial. A certain proof of how far this
is from the essence of justice is that although according to the principles of freedom of
thought and freedom of study it is not considered a crime to read the harmful works of
Doctor Dozy9 and other atheists hostile to Islam, it is counted a crime for those people
needy for the truths of the Qur’an and belief to read and write out the Risale-i Nur,
which teaches those truths as brilliantly as the sun. In addition, only a few sentences
from two or three treatises out of hundreds, which we had held to be confidential so
that no wrong meaning be ascribed to them and had not permitted to be published,
were made the pretext for our indictment. Whereas with one exception, Eskişehir
Court had scrutinized those treatises, seen what they necessitated. As for the
exception, I gave an extremely decisive answer to it in both my petition, and my
objections to Eskişehir Court, and it was proved in twenty respects that “we have
light, not the club of politics.” Nevertheless, those unfair prosecutors inferred that the
three or four sentences in three confidential and unpublished treatises could be
extended to the whole Risale-i Nur, and accused myself and those who read and write
the Risale-i Nur of contesting the government.
I call to witness my close friends and those who meet with me, and I swear that
apart from two Presidents, one deputy, and the Governor of Kastamonu, for more
than ten years, I have not known who the members and ministers of the Government
are, or its leaders, officials and deputies, and I have not had the slightest curiosity to
find out. Is it at all possible

9 Reinhart Dozy (1820-1883), the Dutch orientalist one of whose works was the inaccurate and
derogatory Essaie sur l’Histoire de l’Islamisme, which was translated into Turkish by the atheist
Abdullah Cevdet and published under the title Târîh-i Islâmiyet (Cairo 1908). [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 291 ---
303
for a person not to know the people he is contesting and not to be curious about them,
for him not to know if they are friend or foe, and to attach no importance to finding
out? It is clearly understood from this that they are concocting completely baseless
pretexts to convict me whatever happens.
Since that is how it is, I say not to the court here, but to those unjust people: I
don’t give tuppence for the severest penalty you can inflict on me; it has no
importance. For I am seventy years old and at the door of the grave. It is great good
fortune for me to exchange one or two years of persecuted, innocent life for the rank
of martyrdom. Through the thousands of proofs of the Risale-i Nur, I believe
absolutely certainly that for us death consists of discharge papers. If we are to be
executed, one hour’s distress would be the key to eternal happiness and mercy. But
you unjust people who confuse the judiciary on account of atheism and preoccupy the
Government with us for no reason! Know certainly that you will be condemned to
eternal annihilation and everlasting solitary confinement, and tremble! I see you will be
made to pay for it many times over. I pity you even. Yes, death, which has emptied
this city a hundred times into the graveyard, certainly has greater demands than life.
And the question of people being saved from being executed by it is the most pressing
and most important they face and their most essential and certain need. Even lunatics,
therefore, would understand that in the eyes of reality and justice those who accuse on
petty pretexts the Risale-i Nur students, who have found this solution for themselves,
and the Risale-i Nur, which provides it supported by thousands of proofs, themselves
become the object of accusation.
There are three matters which deceive these unjust people, leading them to
suspect the Risale-i Nur students are a political society, with which they have
absolutely no connection:
The First: Ever since early days, my students have been passionately attached to
me, like brothers, and this has given rise to suspicions of a political society.
The Second: Some of the Risale-i Nur students have acted like the groups within
the Islamic community, the same as everywhere and as is permitted by the laws of the
Republic, and this has been supposed to be a society. But the intention of those three
or four students was not some sort of political society, it was purely sincere
brotherhood in the service of belief and a solidarity which looks to the hereafter.
The Third: Since those unjust people know themselves to be misguided and lovers
of the life of this world, and since they find some of the laws of the land convenient for
themselves, they say to themselves: “Doubtless, Said and his friends are opposed to us
and to the laws of the

--- Sayfa 292 ---
304
Government which are favourable to our ‘civilized’ illicit passions. They must
therefore have a political society which is antagonistic to us.” So I say to them:
You unfortunates! If the world had been eternal and man was going to remain in it
for ever, and if man’s duties had consisted only of politics, there might possibly have
been some meaning in these slanders of yours. And if I had embarked on this matter
for political ends, you would have found not ten sentences in a hundred treatises, but a
thousand, to be combative and connected with politics. And if to suppose the
impossible, like you we were working with all our strength for worldly aims, pleasures,
and politics —which even Satan could not make anyone believe and accept— even if it
was thus, since there is nothing these twenty years to suggest this, and the
Government looks to the hand and not the heart, and all governments have fierce
opponents; then still there is nothing with which we can be charged according the laws
of justice. My final word is:
God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He
the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!10
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
[I quote exactly an old memory and subtle matter of defence which was not
disclosed in Eskişehir Court, and not officially recorded, and was not even
written in my defence.]
They asked me there: “What do you think about the Republic?” I replied: “My
biography, which you have in your possession, proves that I was a religious republican
before any of you, with the exception perhaps of the Chairman of Eskişehir Court, was
born. A summary of it is this: like now, at that time I was living in seclusion in an
uninhabited tomb. Someone would bring me soup and I used to give breadcrumbs to
the ants. I used to eat my bread with the soup. Some people heard of this and asked
me about it, and I told them: “The ant and bee nations are republicans; I give the ants
the breadcrumbs out of respect for their republicanism.”
So they said: “You are opposing the early leaders of Islam.” I replied: “The
Rightly-Guided Caliphs were both Caliph and presidents of the republic. Surely Abu
Bakr the Veracious (May God be pleased with him), the Ten Promised Paradise, and
the Companions of the Prophet were like

10 Qur’an, 9:129.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
305
presidents of the republic. But it was not some meaningless title; they were leaders of a
religious republic the meaning of which was true justice and the freedom of the
Shari‘a.”
Mr. Prosecutor and Members of the Court! You are accusing me of holding an
idea the opposite of which I have held for fifty years. If you are asking about the
secular republic, what I understand by it is that secularism means being unbiased; that
is, in accordance with the principle of freedom of conscience, it refers to a government
that does not interfere with religiously-minded and pious people, the same as it does
not interfere with the irreligious and dissolute. I have withdrawn from political and
social life for ten, and now its twenty, years. I do not know the state of the
Government of the Republic. If, God forbid, it has taken on a fearsome form whereby,
on account of irreligion, it promulgates laws indicting those who work for their belief
and lives in the hereafter, I proclaim to you fearlessly and warn you: if I had a
thousand lives, I would be ready to sacrifice all of them for belief and the hereafter. Do
whatever you like, my last word is For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs. In the face of your sentencing me unjustly to capital punishment or life
imprisonment I say: as the Risale-i Nur has discovered and proved certainly, I am not
being executed but discharged from my duties; I am going to the world of light and
abode of bliss. As for you, you unfortunates who persecute us on behalf of
misguidance! Since I know that you are being sentenced to eternal annihilation and
everlasting solitary confinement, I am prepared to surrender up my spirit with perfect
ease of mind, having taken my revenge on you completely.
                                                                                              Prisoner
                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Sirs!
I have formed the certain opinion as a result of numerous indications that we have
been attacked not for ‘breaching public security by exploiting religious feelings’ on
behalf of the Government, but behind a tissue of lies, on behalf of atheism, because of
our belief and our service to belief and public order. One proof of this out of many is
that despite twenty thousand people reading and accepting the twenty thousand copies
of the parts of the Risale-i Nur over twenty years, public security has not been
breached by students of the Risale-i Nur on any occasion whatsover, and

--- Sayfa 294 ---
306
no such incident has been recorded by the Government, and neither the former nor the
present courts have found such a incident. Whereas, had there been any such
widespread, powerful propaganda, it would have become apparent within twenty days.
That is to say, contrary to the principle of freedom of conscience, Article 163 of this
ambiguous law,11 which embraces all who give religious counsel, is a bogus mask.
Atheists deceive certain members of the Government, confuse the legal establishment,
and want to crush us whatever happens.
Since the reality of the matter is this, we say with all our strength: o wretches who
sell religion for the world and have fallen into absolute unbelief! Do whatever you can!
Your world will be the end of you! Let our heads also be sacrificed for a truth that
hundreds of millions of heads have been sacrificed for! We are ready for any penalty
and for our execution! In this situation, being outside prison is a hundred times worse
than being inside it. Since there is no freedom at all —neither religious freedom, nor
freedom of conscience, nor scholarly freedom— under the absolute despotism that
confronts us, for those with honour, the people of religion and supporters of freedom,
there is no solution apart from death or entering prison. We say, To God do we
belong, and to Him is our return,12 and we trust in our Sustainer.
                                                                                     Prisoner
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Chairman of the Court, Ali Riza Bey!
I have an important request in order to defend my rights: I do not know the new
letters, and my handwriting in the old is very inadequate. Also, they do not allow me
to meet with anyone; I am kept in what is quite simply solitary confinement. The
indictment was even taken off me after fifteen minutes. I also do not have the means to
employ a lawyer. I was able to obtain only one copy of part of the defence I have
presented to you, in the new letters, secretly.  I also had written out one or two copies
of The Fruits of Belief, which is a sort of defence of the Risale-i Nur and a summary
of its way, to give to the public prosecutor and to send to the departments of
government in Ankara. They suddenly took them off

11 Article 163 of the Criminal Code: a law designed to enforce the principle of ‘secularism,’ and
prevent the growth of any religious movements. [Tr.]
12 Qur’an, 2:156.

--- Sayfa 295 ---
307
me and have not returned them. Whereas the judicial authorities in Eskişehir sent a
typewriter to the prison for us. We wrote out one or two copies of our defences on it
in the new letters, and the Court wrote them out as well. My urgent request, therefore,
is either you supply us with a typewriter, or allow us to procure one outside so that we
can type out in the new letters two or three copies of both our defences, and the
treatise which is a sort of defence of the Risale-i Nur. We shall then send them to both
the Ministry of Justice, and the Cabinet, and the National Assembly, and the Council
of State. For it is the Risale-i Nur that is the basis of the indictment, and the charges
against the Risale-i Nur and the objections to it are not some petty, personal matter so
that no importance should be attached to them. On the contrary, it is a general matter
of serious concern to the nation, country, and Government, and will therefore arouse
significant attention in the Islamic world.
Yes, those who covertly attack the Risale-i Nur are those who in order to destroy
the regard, love, and brotherhood of the Islamic world, which is the greatest strength
of this country’s people, and arouse loathing, are covertly establishing absolute
disbelief by making politics the tool of irreligion. They have deceived the Government
and twice confused the legal establishment, saying: “The Risale-i Nur and its students
exploit religion for politics and there is the possibility of their disturbing public order
and security.
You unfortunates! The Risale-i Nur definitely has no connection with politics, but
since it has smashed absolute disbelief, it destroys and repulses anarchy, which
underlies absolute disbelief, and absolute despotism, which overlies it. One of the
hundreds of proofs that it ensures public order, security, freedom, and justice is The
Fruits of Belief (Meyve Risalesi), which is like its defence. It should be scrutinized by
a committee of prominent scholars and sociologists; if they do not confirm what I say,
I consent to any punishment or tortuous execution!
                                                                                    Prisoner
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
Chairman of the Court!
Three matters have been made the basis of the Indictment:
The First is a political society. I cite as witnesses all the Risale-i Nur students here
and those who have met with me, and those who read or write out the Risale-i Nur;
you may ask them. I have not said to anyone

--- Sayfa 296 ---
308
that we were going to set up a political society or a Naqshbandi association. I always
told them that we were going to work to save belief. No society has been mentioned
among us apart from the sacred community of Islam, which includes all believers and
has more than three hundred million members. Through the brotherhood of all
believers and because of our service of the Qur’an, we found ourselves in the ‘Party of
the Qur’an’ (Hizb al-Qur’an), which in the Qur’an is called the Hizb Allah. If this is
what is meant in the Indictment, we admit to it wholeheartedly and with pride. But if
something else is meant, we know nothing of it!
The Second Matter: As is stated in the Indictment and confirmed by the report of
the Kastamonu police, some books like the Treatise On Islamic Dress (Tesettür
Risalesi) and The Six Attacks (Hücumat-i Sitte) and its addendum, were found in
nailed boxes under piles of firewood and coal in a condition that would in no way
allow them to be published. They had been scrutinized and criticized by Eskişehir
Court, a light sentence had been served for them, and they had most certainly been
treated as private. Now, reading false meanings into some of their sentences, it wants
to take us back nine years and charge us again with a crime the penalty of which we
have already served.
The Third Matter: In several places in the Indictment, phrases have been used
which express possibility rather than actual occurrences, like “he may breach state
security or he may harm it.” It is possible for everyone to commit murder, but are they
to be charged with it due to the possibility?
                                                                                         Prisoner
                                                                                  S a i d  Nu r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Chairman of the Court!
I present my defence, which is in the form of a petition I sent to the departments
of government in Ankara and to the President, and the reply from the Prime Minister’s
Office, which shows that they recognized its importance. Contained in this defence are
decisive answers to the unfounded and offensive suspicions that the prosecution have
stated against us. There are numerous untrue and illogical things in the report of the
committee of experts from here, which was based on the superficial and malicious
reports of other places; my objections to these too have been presented.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
309
In Short: As I stated before, I told Eskişehir Court when they wanted to convict
me under Article 163: out of two hundred deputies of the Republican Government, the
same number, 163, agreed to assign one hundred and fifty thousand liras to my
medrese13 in Van. Due to this, the regard in which the Republican Government held
me invalidates Article 163 as far as I am concerned. Although I told the court this, the
committee of experts corrupted what I said and wrote: “163 deputies opened
proceedings against Said.” It is because of this totally baseless accusation of that first
experts’ committee that the prosecution is making charges against us. This is in spite
of the fact that the Risale-i Nur had been referred, on your decision, to the highest
learned and scientific committee, and having studied and scrutinized all its parts, the
committee unanimously made this statement about us: “There is nothing explicit or
inferred in the writings of Said and the Risale-i Nur students which suggests that they
have any intent to exploit religion or sacred matters, encourage the breaching of state
security, or found a political society, or conspire in any way against the Government.
It is understood that in their correspondences, Said’s students did not nurture any evil
intentions against the Government, or have the idea of founding a political association,
or establishing a sufi order.”
The second committee of experts also stated unanimously that “ninety-nine per
cent of Said Nursi’s treatises are both sincere, and disinterested, and have in no way
departed from the principles of scholarship, reality, and religion. There is clearly
nothing in them exploiting religion, or concerning the formation of a political society,
or breaching security. The letters and correspondence between the students and
between them and Said Nursi are of this sort. Apart from five or ten confidential,
complaining, and unscholarly pieces, all the treatises expound Qur’anic verses or the
true meanings of Hadiths. Ninety per cent of the available treatises contain
comparisons illustrating clearly the tenets of belief in God, the Prophet, and the
hereafter and their terminology, scholarly views, moral admonitions to the elderly and
to youths, and instructive incidents selected from his experiences in life. They contain
nothing which could damage the Government, administration, or public security.
Thus, the prosecution ignored the report of this eminent committee and made
extraordinary charges against us based on the confused, deficient first report, so we
are truly extremely upset. We in no way deem it fitting for this just court with its
proven fairness. If there be no mistake in the comparison, it resembles this story: they
asked a Bektashi why he did not perform the obligatory prayers. He told them: “It says
in the Qur’an

13 See, page 483, footnote 69.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
310
‘Approach not the prayers.’” When they reminded him that the verse continued “When
you are intoxicated,”14 he told them: “I have not memorized the whole Qur’an.” They
take a single sentence from the Risale-i Nur, and disregarding what follows it, which
puts it in context and explains it, use it against us. Thirty to forty examples of this are
to be seen in the defence I shall present, when comparing it with the indictment. I shall
recount a subtle incident which is one of those examples:
The prosecution in Eskişehir Court used a phrase about the Risale-i Nur’s
instruction in belief which was anyway the result of an error, like “it corrupts the
people.” Although it later did not use it, one of the Risale-i Nur students called
Abdürrezzaq, said a year after the trial:
“You unfortunate! The Risale-i Nur has received the indirect praise of thirty-three
Qur’anic verses, its value for religion has been established by three miraculous
predictions of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and the powerful allusions of
Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified); these twenty years it has caused the
Government no trouble whatsoever, and besides not harming anyone at all, has
illumined and guided thousands of the sons of this land, and strengthened their belief
and rectified their conduct, and yet you call that guidance ‘corruption.’ You have no
fear of God! May your tongue be cursed!”
Now, the prosecution has seen these words of that student, so I refer to your
fairness and conscience the expression: “Said has spread corruption.”
With the idea of interfering in the social teachings of the Risale-i Nur, the
prosecution said: “The place of religion is the conscience; it cannot be tied to laws and
regulations. Formerly there was social unrest because it was tied to laws.” So I say:
“Religion does not consist only of belief; its second half is righteous action. Is fear of
imprisonment or being seen by a government detective sufficient to deter those who
commit numerous grievous sins which poison society, like murder, adultery, theft,
gambling, and drinking? If that was so, there would have to be a policeman or
detective stationed permanently in every house, or at everyone’s side even, so that
obdurate souls would restrain themselves from those filthy acts. Whereas, in respect of
good deeds and belief, the Risale-i Nur places a permanent immaterial ‘prohibitor’
next to everyone. It easily saves them from bad deeds by recalling the prison of Hell
and Divine wrath.
Also, due to the signature in one treatise of a wonderful and extra-ordinary
‘coincidence,’ the prosecution made a meaningless inference, saying “the members of a
political society.” Are the holders of signatures

14 Qur’an, 4:43.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
311
of this sort in the account books of tradesmen and innkeepers called a society. There
was a similar baseless accusation in Eskişehir Court. When I replied and showed the
treatise called The Miracles of Muhammad (PBUH), they were astonished. If we had
formed a worldly society, those who had suffered so much harm on my account would
certainly have fled from me in total abhorrence. This means that just as I and we have
a relationship with Imam Ghazali which is not broken off because it pertains to the
hereafter not to this world; so these innocent, sincere, pure religious people have
displayed a powerful attachment to an unfortunate like myself for the sake of his
teachings about belief. This has given rise to unfounded suspicions of an imaginary
political society. My last word is:
For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.
                                                                         Prisoner in solitary confinement
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
[This piece is very important]
In His Name, be He glorified!
An Important Part of My Final Word
Sirs! Chairman of the Court! Take note!
Since to convict the Risale-i Nur and its students is the equivalent of convicting
the truths of the Qur’an and belief, it is to try to close —directly on account of
absolute disbelief— the highway taken every year for one thousand three hundred
years by three hundred million Muslims, leading to reality and the happiness of both
worlds, and it will attract towards yourself their revulsion and objections. For those on
the highway assist with their prayers and good works those who have already passed
down it. It will also be a means to a doomsday breaking forth over this blessed
country. What answer will you give at the Last Judgement when you are asked in the
face of those three hundred thousand million claimants: “You did not interfere with the
French work by Doctor Dozy called Tarih-i Islam, which from beginning to end
attacks Islam, your country and your religion, nor with the works of atheists in your
libraries and their free availability, nor with the students of those books who formed
themselves into illegal societies, nor with the societies who opposed your politics like
the communists, anarchists, the old revolutionary societies, or the negative Turkists; so
why have you interfered with

--- Sayfa 300 ---
312
the readers of a work of truth and reality like the Risale-i Nur, a true commentary on
the Qur’an, and its students, who have no connection with politics whatsoever and
have taken the highway of the Qur’an and belief solely to save themselves and their
fellow-countrymen from eternal annihilation and solitary confinement? And why have
you called the friendship and brotherhood of those sincerely religious people which
looks only to the hereafter, a political society? You have convicted them under a
bizarre law, and that is what you wanted.” We ask you the same thing. Our enemies,
the atheists and dissemblers, deceive you, confuse the judiciary, and busy the
Government with us in a way detrimental to the country and people; by calling
absolute despotism “the Republic,” and making absolute apostasy part of the regime,
and calling absolute vice “civilization,” and attaching the name of “the law” to
arbitrary force and compulsion on account of disbelief, they both preoccupy the
Government, and have scattered us, thus dealing blows on account of Europeans at
the supremacy of Islam and the country and people.
Sirs! As is indicated by the four severe earthquakes in four years coinciding
exactly with the severe aggression against the Risale-i Nur students and their being
persecuted, and on each occasion their occurring exactly at the time the students were
attacked and their stopping when the attacks ceased, you are responsible for the
heavenly and earthly disasters that have occurred on our being convicted...!
                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i
                                                       who is being held in total isolation
                                                  and solitary confinement in Denizli Prison
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Another Part of My Final Word
Sirs!
The Ankara committee of experts has confirmed our decisive reply to the charge
of forming a political association insistently put forward by you as a pretext for our
conviction, which you have decided upon as may be deduced from the course followed
by the prosecution. While being amazed and astonished at your insisting on this point
to this degree, this meaning occurred to me: since friendship, fraternal communities
and assemblies, and sincere associations pertaining to the hereafter and brotherhood
are each both foundation stones of social life, and an essential

--- Sayfa 301 ---
313
need of human nature, and a most necessary bond of great strength between people,
from the life of the family to that of tribe, nation, Islam, and humanity, and a point of
support and means of consolation in the face of the assaults of the material and
immaterial things which cause harm and alarm and which each person encounters in
the universe and cannot combat on his own, and which prevent him carrying out his
human and Islamic duties; and since there are some who give the name of ‘political
society,’ although it has no political front, to the gathering together of the students of
the Risale-i Nur around the teachings of belief, which is most praiseworthy and is
sincere friendship centred on the teachings of belief and the Qur’an and certainly leads
to happiness in this world and in religion and in the hereafter, and is a companionship
on the way of truth, and co-operation; most certainly and without any doubt, they have
either been deceived in some appalling manner, or they are extremely vicious
anarchists who are both barbarously inimical to humanity, and tyrannically hostile to
Islam, and harbour enmity towards society in the utterly corrupt and depraved manner
of anarchy, and strive obdurately and intractably as apostates against this country and
nation, the sovereignty of Islam and sacred things of religion, or they are satanic
atheists who, working on behalf of foreigners to cut and destroy the life-giving arteries
of this nation, are deceiving the Government and confusing the legal establishment in
order to destroy or turn against our brothers and our country the immaterial weapons
which up to now we have used against them — those satans, pharaohs, and anarchists.
                                                                                       Prisoner
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
Sirs!
With your permission I shall address a few words, in your presence and apparently
to you, but in fact to the secret revolutionary committee bent on corruption, which has
taken on many forms, and with the idea of depraving this nation in the name of
disbelief and atheism and on account of foreigners, has for thirty or forty years
employed every means to attack the Qur’an and truths of belief; and to the inhuman,
thoughtless officials whom they have made a screen to themselves in this matter; and
their propagandists in the guise of Muslims who have confused this court.
(The decision to acquit us on the second day made this fiery speech superfluous.)
                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i ,
                                                      in total isolation and solitary confinement

--- Sayfa 302 ---
314
The Correct Answer to an Important Question
Several high-ranking officials asked me: “Why did you not accept Mustafa
Kemal’s offer of a three-hundred-lira salary and the post of general preacher in
Kurdistan and the Eastern Provinces in place of Shaykh Sanusi?15 If you had accepted
it, you would have been instrumental in saving the lives of the hundred thousand
people who were slaughtered because of the revolution.”
I told them in reply: the Risale-i Nur, which has been the means of gaining for
hundreds of thousands of our fellow-countrymen millions of years of life in the
hereafter, has performed that task a thousand times over, in place of twenty or thirty
years of worldly life I was unable to save for those people. If I had accepted the offer,
the Risale-i Nur, which can be the tool of nothing nor follow anything and holds the
mystery of sincerity, would not have come into being. I even told my respected
brothers in prison: if those who have condemned me to be executed because of the
heavy blows of the Risale-i Nur, which was sent to Ankara, save their belief through
the Risale-i Nur and are delivered from eternal annihilation, you bear witness that I
forgive them with all my life and soul!
I told those who were pestering me with their surveillance in Denizli after our
acquittal, and the high-ranking officials and police chief and inspectors: It is an
undeniable wonder of the Risale-i Nur that in nine months of close investigations no
document has been found or connection of any kind with any movement, association,
or society here or abroad, in the twenty years of my life of oppression, or in the
hundreds of my treatises and letters, or among my thousands of students. Could this
extraordinary situation have been achieved by the power of thought or through some
arrangement? If the private concerns of one person over a number of years are brought
to light, there certainly would be twenty matters to embarass or convict him. Since the
fact is this, you will say either that some brilliant undefeatable genius is organizing the
matter, or that it is a truly munificent Divine preservation. It would surely be an error
to contest such a genius. It would cause great harm to the country and people. While
to oppose such Divine preservation and dominical grace would be pharaoh-like
obduracy.
If you say: “If we release you and do not keep you under surveillance, you may
contaminate the life of our society with your teachings and obstruse mysteries.”

15 See page 381-2, footnote 9.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
315
I reply: All my teachings without exception have been seen by the Government
and judicial authorities, and no matter has been found requiring even one day’s
penalty. Forty to fifty thousand copies of those teachings have been passed from hand
to hand, being studied attentively and with curiosity, yet the readers have only
benefited, no one has suffered any harm. Also, since both the former court and the
present court could find no indictable offences, it is an ugly and meaningless injustice
for you to interfere with our acquittal granted unanimously by the new court, and with
me and the Risale-i Nur, as is proved decisively by the former court only being able to
give sentences of six months each to fifteen out of one hundred and twenty of my
brothers who were being held in prison, only arbitrarily and on the pretext of five or
ten words out of one hundred and thirty treatises, for the sake of an important
personage in the eyes of the world. Moreover, I have no new teachings and none of
my secrets have remained hidden so that you should try to modify them through
supervision.
I am now very much in need of my freedom. Enough now of the unnecessary,
unjust, and meaningless surveillance to which I have been subjected these twenty
years. My patience is exhausted. There is the possibility that due to old age I shall utter
the curses that up to now I have refrained from uttering. “The sighs of the oppressed
rise to the Divine Throne” is a powerful truth.
Then those tyrannical wretches who occupy high places in the eyes of the world
said: “Not once in twenty years have you worn our headgear; you have not uncovered
your head in the presence of either the former court or the present courts; you have
presented yourself in the former attire. Whereas seventeen million have taken to
modern dress.” So I replied: rather than wearing through a dispensation of the Shari‘a
and under the constraint of the law, the dress, not of seventeen million or even seven
million, but with their own consent and sincere acceptance of seven thousand
European-smitten drunkards, I prefer to wear, in conformity with the Shari‘a and fear
of God, the dress of seven thousand million. It may not be said of someone like me
who for twenty-five years has withdrawn from social life “he obstinately opposes us.”
Even if it was obstinacy, since Mustafa Kemal could not break it, and two courts could
not break it, and the authorities of three provinces could not smash it, who are you to
struggle pointlessly to break that obstinacy to the harm of both the nation and the
Government! Even if he was a political opponent, since as you have confirmed, he has
severed all his connections with the world these last twenty years and has in effect
been dead, he would not be again raised to life, meaninglessly become involved in
political life causing himself considerable harm, and struggle against you; it is therefore
lunacy

--- Sayfa 304 ---
316
to have groundless fears about his opposing you. Since it is a lunacy to even speak
seriously with lunatics, I am giving up speaking with those like you. I said: “Whatever
you do, I won’t feel obliged to you!”, which both angered them, and silenced them.
My final word is:
For us God suffices, and He is the Best of Disposer of Affairs.16 * God
suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He the
Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!17
* * *
What I Said This Time in My Short Defence
The compasssion, reality, and truth of the Risale-i Nur prevents us from
involvement in politics. For innocents are afflicted with calamities and we would have
been unjust towards to them. Some people wanted an explanation of this, and I told
them:
In the present stormy century, the egotism and racialism proceeding from cruel
civilization, and the military dictatorships resulting from the Great War, and the
pitilessness arising from misguidance have led to such extreme tyranny and excessive
despotisms that if the people of truth defend their rights through physical force, or
through severe tyranny, numerous unfortunates will be burnt on the pretext of
partisanship, and in that situation, they too will be excessively tyrannical and will be
defeated. For those who act and attack out of the above feelings, on some petty
pretext, strike at twenty to thirty people because of the mistakes of one or two, and
destroy them. If on the way of truth and justice, the people of truth strike only at the
one who struck, they win only one in the face of thirty losses, and are then in a
position of defeat. If, in accordance with the unjust rule of responding in kind, the
people of truth also crush twenty to thirty people due to the errors of one or two, they
will then perpetrate a ghastly injustice in the name of right.
This then is the true reason for our having strenuously avoided politics and
interfering in government, and for our aversion towards it. For the power of truth we
have at our disposal is such that we could have defended our rights completely. But
since everything is transitory and passing, and death does not die, and the door of the
grave does not close, and if one suffers hardship, it is transformed into mercy; we shall
surely

16 Qur’an, 3:173.
17 Qur’an, 9:129.

--- Sayfa 305 ---
317
place our trust in God in patience and gratitude, and be silent. To forcibly and
harmfully break our silence is totally opposed and contrary to justice, fairness, and
patriotic zeal and endeavour.
To Conclude: The members of the Government, the politicians, the
administrators, the police, and the judiciary have nothing at all over which to struggle
with us. At the most, through the bigotry of absolute unbelief, which no government in
the world can defend and no one in their senses likes, and the bigotry of atheism,
which arises from materialism and is a fearsome plague afflicting humanity, and
through their evil, certain covert atheists deceive a number of government officials,
excite their suspicions, and incite them against us. And we say: if they incited not a
few suspicious people like that but the whole world against us, through the strength of
the Qur’an and Divine grace, we would not flee; we would not lay down our arms
before that apostasizing absolute disbelief and that atheism!
                                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 306 ---
318
The Thirteenth Ray
 [The light-scattering, highly valuable letters Ustad Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
sent his students while in Denizli Prison, which illustrate in brilliant fashion
the great exertions of the Risale-i Nur.]
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I congratulate you with all my being on the Night of Power which has passed and
the coming festival, and I entrust you to the unity and mercy of the Most Merciful of
the Merciful. Although in accordance with the meaning of “he who believes in Divine
Determining is saved from unhappiness,” I do not consider you to be in need of
consolation, I say that I received from the allusive meaning of the verse,
Now await in patience the command of your Sustainer, for verily you are in
Our eyes, and glorify with praise your Sustainer,1
all the solace the verse affords. It was like this:
While thinking of passing Ramadan tranquilly, in forgetfulness of the world, this
unimaginable and completely unendurable episode befell us, yet I observed that it was
pure grace both for me, and for the Risale-i Nur, and for you and our Ramadan, and
our brotherhood. I shall describe only two or three of its many benefits for myself.
One of them: The intense excitement, seriousness, entreating and seeking refuge
with God I experienced overcame a serious illness, and made me work in Ramadan.

1 Qur’an, 52:48.

--- Sayfa 307 ---
319
The Second: I had a powerful desire to see all of you this year and be near you. I
would have agreed to the difficulties I have suffered to see only one of you and to
come to Isparta.
The Third: In an extraordinary way, all the painful circumstances both in
Kastamonu, and on the way here, and here, suddenly change, and contrary to what I
hoped and desired a hand of grace is apparent, making one exclaim: “Good is in what
God chooses.” What made me realize this most was that the most heedless and high-
ranking persons are being made to read the Risale-i Nur with careful attention,
opening up new fields for its triumphs. I was suffering all the pains and regrets of
everyone else as well as my own, but then since this calamity increased the hundred
merits of each hour’s worship to a thousand —for the blessed month of Ramadan
makes each hour the equivalent of a hundred hours— my pity and sorrow for sincere
people like you who have learnt thoroughly the lessons of the Risale-i Nur, so know
that this is a fleeting place of trade, who sacrifice everything for their belief and lives in
the hereafter, and believe that the transient hardships of this ‘School of Joseph’2 will
produce everlasting pleasures and benefits, —my pity and sorrow for you were
transformed into congratulations and appreciation and applause at your steadfastness.
I declared: “All praise and thanks be to God for all circum-stances other than unbelief
and misguidance!”
I am of the opinion that in this respect there are such benefits both for myself, and
for our brotherhood, and for the Risale-i Nur, and for our Ramadans, and for you, that
if the veil was drawn back, it would make us declare: “Thanks be to You, O God! This
Divine Decree and Determining are an instance of Your grace for us.”
Do not blame those who were the cause of this affair. The far-reaching and fearful
plans for this calamity had long since been laid, and in the event we have got off
lightly. God willing, it will pass quickly. In accordance with the meaning of the verse,
It may be that you hate a thing, and it is good for you,3 do not be grieved.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
I am very happy to be close to you. From time to time I converse with you in
imagination and am consoled. Know that if it had been possible, I

2 See, page 478, footnote 63.
3 Qur’an, 2:216.

--- Sayfa 308 ---
320
would proudly and happily have endured all your difficulties. Because of you, I love
Isparta and its environs down to its very stones and soil. I declare even, and I shall say
so officially, if the Isparta authorities were to inflict some penalty on me and another
province was to acquit me, I would still choose here.
Yes, I am from Isparta in three respects. I cannot prove it genealogically, but I
have the conviction that the forebears of Said, who came into the world in the sub-
district of Isparit, went there from here. And the province of Isparta has given me such
true brothers that I would be happy to sacrifice not Abdülmecid4 and Abdurrahman,5
but Said [myself] for each one of them.
It is my guess that there is no one on earth at this time who suffers less —in their
hearts, spirits, and minds— than the Risale-i Nur students. For due to the lights of
certain, verified belief,6 their hearts, spirits, and minds do not suffer distress. As for
physical hardships, they know from the teachings of the Risale-i Nur, that they are
both transitory, and unimportant, and yield reward, and are a means by which the
service of belief unfolds in other channels, and so meet them with thanks and patience.
They prove through their states of mind that certain, verified belief leads to happiness
in this world too. Yes, they say “Let’s see what God does, whatever He does, it is
good,” and steadfastly work to transform these transient difficulties into permanent
instances of mercy.
May the Most Merciful of the Merciful increase the numbers of those like them,
make them the cause of pride and happiness for this country, and grant them eternal
happiness in Paradise. Amen!
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
In regard to this Divinely ordained event from the point of view of the justice of
Divine Determining: because some of the new students sought worldly things by
means of the Risale-i Nur, which were not in keeping with the true meaning of
sincerity, they found themselves confronted by self-seeking rivals, and obtaining from
somewhere a long way off from

4 Abdülmecid (d.1967) was Bediuzzaman’s younger brother. He was a teacher of the religious
sciences, then a Mufti. He translated parts of the Risale-i Nur into Arabic, and others from Arabic
into Turkish. [Tr.]
5 Abdurrahman (1903-1928) was the son of Bediuzzaman’s elder brother, Abdullah. He was
Bediuzzaman’s “spiritual son, student, and assistant,” and joined his uncle in Istanbul after the First
World War. He published a short biography of Bediuzzaman at that time. [Tr.]
6 For ‘certain, verified belief,’ see, page 569, footnote 1.

--- Sayfa 309 ---
321
me the Fifth Ray, the original of which was written twenty-five years ago and in the
past eight years copies of which have only twice come into my possession and were
then mislaid, a number of jealous people like that corrupt hoja aroused the suspicions
of the judiciary with it. At the same time, The Supreme Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra) was
printed without my agreement instead of The Key To Belief (Miftahü’l-Iman
Mecmuasi), which I wanted printed in the new letters; on the arrival of copies of it, it
was reported to the Government, and the two matters were confused. Suggesting the
Fifth Ray had been printed in opposition to the Civil Code, some malicious people
made a mountain out of a molehill and had us put away in this place of penitence.
Nevertheless, Divine Determining drove us here for our own good; it called us again
to the ‘School of Joseph,’ where, being far more meritorious than the places of ordeal
of former times, we could receive a thorough lesson in sincerity and rectify our
attachment to the affairs of this world, which in truth are valueless.
We say in the face of the unfounded suspicions of the worldly: from beginning to
end the Seventh Ray (The Supreme Sign) is about belief; you have been deceived; it is
completely different to the Fifth Ray, which has been held strictly private and was not
found in my possession in any of the scrupulous searches, and was originally written
twenty years ago. We did not agree to show it to anyone at the present time, let alone
have it printed; it nevertheless is a verified prediction, and does not contest anything.

* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
I again congratulate you on the festival; do not be sorry that we could not meet in
person. In truth we are always together, and God willing this togetherness will
continue on the road to eternity. It is my opinion that the eternal merits, and the
virtues and joys of the spirit and heart that you obtain in serving belief reduce to
nothing the present temporary, passing sorrows and hardships. Up to now, there has
been no one who has suffered as few difficulties as the Risale-i Nur students in such
sacred service. Yes, Paradise is not cheap. To save others from absolute disbelief,
which destroys the life of both this world and the hereafter, is of the very greatest
importance at this time. If there is a little hardship, it should be met with enthusiasm,
thanks, and patience. Since our Creator, Who employs us, is All-Compassionate and
Wise, we should rely on His mercy and wisdom and meet everything with resignation
and joy.
An heroic brother of ours has assumed all responsibility for

--- Sayfa 310 ---
322
The Supreme Sign affair. He has shown how much he deserves the extraordinary
honour and merit pertaining to the hereafter he has gained through his pen and the
Hizb al-Qur’an7 and Hizb al-Nuri,8 and made me weep at the deep joy I felt. There is
much wisdom in The Supreme Sign, the Seventh Ray, attracting attention to itself, and
preparing the ground for the future triumphs it deserves: its temporary confiscation
will not nullify the work and expenses of that brother and his wife; God willing, it will
make them shine even more. This we await from Divine mercy.
From your brother who, through the use of the first person plural in all his
supplications, such as: “Deliver us; have mercy on us; preserve us,” includes all of you
in them without exception; who works in accordance with the principle of our
partnership of the spirit, as though we were numerous bodies and a single spirit and is
more concerned with your distress than you are yourselves; and who, from your
collective personality awaits strength, assistance, constancy, steadfastness, and
intercession.
                                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
At a time when, under the effects of this event, I determined to completely resign
myself to sacrificing myself for my innocent brothers and was seeking for a solution, I
read Jaljalutiya.9 It suddenly occurred to me that Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with him) prayed: “O God! Deliver us!”; God willing, you shall be delivered through
the meaning of his supplication.
Yes, in his Qasidat al-Jaljalutiya, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) gave
news of the Risale-i Nur in two ways, and alluded to The Supreme Sign with the lines
“And through The Supreme Sign, secure me from sudden disaster.” Through this
allusion, he is indicating that due to The Supreme Sign, a disaster of significant
proportions will be visited on the Risale-i Nur students and is beseeching God to
deliver the students from the calamity for the sake of The Supreme Sign; he is making
the treatise and its source an intercessor. Yes, the printing of The Supreme Sign was
made the pretext for the calamity that occurred, and confirmed exactly that sign of the
Unseen.
Also, on the opposite page in the qasida, it says at the end of the allu

7 Hizb al-Qur’an: A collection of Qur’anic verses, many of which form the basis of, and are
expounded in, the Risale-i Nur. [Tr.]
8 Hizb al-Nuri: A long supplication. See also, page 501 footnote 78. [Tr.]
9 A qasida written in Syriac and Arabic, which is attributed to ‘Ali b. Abi Talib. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 311 ---
323
sions to the important parts of the Risale-i Nur and their arrangement, in meaning:
These letters of light, gather together their properties;
And study their meanings, for through them good is fulfilled.
That is: “The words and letters of the Risale-i Nur, which we alluded to; collect their
properties and study their meanings, for all good and happiness is achieved through
them.” It may be inferred from the phrase “Study the meanings of the letters” that it
refers not to the letters, which express no meaning, but to the treatises called Sözler,
which means The Words.
Our Sustainer! Do not call us to task if we forget or do wrong.10 * None
knows the Unseen save God.
                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey!
I cannot meet with indifference your learned questions since they are the keys to
important truths contained in the part of the Risale-i Nur called Mektûbat (Letters). A
short answer is as follows:
Since the Qur’an is a pre-eternal address and speaks with all the classes of
humanity and all the groups of worshippers, it has to possess numerous meanings
conformable with them, and numerous levels of the universal meanings. Some
commentators choose only the most general or the most explicit meaning, or one
which expresses an obligatory act or a confirmed practice of the Prophet (PBUH). For
example, for the verse, And in the night glorify God11 they mention an important
sunna, the two rak‘as of the tahajjud prayer, and for the verse the flight of the stars12
the early morning Fajr sunna, which is a confirmed Practice of the Prophet (PBUH).
And there are numerous other constituents of the former meaning. My brother!
Speaking with you does not cease.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I have just performed the noon prayer and it occurred to me when I was reciting
the tesbihat that you were all probably sad at thinking of yourselves and your relations
at home. It suddenly came to mind that if

10 Qur’an, 2:286.
11 Qur’an, 52:49.
12 Qur’an, 52:49.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
324
those of former times who chose the hereafter over this world and passed their lives
mortifying the flesh in caves and other places of ordeal with the intention of being
saved from the sins of society and of working sincerely for the hereafter, had lived
now, they would have been Risale-i Nur students. Certainly, those living under the
conditions of these times are ten times more needy than they were and gain ten times
more merit, and are ten times more comfortable.
* * *
My Dear, Blessed Brothers!
Very many greetings... In former times in my native region, we used to recite Sura
al-Ikhlas a thousand times on the Day of ‘Arafa.13 Now, I am able to recite five
hundred on the day before, and five hundred on the Day of ‘Arafa. Those who are
confident may recite them all at once. I cannot see you and cannot speak with you all
personally, but most of the time I can converse with you all while praying, sometimes
by name.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I reckon that up to now two leaders of the main group of the Light (Nur) Factory
circle have been saved. That circle, that group, has truly accomplished the triumphs of
twenty to thirty years in six or seven; as though it was a souvenir of their shining pens,
their service does not cease; it causes merits to be recorded in the books of their deeds
in their places. In fact, the Hizb-i Nuri has achieved such overwhelming conquests and
entered such important places that it is as if those who published it are continuously
working. I supposed that like the first person, Hafiz Mustafa, who has worked so hard
and is so hardworking, was outside, then I heard that he is here too. Thinking it was
perhaps another Mustafa, I found consolation.
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
This morning while reciting the tesbihat, I pitied Hafiz Tevfik.14 I recalled that it is
the second time he has suffered this trouble. Then it

13 The eve of the Feast of Sacrifices (‘Id al-Adha). [Tr.]
14 Sava or Sav: A village close to the town of Isparta and some 50 k. from Barla, the village
where Bediuzzaman was exiled between 1926-1934. All the inhabitants of Sav, young and old, men
and women, voluntarily assisted in the writing out and dissemination of the Risale-i Nur.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
325
suddenly occurred to me: Congratulate him! With needless caution, he wanted to
withdraw himself a little from his important position and his large share in the Risale-i
Nur. But the vastness and sacredness of his service again awarded him a large share
and vast merit. One should not flee from spiritual honour such as that due to a little
distress and fleeting hardship.
Yes, my brothers! Everything departs, and after it has gone, if it was pleasure and
enjoyment, it goes for nothing, while if it was distress and hardship, it yields such
pleasurable benefits, both in this world and in the hereafter, and from the point of view
of being sacred service, that it reduces the trouble to nothing. With the exception of
one of you, I am the most elderly and it is I who suffers the most troubles, yet I assure
you that by practising total patience, offering thanks, and endurance, I am happy at my
situation. Thanks in the face of disaster is for the reward to be had from disaster, and
for the benefits in this world and the next.
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
With the disappearance of the things preventing the completion of the ‘Topics’ of
The Fruits of Belief, writing will recommence, God willing. One of these was the cold,
the other was the fright the Masons took at its power. I think of this calamity from the
angle of Divine Determining, and my difficulties are transformed into mercy. Yes, as is
explained in the Treatise On Divine Determining, there are two causes for every
event: one is apparent; people base their judgements on this and frequently act
unjustly. The other is reality, according to which Divine Determining judges; it acts
with justice in the events in which man acted unjustly.
For example, a man is sent to prison for a theft he did not commit. Divine
Determining also sentences him to imprisonment, but for a secret crime, and acts justly
within the human injustice. Thus, there are two causes for our having been set this
severe trial, the purpose of which is to separate out the diamonds from the pieces of
glass, the veracious devotees from the inconstant waverers, and the purely sincere
from those unable to give up their egotism and self-interest:
The First is a powerful solidarity and a sincere and remarkable service of religion
which aroused the suspicions of the worldly and the politicians; human injustice looks
to this.
The Second: Since not everyone on their own could demonstrate their worthiness
of this sacred service through complete sincerity and total

--- Sayfa 314 ---
326
solidarity, Divine Determining looked to this too. But that Determining is now pure
mercy for us within the pure justice, for it brought together brothers who greatly
missed each other, and transformed their hardships into worship and their losses into
alms-giving. It is also pure mercy in many other respects, like attracting attention from
all quarters to the treatises the brothers have written out; and not allowing worldly
possessions and children and comfort, which are temporary, fleeting and which one
day they will be bound to leave behind when they enter the grave, to damage their lives
in the hereafter; and making them accustomed to patient endurance; and their being
heroic models for the believers of the future, and even their leaders. But there is one
aspect that caused me some thought, which is that if a finger is wounded, the eye,
mind, and heart neglect their important duties and become preoccupied with it.
Similarly, our lives, which reach this pitch of distress, busy our hearts and spirits with
their wounds. Then just when I should be forgetting the world, the situation took me
to the Masons’ council, and busied me with dealing them blows. I was consoled by the
possibility that Almighty God might accept this state of heedlessness as a sort of
intellectual striving.
I received the greetings of Ali Gül, the brother of Hafiz Mehmed, the Risale-i
Nur’s esteemed teacher. I send greetings and prayers both to him, and to all his fellow
villagers, and to all the people of Sava,15 both living and dead.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Your constancy and steadfastness foil all the plans of the Masons and dissemblers.
Yes, my brothers, there is no need to hide it, those atheists draw comparisons between
the Risale-i Nur and its students, and the sufi orders and particularly the Naqshbandi
Order, and with the idea of refuting us and scattering us, attack us with the schemes
with which they defeated the sufis.
Firstly: To intimidate and scare, and show up the abuses of the sufi way.
And secondly: To publicize the faults of its leaders and followers.

15 Sava or Sav: A village close to the town of Isparta and some 50 k. from Barla, the village
where Bediuzzaman was exiled between 1926-1934. All the inhabitants of Sav, young and old, men
and women, voluntarily assisted in the writing out and dissemination of the Risale-i Nur.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
327
And thirdly: To corrupt them with the enticing vices and stupefying, pleasurable
poisons of materialist philosophy and civilization; and destroy their solidarity; and
disparage their leaders with treacherous lies; and discredit their ways with some of the
principles of science and philosophy. They attacked us with the same weapons they
used against the Naqshbandis and sufis, but they were deceived. For since the essence
of the Risale-i Nur’s way is complete sincerity, and the giving up of egotism, and to
search out and perceive the mercy within difficulties and the permanent pleasures
within pains, and to point out the grievous pains within fleeting dissolute pleasures,
and that belief is the means to innumerable pleasures in this world too, and to teach the
points and truths that the hand of no philosophy can reach, God willing it will make all
their plans come to nothing, and showing that no comparison can be made between the
way of the Risale-i Nur and the sufi orders, it will silence them utterly.
A Subtle Point
This morning someone called me from the gendarmes’ ward next to me and I
went to the window. He said: “Our door has closed by itself and whatever we do we
can’t open it.” So I told him: “It is a sign for you that among the people you guard and
keep behind bars, are those who are innocent like yourselves. They even insulted me
on the pretext of my seeing one of my brothers I had not seen for ten years, and on
another pretext, closed the second of our outer doors. As a punishment, your door
closed too.”
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
There are three further points concerning the subtle point I wrote to you
yesterday:
The First: As a representative of the collective personality of a blessed group that
will be formed in the future, through the blessings of that collective personality, the
bolted door opened of its own accord; again, they were angry with a representative of
a blessed group which is now in existence meeting with me for half a minute, after ten
years. I too was angered, and again said: “Let the doors close!” The following
morning —it had never happened before— the guards’ doors closed, and did not open
for two hours.
Second Elegant Point: I sent a note to the public prosecutor by means

--- Sayfa 316 ---
328
of the prison governor. I said in it: “I am being kept in isolation and I can’t meet with
anyone. Even if I was to, I do not know anyone in this town. ... with someone from
the town council here... and so on.” Later the prosecutor asked if I was in solitary
confinement. The prison governor said: “No.” Both of them objected to my note. The
same day, a distant and half crazy relation came and visited me for half a minute, and it
was portrayed in such a way as to show that I had never been in solitary confinement.
Their objections rebounded on themselves.
The Third: The noise of the troublesome youths next door to me between the
evening and night prayers disturbed me, but not too much. It was that day that they
found an excuse and shut the door. The foul stench also grew worse in my cell, and
the din the youths made by my door disturbed me excessively. I again said: “Let the
doors close! Why are they doing this?” That morning, the incident occurred.
* * *
My Brothers!
The two Topics you have written in the new letters have had a tremendous effect.
It will be excellent if the First, Second, and Third Topics are written out as well. But I
find it worrying if it is Husrev and Tahiri who do this since their pens are particularly
suited to the Qur’an and the Qur’anic script, and are charged with it. It will better if
others write them.
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
For the past year I have been using an amount, that is, around a kilo, of vermicelli
and rice. I have no doubt that they are a means of plenty. But you do not leave them
with me now so that I can cook them. So I give them to you as a gift, as a means to
blessings and plenty. On one occasion, I saw a wondrous increase in the star-shaped
vermicelli. I used to dry the pieces after cooking them. I myself and others saw that
one single piece was ten times larger than normal.
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
Last night while I was reciting my invocations, the guards and others could hear
me. I wondered anxiously to myself if such a display did not decrease the merit. Then I
remembered a famous saying of Hujjat al-Islam Imam Ghazali: “Sometimes doing
something openly is better than

--- Sayfa 317 ---
329
concealing it.” That is, in many ways it may be far more meritorious to do something
openly, for others may benefit from it, or copy it, or be aroused from heedlessness; or
it may be display the marks of Islam in the face of those who persist in misguidance or
vice, and preserve the dignity of religion. Especially at this time and if done by those
who have learnt thoroughly the lessons of sincerity, and no hidden artificiality
intervenes. I thought of this and was consoled.
* * *
Two days ago, the examining magistrate summoned me, and when wondering
how I could defend my brothers, I opened the Hizb al-Masun of Imam Ghazali. These
verses struck my eye:
Verily God will defend [from ill] those who believe.16 * ...how their light runs
forward before them and by their right hands.17 * God watches over them.18 *
For those... is [every] blessedness.19
I saw that if the doubling and madda (long a) are not counted —the waw is also a
madda— according to abjad and jafr reckoning, it makes one thousand three hundred
and sixty-two, which is exactly this year’s date; both its meaning and number coincide
with the time we resolved to defend our believing brothers. All praise be to God, I
said, this leaves no need for my defence. Then the thought “I wonder how it will turn
out” occurred to me. I was curious. I saw that according to jafr reckoning, on
condition the tanwin is counted, the two phrases God watches over them and Tuba
(blessedness) make exactly one thousand three hundred and sixty-two. If one madda is
not counted, it makes two, and if it is counted, three. Coinciding exactly —at this time
we are so needy for Divine preservation— with this year’s date, and with next year’s
date, it consoles us with the assurance that we shall be preserved, despite an awesome
assault against us which has been prepared over the last year on a grand scale and over
a wide field. The Risale-i Nur’s making more brilliant conquests in ruling circles due
to this episode means that its temporary arrest does not and should not cause us to
despair. Also I consider The Supreme Sign’s being confiscated due to its printing to be
a proclamation, attracting attention from all quarters to its shining station. I have just
read the verse,
O our Sustainer! Perfect our light for us, and grant us forgiveness.20

16 Qur’an, 22:38.
17 Qur’an, 57:12.
18 Qur’an, 42:6.
19 Qur’an, 13:29.
20 Qur’an, 66:8.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
330
The phrase grant us forgiveness makes exactly one thousand three hundred and sixty-
two. It coincides exactly with this year’s date, and summons us and orders us to
constantly seek forgiveness so that our light may be completed and the Risale-i Nur
too not remain deficient.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It is my opinion that those who are not shaken by the severe ordeal of these two
‘Schools of Joseph,’21 the former and the present, and do not abandon its lessons, and
do not give up being its students although their mouths have been burnt by the
scalding soup, and whose morale is not broken despite all this aggression, will be
applauded by the people of reality and coming generations; just as the angels and spirit
beings applaud them. However, since among you are some who are ill, delicate, or
poor, the physical distress is excessive. But thinking of the others of you consoling
them and being perfect examples in patience and good conduct, and compassionate
brothers offering solidarity and kind attention, and intelligent companions in discussing
lessons, and mirrors reflecting fine moral qualities, thus reducing the physical hardships
to nothing, my concern for you, whom I love more than my own spirit, was allayed.
One day, I shall send you Mawlana Khalid’s jubba,22 which is one hundred and
twenty years old. I invest each of you with it in his name, in the same way that he
invested me with it. Whenever you want it, I shall send it.
When we first arrived, the doctor gave me a chickenpox vaccination. It formed a
boil and my arm swelled up. The swelling has moved down my arm; it does not let me
sleep and makes it difficult to take ablutions. I wonder if I can’t take vaccinations, or if
it has some other meaning! Twenty years ago they vaccinated me in Ankara, and it still
suppurates from time to time and causes me pain. I thought of this and hoped the new
one would not be the same; how are yours?
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i

21 That is, the prisons of Eskishehir (1935-6) and Denizli (1943-4). [Tr.]
22 Mawlana Khalid al-Baghdadi (1193/1779-1242/1826-7). One of the most brilliant scholars of
his age, who was known as the ‘Regenerator’ (Mujaddid) of his age. His ‘jubba’ or gown was given
to Bediuzzaman in Kastamonu around 1940 by Asiye Hanim, the descendant of one of his ‘khalifas.’
[Tr.]

--- Sayfa 319 ---
331
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
One reason for the justice of Divine Determining driving us to the Denizli School
of Joseph is both its prisoners, and its people, and perhaps also its officials and
judiciary being in greater need of the Risale-i Nur and its students than people
anywhere else. It is because of this that we have been put to this arduous test, with a
task pertaining to belief and the hereafter. Only one or two prisoners out of twenty to
thirty performed the obligatory prayers as they should be performed; but following the
Risale-i Nur students, forty to fifty without exception have begun to perform them
perfectly; this is such instruction and guidance through the tongue of disposition and
action, that it reduces to nothing the distress and hardship; indeed, it makes one love
it. We hope from Divine mercy and grace that just as the students have taught this
through their actions, so through the powerful true belief in their hearts, they will
become like a fortress of steel, delivering the believers from the doubts and suspicions
of the people of misguidance.
The worldly here preventing us from speaking and having contact causes no harm.
The tongue of disposition is more powerful and effective than verbal speech. Since
imprisonment is for training and education, if they love the nation, they should allow
the prisoners to meet with the Risale-i Nur students so that in one month or even a
day, they may receive more training and education than they would otherwise receive
in a year, and may all become persons beneficial both to the nation and country, and
useful for their own futures and their lives in the hereafter. It would have been very
useful if we had had A Guide For Youth here. God willing, it will be brought in.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Today I recalled the conversation between my elder brother, Molla Abdullah, and
Hazret-i Ziyaeddin, which you know about. Then I thought of you and said to myself:
if the Unseen was to be revealed, if each of these sincerely religious and earnest
Muslims who display such constancy in these inconstant times, not being shaken by
these tortuous, testing circumstances, were to appear to be saints or even spiritual
poles, the importance they have in my view, and my concern for them, would increase
very little; or if they were to appear to be commonplace and ordinary, the value I
attach to them would in no way diminish. For the task of saving belief under such
extremely severe conditions is of greater worth than

--- Sayfa 320 ---
332
everything. In such stormy, unstable conditions, the virtues afforded by personal ranks
and the good opinions of others dissolve when those good opinions are destroyed, and
their love lessens. The one possessing the virtues then feels himself obliged to adopt
artificial manners, empty formalities, and a burdensome dignity in order to preserve his
position in their eyes. Endless thanks be to God, we have no need for cold artificiality
such as that.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I congratulate you with all my spirit, heart, and mind on your ‘ten nights,’ and
beseech Divine mercy that they will bring great gains to our spiritual partnership. Last
night I dreamt that I had come to you and awoke when I was about to lead the prayers
as imam. When, according to my experience, the dream was going to be interpreted,
two of our brothers from among the heroes of Sava and Homa arrived in the name of
all you to interpret it. I was overjoyed, as though I had seen all of you.
My Brothers! Certainly, the situation has caused some officials and others to
withdraw from the Risale-i Nur, and has scared them, but it has aroused the attention
of, and a longing in, all opponents and religiously minded people and officials
connected with the business. Do not worry, these lights shall shine out!23
* * *
According to Sabri’s interpretation, in conformity with the allusion of Sura Wa’l-
‘Asr, the Risale-i Nur is a means of preserving Anatolia, and Isparta and Kastamonu,
from heavenly and earthly calamities, like the ark on Mount Judi; they should not
therefore interfere with it, or the expected disasters will shortly be visited on them.
They should come to their senses. I say again what I said shortly before the disaster,
and before those letters had been sent to you. According to news I have now received,
Kastamonu and its surroundings and citadel are weeping as though mourning the
Risale-i Nur; it has caught a fever and is shaking with earthquakes; God willing, it will
be reunited with the Risale-i Nur, and will laugh again and offer thanks.
I wrote to you the other day about my two important gains. In the

23 Brother, please note! In Denizli Prison, when everything was apparently against him, and the
prosecution was even seeking his execution, Üstad said: “Don’t worry, my brothers. These Lights
shall shine out.” See how his words have turned out to be true!
                                                                                                            Signed, His Students.

--- Sayfa 321 ---
333
econd I said, offering supplications and glorifications with hundreds of tongues... till
the end. Some is missing here, it should be: Each one of us, according to his degree,
offers... with hundreds of tongues... and so on.
Also, a venerable elderly man from the village of Sava, to which I am very
attached, was handcuffed to me and we came together; it pleased me greatly and I
understood from it the village’s strong attachment to me. I send special greetings to
that brother.
* * *
My Dear Brother!
The verse,
And even thus did the rejecters of God perish [utterly]24
indicates the allusion of
By [the token of] time [through the ages], * Verily man is in loss,25
that all the wars and destruction of the infidels have caused untold damage and loss.
There is also an indication in the phrase Wa’l-‘Asr (By [the token of] time) which
points to the date 1360 according to the Rumi calendar, in which year dissemblers and
disbelievers would attack the Risale-i Nur, but they would be the losers. For the
Risale-i Nur is a cause of calamities like earthquake and war abating. It may be a
concealed sign that its ceasing from activity attracts disaster.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
It is my guess that our final and true defence will be the short treatise that is the
fruit of Denizli Prison. For the extensive plots hatched against us over the past year,
originally due to unfounded suspicions, are the following: they attacked us on baseless
pretexts such as founding a sufi order, establishing a secret society, being a tool of
external forces, exploiting religious feelings for political ends, working against the
Republic, meddling in government and breaching public security. Thanks be to
Almighty God, their plans failed. Other than the truths of belief and the Qur’an, study
of the hereafter, and working for everlasting bliss, they found nothing, even over such
an extensive area, among hundreds of students, in hundreds of treatises, in the letters
and books written over a

24 Qur’an, 40:85.
25 Qur’an, 103:1-2.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
334
period of eighteen years. They began to seek out anything at all to make a pretext of,
in order to conceal their plots. But I think that in the face of a fearsome, covert
atheistic organization which has deceived some leaders of the Government, turning
them against us, possibly attacking us directly on behalf of absolute disbelief, we were
made to write the treatise of The Fruits of Belief, which is as clear as the sun and
dispels all doubts and is as firm and unshakeable as a mountain, as the most powerful
defence against them and to silence them.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Brothers!
Your place is very constricted, but the expansiveness of your hearts does not
allow this to distress you; it is also relatively freer than where I am. Know that our
firmest strength and support is solidarity. Beware! Do not let irritability caused by
these tribulations make you find fault with one another. Complaining and blaming each
other and saying “If such-and-such had not happened it would not have been like this”
is the equivalent of complaining about fate and Divine Determining; do not do this. I
have realized that there was no way we could have been saved from their assaults,
whatever we did they would have attacked us. For the short time till Divine grace
comes to our assistance, we must respond with patience and thanks, and resignation
towards the Divine Decree and submission to Divine Determining, and try to gain
plentiful reward and merit with few acts.
I pray for the well-being of our brothers there.
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
A significant solace in the face of the swift changes of this worldly life and its
decline, and its fleeting, fruitless pleasures, and its blows of separation, is meeting with
true friends. Yes, sometimes one travels for twenty days and spends a hundred liras to
see a single friend for an hour or two. So now in these strange, friendless times, our
seeing forty to fifty friends all together for one or two months and our speaking
together for God’s sake and receiving and giving true consolation, make these
difficulties and financial losses that have befallen us extremely cheap and unimportant.
I myself would have accepted this hardship to see only one of my

--- Sayfa 323 ---
335
brothers here after having been parted from them for ten years. Complaint is criticism
of Divine Determining, while thanks is submission to it.
* * *
I assure you that if the appointed hour was to come now and I was to die, I would
meet it with perfect ease of heart. For I know that among you are many strong,
steadfast young Said’s who will ‘own,’ ‘inherit,’ and protect the Risale-i Nur far more
effectively than this wretched, elderly, ill and debilitated Said. I felt very grateful and
happy at those whose names are written in Nazif’s note, who effectively strengthen
morale. I had anyway guessed that they would be thus. May Almighty God give them
success and make them good examples to others. Amen.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Since you have attached yourselves to the Risale-i Nur for the hereafter, and for
good works, and worship and reward, and for belief and your lives in the hereafter, it
is surely necessary to offer thanks for your being here to meet your fate and eat the
sustenance appointed to you and earn reward for it. These have been determined by
Divine Determining in this School of Joseph, an arena of trial in which each hour in its
severe conditions is the equivalent of twenty hours’ worship. Since those twenty hours
are a striving in the service of the Qur’an and belief, they have the value of a hundred
hours. And those hundred hours consist of meeting with true brothers, who are
striving on God’s way, each of which have the importance of a hundred people, and to
pledging your brotherhood, and strengthening them and receiving strength, and
consoling them and receiving consolation, and steadfastly persisting in this sacred
service in true solidarity, and profiting from their fine qualities, and acquiring
worthiness to be students of the Medresetü’z-Zehra. It is necessary to think of all
these benefits in the face of all the hardships, and to respond to them with patient
endurance.
                                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Brothers!
I sincerely hoped that resolute heroes like those of Isparta and its environs (like
the Husrev’s and Hafiz Ali’s), strong as steel, would appear here from Kastamonu as
well. Endless thanks be to God that that province fulfilled my hopes, sending
numerous heroes to our assistance. I

--- Sayfa 324 ---
336
send greetings to all my self-sacrificing brothers who are with you, who are always
present in my imagination but whose names I cannot write, and I pray for their well-
being.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal, Constant, and Faithful Brothers!
I am describing some of my circumstances here, not to sadden you or to take any
physical measures, but so that I might profit more from your shared prayers, and you
might practise greater self-restraint, caution, patience, and forbearance, and earnestly
perserve your solidarity. The torment and distress I suffer here in one day is more than
I suffered in a month in Eskişehir Prison. The ghastly Masons have inflicted one of
their unfeeling fellows on me so that out of anger I should lose patience in the face of
their torments, and they could then use it as a pretext and make it the reason for their
cruel aggression, and so conceal their lies. As a wondrous mark of Divine grace, I
merely offer thanks in patience and I am resolved to continue to do so.
Since we have submitted to Divine Determining and in accordance with the
meaning of “The best of matters are the most difficult,”26 and we know these
difficulties to be a Divine bounty through which we may gain greater merit; and since
we have the absolutely certain conviction, at the degree of ‘absolute certainty,’ that we
have dedicated our lives to a truth more brilliant than the sun, as beautiful as Paradise
and sweet as eternal happiness; certainly, knowing that we are carrying out this
immaterial struggle in God’s way, proudly and offering thanks, despite the distressing
conditions, we should not complain.
* * *
My Dear Brothers!
My first and last advice to you is to preserve your solidarity; avoid egotism,
selfishness, and rivalry, to preserve your composure, and be cautious.
                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It is understood from the public prosecutor’s indictment that the plans of the
covert atheists who deceived some of the leaders of the

26 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, i, 155.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
337
Government, prompting them to move against us, have come to nothing and turned
out to be false. They are now trying to conceal their lies by accusing us of forming a
political society and a secret revolutionary committee, and as a result of this, they do
not allow me to have contact with anyone. As though all those who have contact with
us join us. High officials too are careful to avoid us, and they try to curry favour with
their superiors by harassing us. I was going to add the below passage to the end of my
objections, but I had an idea that did not allow me to. The passage was this:
Yes, we are a society and we are a society that every century has three hundred
and fifty million27 members. Every day through the five obligatory prayers, its
members demonstrate with complete veneration their attachment to the principles of
that sacred society. Through the sacred programme of The believers are indeed a
single brotherhood,28 they hasten to assist one another with their prayers and spiritual
gains. We are members of that sacred, vast society, and our particular duty is to teach
the believers in certain, verified fashion the Qur’anic truths of belief, and save them
and ourselves from eternal annihilation and everlasting solitary confinement in the
Intermediate Realm. We have absolutely no connection with any worldly, political, or
intriguing society or clandestine group, or the baseless, meaningless secret societies
concerning which we have been charged; we do not condescend to such things.
* * *
My Dear and Loyal Brothers!
Before dawn today I felt real pity for all of you. Then I remembered the Treatise
For The Sick (Hastalar Risalesi ), and it consoled me.
Yes, this calamity is a sort of social sickness. Most of the remedies connected
with belief in that treatise are in this too. As I told that blessed sick person in Erzurum,
the pain of all past tribulations has passed; what remains of it is its good, and its
benefits that look to this world, the hereafter, belief, and the Qur’an. That means the
single transitory tribulation has been transformed into numerous permanent bounties.
As for the future, since it is non-existent at the present, the tribulations that will
continue in it give no pain now. To suffer pain due to delusions is to lack confidence in
Divine mercy and Determining.
Secondly: Most of mankind on the earth now are afflicted with

27 Now one and a half thousand million. [Tr.]
28 Qur’an, 49:10.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
338
calamities, physical and non-physical, and in their hearts, spirits, and minds. Compared
with theirs, our calamity is both extremely light, and profitable. There are pleasures for
the heart and spirit, springing from belief, good health, and well-being.
Thirdly: If we had not entered here amid these storms, due to our contact with
suspicious officials, this slight calamity would have been even severer, and there would
have been the calamity of having to toady to them and flatter them.
Fourthly: Seeing with very little expense true friends more compassionate than
brothers, and brothers of the hereafter like spiritual guides, here in the workless,
compounded physical and spiritual winter of this School of Joseph, which is a
department of the Medresetü’-Zehra; and visiting them, profiting from their personal
qualities, and receiving strength from their fine characteristics, which like light are
diffused through transparent objects, and from their spiritual assistance, joy, and
consolation; all changes the form of this calamity, making it a sort of veil to Divine
grace. Yes, a subtle facet of this hidden grace is that all the Risale-i Nur students here
are called “Hoja;” they are spoken of respectfully as “the hojas... the hojas.” There is
a further subtle allusion in this, that just as this prison has turned into a medrese
(religious school), so the Risale-i Nur students have all become teachers, and thanks
to these hojas the other prisons will also all become schools, God willing.
* * *
My Brothers!
If the short letters written before to console you, like this one, are read and
studied together with the last parts of The Fruits of Belief, and any matters of the
Risale-i Nur that occur to you are discussed, God willing it will gain for you the
honour of being ‘students of the religious sciences.’ Pre-eminent figures like Imam
Shafi‘i (May his mystery be sanctified) attached the greatest importance to this, saying
“the sleep even of students of the sciences is counted as worship.” If at this time of no
religious schools, a hundred difficulties are suffered in these places of torment due to
being such elevated students, no importance should be given to them, or else, saying
“The best matters are the most difficult,” we should smile happily at those hardships.
As for the families of our needy friends and their having enough to live on, in
consequence of the rule of the Qur’an, belief, and the Risale-i Nur, which is to look at
those worse hit by disaster than oneself and at those in greater deprivation, they are
better off than eighty per cent of people. They have no right to complain; their right,

--- Sayfa 327 ---
339
their obligation, is to offer eighty degrees of thanks. Divine Determining ordained that
we meet our fate here and eat the food appointed for us. The justice of Divine mercy
gathered us together here; the families have been entrusted to their true Provider,
relieving those brothers temporarily of their duties of supervision. Just as one day they
will be relieved of them entirely and dismissed... Since the reality is this, we should say
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs,29 and offer thanks.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
For sure I can’t meet with you in person, but I am happy and thankful that I am
close to you in the same building. It came to me involuntarily that some necessary
precautions should be taken. One of these: a prisoner was sent to the ward next to
mine by the Masons who is both a liar and a spy. Since destruction is easy, especially
among idle youths such as those, I knew from the scoundrel’s excessive harassment of
me and his corrupting the youths, that atheism is attempting to corrupt their morals in
the face of our guiding and reforming them. Extreme caution is necessary in this
situation, and it is absolutely essential as far as is possible not to be offended by the old
prisoners nor to offend them and not to allow any disagreements, and to keep cool and
put up with things, and as far as is possible for our brothers to strengthen their
brotherhood and solidarity through humility and modesty and giving up egotism. It
pains me to concern myself with worldly matters, so having confidence in your
perceptiveness, I do not consider them so long as it is not essential.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Brothers!
Against all eventualities, I have to explain a matter that was imparted to me this
morning. Asking: “I wonder what atheist philosophers can say to this, and with what
will they support themselves?”, for twenty years my soul and my satan have
investigated whether or not the truths we have taken from the Qur’an leave any room
for doubt or hesitation, and if they are as clear as daylight. They could find no fault in
any nook or cranny, and fell silent. I reckon that a truth which silences my soul and
devil, which are extremely sensitive and involved in the matter, will silence also even
the most obdurate of them. Since we are working for the sake of and

29 Qur’an, 3:173.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
340
on the way of a truth which is thus unshakeable, elevated, vast, and important, and is
of inestimable value, and if the whole world and a person’s life was given as its price,
it would still be cheap; we should certainly respond with complete steadfastness to all
the tribulations, distress, and enemies. They have also confronted us with a number of
deceived or hoodwinked hojas, shaykhs, and apparently pious people. We must
preserve our unity and solidarity in the face of them, and not bother with them or
argue with them.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It was disclosed to me this morning before dawn that the real reason for this
extensive and significant aggression against us is not the Fifth Ray, but the Hizb al-
Nuri, and The Key To Belief, and Hüccetü’l-Baliga (The Eloquent Proof).30 I read
part of the Hizb al-Nuri carefully, and thought of The Key To Belief, and I understood
that the atheists had put forward the Fifth Ray, which has a slight connection with
politics, as the apparent reason, because they could not defend their way of absolute
disbelief against the blows of these two keen swords. So they deceived the
Government, making it move against us. It occurred to me at the same time that if
some of our weak brothers temporarily give up, they might be able to save themselves
from this calamity, and I wanted to give them permission. Suddenly it was imparted to
me that those who are closely concerned and have twice been put to this test and in
return have suffered so much hardship, would not then give it up in a heartfelt way
that was both harmful and without benefit, but might possibly apparently hold back
just to deceive them. It would otherwise cause harm both to himself, and to us, and to
our sacred way, and as a penalty, the person would receive a blow contrary to his
intentions.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Certainly according to the degree of their being the cause of this imprisonment,
which is more distressing and colder than other places, those who are suffering its
hardships will feel inclined to escape them. But since the certain, verified belief that the
Risale-i Nur —its apparent

30 The second part of the collection from the Risale-i Nur called Âsâ-yi Musâ (The Staff of
Moses). It consists of 11 pieces proving the fundamentals of belief. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 329 ---
341
cause— gains for those who suffer these hardships, and the happy death its gains
through the certain, verified belief, and the good works of a hundred men it gains
through the spiritual partnership, all transform the bitter hardship into sweet mercy,
then the price of these two results is unshakeable fidelity and steadfastness. To be
regretful and give it up would therefore be a great loss. For those of the students who
have no connection with the world, or very little, this imprisonment is preferable to
freedom, and in one respect is a place of freedom. While since for those who are
connected and who are well-off, the money spent becomes multiple almsgiving, and
the hours spent are transformed into multiple worship, they should offer thanks rather
than complaining. As for those who are impecunious and needy, their lives outside
afford them merits that are without benefit and hardships for which they are
responsible, while the hardships here produce many merits and much reward and entail
no responsibility, and are alleviated by the solace of their companions; this demands
that they offer thanks.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
A pious person in Kastamonu said by way of complaint: “I have declined; I have
lost my former spiritual state, lights, and illuminations.” I told him:
“Perhaps you have progressed so that you have left behind your illuminations and
revelations, which flatter the ego, give a taste of the fruits of the hereafter while still in
this world, and encourage self-centredness. By giving up egotism and not seeking
fleeting pleasures and through self-abasement, you have perhaps flown to a higher
station.” Yes, an important Divine bounty is not making the person who has given up
his egotism perceive the bounty so that he does not become proud and conceited.
My brothers!  In consequence of this truth, those who think similarly to that
person or who take into account the brilliant stations that the good opinions of others
give, look at you, and among you see the students who appear in the garment of
humility and self-abasement and service, to be common, ordinary people, and they say:
“Are these the heroes of reality who challenge the whole world? Alas! Who are these?
Where are the people who are striving to perform this sacred service, before which
even the saints are impotent at this time?” If they are friends, they experience
disappointment, and if opponents, find their opposition justified.
                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 330 ---
342
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
In my view your prison fruits31 are as agreeable and valuable as fruits of Paradise.
They confirm the great hopes I had for you and what I had claimed, as well as
demonstrating beautifully the power of solidarity. As when three or four ‘alifs’32 are
put side by side, those blessed pens uniting while suffering severe oppression showed a
value of three or four hundred. The state of mind which preserves your unity in these
confused conditions proves what I said yesterday. Yes —there is no error in the
comparison— just as according to the Sunnis the position of a great saint regarding
service of Islam is lesser than that of a Companion of the Prophet (PBUH), so a
sincere brother who forgoes the pleasures of the soul in serving belief at this time and
practising humility preserves solidarity and unity, is afforded a position higher than
that of a saint. This was the conclusion I came to and you confirm it constantly. May
God be eternally pleased with you. Amen!
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The Fruits of Belief is most important and very valuable. It is my hope that in time
it will achieve great triumphs. It seems you have thoroughly understood its value, for
you have not left this place of study without lessons. On my own account I say that if
the fruit of all this trouble and expense is only this treatise and Müdâfaa Risalesi (The
Defence Speeches), and being together with you in the same place, it reduces to
nothing the expense and the trouble, and even if I were to suffer this calamity ten times
over, it would still be cheap.
Due to many experiences and especially in this distressing, restricted prison, I
have formed the firm conviction that being occupied with the Risale-i Nur, both
reading it and writing it out, greatly lessens the distress and gives one a feeling of
expansiveness. When I am not busy with it, the calamity doubles and I am upset by
trifling things. Although I reckoned that for various reasons Husrev, Hafiz Ali and
Tahiri would be suffering most, I saw that it was they and those with them who had
the greatest composure and submission and ease of heart. I asked myself why. Now I
have understood that they are carrying out their true duties; since they are not
occupied with anything frivolous, and do not interfere in the functions of Divine
Decree and Determining, and are not boastful, critical, or

31 That is, the treatises they had written out, particularly The Fruits of Belief. [Tr.]
32 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, written as a vertical stroke, the numerical value of
which is one. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 331 ---
343
panicky, all of which spring from egotism, with their self-possession and their
steadfastness and peace of mind, they have exonerated the Risale-i Nur students and
demonstrated their moral strength in the face of atheism. May Almighty God make the
true dignity and heroism within their utter humility and self-abasement spread to all
our brothers. Amen!
* * *
My Brothers!
A fearful egotism arising from heedlessness and love of this world rules at this
time. The people of reality, therefore, have to give up egotism and selfishness, even if
it is in a licit form. Since the Risale-i Nur students dissolve their egotism, which is an
ice-block, in the joint pool of their collective personality, they will not be shaken by
this storm, God willing. Yes, a well-tried method of the dissemblers is to collect
together people who are all like officers and judges, concerning some common
question in constraining places which make them stand-offish, and irritable and critical
of each other; stirring them up so they fight among themselves, they destroy their
morale. The dissemblers then easily deal blows at those who have lost their strength,
and kill them. Since the Risale-i Nur students have taken the way of love and
brotherhood and ‘annihilation in the brothers,’ God willing, they will foil this well-
tried, divisive stratagem.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
One time, a shaykh had so many followers the Government became anxious
regarding its political implications and wanted to scatter his community. The shaykh
told the Government: “I only have one and a half followers. No others. If you like we
can put it to the test.” So he had a tent pitched somewhere and gathered together all
his thousands of followers there. He told them: “I am going to put you to the test.
Whoever is my disciple and complies with my command will go to heaven.” He
summoned them into the tent one by one. He had a sheep slaughtered secretly, as
though he had killed his favourite disciple and sent him to Paradise. When the
thousands of followers saw the blood, they no longer obeyed the shaykh and started to
denounce him. Only one man said “May I be sacrificed for you,” and went to him.
Then a woman went to him too, and the rest dispersed. The shaykh told the
government men: “Now you have seen for yourselves that I only have one and a half
followers.”
Endless thanks be to Almighty God that in the test and trial of Eski

--- Sayfa 332 ---
344
şehir, the Risale-i Nur lost only one and a half of its students. Through the efforts of
the heroes of Isparta and its surroundings, in their place ten thousand were added, just
the opposite to the shaykh. God willing, in this ordeal too, through the efforts of the
heroes of both the east and the west, few will be lost, and ten will come in place of any
one that goes.
* * *
One time, someone who was not a Muslim found a way of succeeding to the
leadership of a sufi order and began to give guidance. The disciples under his training
began to advance, then one of them saw through a revelation that their guide had
suffered a serious decline. With his insight, the guide told his disciple: “So you have
understood.” But the disciple said: “Since it was with your guidance that I rose to this
station, I shall follow you even closer from now on.” He beseeched Almighty God and
saved his unhappy shaykh, who all of a sudden advanced, and outflanking all his
disciples, again became their true guide. This means that sometimes a disciple becomes
the shaykh’s shaykh. But the true skill is that when one sees his brother in a bad
situation, he does not abandon him, but strengthens their brotherhood and tries to
reform him. This is the mark of the loyal and faithful. Because the dissemblers want to
destroy the solidarity of brothers in such situations and spoil their good opinions of
each other, they say: “See, those you think so highly of are common, ordinary people.”
Anyway, we have suffered much in this calamity, but since it is a matter concerning the
whole world of Islam, it is very cheap and of high value. Due to their being politics of
religion or for other reasons, similar events have not been of concern for the whole
Islamic world.
*  *  *
Since the strange signature at the beginning of the printed edition of the Old
Said’s work Lemeât coincides with little change with my present circumstances and
exactly with my seventy-second year, I have included it here. If you consider it
suitable, you can add it to the end of the defences in place of a signature, and to the
Fruits and the short letters. That strange signature consists of the following three and a
half lines:
The Supplicant
My demolished grave in which are heaped up sixty-nine dead Said’s with his sins
and sorrows.
The seventieth is a gravestone to a grave; altogether they weep at Islam’s
decline.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
345
I have hope that the skies of the future and Asia will together surrender to
Islam’s clean, shining hand,
For it promises the prosperity of belief; it affords peace and security to mankind.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The reason for the supreme importance I give your solidarity is not only because
of its advantages for us and the Risale-i Nur, but for the mass of believers who are not
within the sphere of certain, verified belief, and are much need of a point of support
and a truth which a community unshaken by events finds certain. Since it is an
authority, a guide, a proof, which is unfearing, unflinching, incorruptible, and
undeceiving in the face of the currents of misguidance, one who sees your powerful
solidarity forms the conviction that there is a truth that may be sacrificed for nothing,
that does not bow before the people of misguidance, nor is it defeated; his morale and
belief are strengthened, and he is saved from joining the worldly and their vice.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Beware! Do not dispute among yourselves, spying ears will take advantage of it.
Right or wrong, those who argue in our situation are wrong. Even if they are right to
one degree, by disputing they could cause us untold harm.
I shall repeat a story I once told my irritable brothers in Eskişehir Prison. During
the Great War, I was being held as a prisoner together with ninety officers in a long
dormitory in northern Russia. Since they had a regard for me far higher than was my
due, through my advice to them, I  did not allow any noise or trouble. But then,
irascibility arising from the constraints and irritations began to give rise to violent
rows. I told three or four of them that whenever they heard a noisy dispute, to go and
help those in the wrong. They did this, and the damaging rows ceased. They asked me
why I had taken such unjust precautions, and I told them:
“A person who is in the right, is fair; he will sacrifice his one ‘dirhem’s’ worth of
right for the general peace, which is worth a hundred

--- Sayfa 334 ---
346
‘dirhems.’ Those in the wrong are mostly egotistical; they will sacrifice nothing, so the
din increases.”
* * *
My Brothers!
You should repeatedly and carefully read the pieces in the treatise containing the
short letters, which are a means of consolation and enjoin forbearance and patient
endurance. I am the weakest of you and I have the greatest share of this distressing
calamity. Thanks be to God, I am enduring it and I have not been vexed by those who
have piled all the blame on me, nor annoyed at those who because it is the same matter
have defended themselves alone, and implying we have formed a political association,
put the blame on me. I request that since we are brothers, you imitate me in this
patience.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Friends in this Hostel of the World!
I thought tonight of our being led handcuffed together to the court by soldiers
with bayonets fixed. The Old Said’s proud vein of temperament made me feel
exceedingly angry. But it was suddenly imparted to me that we should respond to this
situation not with anger, but with pride, thanks, and joy, for in the eyes of the
intelligent, and of incalculable numbers of angels and spirit beings and the people of
reality and those among men with consciences and certain, verified belief, we appear
as a caravan of heroes on the way of truth, reality, the Qur’an, and belief, challenging
this century. In the face of their elevated regard, applause, and appreciation, which is
indicative of dominical acceptance and Divine mercy, the insulting looks of a limited
number of dissolute layabouts, can be of no importance. One day, even, when I went
by car because of illness, I felt a constrictedness. But then when I went together with
you with my hands bound, I felt an expansiveness and joy of the spirit. That is to say,
my state of mind arose from this meaning.
I have said it many times and I shall repeat it: none have been seen in history who
have performed as great service on the way of truth and have earned so much reward
while suffering so little difficulty, as the Risale-i Nur students. However much
hardship we suffer, it is still not costly.

--- Sayfa 335 ---
347
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Our escaping from this calamity and being saved from it is impossible in two
respects:
The First: Since Divine Determining appointed that we should meet part of our
fate here, we would anyway have come here. This way is therefore the best.
The Second: We found no way of being saved from the plots that were being
hatched against us. I perceived them, but there was no way out. The unfortunate late
Shaykh Abdülhakim, and Shaykh Abdülbaki could find no way to save themselves.
This means that to complain about one another in this calamity is both unjust, and
meaningless, and harmful, and is to feel a sort of offence at the Risale-i Nur. Beware!
To consider some of the activities of the leading students to be the cause of this
calamity and to feel indignant at them, is to withdraw from the Risale-i Nur and regret
having learnt the truths of belief. This is a far greater calamity than the material
calamity. I swear that although my share of this calamity is twenty or thirty times
greater than each of yours, because they have acted with a pure intention, I would not
be annoyed at them even if the calamity, which occurred due to lack of caution, was
ten times greater. It is also meaningless to object to things that are past, because they
cannot be repaired.
My Brothers! Anxiety doubles the calamity; it also roots the physical calamity in
the heart; it also suggests objection to and criticism of Divine Determining and
accusation against Divine mercy. Since everything has a good side and in everything is
a manifestation of Divine mercy, and Divine Determining works with justice and
wisdom; we are surely bound not to give importance to any slight trouble we may
suffer as a result of the sacred task we are performing which concerns the whole
Islamic world at this time.

--- Sayfa 336 ---
348
 [An unimportant, commonplace condition of mine necessitated that I write
this to you.]
My Brothers!
I have formed the firm conviction that the evil eye affects me severely and makes
me ill. I have experienced it on numerous occasions. I want with all my heart and soul
to be a companion to you in all circumstances, but in accordance with the famous rule,
“The evil eye puts the camel in the cooking-pot and man into his grave,”33 the evil eye
has an effect on me. For those who look at me, do so with either violent hatred, or
appreciation. Both these are present in the looks of some people who possess the
ability to affect with the evil eye. I have formed the intention therefore that if it is
possible and they do not force me, I shall not always accompany you while going to
the court.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
My Dear Brothers!
This morning before dawn a piece was suddenly imparted to me. Yes, I confirm
the wonder (keramet) of the Risale-i Nur concerning the earthquake what Husrev
wrote in detail; what I thought also centred on that. For just as the coinciding of the
four occasions of severe aggression against the Risale-i Nur and its students and the
four occasions of the assaults of earthquakes were not chance, so the exact
coincidence of the two centres of the Risale-i Nur’s dissemination, Isparta and
Kastamonu, being preserved from disaster relative to other places; and as alluded to by
Sura al-‘Asr, since the means of salvation from the Second World War —mankind’s
greatest ‘loss’ at the end of time— is belief and good works; it cannot be mere chance
that the Risale-i Nur has spread certain, verified belief all over Anatolia, and Anatolia
was saved from the great losses of war in extraordinary fashion. Also, just as the exact
coinciding of those who impede the Risale-i Nur’s service or those who err in that
service receiving blows either of compassion or wrath, cannot be mere chance —of
which there have been hundreds of incidents; so too the thousands of incidents of,
almost without exception, all those who serve the Risale-i Nur well experiencing
plenty in their livelihoods and ease of mind and happiness, cannot be mere chance.

33 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 76; al-Maghribi, Jami’ al-Shaml, ii, 49; al-Munawi, Fayd al-
Qadir, no: 5748.

--- Sayfa 337 ---
349
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
According to the inner meanings of “good is in what God chooses,” and,
It may be that you hate a thing and it is good for you,34
the most confidential pieces of the Risale-i Nur have emerged from behind the veil of
“sirran tenevveret”35 so as to come into the possession of the most undesirable people,
to strike the arrogant, and show up the errors of those at the top. They wanted to
make the matter appear unimportant, but somehow or other they understood that it
has great importance, and attracting attention to it in a big way, leads to shining
triumphs for the Risale-i Nur and its enemies being made to read it in wonderment. In
fact, it illuminated many hesitant, bewildered, and needy people during the Eskişehir
trials, and saved them, transforming our hardships into mercy. God willing, on this
occasion it will perform that sacred service on a wider scale, in many courts and
centres. Yes, those who see the Risale-i Nur’s style and explanations cannot remain
indifferent to it. It not only makes the mind and heart submit like other works, it also
conquers the soul and emotions.
Your being released causes no harm to this fact, but my acquittal would be
detrimental. Even my soul agrees to sacrifice for a truth that concerns the whole
Islamic world not only the life of this world but if necessary that of the next, and to
sacrifice through the Risale-i Nur my own happiness for that of the people of belief.
* * *
[Included here is the continuation of the earthquake incident from Husrev’s
letter; the beginning is not included.]
I later saw in another newspaper, the following amazing, complementary facts:
before the earthquake, the cats and dogs gathered together in groups of four or five.
They silently sat down together looking at each other pensively and blankly, then
dispersed. None of these animals was to be seen either during the earthquake, or
immediately before it, or after it; they disappeared into the countryside away from the
towns. Another strange thing they write is that these animals gave news of the coming
disaster, which resulted from our sins, through the tongue of disposition, and they did
not understand it and are amazed.
Among the hundreds of things that for years Bediuzzaman has

34 Qur’an, 2:216.
35 A  phrase quoted from the qasida ‘al-Jaljalutiya’. See, footnote 9 above.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
350
predicted in the Risale-i Nur, is that the atheists should avoid interfering with the
Risale-i Nur and its students, for if harm comes to them, the disasters waiting in the
offing will make them regret it a hundred time over. The earthquake verified this with
its signature, then four more disasters occurred... May Almighty God bestow belief on
our hearts and on the hearts of those who attack the Risale-i Nur, and give them
minds that will recognize the truth, and save us from these dungeons and them from
disasters. Amen.
                                                                                 H u s r e v
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Companions in Disaster!
There being blessed scholars, good organizers, and sincerely devoted students
among you, I felt firmly confident that you would preserve your unity and solidarity in
the face of our powerful, cunning, and numerous enemies. I felt easy and was not
preoccupied with you. But it has now become necessary to explain a number of
matters.
The First: I was not going to send anything to Ankara, lest it delay your release.
But since the court mixed up the treatises that are confidential and those which are not
and the old letters and the new, and sent them to Ankara, it was essential to send to
those departments Müdafaat Risalesi (The Defences), which supplies extremely
powerful replies concerning the confidential treatises, especially the Sufyan and Islamic
Dajjal (Antichrist) in the Fifth Ray, and The Fruits of Belief, which smashes the
arrogant disbelief arising from Naturalist philosophy and its insolent attacks on belief,
so that the committee of experts there would not base their judgements on those
confidential treatises and rule against us like the first committee.
The Second Point: My Dear Brothers! While writing the reply to your important
letter, they gave me the same letter. I had begun the Second Point and it remained
unfinished. Now I am completing it, so take note of it. If this idea is given currency by
your useless lawyer, it is doubtless a plan of those who are seeking our conviction, so
that like the committee of experts here, the committe in Ankara will take as basic the
unpublished confidential treatises, and especially the Fifth Ray, extend them to the
whole Risale-i Nur then confiscate it, and inferring that the matters discussed in the
Fifth Ray are what all the wretched students study who read the Risale-i Nur, have
them all convicted due to my crime. The prison governor and assistant prosecutor’s
making difficulties for me by preventing me from speaking and confiscating what I
have written is a powerful

--- Sayfa 339 ---
351
sign that the intention is for Ankara to make the ruling against us before the irrefutable
replies of the defences reach there.
The Third Point: In fact, the Chairman of the Court said that day that he was
going to send the books, documents, and defences of importance, which would
prolong the case, to Ankara. These have certainly arrived by now. If my two well-set-
out and explicatory defence speeches are sent, they may solve the case quickly; it
would not be prolonged but expedited, and those with families released. But myself
and those like me who have no one, we should not be released, but remain in prison,
for it is the best place to defend the truths of belief against the atheists and apostates.
Fourth Point: If the Risale-i Nur is not acquitted and my defence is not taken
into consideration, your apparent denial will not save you; because of its all being the
same question, we are all bound together. Only a very few of our friends who have a
slight connection might be saved. Eskişehir Court demonstrated this in fact. For the
past year they have planted spies among us who carefully record the disclosures of
simple-minded and rash students, and have employed every means to wreck us and
make us regret our way, and have even mobilized Shaykh Abdülhakim against us. But
they have ruined him the same as they have ruined us and Shaykh Abdülbaki and
Shaykh Süleyman, who has objected to me from time to time, so your denials to them
and your running away will make absolutely no difference to what they think, and what
they call “discretionary conviction,” just as it made no difference in Eskişehir.
Fifth Point: We have understood certainly through our experiences of both here
and Eskişehir that due to it all being the same case, our greatest need is for complete
solidarity. Taking offence and being irritable and critical due to the hardships doubles
the wretchedness of our plight. Regretably, it was you that I had the most confidence
in and trusted most. Sometimes when I feel a twinge of anxiety, I think of Kamil Hoja
and Siddik Hoja from Istanbul and the people in the province of Kastamonu who have
displayed an extraordinary loyalty, and my anxiety evaporates. Be careful that the
secret organization that supports absolute disbelief does not infiltrate you. It infiltrated
the ward next to me and caused me indescribable torment. Discuss this among
yourselves now without argument; I shall accept your decision. But if in your
discussions you take into consideration the possibility that if my defence goes to
Ankara and is studied there the court here may come to a decision about those whose
release is possible; and the possibility that those who struggle against us, and exiled
Abdülbaki, Abdülhakim, and Haji Süleyman, and made Yesil Semsi remain here after
he had been officially released, will not release those like Hafiz Mehmed and Seyyid
Sefik, with their firm adherence to

--- Sayfa 340 ---
352
religion and refusal to bow before the dead leader and his picture, and their
demonstrating their lack of support for atheism and innovations. You should also take
into consideration that it is of the greatest importance that the Risale-i Nur emerges
from obscurity and in a momentous general question at a time they are contesting
themselves in their centres, the hesitant and bewildered people of belief can find the
students behind them and by not running away it can be shown to them that the
students are bound to an unshakeable and invincible truth. Beware! Take no notice of
each other’s faults; have respect instead of feeling angry, and help each other rather
than being critical.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal, Faithful Brothers!
For the past few days I have changed the form of my supplications. I no longer
say “faithful” in the phrase “faithful students of the Risale-i Nur” when repeating
perhaps a hundred times “forgive us” or “give us success.” Then those of our brothers
who feel themselves obliged to act as though they have dispensations, or due to the
anxiety and despair caused by distress, act contrarily to resolution and fidelity by
apparently denying or holding back, are not left out of those prayers.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear Brother Hafiz Ali!36
Do not worry about your illness. My Almighty God grant you healing. Amen!
You are making a high profit since one hour’s worship in prison is the equivalent of
twelve hours’ worship. If you want some medicine, I have some here; I can send them
to you. Anyway there is a slight illness doing the rounds. I am certain to be ill the day I
attend the court. Perhaps you have taken on a little of my illness in order to help me,
like those of former times who with extraordinary self-sacrifice, were ill and died in
each other’s places.

36 Hafiz Ali: A leading Risale-i Nur student in the Isparta area. He was from the village of
Islâmköy, many of whose inhabitants he led in serving the Risale-i Nur. He fell ill and died in Denizli
Prison in 1944.

--- Sayfa 341 ---
353
[A perfectly apt obituary]
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Who say when afflicted by calamity: To God do we belong and to Him is our
return.37
I offer my condolences to myself, to you, and to the Risale-i Nur, and I
congratulate Hafiz Ali and the Denizli graveyard. That heroic brother of ours who
knew with ‘knowledge of certainty’ the truths of The Fruits of Belief, has left his body
behind in his grave to ascend to the stations of ‘vision of certainty’ and ‘absolute
certainty,’ to journey round the stars and the world of spirits like the angels. Having
carried out his duty to the letter, he has been discharged to take his rest. May the Most
Merciful of the Merciful write merits in the book of his good deeds to the number of
the letters of the Risale-i Nur, both written and read. Amen! And may He pour down
blessings onto his spirit to their number. Amen! And may He make the Qur’an and the
Risale-i Nur pleasant, friendly companions to him in his grave. Amen! And may He
bestow ten heroes to take his place in the Light Factory,38 and make them work.
Amen. Amen. Amen.
Remember him in your prayers like me. I beseech Divine mercy that a thousand
tongues will be employed in place of his single tongue and he will gain a thousand lives
in place of the single life and tongue he lost.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Endless thanks be to the Most Merciful of the Merciful that in these extraordinary
times and strange place, He permitted us by means of you to win the honour of being
students of the religious sciences and to perform important services. It has been seen
on numerous occasions by those who divine the state of people in their graves that like
martyrs, in their graves, some enthusiastic and serious students of the religious
sciences who die when busy with their studies suppose themselves to be alive and still
studying. Indeed, while observing a student who died when studying grammar and
syntax, one such diviner of graves was curious what answer the student would give to
Munkar and Nakir in his grave, and he heard that when the questioning angel asked
him: “Who is your Sustainer?”, the student replied: “‘Who’ is the subject, and ‘your
Sustainer’ is its predicate.” He gave a grammatical answer, supposing himself to be in
his medrese. Thus, like that incident, I know the late Hafiz Ali to be a student

37 Qur’an, 2:156.
38 That is, the village of Islâmköy.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
354
of the religious sciences working at the Risale-i Nur, the highest of the sciences, at the
degree of martyrs and at their level of life. With that conviction, in some of my
supplications I pray for him, and like him for Mehmed Zühdü and Hafiz Mehmed: “O
God! Busy them in perfect happiness and contentment till the resurrection of the dead
with the truths of belief and mysteries of the Qur’an in the guise of the Risale-i Nur.
Amen!
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear and Loyal Brothers!
I cannot forget the late Hafiz Ali; his suffering upsets me terribly. In earlier times,
self-sacrificing persons would sometimes die in place of their friends; I reckon he
departed in my place. If those like you who follow his system were not performing his
supreme service, it would have been a terrible loss for Islam. My pain subsides when I
think of you, his heirs, and I feel cheered up. It is astonishing but his departing with his
spiritual life, indeed, with his physical life, to the Intermediate Realm, has aroused in
me a longing to go to that world, and one veil more has been folded back in my spirit.
Just as we send greetings to our brothers in Isparta from here and converse with them
and exchange news, so the Intermediate Realm, where Hafiz Ali now dwells, has
become like Isparta or Kastamonu in my view. I heard, even, that someone from here
was sent there last night. I felt even sorrier; why had I not sent Hafiz Ali greetings with
him? Then it occurred to me that no means are needed to send greetings; his powerful
connection is like a telephone. Also, he would come and receive them. That great
martyr has caused me to love Denizli, I do not want to leave here now. He and
Mehmed Zühdü and Hafiz Mehmed are continuing their tasks serving belief and the
Risale-i Nur which they carried out in their lives. They watch from very close by, and
even help. With their taking their places, due to the valuable service they performed, in
the sphere of the great saints, I mention the names of those two, together with Hafiz
Mehmed, together with those of the spiritual poles in my ‘chain,’ and bequeath my
gifts.
* * *
My Dear and Loyal Brothers!
Your sincerity, loyalty, and steadfastness are sufficient reason to disregard one
another’s faults in the present trying circumstances, and to hide them. For the powerful
brotherhood within the Risale-i Nur is such a good

--- Sayfa 343 ---
355
act it causes one to forgive a thousand evils. Since at the Last Judgement when good
deeds will preponderate over evils, Divine justice will forgive, you too, seeing that
good deeds preponderate, should act with love and forgiveness. For to become angry
due to a single bad deed, and exasperated in harmful manner out of irritability, and
upset because of the difficulties, is to be wrong in two respects. God willing, you will
assist one another in joy and consolation, and will reduce the hardship to nothing.
* * *
My Loyal, Blessed Brothers!
The reason I have not spoken with you for a few days is a severe illness resulting
from poison, the like of which I have never experienced. On account of the Risale-i
Nur, I shall be proud till the end of my days of my steadfast, staunch, unshakeable
brothers in the ‘Light’ and ‘Rose’ areas,39 and the devoted brothers of Kastamonu, and
I find them a powerful support and effective solace in the face of the afflictions of all
the tyrants. If I was to die now, I would meet my death happily seeing that they are
there.
The worldly cast me into prison due to their groundless fears that I was opposing
them, but Divine Determining imprisoned me because I did not speak with them and
did not try to reform them. If I remain in prison with only a few friends, I shall seek an
open trial which will arouse the interest of all the Islamic world, and I shall open
proceedings against the departments of government in Ankara, and have numerous
copies made in the new letters of The Fruits of Belief and the defence speeches, and
shall send them to the important departments, God willing.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Hadiths of this sort are allegorical. They are not particular and do not look to
general places. As for others, of the religious differences that would afflict the Umma,
they point out a single time, citing the Hijaz and Iraq as examples. Anyway in the
‘Abbasid period, numerous misguided sects came into being which harmed Islam, like
the Mu‘tazila, the Rawafid, Jabriyya, and atheists and heretics under various guises. At
a time there were serious upheavals regarding the Shari‘a and tenets of belief,
numerous leading figures of Islam like Bukhari, Muslim, Imam-i A‘zam, Imam Shafi‘i,
Imam Malik, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Imam Ghazali, Gawth al-A‘zam, and Junayd
al-Baghdadi, emerged and quelled the

39 That is, Islâmköy (led by Hafiz Ali) and Isparta (led by Husrev) respectively.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
356
religious dissension. The victory continued for around three hundred years, but the
sects of the people of misguidance covertly, by way of politics, brought down on the
Muslims the dissension of Hulagu and Jenghiz. Both Hadiths, and Imam ‘Ali (May
God be pleased with him) explicitly indicate this dissension together with its date.
Then since the dissension of the present time is one of the most serious, both
numerous Hadiths, and numerous Qur’anic allusions give news of it, together with the
date. Making an analogy with this, when a Hadith mentions in general fashion the
stages the Umma will pass through, it sometimes points out the date of a particular
event within the generality, by way of an example. Various parts of the Risale-i Nur
have made certain interpretations of allegorical Hadiths such as these, the meanings of
which are not completely understood. The Twenty-Fourth Word and Fifth Ray
elucidate this truth by means of principles.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It was imparted to me that I should explain a truth so that you do not accuse one
another of egotism or disloyalty.
At one time I observed that some of the great saints who had given up egotism
and none of whose evil-commanding souls remained, complained bitterly about them
and I was astonished. I later understood perfectly that on the death of the evil-
commanding soul, its implements are handed over to veins of temperament and
emotions, so that the striving of the soul can continue to the end of the person’s life;
and the exertion does continue. Those great saints, then, complain of this second
enemy and heir of the soul. Moreover, spiritual worth, station, and virtue do not look
to this world so that they should make themselves felt. In fact, since some of those at
the highest station do not perceive the great Divine favours bestowed on them, they
consider themselves to be more wretched and bankrupt than everyone, which shows
that the wonder-workings, unfoldings, illuminations, and lights which the mass of
people consider to be spiritual perfection, cannot be the means to and touchstone for
that spiritual worth and those stations. This is proved by the fact that although one
hour of the Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) had the worth of a day of other
saints, or perhaps forty days’ ordeal, all the Companions experienced the same
wondrous illuminations and states as the saints.
My brothers, be careful! Do not let your evil-commanding souls deceive you by
comparing others to yourselves and thinking ill of them; do not allow them to make
you doubt the Risale-i Nur’s ability to train.

--- Sayfa 345 ---
357
In His Name, be He glorified!
[The unruly youths themselves confirm that nine slaps they received related to
the five matters in the Risale-i Nur’s Guide For Youth and Fruits of Belief
are a subtle instance of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working.]
The First is Feyzi, who sometimes assists me. At the start I told him: You have
attended a reading of The Fruits, so don’t get into trouble. He did get into trouble, and
received a slap: he could not use his hand for a week.
                                                                                 Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                      Feyzi
The Second is Ali Riza, who assists me and writes out The Fruits. One day I was
going to teach him about what he had written. Out of laziness, he made an excuse
about cooking the food and did not come. He suddenly received a slap: although his
saucepan was in good shape, the bottom suddenly fell out together with the food.
                                                                                Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                     Ali Riza
The Third is Ziya. He wrote out the topics about youth and the obligatory prayers
from The Fruits for himself, and began to perform the prayers. But then he became
lazy and gave up praying and writing. He suddenly received a slap: for no reason and
in extraordinary fashion, his basket and the clothes in it, which were beside him,
caught fire. No one among that crowd being aware of this until they had burnt shows
that it was an intended ‘compassionate slap.’
                                                                                  Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                         Ziya
The Fourth is Mahmud. I read him the topics about youth and the prayers from
The Fruits and I told him not to gamble and to perform the prayers. He agreed. But he
was overcome by laziness, and did not pray and did gamble. He suddenly received ‘an
angry slap:’ while gambling, he lost three or four times, and despite his poverty, had to
hand over forty liras, his sack coat and his trousers to his opponent, and he still has not
come to his senses.
                                                                                     Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                           Mahmud
The Fifth: A boy of fourteen called Süleyman was always causing

--- Sayfa 346 ---
358
trouble and at the same time egging others on. I told him to behave himself and
perform the prayers, or his conduct would get him into big trouble and put him into
danger. He began to perform the prayers, but then he gave them up and began making
trouble again. He suddenly received a slap; he caught scabies and had to remain in bed
for three weeks.
                                                                                      Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                          Süleyman
The Sixth is Ömer, who at the beginning assisted me; he began to perform the
prayers and gave up singing. Then one evening, a song reached my ears which was
being sung close to my door; it disturbed me as I was reciting my supplications. I was
angry, went out and saw that unusually, it was Ömer. And unusually for me, I dealt
him a slap. Then, unusually, the following morning, he was sent to another prison.
The Seventh: A sixteen year old called Hamza, who because he had a good voice,
used to sing songs, also whetting the appetites of others and upsetting things. I told
him not to do it or he would receive a slap. Then suddenly two days later his hand was
dislocated and he suffered torments for two weeks.
                                                                                   Yes, it’s true,
                                                                                          Hamza
There are other slaps like these, but the paper is finished and so is the meaning.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
An education minister raised the veil from his face and revealed absolute disbelief
in another guise. He must have written that manifesto on some other prompting,
before receiving the defences we last sent. I was not thinking of sending them to that
department, but this has shown that it is both appropriate and necessary to send them
there too, with my brothers’ approval. For most likely a deputy so bigotted in atheism
would not be indifferent towards the documents and confidential treatises sent to
Ankara. He was suddenly hit on the head by the irrefutable defences; it was excellent.
God willing, it will give rise to a powerful movement in favour of the Risale-i Nur in
that department too.
My Brothers! Since some people are like that, to submit to them is a sort of
suicide; it is to regret Islam, or even to shake off religion. For they are so bigotted in
atheism that they are not content with people like us

--- Sayfa 347 ---
359
only submitting or pretending to submit; they tell us: “Give up your hearts and
consciences, and work for this world alone.” In such a situation, there is no solution
other than relying on dominical grace, trusting in God in patience and fortitude,
sending four crates of copies of the Risale-i Nur to that centre, and praying that with
their powerful truths, they will be victorious. Our experience up to now has shown
that avoiding one another and being upset, and dissociating oneself from the Risale-i
Nur, and submitting to them and even joining them, is of no benefit. Also, in no way be
anxious. That deputy’s blustering alarm shows his weakness and fear, and that he is
compelled not to attack, but to defend himself.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Sami Bey told me that one of our brothers from Homa, a student called Ali, died
around the same time as Hafiz Ali. Mehmed Ali, one of heroes of Homa, also wrote
and told me. So in many of my prayers I have made that Ali a companion to the great
martyr Ali.
Recently, a lady who is connected with us dreamt that three of our brothers had
died. Its interpretation is that these two Ali’s and Mustafa, who in prison wanted to
become a follower of the Risale-i Nur and was hanged, went to the hereafter in place
of all of us, and were sacrificed for our well-being.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable Brothers, who know the true nature and meaning
of reliance on God!
Although for twenty years I have not had the curiosity to either read or ask about
any newspaper, with much regret I today saw, only for the sake of some of our weak
brothers, a newspaper article. I understood from it that covertly and openly a number
of important movements are playing false parts. Since we appear in the public eye, it is
supposed we are connected with those movements. God willing, the four boxes of
powerful, irrefutable treatises and notebooks of decisive defences will produce good
results for both us, and belief and the Qur’an, and Islam. We have not meddled in their
worlds and they have in no way established that we are going to meddle. Ankara was
compelled to request the whole Risale-i Nur in order to scrutinize it.

--- Sayfa 348 ---
360
Since this is the fact and since up to now in the service of the Risale-i Nur we
have witnessed the manifestation of dominical grace to an undeniable degree — we
have all experienced this, particular and universal; and since many of the movements of
politics and the world are mustering forces against each other; and since we can do
nothing except be content with the Divine Decree and submit to Divine Determining,
and receive the vast and sacred consolation arising from the service of belief and the
Qur’an and the Risale-i Nur; certainly, what we have to do before anything else is not
be alarmed and not to despair and strengthen each other’s morale and not to be
frightened and to meet this calamity trusting in God, and recognize the mountains
which the inane, clamorous journalists who make mountains out of molehills to be
molehills, and to give them no importance. The life of this world, especially at this time
and under these conditions, is without value. Whatever happens to one, one should
meet it contentedly.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Two or three of my brothers have a good way of consoling themselves. They say
this:
Some of our new brothers in this prison are enduring patiently one or two or
perhaps ten years of this calamity because of one or two hours illicit activity. Some of
them even offer thanks, saying that they have been saved from other sins. They say:
Why should we complain about six or seven months of beneficial hardship, since we
are employed in the most licit activity and are serving belief through the Risale-i Nur?
I congratulate them. Yes, to suffer difficulties for five or ten months because of
performing for five or ten years an enjoyable, pleasant, beneficial, sacred service and
elevated worship and reflection with the intention of saving both one’s own belief and
that of others, is a cause of pride and thanks. In a Hadith it says: “For one person to
come to believe through you is better for you than a plainful of red sheep and
goats.”40You should think therefore of all the people here, in the court, and in Ankara,
whose belief has been saved, and will be saved, from ghastly doubts through your
writings and your service, and offer thanks in patience and with resignation.
If the Republican People’s Party, which governs in Ankara, obsti

40 Bukhari, Jihad, 102; Abu Da’ud, ‘Ilm, 10; Darimi, ‘IIm, 10; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi,
359, No: 9609.

--- Sayfa 349 ---
361
nately opposes the powerful parts of the Risale-i Nur which go there, and does not
attempt to protect it with the intention of being conciliatory,  the most comfortable
place for us is prison. It is a sign that the atheists have combined communism and
atheism, and the Government is obliged to heed them. In which case, the Risale-i Nur
would draw back and halt, and calamities, material and immaterial, would begin their
onslaught.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
O assembly of jinns and men! Came there not unto you messengers from
among you?41
[Although these verses state that prophets were sent from the jinns, the
following is Üstad’s answer to a question aimed at solving this difficulty.]
My Dear Brothers!
Truly this question of yours holds much importance, but since the Risale-i Nur’s
chief function is saving mankind from misguidance and absolute disbelief, it has no
place for matters of this sort and does not discuss them. The leading figures of the first
generations of Islam also did not discuss them much. For such unseen, invisible
matters are open to exploitation. Fraudulent persons also may exploit them for their
own ends, just as spiritualists nowadays perform their charlatanry under the name of
‘calling up spirits [jinns].’ It should not be much discussed therefore since they exploit
it to harm religion. Also, no prophets have been sent from the jinns after the Seal of
the Prophets (PBUH). Also, the Risale-i Nur has tried to prove the existence of jinns
and spirit beings with incontrovertible proofs in order to refute the ideas of
materialism, which plagues humanity at this time. It has put the matter in third place
and has left detailed discussion of it to others. God willing, a student of the Risale-i
Nur may expound Sura al-Rahman in the future and solve the question.

41 Qur’an, 6:130.

--- Sayfa 350 ---
362
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Who say when afflicted by calamity: To God do we belong, and to Him is
our return.42
The deaths of Hafiz Ali, Hafiz Mehmed, and Mehmed Zühdü were truly a great
loss not only for us, but for Isparta, and even for this country and the Islamic world.
But up to now, as a manifestation of Divine grace, whenever a Risale-i Nur student
has been lost, two or three have immediately appeared who follow the same system. I
have powerful hopes therefore that serious students will emerge who will carry out
those students’ duties in another form. Anyway, those three blessed people performed
a hundred years’ worth of duties serving the cause of belief in a short period. May the
Most Merciful of the Merciful grant them mercy to the number of the letters of the
Risale-i Nur that they wrote, published, and read. Amen!
Offer my condolences to Hafiz Mehmed’s relations and his blessed village for me.
I have made him the companion to Hafiz Ali and Mehmed Zühdü, and included the
names of the three of them among the names of those of my masters who were
spiritual poles. And I have made Hafiz Akif the companion of Asim and Lütfi.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
In accordance with an inner meaning of “Good is in what God chooses,” it is
good this matter of ours has been delayed. For love of that dreadful dead man was
being inculcated in all the schools, government departments, and in the people. This
situation would have had a grievous and painful effect on the Islamic world and the
future. The Risale-i Nur, which demonstrates with decisive proofs his true nature, now
passing —outside our wills— into the hands of those at the top and those most closely
connected with him and those who would be last to give him up, and its being carefully
and curiously studied, is such an event that if thousands of people like us were to be
sent to prison, and even to be executed, it would still be cheap with regard to the
religion of Islam. At the very least, it will save to a degree the most obdurate of them
from absolute disbelief and apostasy, lead them into ‘doubting’ disbelief, and moderate
their arrogant and insolent aggression. We have claimed with the final

42 Qur’an, 2:156.

--- Sayfa 351 ---
363
words we said to their faces in court, “Let our heads too be sacrificed for a sacred
truth for which millions of heroic heads have been sacrificed!”, that we shall hold out
to the very end. This cause may not be renounced. I hope that there is no one among
you who would give it up. Since you have patiently endured it up to now, say: “Our
fates and duties have not yet been fulfilled,” and continue to endure it. Certainly, they
will not obstinately oppose the Risale-i Nur in order to defend their way, which is
undeniably proved in The Fruits to consist of eternal annihilation and everlasting
solitary confinement; they will rather seek ways of coming to terms or making a truce.
Patience is the key to happiness and joy.43
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
In the First Ray, the allusions have been elucidated of the verse,
Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life, and a light whereby he can
walk amongst men...?44
to both the Risale-i Nur, and with the word dead, with three powerful signs and
connections, to these unhappy Risale-i Nur students. Now, in the present events, one
of those signs is being realized. For, holding up life, civilization, and pleasure, those
who oppress us accuse us of giving no importance to that style of life; they make
charges against us, and even want to have us imprisoned with heavy labour, or
executed. But they can find no legal sanction for this. As for us, we hold up death, the
introduction to eternal life and its veil, and hit them over the heads with it to bring
them to their senses, and work with all our strength to save them from true conviction,
eternal execution, and everlasting solitary confinement. Even if I am given the severest
penalties because of the vehement treatises that were sent to Ankara, and those who
mete out the penalties are saved through the treatises from the execution of death,
both my heart and my soul would consent to it. That is to say, we want them to have
life in both worlds and this is what we are seeking, while they want us to die and they
are seeking pretexts for this. But we are not defeated before them, because the reality
of death and thirty thousand human corpses daily display as clearly and visibly as the
sun the proclamations and decrees for thirty thousand eternal executions and thirty
thousand solitary confinements for the people of misguidance. Let them do what they
want.

43 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 298; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, ii, 22.
44 Qur’an, 6:122.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
364
According to jafr and abjad reckoning, the verse,
It is the fellowship of God that must triumph45
has given us the good news, even in the twelve years of our most bitter defeat, of our
victory together with its date. Since the reality is this, we shall from now on say the
following, both to the court, and to the people:
We are trying to be saved from death’s eternal execution, which awaits us ever
before our eyes, and from the everlasting darkness of the solitary confinement of the
grave, which opens its door to us and summons us ineluctably. We are helping you to
be saved from that awesome, inevitable calamity. The questions of politics and this
world, which in your view are the most momentous, in our view and in that of reality
have little value, and for those not directly concerned, are meaningless, unimportant,
and worthless. Whereas the essential human duties with which we are occupied have a
genuine connection with everyone all the time. Those who do not like this task of ours
and want to put a stop to it, should put a stop to death and shut up the grave!
The third and fourth points have not been written for now.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
It is one of the wonders of the Risale-i Nur that for ten years Üstad Bediuzzaman
has repeatedly said: “Atheists and apostates! Don’t interfere with the Risale-i Nur! It
is a means of repulsing disasters, like almsgiving, so attacks on it, or its ceasing from
activity, weakens its defence against disaster. If you molest it, the calamities that are
waiting in the offing will rain down on you in floods.” There are numerous disasters
we have witnessed in this connection. Whenever in the past four years the Risale-i Nur
and its students have been attacked, a disaster or calamity has followed, demonstrating
the Risale-i Nur’s importance and that it is a means of repulsing disaster. Among the
hundreds of events Bediuzzaman predicted through the Risale-i Nur, disasters have
put their signatures to their correctness with the hand of earthquakes; the four
disasters which followed them showed how that the Risale-i Nur is a means of
repulsing calamities. May Almighty God bestow belief on the hearts of those who
attack us and the Risale-i Nur, and minds and eyes in their heads that will see the
truth; and may He save us from these dungeons and them from those disasters. Amen!
                                                                            H u s r e v

45 Qur’an, 5:56.

--- Sayfa 353 ---
365
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It is a manifestation of dominical grace that while expecting the Education
Minister to erupt and attack us, although he had not seen our defences, documents,
and books, and had only sensed them; and although the highest government
departments had studied our most vehement confidential treatises like the Fifth Ray
and Addendum to The Six Attacks (Hücumat-i Sitte’nin Zeyli) in order to criticize
them; and our defences’ bold, harsh and serious blows at absolute disbelief should
have led Ankara to act severely against us; they adopted a very lenient, and even
conciliatory, position relative to the importance of the question. One reason for this
manifestation of Divine grace is this: the Risale-i Nur’s being read with care and
attention in all the country, which as a result of the interest has become a large
dershane or place of study, and by all the important departments of government. Yes,
such elevated teachings being studied at this time on such a comprehensive and
universal scale is certainly a significant instance of Divine favour and is a powerful sign
that it has smashed absolute disbelief.
My Brothers! Supposing that there may be an excuse for some weak family men
who have suffered much hardship and loss to withdraw a little from the Risale-i Nur
and from us, or even to give us up, I say in consequence of the possibility that they
may change after having been released: it would be a serious loss for those who have
paid this price, material and non-material, for goods of such value, and have suffered
much torment, to forgo those goods. And if they suddenly give up the Risale-i Nur
and its parts, and their attachment to it, and stop protecting us and helping and serving
us, it would be an unnecessary loss both for them and for us. For this reason, in
addition to being cautious, it is necessary not to change their loyalty, ties, and service.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It is a manifestation of dominical favour and instance of Divine preservation that
as I have heard, the experts’ committee in Ankara has been defeated in the face of the
Risale-i Nur’s truths, and while there are numerous reasons for its criticizing it and
objecting to it strongly, it has quite simply supplied the decision for its acquittal.
However, the harsh expressions in the confidential treatises and the challenging words
in the

--- Sayfa 354 ---
366
defences, and the fiery attacks of the Education Minister, and there being two
materialist philosophers attached to the Ministry of Education on the experts’
committee and a prominent scholar who supports the new measures, and for the past
year a covert atheistic organization has been inciting the People’s Party and Ministry
of Education against us, all led us to expect violent objections and crushing penalties
from the experts’ committee. But then the preservation and grace of the Most Merciful
came to our assistance, and pointing out to them the Risale-i Nur’s high station,
induced them to forgo their violent criticisms. Even, with the idea of saving us from
being convicted, and so that, because of the Eskişehir affair and famous Thirty-First of
March Incident I should not be regarded as having been previously convicted of
political crimes, and show that we act solely for religion and belief and have no
political aims, they said: “Said Nursi has long claimed to be an heir of the Prophet. He
adopts the position of a regenerator in serving the Qur’an and belief; that is, he is
sometimes overcome by a sort of ecstasy, and gets carried away.” With this passage
and the irreligious expressions of the philosophers, they are saying to those who
support religion, whoever they are: he is carrying out this duty, having inherited it
from the regenerators of religion. They have used those irreligious philosophical terms
in order to both criticize the excessively good opinions of me of some of our brothers,
which are higher than my due; and by calling me an ecstatic, together with my
vehemence, to exonerate me from political involvement and being convicted of it; and
to flatter to an extent those who object to us and are hostile; and to show that the
Qur’anic allusions, and wondrous indications of Imam ‘Ali, and the truths of Gawth al-
A‘zam, are all powerful; and to smash the ambition, egotism, and conceit which by
comparison with others they reckon is certainly present in me. From beginning to end,
the Risale-i Nur furnishes a reply to those words as brilliant as the sun. And since our
way is brotherhood and the giving up of egotism, and since we have not made any self-
advertising ecstatic utterances, the New Said’s humble life in the time of the Risale-i
Nur and his disregarding the excessively good opinions of him of his blessed brothers
and moderating them with his instruction, completely refute the implications of those
expressions, and dismiss them.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I am not sending you the committee of experts’ unanimous decisions for the
moment so that no harm comes to those who informed on us. This last experts’
committee has evidently done all it can to save us and preserve us from the evil of the
people of misguidance and innovation, and

--- Sayfa 355 ---
367
has exonerated us from all the charges made against us. They give the feeling that they
have grasped thoroughly what the Risale-i Nur teaches, and have unanimously decided
that the greater part of its scholarly parts about belief are written knowledgeably, that
Said explains his views both sincerely and seriously, and that the power and strength in
it are not to contest the government, but only to teach the needy the truths of the
Qur’an. And they inferred about the confidential treatises, which they call
“unscholarly:” “He sometimes goes into ecstasy and suffers emotional disturbance and
mental storms, and should not therefore be held responsible.” And concerning the
terms “the Old Said” and “the New Said,” they said there are two personalities, and
inferred that in the second are an extraordinary strength of belief and knowledge of the
Qur’anic truths, and for the sake of the philosophers said that “there is the possibility
of a sort of ecstasy and mental disturbance,” while to save us from being charged
concerning a certain violence of expression and to flatter our opponents, they said:
“the possibility may be noted of an illness affecting hearing and sight which results in
hallucinations.” The treatises of the Risale-i Nur, which are superior to other products
of the mind, form sufficient answer to the suggestion of this possibility, refuting it
totally. They have these in their possession, and the treatises containing the defence
speeches and The Fruits of Belief, which have left all the lawyers in amazement. I offer
many thanks that due to this possibility the allusion of a Hadith was imparted to me.
Also, the experts’ committee have completely acquitted all my brothers and myself.
They said, “They adhere to Said’s scholarly and knowledgeable works for their belief
and their lives in the hereafter; we found nothing explicit or implicit in either their
correspondence, or their books or treatises, suggesting any sort of conspiracy against
the government.” They gave their decision unanimously, and put their signatures,
philosopher Necati, (scholar) Yusuf Ziya, and philosopher Yusuf.
It is a subtle coincidence that while for ourselves, we call this prison a School of
Joseph (Medrese-i Yusufiye) and The Fruits of Belief, its fruit, these two other
Yusuf’s have said secretly through their tongues of disposition “we also have shared in
the lessons of that School of Joseph.” Moreover, their subtle evidence for the
possibility of ecstasy and hallucinations are phrases like “The Thirty-Third Word” and
“The Thirty-Third Letter Containing Thirty-Three Windows,” and “his hearing his cat
reciting the Divine Names ‘Ya Rahim! Ya Rahim! (O Most Compassionate One!’,” and
“his seeing himself as a gravestone.”
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 356 ---
368
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Since according to numerous signs, we are under Divine protection, and since in
the face of numerous inequitable enemies, the Risale-i Nur has not been defeated, and
has silenced to a degree the Education Minister and People’s Party, and since those
who, greatly exaggerating the extent and breadth of our question, have caused alarm
to the Government are sure to try to conceal their slander and lies with various
trumped up excuses; what we must do is to retain our patience and composure in
perfect submission, and particularly not to feel disillusioned, and not to despair when
sometimes the opposite of what we hoped occurs, and not to be shaken by passing
storms! Yes, disillusionment may destroy the morale and enthusiasm of the worldly,
but for the Risale-i Nur students, who see beneath the hardship, striving and distress,
the favours of Divine mercy, disillusionment is necessary to strengthen their efforts,
their progress, and their seriousness. Forty years ago the politicians sent me to a
lunatic asylum saying I was suffering from a temporary madness. I told them: I
consider most of what you call sanity to be insanity; I resign from that sort of sanity. I
observe in you the rule, “Everyone is mad, but their madness differs according to their
caprices.” Now with the idea of saving myself and my brothers from serious charges, I
repeat the same words to those who ascribe occasional ecstasy or a temporary insanity
to me because of the confidential treatise, and I am grateful in two respects:
The First: In a sound Hadith, it says: “The ordinary people deeming, because they
are beyond their understanding, the elevated states of one who has attained perfect
belief to be madness, point to the perfection of his belief.”46
The Second Respect: I would agree with complete pride and joy, not only to be
called mad, but to sacrifice my mind completely, and my life, for the well-being and
salvation of my brothers in this prison and for them to be delivered from darkness. If
you think it suitable, even, let someone write a letter of thanks to those three persons,
and tell them that we are allowing them to share in our spiritual gains.

46 Musnad, iii, 86; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 499.

--- Sayfa 357 ---
369
My Dear, Loyal Brothers, and Sincere Friends in the Service of the Qur’an and
Belief, and My Inseparable Companions on the Way of Truth and Reality and the
Intermediate Realm and the Hereafter!
With the time drawing close for us to part from one another, because of the faults
and tensions arising from annoyances, the principles of the Treatise On Sincerity have
not been preserved. It is therefore absolutely essential that you wholely forgive each
other. You are brothers closer to each other than the most devoted blood brother, and
a brother conceals his brother’s faults, and forgives and forgets. I do not attribute your
uncustomary differences and egotism here to your evil-commanding souls, and I
cannot reconcile it with the Risale-i Nur students; I rather consider it to be a sort of
temporary egotism found even in saints who have given up their souls. So on your
part, do not spoil my good opinion through obstinacy, and make peace with each
other.
* * *
My Brothers!
It is understood from the report of the experts’ committee that the Risale-i Nur
defeats all the groups opposing us, for by repeating The Eloquent Proof
(Hüccetullahü’l-Bâliga), and the Treatise For The Elderly and Treatise On Sincerity,
they are attracting attention to them. Moreover, the purpose of their extremely
superficial and pseudo-bigotted hoja-like criticisms, the answers to which are quite
plain; and their saying, without grasping which matters are completely unrelated and
which are in truth conformable, that “there is a contradiction between them;” and their
unhesitatingly affirming and appreciating ninety per cent of the treatises despite the
vehement refutations in the addendum to The Six Attacks (Hücumat-i Sitte) of those
who have issued the fatwas for the innovations, and the attacks on them, is only to
justify themselves. Moreover, their sufficing with pointing out that my saying that
persecuted, religious Christians who are killed by the enemies of religion may at the
end of time be sorts of martyrs is contradictory to the Addendum’s severe attacks on
performing the prayers with uncovered head and making the call to prayer in Turkish,
gives one the conviction that they have most definitely been defeated by the Risale-i
Nur.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 358 ---
370

--- Sayfa 359 ---
370
The Fourteenth Ray
A Short Addendum to My Statement
I say this to Afyon Court:
As is said in my statement, which has been presented to you and been put before
the law and its justice: to raid my house three times illegally, summon me for
questioning, and arrest me has violated the dignity of three high courts and cast
aspersions on their justice, indeed insulted it. For three courts and three ‘committees
of experts’ have scrutinized closely over two years my books and letters of twenty
years, and both we have been acquitted, and our books and letters returned.
Moreover, living in complete seclusion under the most rigorous surveillance for three
years after having been acquitted, I was able to write only one harmless letter a week
to some of my friends. It was as though all my relations with the world had been cut,
for although I had been given my freedom, I could not return to my native region. It
tramples the honour of those three courts to bring up the same question again now, as
though completely disregarding their just decisions. I make a plea to your court to
preserve the honour of those courts, which acted justly towards me. You should find
some matter with which to blame me other than “the Risale-i Nur,” “organizing a
political society,” “founding a sufi order,” and “the possibility of breaching security
and disturbing public order,” for they constitute the same case! I have many faults. I
have decided to help you concerning my blameworthiness, for I have suffered far more
outside prison than inside it. I would find more comfort now in either the grave or
prison. Truly I am fed up with life. Enough now of these twenty years of torment in
solitary confinement, intolerable surveillance and humiliation. It will

--- Sayfa 360 ---
371
provoke Divine wrath. It will put this country to shame. I am reminding you. Our
firmest refuge and shield is:
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.1 * God suffices
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!2
* * *
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And from Him do we seek help
 [This petition, which after eighteen years’ silence I am compelled to present
to the court and a copy of which I am sending to Ankara, comprises my
written objections concerning the indictment, which I am obliged to put
forward.]
This is a summary of a short defence speech: it should be known that it is exactly
what I twice told the public prosecutor and police inspector, and on the third occasion
the police chief and six or seven inspectors and police, who three times came to search
my house in Kastamonu; and what I said in reply to the questions of the public
prosecutor in Isparta, and the Courts of Denizli and Afyon. It is like this:
I told them: I have been living alone for eighteen to twenty years. I lived for eight
years in Kastamonu opposite the police station, and in other places for twenty years,
under constant surveillance and supervision, and the place where I was staying was
searched on several occasions, but not the slightest hint or sign of anything related to
this world or politics was found. If there had been anything irregular on my part and
the police and judiciary did not know, or they did know but ignored it, then surely they
are answerable to a greater extent than me. And if not, why, although nowhere in the
world recluses are bothered who are preoccupied with their lives of the hereafter, do
you bother me unnecessarily to this extent, to the detriment of the country and nation?
We students of the Risale-i Nur do not make the Risale-i Nur a tool of worldly
currents, nor even of the whole universe. Furthermore, the Qur’an severely prohibits
us from politics. For the Risale-i Nur’s duty is to serve the Qur’an through the truths
of belief and through extremely

1 Qur’an, 3:173.
2 Qur’an, 9:129.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
372
powerful and decisive proofs, which in the face of absolute unbelief —which destroys
eternal life and also transforms the life of this world into a ghastly poison— induce
even the most obdurate atheist philosophers to believe. Therefore we may not make
the Risale-i Nur a tool of anything.
Firstly: In order not to reduce to the value of fragments of glass in the view of
the heedless, the diamond-like truths of the Qur’an by giving the false idea of political
propaganda, and not to betray those precious truths.
Secondly: Compassion, truth and right, and conscience, the fundamental way of
the Risale-i Nur, severely prohibit us from politics and from interfering in government.
For dependent on one or two irreligious people fallen into absolute unbelief and
deserving of slaps and calamities are seven or eight innocents — children, the sick and
the elderly. If slaps and calamities are visited on the one or two, those unfortunates
suffer also. Therefore, since the result is doubtful, we have been severely prohibited
from interfering in the life of society by way of politics, to the harm of government and
public order.
Thirdly: Five principles are necessary, essential, at this strange time in order to
save the social life of this country and nation from anarchy: respect, compassion,
refraining from what is prohibited (haram), security, the giving up of lawlessness and
being obedient to authority. The evidence that when the Risale-i Nur looks to the life
of society it establishes and strengthens these five principles in a powerful and sacred
fashion and preserves the foundation-stone of public order, is that over the last twenty
years the Risale-i Nur has made one hundred thousand people into harmless, beneficial
members of this nation and country. The provinces of Isparta and Kastamonu testify to
this. This means that knowingly or unknowingly the great majority of those who try to
hamper the Risale-i Nur are betraying the country and nation and dominance of Islam
on account of anarchy. The great good and benefit for this country of the one hundred
and thirty treatises of the Risale-i Nur cannot be refuted by the imaginary harms of
two or three of its parts, which are fancied to be harmful in the superficial view of the
deluded heedless. Anyone who refutes the former with the latter is an exceedingly
unfair and tyrannical.
As for my own unimportant personal faults, I am unwillingly obliged to say, this: I
am someone who has lived alone and in solitude in an exile resembling solitary
confinement. During that time I have not gone once of my own will to the market and
well-attended mosques. Despite suffering much persecution and distress, I have not
once applied to the Government for my own comfort, unlike all my fellow exiles. In
twenty years have not read a single newspaper, nor listened to one, nor been curious

--- Sayfa 362 ---
373
about one. As is testified to by all my close friends and those I met with, for a full two
years in Kastamonu and seven years in other places I knew nothing of the conflicts and
wars in the world, and whether or not peace had been declared, or who else was
involved in the fighting, and was not curious about it and did not ask, and for nearly
three years did not listen to the radio that was playing close by to me. But I
triumphantly confronted with the Risale-i Nur absolute unbelief, which destroys
eternal life and transforms the life of this world even into compounded pain and
suffering; and with the Risale-i Nur, which issued from the Qur’an, have saved the
belief of a hundred thousand such people, as has been attested by them, and for a
hundred thousand people have transformed death into discharge papers. Is there any
law demanding that such a person is harassed to this degree, and made to despair, and
by making him weep to make hundreds of thousands of those innocent brothers of his
weep too? What advantage is there in it? Is it not unprecedented tyranny in the name
of justice? Is it not an unprecedented miscarriage of justice on account of the law?
If you accuse me like some of the officials who searched my house, saying: “You
and one or two of your treatises oppose the regime and our principles...”
T h e  A n s w e r , Firstly: These new principles of yours have absolutely no right
to enter the retreats of recluses.
Secondly: To reject something is one thing, not to accept it wholeheartedly is
something else, and not to act in accordance with it is something quite else. Those in
authority look to the hand, not to the heart. All governments have vehement
opponents who do not interfere in government and public order. In fact, the Christians
who were under the Caliph ‘Umar’s (May God be pleased with him) rule were not
interfered with although they rejected the law of the Shari‘a and the Qur’an.
According to the principles of freedom of thought and conscience, so long as they do
not upset the government, if some of the Risale-i Nur students do not accept the
regime and your principles on scholarly grounds and act in opposition to them, and
even if they are inimical to the regime’s chief, they may not be touched legally. As for
the treatises, I said they were confidential and prevented their publication. In fact, in
regard to the treatise that was the cause of this affair, only once or twice in eight years
in Kastamonu did someone bring me a copy. The same day I put it away somewhere.
Now you are forcibly publicizing it, and it has become famous.
It is well-known that if there is some fault in a letter, only the faulty words are
censored, and the rest are permitted. As a result of the four

--- Sayfa 363 ---
374
months of close investigation in Eskişehir Court, only fifteen words were found in a
hundred treatises of the Risale-i Nur that were the cause of criticism, and now on only
two pages of the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr are explanations of Qur’anic verses
about inheritance and the veiling of women, which were written thirty years ago and
do not now conform to the Civil Code. This proves decisively that they have no
worldly aim, and everyone is in need of them. The four-hundred-page Zülfikâr, which
everyone has need of, may not be confiscated because of two pages. Those two pages
should be excised and the collection returned to us; it is our right that it is returned.
If you say like those who suppose irreligion to be politics of a sort and in this
episode have said: “You are spoiling our civilization and our pleasure with these
treatises of yours...”
I reply: It is a universal principle accepted worldwide that no nation can continue
in existence without religion. Particularly if it is absolute unbelief, it gives rise to
torments more grievous in this world than Hell, as has been proved with complete
certainty in A Guide For Youth. That treatise has now been printed officially. If, God
forbid, a Muslim apostasizes, he falls into absolute disbelief; he cannot remain in a
state of ‘doubting unbelief,’ which keeps him alive to an extent. He also cannot be like
irreligious Europeans. And in respect of the pleasure of life, he falls infinitely lower
than the animals, for they have no sense of the past and future. Because of his
misguidance, the deaths of all past and future beings, and his being eternally separated
from them, overwhelm his heart with continuous pain. If belief enters his heart and he
comes to believe, those innumerable friends are suddenly raised to life. They say
through the tongue of disposition: “We did not die and we were not annihilated,”
transforming his hellish state into Paradise-like pleasure. Since the reality is this, I
warn you: do not contest the Risale-i Nur, for it relies on the Qur’an. It cannot be
defeated. It would be most regretable for this country.3 It would go somewhere else
and illuminate there. Also, if I had heads to the number of the hairs on it and every day
one was cut off, I would not bow this head, which is devoted to the Qur’an, to atheism
and absolute disbelief, I would not and could not give up this service of belief and the
Risale-i Nur.
Certainly, any faults in the statement of someone who has been a recluse for
twenty years will be disregarded. He is defending the Risale-i Nur, so it cannot be said
he deviated from the subject. Eskişehir Court found nothing after studying its hundred
treatises, both confidential and

3 The severe earthquakes which occurred the four times the Risale-i Nur was contested proved
that it would be “most regretable for this country.”

--- Sayfa 364 ---
375
otherwise, for four months, apart from one or two points touching on a subject
necessitating a light penalty, and it gave six-month sentences to fifteen people out of
one hundred and twenty. I served the sentence as well. And since a few years ago all
the parts of the Risale-i Nur came into the hands of the Isparta authorities, who after
studying them for several months, returned them to their owners; and since after
serving that sentence, nothing was found to concern the police and judiciary during my
eight years in Kastamonu despite the minute searches; and since during the last search
in Kastamonu some of my treatises came to light, in a condition they could never have
been published, having been hidden under piles of firewood several years previously,
as was verified by the group of police; and since although the Kastamonu Police Chief
and judiciary gave their certain word to return those harmless books of mine that had
been hidden, I was moved on without receiving those trusts, since on the second day
the order suddenly came from Isparta for my arrest; and since the courts of Denizli and
Ankara acquitted us and returned all my treatises; certainly and without doubt, as a
consequence of the above six facts, it is demanded by their positions that Afyon Court
and its public prosecutor take into consideration this very important right of mine, as
did Denizli Court and public prosecutor. I am hopeful that the public prosecutor, who
defends the rights of the people, will also defend my personal rights, which due to my
relation with the Risale-i Nur are like important public rights; and I await this from
him.
The New Said has for twenty-two years withdrawn from social life, and does not
know the present laws and how defences should be carried out, and is presenting to
this new court the irrefutable hundred-page defence he presented to Eskişehir and
Denizli Courts; he paid the penalty for his errors up to that time, and after that in
Kastamonu and Emirdağ lived in a sort of solitary confinement under constant
surveillance; he is therefore now falling silent and leaving it to the Old Said to speak.
And the Old Said says this:
Since the New Said has turned away from the world, he does not speak with ‘the
worldly’ unless absolutely compelled to defend himself, and considers it unnecessary.
But numerous innocent artisans and tradesmen being arrested in this affair due to some
slight connection with me aroused my extreme sympathy, since at this busy time they
have been unable to earn livelihoods for their families. It upset me deeply. I swear that
if it had been possible, I would have taken all their difficulties upon myself. Anyway, if
there is any fault, it is mine. They are innocent. Because of this grievous situation, I
say, despite the New Said’s silence: since the wretched New Said answered the
hundreds of unnecessary ques

--- Sayfa 365 ---
376
tions of the public prosecutors of Isparta, Denizli, and Afyon, it is my right to ask of
the present Ministry of Justice, with the intention of defending my rights, the three
questions I asked the Ministry of Home Affairs, and chiefly Kaya Shükrü, thirteen
years ago.
The First: Which law states that one hundred and twenty people including myself
should be arrested because of the merely verbal argument with a gendarme sergeant of
a man from Egirdir, who though not a Risale-i Nur student was carrying an
unimportant letter of mine? Then with the exception of fifteen, the innocence of all of
them was established by their being acquitted after four months of investigation by the
court. According to what principles is it to cite such possibilities instead of
occurrences? According to what rule of justice is it to cause loss of thousands of liras
to seventy unfortunates who had previously been acquitted by Denizli Court after nine
months of investigations?
Second Question: According to the fundamental principle, No bearer of burdens
can bear the burden of another,4 even a blood-brother cannot be held responsible for
his brother’s faults, so under which law of justice was it to arrest me in Ramadan
because of a short treatise whose publication I had prevented, which had passed into
my hands once or twice in eight years, was originally written more than twenty-five
years ago, saves believers from doubting a number of important points and prevents
them denying some misunderstood allegorical Hadiths, —because this treatise was
found on someone I did not know a long way away from me, and the wrong meaning
was given to this, and an offensive letter was found in Kütahya and Balıkesir; and to
arrest now in this freezing cold numerous artisans and tradesmen for having in their
possession some old, commonplace letter written by me, or for having driven me
around in their carriage, or because of their friendship towards me, or for having read
one of my books, and to ruin them, and cause them, and the country and nation,
material loss and immaterial loss of thousands of liras,— what law demands this?
Which article of which law necessitates it? I request to learn of these laws so I do not
take any false step.
Yes, one reason for our arrests at both Denizli and Afyon was this: even if to
suppose the impossible the Fifth Ray did look to this world and politics, —although it
was written long ago while I was in the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye,5 and the original
was written even before that, with

4 Qur’an, 6:164, etc.
5 The Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye was a learned body set up in 1918 to find solutions for the
problems confronting the Islamic world, and to provide scholarly answers for attacks made on Islam.
It was attached to the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office and was composed of nine permanent members and
various officers. Bediuzzaman’s appointment was ratified by the Caliph in August 1918.

--- Sayfa 366 ---
377
the idea of saving the belief of the ordinary people in the face of those who denied
some Hadiths because they thought they were irrational, since they did not known how
they should be interpreted— and even if it had been written at this time, since it was
private, and was not found with me in the searches, and its predictions about the future
turned out to be true, and it dispels doubts on questions of belief, and does not disturb
public order, and is not confrontational, and only gives news of things, and does not
specify any individuals, and sets out a scholarly truth in general form, — since this is
the case, surely even if the Hadith’s meaning is seen to conform to certain persons at
this time, and before it was exhibited and made public in the courts it had been held to
be confidential in order not to give rise to dispute, it cannot in any way constitute a
crime. I also do not consider it possible that in any court of law in the world it is
considered a crime to say “to reject something is one thing, and not to accept it on
scholarly grounds or not to act in accordance with it is something completely different.
That treatise does not accept on scholarly grounds a regime that was going to emerge
in the near future.”
In Short: The Risale-i Nur has for thirty years killed at the root absolute disbelief,
which destroys eternal life, turns the life of this world into a ghastly poison, spoiling all
its pleasures; it has successfully killed the atheistic ideas of the Naturalists; has proved
brilliantly with wonderful arguments the principles that will bring happiness to this
nation in both this life and the next; and is based on the Qur’an’s reality, from the
Divine Throne. I claim, and am ready to prove it, that not one or two points of a short
treatise such as that, but if it contained a thousand errors, its thousand significant good
aspects would cause them to be forgiven.
Third Question: It is the rule that if in a letter of twenty words five are
considered reprehensible, the five are censored and the rest are permitted. So since
after scrutinizing it for four months Eskişehir Court could find only fifteen words out
of a hundred thousand that to the superficial view were imagined to be harmful; and
since the Cabinet questioned only the explanations of two Qur’anic verses, because
they contravened the present law although they had been written thirty years
previously, on two of the four hundred pages of Zülfikâr; and the Denizli and Ankara
Committees of Experts questioned only fifteen errors; and since up to the present it
has been the means of reforming the characters of hundreds of thousands of people,
the Risale-i Nur has brought to pass a thousand things widely beneficial for this
country and nation; —since this is so, which principle of the Government of the
Republic does it conform to, to arrest in this work-season and bitter winter
unfortunates like the Çalışkan’s who serve me seeking God’s pleasure, because they
have

--- Sayfa 367 ---
378
performed some small service for the Risale-i Nur, or written out one of its treatises
because it had saved their belief, and were brotherly towards me out of kindness
because I was elderly and a stranger in Emirdağ? Which of its laws would permit such
a thing?
Since in accordance with the law of freedom of conscience the principles of the
Republic do not interfere with those without religion, surely it necessitates that they do
not interfere with religiously-minded people who are not involved in the world as far
as it is possible, and do not dispute with the worldly, and strive usefully for their lives
in the hereafter, their belief, and their country too. I know that the politicians who
govern in Asia, where the prophets appeared, will not, and cannot, ban taqwa and
good works, which for a thousand years have been as essential for this nation as food
and medicine. Humanity demands that anything not conforming to the current view in
the above questions is overlooked, since, having lived in solitude for twenty years,
they were asked with the head of the Said of twenty years ago.
I consider it my patriotic duty to recall the following, for the benefit of the
country, nation, and public security: to arrest and make resentful in this way because
of some slight connection with me and the Risale-i Nur, may turn against the
Government numerous people who are religiously beneficial for the country and its
security, thus opening up the way to anarchy. Yes, there are far in excess of a hundred
thousand people who have saved their belief through the Risale-i Nur and have
become harmless and highly beneficial for the nation. With their moderation and
usefulness, they are perhaps to be found in every large department of the Government
of the Republic and in every level of society. It is essential that these people are not
offended but protected.
I feel a strong anxiety that certain official persons who do not heed our complaints
nor allow us to speak out, and repress us on various pretexts are opening up the way
to anarchy to the harm of this country.
Also, for the good of the Government I say this: since the courts of both Denizli
and Ankara scrutinized the Fifth Ray, and did not object to it but returned it to us, it is
essential for the Government that proceedings are not reopened officially, giving rise
to rumours and gossip. Just as I concealed the treatise before it passed into the hands
of the courts and they publicized it, so the Afyon authorities and Court should not
make it the object of question and answer. For it is powerful and irrefutable. It made
predictions, and they turned out right. Moreover, its aim is not this world, at the most
one of its many meanings fits a person who is dead and gone. For the sake of the
country, nation, public order, and government, I

--- Sayfa 368 ---
379
am bound by conscience to warn against making those predictions and meanings
official due to bigoted friendship for him, and further publicizing it by reprimanding us.
* * *
To the Afyon Public Prosecutor and the Chairman
and Members of the Court
 [I am presenting to you in order to protect my rights, exactly the same nine
‘Principles’ which I presented to the Denizli judicial authorities.]
Twenty years ago I abandoned social life, and especially official, refined,
political life such as this. I do not know what position should be taken in
such situations, and I do not think of it, and to think of it causes me acute
distress. But I am compelled to present this disorganized defence and
petition, which is the conclusion and summary of the answers I gave to the
numerous, repetitious, and haphazard questions of an unfair member of
another court of law. Perhaps it lacks order and contains irrelevant and
unnecessary repetitions, vehement expressions which may act against me,
and sentences opposed to the new laws, which I do not know. But since it
proceeds on the truth, for the sake of the truth the faults should be
disregarded. This petition and defence speech is based on nine ‘Principles’.
The First: Since in accordance with the Republic’s principle of freedom of
conscience, the Government of the Republic does not interfere with the irreligious and
dissipated, it certainly should not interfere with the religious and righteous; and since
no irreligious nation can continue in existence, and with regard to religion Asia does
not conform to Europe, and an irreligious Muslim does not resemble any other person
without religion; and since no sort of progress or civilization can take the place of
religion, or righteousness, or the learning of the truths of belief in particular, which are
the innate need of the people of this country, who for a thousand years have illumined
the world with their religion and heroically preserved their firmness of faith in the face
of the assaults of the whole world, and cannot be made to forget that need; surely no
government of this nation in this country can intervene in the Risale-i Nur in respect of
justice and the law and public order.

--- Sayfa 369 ---
380
Second Principle: Since it is one thing to reject something and something quite
different not to act in accordance with it; and all governments have fierce opponents;
and there were Muslims under Zoroastrian rule and Jews and Christians under the
Islamic government of the Caliph ‘Umar; and all those who do not cause trouble to the
government or disturb public order have personal freedom, and this may not be
curtailed, and governments look to the hand and not to the heart; and since those who
want to upset public order and the administration and interfere in politics will
doubtless concern themselves with the newspapers and current affairs in order to learn
about the movements, situations, and events that will assist them so they make no false
moves; and since the Risale-i Nur so restrains its students that as my close friends
know, for twenty-five years it has made me give up reading the newspapers and even
asking about them or being curious and thinking about them; and since for ten years
now I have withdrawn from social life to such an extent that apart from the German
defeat and the spread of communism I have heard no news about what is happening in
the world and the current situation; certainly and without doubt no one can attack me
and my brothers like me on grounds of governmental wisdom, the laws of politics, and
principles of justice; and if they do, it is bound to be due to delusions, or out of hatred
or obduracy.
Third Principle: I am obliged to give the following lengthy details because of the
meaningless and unnecessary objections of the public prosecutor of the former court,
which he made due to a misunderstanding concerning not the law, but his bigoted love
of a certain dead person.
Firstly: Before it fell into the hands of the Government, I treated the Fifth Ray as
confidential. Moreover, it was not found in any of the searches. Also, its purpose was
only to save the ordinary people from doubts concerning their beliefs and from denying
allegorical Hadiths. It looks to worldly aspects of the Hadiths only indirectly, in third
or fourth place. The predictions it makes are true. Moreover, it does not contest the
politicians and worldly; it only makes predictions. Also, it does not specify anyone. It
explains in general fashion a true meaning of a Hadith. But they applied that general
truth to a fearsome person living in this century. They therefore objected to it,
supposing it had been written in recent years. In fact, the original of the treatise was
previous to the Darü’l-Hikmet. But it was set in order some time later, and included in
the Risale-i Nur. It was like this:
Forty years ago, the year before the Proclamation of the Constitution,6

6 The Proclamation of the (Second) Constitution in July, 1908.

--- Sayfa 370 ---
381
I came to Istanbul. The Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese army had asked some
questions of the Istanbul ‘ulama at that time. The Istanbul hojas asked me about them.
They asked me many things in that connection.
For instance, they asked me about a Hadith which says: “At the end of time, a
fearsome individual will rise in the morning and on his forehead will be written: ‘This
is an infidel.’”7 I told them: “This extraordinary person will come to lead this nation;
he will rise in the morning, put a [brimmed] hat on his head, and make others wear it.”
After receiving this answer, they asked me: “Won’t those who wear it be
infidels?” I said: “They will be made to wear the brimmed hat and be forbidden to
prostrate in prayer. But the belief in the heads of those wearing the brimmed hat will
make the hat prostrate, and God willing, will make it Muslim.”
They then said: “This person will drink water and his hand will be pierced, and it
will be known through this that he is the Sufyan.” I said to them in reply: “It is
commonly said about someone who is very extravagant that he has a hole in his hand.
That is, he cannot hold onto anything; it flows from him and is lost. Thus, this
fearsome man will be addicted to raki, it will make him ill, he will become excessively
extravagant and accustom others to being the same.”
Then someone asked: “When he dies, Satan will proclaim loudly to the world
from ‘Dikili Ta_’ in Istanbul that so-and-so has died.” So I said: “The news will be
broadcast by telegraph.” However, I heard shortly afterwards that the radio had been
invented, and I realized that my answer had not been completely accurate. Eight years
later while in the Darü’l-Hikmet, I said: “Satan will broadcast it to the world by radio.”
They then asked me questions about the Barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn, Gog and
Magog, the Beast (Dabbat al-Ard), the Antichrist (Dajjal), and the second coming of
Jesus (Peace be upon him), and I replied to them. In fact the answers are written in
part in my old treatises. Some time later, Mustafa Kemal twice summoned me to
Ankara8 by code by means of the former governor of the province of Van, my old
friend, Tahsin Bey, in recognition of my published work The Six Steps (Hutuvât-i
Sitte). I went. Since Shaykh Sanusi9 did not know Kurdish, it was proposed I should

7 Bukhari, Fitan, 26; Muslim, Fitan, 101, 102; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 62; Musnad, iii, 115; 211, 228,
249, 250; v, 38, 404-5; vi, 139-40. For this and the other Hadiths about the signs of the end of time,
see, The Fifth Ray in the present work.
8 In 1922, during the Independence Struggle. [Tr.]
9 Sayyid Ahmad Sanusi. He took over the leadership of the Sanusiyya movement in North Africa
in the early 1900’s, and fought alongside the Ottomans against Italian aggression in 1911. As a
staunch supporter of the Caliphate, he was invited to Istanbul in 1918, and subsequently appointed
‘General Preacher’ in eastern Turkey and greatly assisted the Turks in the War of Independence. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 371 ---
382
take his place as ‘general preacher’ of the Eastern Provinces on a salary of three
hundred liras. I was also offered a position as a deputy, and my former post together
with the other members of the Darü’l-Hikmet within the Directorate of Religious
Affairs. Moreover, being endorsed by one hundred and sixty-three out of two hundred
deputies, one hundred and fifty thousand liras were allotted for the Medresetü’z-
Zehra, my university in the East, the foundations of which I had laid in Van, and this
was accepted. However, since I saw that the predictions of the original of the Fifth
Ray were in part realized in a person there, I was compelled to forgo those most
important duties. Telling myself that the person could not be opposed or confronted, I
gave up the world, and politics, and the life of society, and dedicated all my time to
saving religious belief. However, a number of tyrannical and unjust officials forced me
to write two or three treatises which looked to the world.
Later, in connection with some questions asked by some persons about allegorical
Hadiths which give news of the events at the end of time, I rearranged that old
treatise. It received the name of the Fifth Ray. The Risale-i Nur is not numbered
chronologically. For example, the Thirty-Third Letter was written before the First
Letter, and the original of the Fifth Ray and some other parts were written previously
to the Risale-i Nur itself. Anyway... the illegal, unnecessary, and inaccurate objections
and questions of a public prosecutor, asked out of bigoted love of Mustafa Kemal,
forced me to provide these explanations outside the subject. I am giving here as an
example some of the entirely personal and unlawful things he said in the name of the
law. He said:
“Aren’t you sincerely sorry that you insulted him in the Fifth Ray with expressions
like ‘swilling down raki and wine like a water pump’?” I say in reply to the completely
meaningless and mistaken bigotry arising from his love: “The victory and honour of
the heroic army cannot be ascribed to him; he can have only a share of it. Like it would
be tyrannical and an awesome injustice if the booty, possessions, and rations of an
army were all given to its commander. Yes, just as he accused me of not loving that
unjust and extremely faulty man, quite simply accusing me of being a traitor, so I
accuse him of not loving the army, for he ascribes all its honour and moral booty to the
man he loves, depriving the army of all glory. The reality is that positive things, and
instances of good and virtue, should be distributed among the community and army,
and the negative things, destruction, and faults ascribed to the chief. For the existence
of

--- Sayfa 372 ---
383
something is dependent on the existence of all its conditions and elements, and the
commander is only one of the conditions. While the non-existence of the thing and its
falling apart, occurs through the non-existence of one of its conditions and one of its
elements being spoilt and destroyed. Instances of good and virtues for the most part
are positive and pertain to existence. The leaders cannot lay claim to them. Instances
of bad and faults are destructive and pertain to non-existence, and the leaders are
answerable for them. While the reality is thus, just as if a tribe is mocked if, when it
wins victories ‘Hasan Aga’ is applauded, and when it is defeated it is blamed, and this
is judged to be the reverse of the truth; in just the same way, in the name of the court
the public prosecutor imputed a fault to me that was completely the reverse of the
truth and reality.
Similarly to his mistake, a little previously to the Great War while I was in Van, a
number of religious, God-fearing persons came to me. They told me: “Some of the
military commanders act contrarily to religion. Come and join us, we are going to rebel
against them.”
I told them: “Bad conduct and irreligion like that is particular to commanders like
them; the army cannot be held responsible for it. There are perhaps a hundred
thousand saints in the Ottoman Army; I shall not draw my sword against it. I will not
join you.” They left me, drew their swords, and the fruitless Bitlis Incident occurred. A
short time later war broke out. The army took part in it in the name of religion; it
entered the jihad, and a hundred thousand martyrs from it rose to the degree of
sainthood. They confirmed what I had said, signing the decrees for their sainthood
with their blood. Anyway... I was compelled to relate this at some length. The
extraordinary attitude of a public prosecutor who acted derisively towards myself and
the Risale-i Nur due to unimportant, mistaken feelings and partiality, in the name of
justice, one incontrovertible mark of which is imperviousness to all feelings and
outside influences, drove me to make this long statement.
Fourth Principle: After scrutinizing for four months hundreds of copies of
treatises and letters, Eskişehir Court could only give sentences of six months to fifteen
men out of one hundred and twenty, and one year to myself for fifteen words in one or
two treatises out of a hundred. They acquitted us of founding a sufi order and
organizing a political society and in the hat question. We anyway had served the
sentence. Then in Kastamonu they found nothing in numerous searches. And a number
of years ago in Isparta all the parts of the Risale-i Nur without exception, both
confidential and otherwise, fell into the hands of the authorities. They were all returned
to their owners after three months of scrutiny. A few years later, all the parts of the
Risale-i Nur remained for two years in

--- Sayfa 373 ---
384
the Courts of Denizli and Ankara, then they were all returned to us. Since the fact is
that, those who accuse myself and the Risale-i Nur students emotionally, maliciously,
and unlawfully in the name of the law like him, are accusing before us both Eskişehir
Court, and Denizli Court, and Ankara Criminal Court, making them partners in our
crime, if there is one. For if we had been guilty, those three or four authorities did not
see it despite their close scrutiny or they disregarded it, and two courts did not see it
having studied it minutely for two years, or they disregarded it, which makes them
more guilty than us. However, if we had had any desire to interfere in the world, it
would not have been with the buzzing of a fly, it would have exploded and boomed
like a cannon.
Yes, anyone who accuses of political intrigue a person who defended himself
vehemently and without restraint in the Military Court after the Thirty-First of March
Incident10 and in the Speaker’s Office in the face of Mustafa Kemal’s anger, saying he
was hatching his schemes for eighteen years without allowing anyone to detect it,
surely does so for some malicious purpose. We are hopeful that like the Denizli public
prosecutor, the Afyon public prosecutor will save us from the malice and accusations
of such people and demonstrate true justice.
Fifth Principle: A fundamental principle of the Risale-i Nur students is that as far
as is possible they do not interfere in politics, or matters of administration, or
government activities, because for them, working seriously for the Qur’an is worth
everything, and is sufficient.
Also, no one who enters politics, among the overwhelming currents that now
prevail, can preserve his independence and sincerity. He is bound to become subject to
one of the currents, and it will exploit him for worldly ends. It will corrupt the
sacredness of his duty. Also, in the material struggle, due to the utter tyranny and
despotism that is the rule this century, he would have to crush numerous innocent
supporters of a person because of the error that person had made. He would otherwise
be defeated. It would also seem in the view of those who had given up their religion
for the world, or who exploited it, that the Qur’an’s sacred truths, which can be the
tool of nothing, were being exploited for political propaganda. Also, every class of
people, supporters and opposers, officials and common people, should have a share of
those truths and all are in need of them. The Risale-i Nur students have therefore to
avoid politics and the material struggle completely, and not be in any way involved in
them, so that they may remain completely impartial.

10 The name given the revolt which broke out in the army in Istanbul in 1909 and resulted in the
dethronement of Sultan ‘Abdulhamid. Despite playing a pacifying role, Bediuzzaman was arrested
following the revolt along with many others and tried, but was acquitted. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 374 ---
385
Sixth Principle: The Risale-i Nur should not be attacked in this matter because
of my personal faults or those of some of my brothers. It is bound directly to the
Qur’an, and the Qur’an is bound to the Supreme Throne. Who has the ability to
stretch out his hand and unfasten it? Also, as is indicated by thirty-three Qur’anic
verses, Imam ‘Ali’s (May God be pleased with him) three miraculous prophecies and
the certain pronouncements of Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified), the
Risale-i Nur has performed an extraordinary service for this country and is a source of
material plenty and spiritual effulgence for it, and cannot therefore be held responsible
for our petty, personal faults, and it should not be held responsible. Otherwise both
material and spiritual loss will be caused to this country which it will impossible to
repair.
God willing, the assaults and diabolical machinations against the Risale-i Nur of
the atheists hostile to us will be foiled, for its students cannot be compared with
others, they cannot be scattered nor be made to give it up; through God’s grace, they
will not be defeated. If the Qur’an had not prohibited them from physical defence...
those students, who are everywhere and have won public favour, which is like the life-
blood of this nation, would never get involved in petty and fruitless incidents like the
Shaykh Said11 and Menemen incidents.12 If, God forbid, they were persecuted to the
point they were compelled and the Risale-i Nur attacked, the atheists and dissemblers
who deceive the Government would regret it a thousand times over.
In Short: Since we do not interfere in the worlds of the worldly, they should not
interfere in our work for the hereafter and our service of religious belief.
[I am relating here by way of defence an old memory and pleasant anecdote
which was not divulged in Eskişehir Court and was not written in the official
records, nor has been included in my defence speeches.]
They asked me there: “What do you think about the Republic?” I replied: “As my
biography which you have in your hands proves, I was a religious republican before
any of you, with the exception of the Chairman of the Court, was born. A summary is
this: like now, I was living at that time in seclusion in a remote tomb. They used to
bring me soup, and I would give breadcrumbs to the ants. I used to eat my bread
having

11 The famous Shaykh Said Revolt which broke out in February, 1925 in eastern Turkey.
Bediuzzaman strongly advised its leaders against undertaking any such action against the
Government, as it would “... make Ahmed kill Mehmed, and Hasan kill Husayn.” [Tr.]
12 A minor incident which occurred in the town of Menemen in western Turkey 1930, but was
blown up out of all proportion and brutally suppressed. Bediuzzaman was in no way involved in it.
[Tr.]

--- Sayfa 375 ---
386
dipped it in the soup. They asked me about it and I told them: the ant and bee nations
are republicans. I give the breadcrumbs to the ants out of respect for their
republicanism.”
Then they said to me: “You are opposing the righteous early generations of
Islam.” I told them in reply: “The four Rightly-Guided Caliphs were both Caliphs and
Presidents of the Republic. Abu Bakr the Veracious (May God be pleased with him),
the Ten Promised Paradise, and the Companions of the Prophet were like presidents of
the republic. But not as an empty name and title, they were heads of a religious
republic which bore the meaning of true justice and freedom in accordance with the
Shari‘a.”
I told them: Mr. Prosecutor and Members of the Court! You are accusing me of
holding an idea opposite to that which I have held for fifty years. If you ask me about
the secular republic, what I understand by it is that ‘secular’ (laic) means to be
impartial; that is, a government which, in accordance with the principle of freedom of
conscience, does not interfere with the religiously-minded and pious, the same as it
does not interfere with the irreligious and dissipated. I withdrew from political and
social life twenty-five years ago, and what form the Government of the Republic has
taken, I do not know. If, I seek refuge with God, it has assumed a fearsome form
whereby, on account of irreligion, it passes and accepts laws to incriminate those who
work for their belief and lives in the hereafter, then I announce to you fearlessly and
warn you that if I had a thousand lives, I would be ready to sacrifice all of them for
belief and life in the hereafter. Do whatever you will! My last word is For us God
suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs! In response to your wrongfully
condemning me to capital punishment or hard labour, I say: as the Risale-i Nur has
discovered and shown with absolute certainty, I am not being executed; I am being
discharged and departing for the world of light and happiness. As for you, our covert
enemies, wretches who oppress us on account of misguidance! Since I know you are
condemned to eternal extinction and everlasting solitary confinement, and I have seen
this, I have taken my revenge on you totally, and am ready to surrender up my spirit
with a perfectly easy mind!
Seventh Principle: In consequence of superficial investigations held in other
places, Afyon Court looked on us as a political society. My reply is this:
Firstly: As is testified to by all those who have befriended me, I have read no
newspaper for nineteen years, nor listened to one, nor asked about one, and for the
past ten years five months have received no news except

--- Sayfa 376 ---
387
about the German defeat and the terror of communism, and I have not been curious,
and have not known. Such a person surely has no connection whatsoever with politics,
and no relations with any political society.
Secondly: The one hundred and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur are there for all to
see. Understanding that they contained no worldly goal and no aim other than the
truths of belief, Eskişehir Court did not object to them with the exception of one or
two of the parts, and Denizli Court objected to none at all, and despite being under
constant surveillance for eight years the large Kastamonu police force could find no
one to charge apart from my two assistants and three others, and those charges were
merely pretexts. This is a decisive proof that the students of the Risale-i Nur are in no
way a political society. If what is intended by ‘society’ in the indictment is a
community concerned with religious belief and the hereafter, in reply we say this:
If the name ‘community’ is given to university students and tradesmen, it may also
be applied to us. But if you call us a community that is going to breach internal
security by exploiting religious feelings, in response we say:
The facts that in no place over a period of twenty years in these stormy times
Risale-i Nur students have breached internal security or disturbed public order, and no
such incident has been recorded by either the Government or any court, refutes this
accusation. If the name community is given meaning it might breach internal security in
the future through strengthening religious feelings, we say this:
Firstly, foremost the Directorate of Religious Affairs, and all preachers, perform
the same service.
Secondly, it is not disturbing the peace and breaching security, the students of the
Risale-i Nur protect the nation from anarchy with all their strength and conviction, and
maintain public order and guard security. The evidence for this has been cited in the
First Principle.
Yes, we are a community, and our aim and programme is to save firstly ourselves
and then our nation from eternal annihilation and everlasting solitary confinement in
the Intermediate Realm, and to protect our compatriots from anarchy and lawlessness,
and to protect ourselves with the firm truths of the Risale-i Nur against atheism, which
is the means to destroying our lives in this world and in the next.
Eighth Principle: Saying its treatises contain some sharp expressions, they
accuse us as a result of deficient and superficial study of the Risale-i Nur carried out in
other places. In reply I say this: since our aim is belief

--- Sayfa 377 ---
388
and the hereafter, it is not confrontation with the worldly. And since the sharpness
particular to these very insignificant one or two treatises was not intentional —we
bumped against the worldly while advancing towards our goal— it certainly does not
infer political prejudice. And since possibilities are one thing and occurrences are
something else, and what we have been accused of is “possibly” disturbing public
order, not having disturbed it, it is meaningless, for anyone may kill someone else. And
since over a period of twenty years in their scrupulous investigations into twenty
thousand people and thousands of copies and letters, and in their searches, neither
Eskişehir, nor Kastamonu, nor Isparta, nor Denizli could find anything constituting a
real crime, Eskişehir Court was compelled to find us guilty because of one short
treatise under one article of an ‘elastic’ law, and could only give six-month sentences
to fifteen people out of a hundred in such a way that they should have sentenced all
who teach religion. I wonder if the twenty confidential letters one of your people had
written over a year were scrutinized, wouldn’t they contain twenty incriminating
sentences which would shame him? But the fact that in twenty thousand copies of the
treatises and letters from twenty thousand people they could not find twenty truly
incriminating sentences shows that the Risale-i Nur’s aim is solely the hereafter. It has
no business with this world.
Ninth Principle: As with the matters which Denizli Court’s just prosecutor
included in the indictment because of the unfair and superficial records of other places,
so with Afyon Court —as indicated by what we experienced while being questioned—
pretexts have been made so that we have been charged concerning the same matters,
and undated letters, and correspondence over twenty, fifteen, and ten years, and the
Fifth Ray —decisive answers about which are found in the Third Principle above and
in the Second Question of my petition above— and four or five treatises out of the
hundred and thirty of the Risale-i Nur, and a number of letters and treatises which
were scrutinized by Eskişehir Court and for which the sentences were served, were
later covered by the pardon and were acquitted by Denizli Court. Can it be said about
someone who with a speech outside the War Ministry during the Thirty-First of March
Incident brought to order eight battalions which had not heeded the Shaykh al-Islam
and ‘ulama, that he strove for eight years —as stated by the police report— and only
succeeded in deceiving twenty or thirty people? For instance, in the large town of
Kastamonu he was able to hoodwink only five people? For during the Denizli affair, in
Kastamonu they pulled out all my papers and books, both confidential and otherwise,
from under the firewood, and after studying them for three months could find no one

--- Sayfa 378 ---
389
in that large town other than Feyzi, Emin, Hilmi, Tevfik, and Sâdik. Because Feyzi and
the others had performed some personal services for me for God’s sake, they sent
them to prison, together with the three brothers and three or four others they found in
Emirdağ, who had assisted me for three and a half years. If I had done what that
superficial report stated, I would have deceived not five or ten people but five hundred
or perhaps five thousand, or even five hundred thousand. As in Denizli Court I pointed
out the many errors in the police reports, so too here I am pointing out one or two
examples:
They accused us of “corrupting religion” because, following an Islamic custom
practised since the age of the Prophet, I had compiled a Hizb al-Qur’ani like a large
An‘am13 out of the hundreds of well-known verses which form the sources of the
Risale-i Nur.
Also, they want to incriminate us by showing that the Treatise On Islamic Dress
(Tesettür Risalesi) was written and published this year, whereas I have already served
a year’s sentence for it, and I treated it as confidential, and as noted in the police
report, it was pulled out from under piles of firewood. Also, although the well-known
person did not respond and was silent in the face of the objections and harsh words I
said to him in the Speaker’s Office in the Assembly in Ankara, with gross exaggeration
the prosecution applied to him literally the natural, necessary, general, and confidential
criticisms in my explanations of forty years previously concerning a Hadith which
describes his errors, after his death, making it into an indictable offence for us. Can
there be any comparison between the sake or memory of someone who is dead and
gone and who no longer has any connection with the Government, and Almighty
God’s laws of justice, which are a manifestation of His sovereignty?
Also, freedom of conscience which, of the principles adopted by the Government
of the Republic, is the one we have most relied on and defended ourselves with, has
been made something we have transgressed against, as though we are opposed to it.
Also, because I criticised the evils and faults of civilization, unimaginable things
are ascribed to me in the police reports: as though I do not accept the use of the
radio,14 aeroplane and railway, they accuse me of being opposed to modern progress.

13 It had formerly been a common practice to gather together in a single volume for constant
reading Sura al-An‘am and other meritorious suras and verses from the Qur’an. [Tr.]
14 I said that in order to offer supreme thanks for a supreme Divine bounty like the radio, it
should “recite the Qur’an so that all the people on the face of the earth could listen to it, and the
atmosphere might become a hâfiz of the Qur’an.”

--- Sayfa 379 ---
390
Making a comparison with these examples, God willing, like the just and fair
Denizli public prosecutor, Afyon Court will show how contrary to justice this
treatment is, and will attach no importance to the delusions in those police reports.
The strangest error is this: in one place I said: although mankind should have
responded with endless thanks to Almighty God’s supreme bounties of the aeroplane,
railway, and radio, they did not respond in that way, so He rained down bombs on
their heads from the ’planes. The radio is also a supreme bounty, and thanks for it may
be shown by making it a universal reciter of the Qur’an with millions of tongues,
allowing all the people on the face of the earth to listen to it. Also, I said when
explaining in the Twentieth Word that the Qur’an makes predictions about the future
wonders of civilization, that one of its verses indicates that the infidels will defeat the
Islamic world with the railway. Although I had urged Islam to lay hold of these
wonders, some of the prosecutors in previous courts, accused us of being against
modern progress, and made the aeroplane, railway, and radio the basis of charges
against us.
Also, although it is completely unrelated, someone said about the name
‘Risaletü’n-Nur,’ which is a second name of the Risale-i Nur, that “it is a message
(risalet) from the light of the Qur’an, that is, it is inspired by it, and is an heir
performing the function of Divine messengership, of the Shari‘a.” In another place in
the indictment, it was given the wrong meaning and made the basis of other charges,
as though I had said: “the Risale-i Nur is a Divine Messenger (resûl).”
I have also proved with decisive arguments in twenty places in my defence
speeches that even if it was for the whole world, we would not exploit either religion,
or the Qur’an, or the Risale-i Nur, and they may not be exploited, and that we would
not change one of their truths for rule over the whole world, and that is how we are in
fact. There have been thousands of indications of what I claim over the last twenty
years. But from the way the interrogations at Afyon are going, and its indictment, we
are being accused due to other police reports of expending all our efforts on worldly
intrigues, and hastening to the hateful games of this world, and making religion the
tool of lowly things and degrading its sacredness, and making these our aim. Since it is
thus, with all my strength I say: For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs!
                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 380 ---
391
In His Name, be He glorified!
An Addendum to My Written Objections to the Charges
Made Against Us by Afyon Court
 [Those I address in this objection are not the Afyon Prosecutor and Court,
but the spiteful and suspicious officials who due to the false and defective
reports of public prosecutors in other places and informers and detectives,
have turned against us the extraordinary situation here and in the office of
the examining magistrate.]
Firstly: Just how far from justice it is to call the Risale-i Nur students, who are
innocent and have no connection with politics, a political society, which is completely
baseless and never even occurred to us, and to accuse the unfortunates who embraced
the Risale-i Nur and have no aim other than belief and the hereafter, of publishing
works for that society, or being active officers or members of it, or of reading the
Risale-i Nur or teaching it to others, or of writing it out, thus deeming them guilty of
some crime, and to send them to court — a proof of how far this is from justice is as
follows:
In accordance with the principles of freedom of thought and freedom of
scholarship, those who read the harmful works written to oppose the Qur’an by
Doctor Dozy and other atheists are not considered to have committed crimes, yet
those who have great need to learn the truths of the Qur’an and belief and long to do
so, and read and write out the Risale-i Nur, which teaches those truths as clearly as
daylight, are considered guilty of crimes. Also, they based their allegations on a few
sentences in one or two treatises which we had treated as confidential before they
were exhibited in court, so that among a hundred other treatises a wrong meaning
should not be given them, and accusations were made concerning them. However,
with the exception of one of those treatises, Eskişehir Court scrutinized them and
objected only to one or two matters in Treatise On Islamic Dress, and the exception is
replied to extremely decisively in both my petition and my objections to the indictment;
and the fact that “we have light in our hands, not the club of politics” was proved
conclusively from twenty angles in Eskişehir Court; and Denizli Court scrutinized all
the treatises of the Risale-i Nur without exception and did not object to any of them.
Nevertheless, those unfair prosecutors extended those three or four sentences to the
whole Risale-i Nur, and just

--- Sayfa 381 ---
392
as they confiscated the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr because of two pages, so they
stated those who read and write out the Risale-i Nur were guilty of a crime and
accused myself of contesting the Government. I call on those close to me and the
friends who meet with me to testify that for more than ten years, apart from two
leaders, one deputy, and the Governor of Kastamonu, I have have not known who the
leaders of the Government were, or who its ministers, commanders, officials, and
deputies were, and I have not been curious to find out. However, one or two years
ago, one or two persons displayed an interest in me and I learnt of five or six of the
leading members of the Government. Is it in any way possible for someone not to
know the people he is contesting, and to have no wish to know them, to attach no
importance to learning whether they are friend or foe? It is understood from this that
they dream up totally baseless pretexts to ruin me whatever happens.
Since that is the case, I say not to the court here but to those unjust people: I
don’t give tuppence for your severest penalty; it has no importance whatsoever. For I
am seventy-five years old and have one foot in the grave. To exchange one or two
years of innocent life of persecution for the rank of martyrdom would be the greatest
happiness for me. Thanks to the thousands of proofs of the Risale-i Nur, I believe with
the utmost certainty that for us death is our discharge papers. Even if outwardly it is
execution, for us one hour’s distress would be the key to eternal happiness and mercy.
But as for you, covert, cruel enemies who confuse the judiciary on account of atheism
and preoccupy the Government with us for no reason! Be certain of this and tremble!
For you are being condemned to eternal annihilation and everlasting solitary
confinement. We see that our revenge is being taken on you in compounded fashion.
We pity you even. Yes, surely the reality of death, which has emptied this town a
hundred times into the graveyard has demands greater than life. To find a way of being
delivered from its certain execution is man’s greatest need, more important than
anything. Those who on trite pretexts impute guilt to the Risale-i Nur students, who
have found this way for themselves, and to the Risale-i Nur, which provides that way
with thousands of proofs, —how guilty they are themselves in the eyes of truth and
justice even lunatics would understand.
There are three matters which deceive these unjust people and give rise to the
delusion of a political society, which is completely irrelevant:
The First: The fact that since early days my students have been fervently attached
to me like brothers, has given rise to the erroneous impression of a society.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
393
The Second: Some of the Risale-i Nur students have acted as though they were an
Islamic group, such as is found everywhere and is permitted by the laws of the
Republic and is not harassed by it, and this has been imagined to be a society. But
those limited three or four students have not intended any sort of political society, only
to serve belief together sincerely as brothers and to support each other in working for
the hereafter.
The Third: Because those unfair people know themselves to be misguided and
overcome by love of this world, and because they find some of the Government’s laws
convenient for themselves, they say to themselves: “Most probably Said and his friends
oppose the Government’s laws, which suit our caprices, which are illicit in the eyes of
civilization. In which case, they are a political society which opposes the
Government.”
So I say: You wretches! If the world was eternal, and man was going to remain in
it permanently, and his only duty was politics, perhaps there would have been some
meaning in your slander. But if I had undertaken this work with a view to politics, you
would have found not ten sentences in a hundred treatises, but a thousand, to be
political and combative. If to suppose the impossible, like you, we had been working
with all our strength for worldly aims and pleasures and politics, which not even Satan
could make anyone accept, even if it had been thus, since these twenty years there has
been no incident in which we were involved, and the Government looks not to the
heart but to the hand, and all governments have fierce opponents, you cannot deem us
guilty in the name of the law. My last word is
God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He
the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!15

15 Qur’an, 9:129.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
394
[After our acquittal in Denizli Court I lived alone for three years and did not
concern myself with politics. This new affair, which has resulted in our being
sent to Afyon Prison, is therefore unlawful in ten ways, as I shall explain.]
The First: Although the Risale-i Nur has been scrutinized by three courts and
three committees of experts, and seven departments of government in Ankara and their
legal bodies, and although all the treatises were unanimously acquitted without
opposition, and Said and his seventy-five companions were all acquitted without being
sentenced to a single day’s imprisonment, to again seize those treatises as though they
were pernicious writings is totally contrary to the law, as anyone the slightest bit
reasonable would understand.
The Second: A man who lived for three and a half years all alone and a stranger
in Emirdağ after having been acquitted, with his door locked from the outside and
bolted on the inside, who accepted only one out of a hundred people on essential
business, and even gave up the work of writing he had pursued for twenty years and
wrote no more —he had the lock on his door smashed by detectives for political
purposes and they broke in on him, but they could find nothing other than an Arabic
prayerbook and a wall-hanging. Anyone with even a grain of fairness would
understand how illegal it was to harass him in this way.
The Third: As he said in court: if there is someone who as is confirmed by
seventy witnesses, for seven years knew nothing of the Second World War and was
not curious about it nor asked about it, and now for ten years has been in the same
state of mind, and for twenty-five years has read no newspaper nor listened to one, and
for thirty years has said: “I seek refuge with God from Satan and politics,” and has
avoided politics with all his strength, and if in twenty-two years of the most tortuous
distress, in order not to attract the attention of politicians or become involved in
politics, has not once applied to the Government to alleviate his conditions —if there
is such a person, is it in conformity with any law to raid his place of seclusion as
though he was plotting political intrigues, and cause him unheard of suffering while he
was ill? Anyone with an iota of conscience would pity him in that state!
The Fourth: Eskişehir Court studied the Risale-i Nur for six months because we
had been charged with organizing a political society and founding a sufi order, and due
to that suspicion and because of the personal hatred towards us of the great leader it
urged certain members of the judiciary to act against us, yet that court acquitted us of
founding a

--- Sayfa 384 ---
395
political society and sufi order and the Risale-i Nur charges, and only making a pretext
of a short piece called Treatise On Islamic Dress, gave sentences of six months to
fifteen out of a hundred students, not in accordance with the law but arbitrarily. And
although until the investigations had been completed they remained in prison for four
and a half months, that is, they served prison sentences of one and a half months, and
ten years later Denizli Court again on a number of pretexts like organizing a political
society and founding a sufi order, and after scrutinizing closely twenty years’ worth of
letters and writings, sent five boxes of books to Ankara Criminal Court, and although
those books and letters were the subject of two years’ close scrutiny by Ankara and
Denizli Courts, they passed a unanimous decision for their acquittal concerning the
political society and sufi order16 and other pretexts, and returned all the books to their
owners. They also acquitted Said and his companions. So anyone who has not lost his
humanity will understand just how illegal it is to look on him as a political activist and
accuse him of being a plotter, and to provoke the officers of the court against him.
The Fifth: Because of the compassion which is the basis of my way and that of
the Risale-i Nur and for thirty years has been a principle by which I have lived, so that
no harm comes to the innocent I do not censure the tyrants who persecute me, let
alone cursing them. Even when angry at some of those depraved wretches who
oppress me out of vicious hatred, or even the irreligious tyrants, my compassion
prevents me from responding with a curse, let alone physically. For those cruel tyrants
have parents and children; I do nothing to them so that no material harm comes to
those four or five elderly unfortunates and innocents. Sometimes I even forgive them.
It is because of this compassion that I absolutely never interfere in government or
disturb public order. Moreover, I have recommended this so strongly to all my friends
that some of the fair-minded police of three provinces have admitted that “these
Risale-i Nur students are police of a sort; they preserve order and maintain public
security.” There are thousands of witnesses to this fact, and they have confirmed it
through twenty years’ experience and thousands of students have corrob

16 The basis and aim of the Risale-i Nur is certain belief and the essential reality of the Qur’an.
For this reason, three courts of law have acquitted it in regard to being a tarikat. Furthermore, not one
person has said during these twenty years: “Said has given me tarikat [instruction].” Also, a way to
which for a thousand years most of this nation’s forefathers have been bound may not made
something for which [the members of the nation] are answerable. Also, those who combat
successfully those covert dissemblers who attach the name of tarikat to the reality of Islam and attack
this nation’s religion, may not themselves be accused of being a tarikat. As for a society or
community, it is a fraternity which look to the hereafter within Islamic brotherhood. It is not a
political society, as three courts have ruled. They have acquitted it in that respect.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
396
orated it by never having been involved in any incident recorded by the police, so
which law permits that unhappy man’s house to be raided as though he were a
revolutionary and ‘komitadji’, and for pitiless men to insult him, and despite not
finding anything in his house, as though he was a multiple criminal gather up his most
precious, miraculous Qur’an and the inscriptions hanging on his wall as though they
were pernicious writings? What benefit demands turning thousands of religious people
who thus serve public order with their good morals against government and public
order because of some baseless suspicion?
The Sixth: Endless thanks be to God that thirty years ago, through His grace and
the effulgence of the Qur’an, a person realized just how valueless and meaningless are
the fleeting fame and glory of this world, and its egotistical self-admiration and
celebrity, and since that time has struggled with all his strength against his evil-
commanding soul, and to be self-effacing and give up egotism, and not to be artificial
and hypocritical. Those who have served him or befriended him are perfectly certain of
this and testify to it. For twenty years he has fled with all his might from people’s good
opinions and their attention, which everyone takes too much pleasure in, and contrary
to everyone else has rejected praise and acclaim and being accorded a spiritual rank.
He has also rejected the excessively good opinions of him of his closest brothers, and
has wounded their feelings by not accepting the praise and commendation expressed in
their letters. He has show himself to be devoid of virtue, and has ascribed all virtue to
the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary, and hence to the collective personality of the
Risale-i Nur students, thinking of himself as only a lowly servant. This proves that he
has not tried to make himself liked, and he has not wanted to and has rejected it. So
under what law has he been deemed guilty because without his consent some of his
friends in a distant place had an excessively good opinion of him and eulogized him
and awarded him a high spiritual rank; and because of what a preacher said in the
region of Kütahya whom he does not know; and because of a letter with a forged
signature which had been sent to Kütahya, where I have never sent any letter; and
because of an offensive book in Balikesir, the author of which is unknown? Would any
law in the world permit sending officials to break the lock of a wretched, aged, ill
stranger’s room as though he had committed a serious crime, and allow them to justify
this by finding only a book of supplications and a wall-hanging? Would any politics
allow such aggression?
The Seventh: Would any law permit for an unfortunate who, although at this
time inside the country when there are so many lively political parties and currents,
internal and external, and the ground is ripe to take

--- Sayfa 386 ---
397
advantage of this, that is, to win numerous diplomats and politicians as supporters in
place of his handful of friends, told all his friends, solely in order not to get involved in
politics, nor damage his sincerity, nor attract the government’s attention to himself,
nor to become preoccupied with the world: “Beware! Don’t get carried away by those
political currents! Don’t get involved in politics! Don’t disturb public order!”; and
although two currents caused him harm and distress because he withdrew in this way,
the old one because of its groundless fears, and the new, because it says he does not
help it — despite all this he never interfered in the worldly’s world and was busy with
his life in the hereafter, and wrote not even one letter in twenty-two years to his own
brother in the village of Nurs in his native region, nor ten letters in twenty years to his
friends in those provinces — so which law permits that anyone intervenes to this
extent with his preoccupation with the hereafter?
Would any law permit collecting up copies of the Risale-i Nur, in which three
courts of law have found nothing indictable, although under the liberty laws the
publications of those without religion and the communists are not interfered with
despite being extremely harmful for the country and nation and morality. For the
Risale-i Nur has been striving for twenty years to maintain the country and nation’s
social life and morality and security; and has been effectively struggling to regain for
this nation its true support, the Islamic world’s brotherhood and its friendship, and to
strengthen these; and the parts of the Risale-i Nur like Zülfikâr and The Staff of Moses
(Âsâ-yi Mûsa), which having been studied for three months by the Directorate of
Religious Affairs on the orders of the Minister for Internal Affairs for the purpose of
having it criticized, fully appreciated its value and had it put in the Department library
as “an important work;” and The Staff of Moses, which was placed on the tomb of the
Prophet Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), as a sign of its acceptance
was seen there by the Hajjis. Would any law, conscience, or justice permit these to be
collected up as though they were injurious papers and sent to court?
The Eighth: Then a person who although he was given complete freedom after
twenty-two years of distressing and unjustified exile, did not return to his native region
where he had thousands of friends and relations, but preferred solitude and exile so
that he should have no contact with social life and politics; and who gave up the very
meritorious congregation of the mosque in preferance to performing the prayers on his
own and remaining in his room; that is, his state of mind made him avoid the people’s
adulation; and as is testified to by twenty years of his life and confirmed by thousands
of valuable Turks, preferred one pious Turk to numer

--- Sayfa 387 ---
398
ous negligent Kurds, and who even proved in court that he would not exchange a
hundred negligent Kurds for one Turkish brother with powerful belief like Hafiz Ali;
and who in order not to be the object of their respect and veneration, never met with
people so long as it was not essential and did not go to the mosque; and for forty years
has worked with all his strength and all his works for Islamic brotherhood and so that
Muslims would love one another; and who, since the Turkish nation is the Qur’an’s
standard-bearer and is praised by the Qur’an, has great love for that nation and has
passed his life among its people —in order to insult this person with the tongue of
officialdom and make propaganda and scare away his friends, the former governor
said: “He is a Kurd and you are Turks. He is a Shafi‘i and you are Hanafi’s,” trying to
frighten everyone into abandoning him. And although over twenty years and in two
courts he was not forced to change his manner of dress, and the army peaked cap was
modified, a brimmed hat was forcibly placed on the head of that recluse — what
benefit is there is all this? What law permits it?
The Ninth: is very important,17 and very powerful, but it touches on politics so I
am remaining silent.
The Tenth: This is an attack, which no law permits, and is without advantage, and
is only making mountains out of molehills due to some meaningless delusion, and is no
part of any law. Concerning this too I am remaining silent so as not to touch on
politics, which according to our way we are unconcerned with.
In the face of treatment which is thus illegal in ten ways, all we say is For us God
suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs!
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i

17 The fact that there were Christians and Jews in Islamic governments, and Muslims in
Christian and Zoroastrian governments shows that opponents who do disturb public order or interfere
in government cannot be legally interfered with. Moreover, one is not answerable for possibilities.
Otherwise everyone would have to be sent to court and tried because of ‘possibility’, for everyone
might kill other people.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
399
I have a few more points I want to submit to
the authorities of Afyon, and to its Court and Police
The First: Most of the prophets appearing in the East and in Africa, and most of
the philosophers emerging in the West and in Europe is a sign of pre-eternal Divine
Determining that in Asia religion is dominant and philosophy is in second place. In
consequence, even if those ruling in Asia are not religious, they should not interfere
with those who work for religion; they should encourage them.
The Second: The All-Wise Qur’an is the intellect and power of thought of the
head of the earth. If, I seek refuge with God, the Qur’an were to depart from the
globe, the globe would go mad. It is not far from reason to suppose that another
planet colliding with its head emptied of reason, would cause doomsday to erupt. Yes,
the Qur’an is a chain, a ‘rope of God,’ binding the earth to the Divine Throne. It
preserves the earth more than gravity. Thus, the Risale-i Nur, which is a true and
powerful commentary on the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, is a supreme Divine bounty
which has been demonstrating its effectiveness for twenty years in this century, an
insuppressible miracle of the Qur’an. The Government therefore should not be
interfering in it and trying to scare its students away from it, but protecting it and
encouraging people to read it.
The Third: In Denizli Court I said the following in connection with all the
believers assisting with prayers for forgiveness those who have departed for the past,
and their bequeathing good works on their spirits:
When you are asked by millions of believing plaintiffs at the Supreme Tribunal:
“Why did you want to ruin with imprisonment and persecution the Risale-i Nur
students, who were striving to save the country and nation from anarchy and irreligion
and immorality and their compatriots from eternal annihilation, although because of
the liberty laws you looked tolerantly on the publications of atheists and communists
and political societies that produce anarchists, and did not bother them?” What answer
will you and those who want to convict and ruin the Risale-i Nur students, who serve
the truths of the Qur’an, give? I am asking you the same thing! I said that to them and
those just and fair-minded people acquitted us, demonstrating the fairness of the
judicial system.
The Fourth: I was expecting to be taken for interrogation to a place of
consultation, in either Ankara or Afyon, where questions would be asked and
answered about matters of overriding importance and the Risale-i

--- Sayfa 389 ---
400
Nur’s relation to them. Yes, matters connected with finding ways of restoring the
brotherhood, love, and good will of three hundred and fifty million Muslims for this
nation and country, and their moral assistance for it. An indication that the Risale-i
Nur is the most effective means of achieving this is the following:
In Mecca this year, a scholar of great eminence translated the main collections of
the Risale-i Nur into both one of the Indian languages and Arabic, and sending them
to India and Arabia, said: “Just as he strives through the Risale-i Nur to secure unity
and Islamic brotherhood, our most powerful support, so he demonstrates that the
Turkish nation is always progressive in religion and belief.”
I was also expecting that momentous questions would be asked like “What is the
extent of the service the Risale-i Nur can provide in the face of the danger communism
poses to this country, because it turns into anarchy? How can this blessed country be
defended against this terrible torrent?” It should have been thus, but having been
blown up out of all proportion due to the petty and  personal slander of the spiteful,
matters holding not the slightest importance and which are in no way crimes, were
discussed, which caused me distress in these serious conditions, the like of which I
have never before suffered in my life. Meaningless questions were asked about one or
two minor personal matters which three previous courts had previously examined then
acquitted.
The Fifth: The Risale-i Nur cannot be contested or defeated. It has been
silencing the most obdurate philosophers for twenty years. It demonstrates the truths
of belief as clearly as the sun. Those who rule this country should profit from its
strength.
The Sixth: Destroying my unimportant character because of my personal faults,
and through contemptuous treatment poisoning public opinion about me does not
harm the Risale-i Nur, in fact it strengthens it in some ways. For in place of my mortal
tongue are the undying tongues of a hundred thousand copies of the Risale-i Nur, and
they cannot be silenced; they will speak out. And as they have up to now, the
thousands of powerful tongues of its sincere students will continue that sacred,
universal service till the end of the world, God willing.
The Seventh: As I stated in the previous trials putting forward the proofs, our
enemies and those who oppose us both officially and unofficially, deceiving the
Government, making some of its leading members suspicious about us and causing the
judiciary to move against us, are either seriously deceived or have been deceived by
others, or are exceedingly treacherous revolutionaries working on account of anarchy,
or cun

--- Sayfa 390 ---
401
ning atheists struggling against Islam and the truths of the Qur’an on account of
apostasy. Calling absolute despotism “the Republic” in order to attack us, and making
the regime a screen to absolute apostasy, and calling absolute dissipation “civilization,”
and calling arbitrary compulsion on account of disbelief “the law,” they have both
ruined us, and deceived the Government, and preoccupied the judiciary with us for no
reason. Referring them to the wrath of the All-Compelling and Glorious One, we take
refuge in the citadel of For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs so
as to defend ourselves against their evil.
The Eighth: Last year the Russians sent numerous people to make the Hajj as
propaganda in order to show that they are more respectful towards the Qur’an than
other nations and, because of religion, to try to turn the Islamic world against the
religious people of this country. But the main collections of the Risale-i Nur were
being spread at that time in both Mecca, and Medina, and Damascus, and Egypt, and
Aleppo, attracting the appreciation of the religious scholars, which both negated the
communist propaganda, and showed to the Islamic world that like formerly the
Turkish nation and its brothers are supporting religion and the Qur’an and are the
elder brothers of the other peoples of Islam and their heroic commander in the service
of the Qur’an. Those collections from the Risale-i Nur demonstrated this in those
sacred centres. Will it not the bring the earth to anger if this valuable national service
of the Risale-i Nur is responded to with torments in this way?
The Ninth is a brief summary of a matter that was proved and elucidated in my
defence in Denizli.
If through his genius and intelligence a great military commander arrogates to
himself all the positive virtues of the army and ascribes to the army his own negative
evils, the courageous actions and virtues of the soldiers, which equal them in number,
will be reduced to one, while the commander’s evils will be equal in number to the
soldiers, which is an awesome wrong and contrary to the truth. This being so, I said to
the public prosecutor in our previous trials, who was attacking me because of the slap
a Hadith I expounded forty years earlier dealt that person: “It’s true I’m offending him
due to predictions made by Hadiths, but I’m also defending the army’s honour and
preserving him from serious error. As for you, for the sake of one single friend of
yours, you are affronting the honour of the army, which is the Qur’an’s standard-
bearer and an heroic commander of the Islamic world.” God willing, the prosecutor
saw the matter more fairly and was saved from his error.
The Tenth: It is because in the administration of justice the essence of

--- Sayfa 391 ---
402
justice and the rights of everyone who applies have to preserved without
discrimination and the duty of those involved is to work solely for the sake of right,
that during his caliphate, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) sat together with a
Jew in court and they were tried together. On another occasion, a just judge saw that
an official was angry with a delinquent thief when he was cutting off his hand as
demanded by the law. He immediately sacked the official, and full of regret said:
“Those who up to now have been influenced by their feelings in this way while
executing the law have perpetrated great wrongs.” Yes, even if in executing the law he
does not pity the convicted man, he may not be angry; if he is, he is acting tyrannically.
If he carries out capital punishment angrily, even if it is in retaliation (qisas), he
becomes a sort of murderer.”
Thus, in courts of law it is this pure, unbiased truth which rules. But although
three courts have acquitted us, and perhaps if they knew, ninety per cent of this nation
would testify that the Risale-i Nur students are harmless and beneficial for nation and
country, the students are being angrily and contemptuously mistreated, despite being
innocent and much in need of consolation and the indulgence of the law. But since we
have decided to meet with patience and forbearance every calamity and insult, we are
silent, referring it to God and saying: “Perhaps there is some good in this.” However, I
was afraid that these innocent unfortunates being treated in this way due to unfounded
suspicions and the malicious reports of informers would lead to the visitation of
disaster, and I was therefore obliged to write this. Anyway, if there is any fault in this
matter, it is mine. These unfortunates assisted me solely seeking God’s pleasure and to
save their religious belief and lives in the hereafter. For them to receive such treatment
when they were deserving of praise and appreciation, is enough to make anyone angry.
Moreover, it is amazing, but again they are making unsupported assertions about
a political society. However, both three courts have scrutinized this aspect of the case
and acquitted us, and neither the courts, nor the police, nor the experts’ committees
have discovered any sign of any society that could justify such an accusation: the
Risale-i Nur students are a brotherhood which looks to the hereafter, like the students
of a teacher, or university students, or the students of a Qur’an teacher who is
teaching them to memorize the Qur’an. Those who have made charges against them
calling them a political society, have to look on all tradesmen, preachers, and school-
children as belonging to such societies. I therefore see no necessity to defend those
imprisoned here as a result of such meaningless and baseless charges.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
403
However, there is nothing at all to prevent me defending the Risale-i Nur with the
same facts that I have defended it with three times previously, for it closely concerns
both this country and the Islamic world, and it is the beneficial cause of plenty and
blessings, material and spiritual, for this nation and country. No law or politics
prohibits this or could prohibit it.
Yes, we are a society, but we a society which every century has three hundred and
fifty million members. Every day with the obligatory prayers, its members demonstrate
five times with perfect veneration their attachment to the principles of that sacred
society, and their wish to serve it. In accordance with the sacred programme of
Indeed, the believers are brothers,18 they hasten with their supplications and spiritual
gains to assist one another. Yes, we are members of that holy and vast society. And
our particular duty is to convey in confirmatory form to the people of belief the
Qur’anic truths of faith, and save them and ourselves from eternal annihilation and
perpetual solitary confinement in the Intermediate Realm. We have absolutely no
connection with any worldly, political, plotting society, political or revolutionary, as
has been imputed to us; we do not condescend to any such meaningless, purposeless
secret society. In any event, four courts of law have investigated this down to the
finest details, and then acquitted us concerning it.
                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i

18 Qur’an, 49:10.

--- Sayfa 393 ---
404
My written objections, which form a supplement and addition
to my defence, and were sent to six departments of government in
Ankara, and presented to Afyon Criminal Court
I say this to Afyon Court: Enough now! My patience is exhausted! It is a cruel
and unprecedented wrong that in addition to having harassed me for twenty-two years
without reason by holding me under constant surveillance in exile in total isolation and
solitary confinement, to have illegally imprisoned the Risale-i Nur students three times
and caused us loss of hundreds of thousands of liras because of unfounded suspicions
and utilizing ‘possibilities’ instead of facts. And this, in spite of the fact that other than
two or three matters six courts have been unable to find anything contrary to the law
in the hundred parts of the Risale-i Nur. The future and its generations will curse the
tyrants who have been responsible for it. Up to now I have found consolation since it
is my conviction that they will condemn them and cast them down to the depths of
Hell at the Last Judgement, and holding my silence I have endured it. Otherwise, we
could have defended our rights to the full.
Six courts over fifteen years have scrutinized the Risale-i Nur and our
correspondence, and five of them in effect acquitted us on all points. Only Eskişehir
Court made a pretext of five or ten words in the short treatise about the veiling of
women, a single matter, and gave a light sentence under a ‘flexible’ law. When they
did this, I wrote the following in the correction which after the Appeal Court I sent
officially to Ankara as the sole example of illegality:
A long time ago, following the consensus and rulings of three hundred and fifty
thousand Qur’anic commentaries, I expounded the Qur’anic verses about the veiling of
women, which for one thousand three hundred and fifty years have taught and
enjoined a powerful, perpetual Islamic practice and sacred principle of three hundred
and fifty million people, in order to defend them against an atheist’s objections and his
criticisms of Qur’anic civilization. If there is any justice in the world, the Court will
surely quash the conviction of someone and the sentence passed on him for
expounding the verses, since he was following the way taken by our forefathers for
one thousand three hundred and fifty years; it will surely remove this extraordinary
stain from the legal establishment of this Islamic State.
I wrote this in the addendum containing my corrections and showed it

--- Sayfa 394 ---
405
to the public prosecutor. He was horrified and said: “There is no need for this. Your
sentence was short and only a small part of it remains. There is no need to send this.”
Thus, you have understood the truly strange examples like this one in my defence
and objection, which has been presented to you and the departments of government in
Ankara. What I seek and hope from Afyon Court is this: I await from you in the name
of true justice that you decide on the complete freedom of the Risale-i Nur, whose
service and effulgence profits the nation and country as much as an army. Otherwise, I
have to inform you that when the five or ten of my friends who were sent to prison
because of their relations with me are released, I have the idea of committing some
offence which will necessitate the heaviest penalty, compelling me to bid farewell to
this life. It is like this:
Although for the good of the country and nation, the Government should give me
full protection and assist me, the fact that it is pressurizing me suggests that part of the
communist organization and the secret atheistic society that have been working against
me these last forty years, with which it has now combined, have both gained control of
important positions, and are opposing me. It worries me, for there are numerous signs
that the Government either does not know of this, or it is permitting it.
Chairman of the Court! With your permission, I shall ask you a question about
which I am extremely curious: why, although I have in no way been involved in
politics, have the politicians deprived me of all civil rights, all liberties, and even all the
rights of life? And why have they forbidden my very careful brothers and loyal
assistants to have any contact with me, who tried to protect me against those plans to
assassinate me while I was being held for three and a half months in total isolation, and
to defend me against my covert enemies who have poisoned me eleven times, and have
even prevented me, although I am elderly, alone, in exile, and ill, from studying my
blessed, harmless books, which I always had with me?
I pleaded with the public prosecutor to give me my books, but he did not give
them although he promised. They compelled me to remain alone in a huge, locked, and
freezing ward with nothing to occupy myself, and instead of the officials and menials
concerned being friendly and comforting, they quite simply encouraged them to look
on me hostilely. A small example is this: I wrote a petition to the prison governor,
public prosecutor, and chairman of the court, and sent it to one of my brothers to write
out since I do not know the new letters. It was written and was given to them. Then,
as though I had committed some heinous crime, they nailed

--- Sayfa 395 ---
406
up my windows. The smoke from the stove was a great discomfort to me, and I
insisted that they left one window open. Now they have nailed that up too. Also,
although according to prison practice, solitary confinement usually lasts around a
fortnight, I was in total isolation for three and a half months and they did not allow any
of my friends to have any contact with me. Also, three months ago a forty-page
indictment was written against me, and they showed it to me. But I do not know the
new letters, and I was ill, and my own writing is very poor, so I pleaded with them to
let two of my students come, who know my language, and could read the indictment
and write out my objections to it. But they did not permit it. They said: “The defence
lawyer should come and read it.” Then they did not permit him either. Only, they told
one of my brothers to write it out in the old letters and give it to me. But it would take
six or seven days to write out those forty pages. To make the hour’s work of reading
me the indictment stretch over six or seven days, just so that no one should have
contact with me, is appalling repression and deprives me of my right of defence
entirely. A multiple murderer condemned to be hanged does not receive such
treatment. I truly suffer extreme distress since I know of no reason for this
unprecedented torment. I heard that the Chairman of the Court is fair-minded and
kind. I have therefore for the first and last time written this petition and complaint.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i ,
                                                          who is ill, wretched, and in total isolation.
* * *
The Indictment contains four basic points concerning me
First Point: I consider myself to be a regenerator of religion, as though I was
proud and self-seeking.
I reject this with all my strength. Moreover, all my brothers will testify that I have
never accepted anyone’s suggestion that I was the Mahdi. In fact, when the experts’
committee of Denizli Court said “If Said was to declare himself Mahdi, all his students
would accept it,” Said stated in his objections, saying: “I am not a Sayyid, and the
Mahdi will be a Sayyid,” thus refuting them.
Second Point: Publishing things secretly.
Our covert enemies should not misconstrue things, for there is nothing that
touches on politics and public order. Also, they should not make the duplicating
machine and the old letters a pretext. Six courts of law and various departments of
government in Ankara understood the blow dealt

--- Sayfa 396 ---
407
by the Risale-i Nur19 20at Mustafa Kemal, and they did not bother about it and
acquitted us, returning all our books to us including the Fifth Ray. Moreover, his bad
deeds were pointed out in order to preserve the army’s worth. One person was
disliked in order to affectionately praise the army.
The Third: “He encourages the breaching of public security.” This extraordinary
accusation is refuted by the facts that over a period of twenty years six courts and the
police of ten provinces have not recorded a single instance when any of the hundred
thousand Nurju’s and hundred thousand copies of parts of the Risale-i Nur breached
public security or disturbed public order, and they have not found any such thing. It is
meaningless to reply to a few unimportant matters in this new indictment, for three
courts of law have acquitted us on these very points and they have been replied to
repeatedly. Since charging us with these matters is the equivalent of charging Ankara
Criminal Court and the Courts of Denizli and Eskişehir, which acquitted us concerning
them, I leave it to them to reply. But there are two or three further matters.
The First: Although it was studied for two years in the closest detail by Denizli
and Ankara Criminal Courts and they acquitted us and returned the book, this
Indictment applies one or two matters in the Fifth Ray to a commander who is dead
and gone and shows them to be indictable offences. So we say: absolutely no law can
deem it an offence to make a fair, general criticism which might be made applicable to
a person who dead and gone and has no connection with the Government.
Manipulating the facts, the prosecution has taken one aspect of that general
interpretation and applied it to that commander. No law can consider it a crime if one
hundredth of a meaning which may be understood as referring to someone is found in
a confidential and private treatise. Moreover, the treatise expounds allegorical Hadiths
in wondrous fashion.

19 The wrong meaning has been given in the Indictment, for it has deemed an offence some
instances of the Risale-i Nur’s ‘wonder-working’ (kerâmet) which took the form of ‘slaps’. As though
disasters like the earthquakes that occur when the Risale-i Nur is attacked are blows dealt by the
Risale-i Nur. God forbid! We never said such a thing, nor wrote it. What we said in many places
supported by proof was that like acceptable almsgiving, the Risale-i Nur is a means of repulsing
disasters. Whenever it is attacked, it hides itself; then calamities seize the opportunity and assault us.
Yes, confirmed by thousands of Risale-i Nur students and what they have observed, supported by
hundreds of incidents and events and their ‘coincidences’,20 which in no way could have been
attributed to chance, as well as numerous indications and ‘coincidences’ of the Qur’an, some of which
were even pointed out in court, I have formed the certain conviction that those ‘coincidences’ are a
Divine bestowal indicating the Risale-i Nur’s acceptability and are a sort of wonder of the Risale-i
Nur on account of the Qur’an.
20 ‘Coincidences’ (tevâfukat): the unintentional correspondence of words or letters in lines or
patterns on one or several pages, or the ‘coinciding’ of apparently unrelated events. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 397 ---
408
Since those explanations were written thirty or forty years ago, and decisive answers
have been given in my defence and objections, which have been presented to three
other courts besides yours, and to six departments of government in Ankara, and have
received no criticism, surely it cannot be considered to be at variance with any law if
explanations of the Hadith’s true meaning turn out to fit a faulty individual.
Also, the merits of the reforms in which that person had a part, the faults of which
he was the cause, are not only his, they are also the army’s and the government’s. He
only had a share of them. Just as it is surely not a crime to criticize him for his faults,
so it cannot be said it is attacking the reforms. Also could it possibly be a crime not to
like someone who turned the Aya Sophia Mosque into a house of idols —despite its
being an eternal source of this heroic nation’s honour, and shining like a jewel in its
jihad and service of the Qur’an, and being a vast and precious souvenir of the nation’s
swords— and who also transformed the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high
school?
The Second Matter with which I am charged in the Indictment:
Three courts of law have acquitted me on this matter; and as I pointed out forty
years ago when elucidating the wondrous interpretation of a Hadith, the Shaykh al-
Islam of men and jinn, Zembilli ‘Ali Efendi, stated: “It is not permissible to put a
brimmed hat on one’s head, even as a joke,” and all the Shaykh al-Islams and all the
Islamic ‘ulama considered it impermissible. The mass of Muslims were therefore in
danger when they were forced to wear such hats (that is, they either had to renounce
their religion or rebel); but since in one section of the Fifth Ray, which was written
forty years ago, it says “The wearing of the brimmed hat will be enforced, and
prostration in prayer will be forbidden. But the faith in the heads of those wearing it
will make the hat prostrate, God willing, making it Muslim,” it saved the mass of
Muslims both from rebellion and revolt, and from voluntarily renouncing their religion
and belief; and although no law at all can propose such a thing to those living in
seclusion; and in twenty years none of six provincial authorities have forced me to
wear it; and officials in their offices and women and children and people in the
mosques and the majority of villagers are not compelled to wear it; and it has now
been officially taken off the soldiers’ heads; and in many provinces now berets and
knitted hats are not prohibited; nevertheless, it has been put forward as a reason for
the conviction of myself and my brothers. Could any law in the world, any principle,
any good, consider this completely meaningless charge to be a crime?

--- Sayfa 398 ---
409
The Third Matter with which I am charged:
Incitement to breach public security in Emirdağ. My objection to this is as follows:
Firstly is my irrefutable list of objections, which has been presented to the court
here and to six departments of government in Ankara with this court’s knowledge and
permission. I am now stating it exactly in answer to the indictment.
Secondly: As is testified to by all those who met with me in Emirdağ and is
confirmed by its people and police, in my solitude I avoided involvement in politics
with all my power. I even gave up writing and corresponding with others. I wrote
nothing apart from two pieces, one on repetition in the Qur’an, the other about the
angels. And I used to write one letter a week to one place to encourage people in the
Risale-i Nur. In fact, in three years I wrote only three or four letters to my own
brother, who is a Mufti and for twenty years was with me as my student, and was very
anxious about me, and sent me congratulations for the religious festivals. And
although for twenty years I have not written once to my brother who is in my native
region, I am accused in the indictment of breaching security, and once again, of
“opposing the reforms.” In reply I say this:
The fact that in twenty years six courts of law and the police of ten provinces
connected with the matter have not recorded any incident involving the disturbance of
public order and breaching of security in connection with the twenty thousand or
perhaps a hundred thousand people who enthusiastically read the twenty thousand
copies of the Risale-i Nur, shows that it looks on a single possibility out of thousands
as being established fact. But if there is no sign of anything concerning one possibility
out of two or three, there can be no crime. And it is not one possibility out of
thousands, but everyone including the prosecutor who attacks me, could kill numerous
people; they could disturb public peace and order on account of communism, and
breach security. That is to say, it is contempt of court and the law to put forward
extraordinary and exaggerated possibilities in place of events.
Furthermore, every government has opponents. It is no crime to oppose a
government purely intellectually. The government looks to the hand, not to the heart.
Especially someone who has performed great services for this country and nation and
caused no harm, and latterly played no part in the life of society, but has been made to
live in absolute isolation, and whose works have been appreciated and applauded in
the most

--- Sayfa 399 ---
410
important centres of the Islamic world.21 I fear that those who level these quite
extraordinary, groundless accusations at such persons are unknowingly being exploited
on account of anarchy, indeed, communism.
I have understood from certain signs that with the idea of belittling the Risale-i
Nur and due to groundless suspicions about the Mahdi question, which has political
associations, our covert enemies are investigating completely baseless suggestions that
the Risale-i Nur is being exploited for this. Perhaps it is because of these suspicions
that I am made to suffer such torments. I say to those tyrannical secret enemies and to
those who listen to them out of hostility to us: God forbid! Again, God forbid! Both
my seventy-five-year life, and especially these last thirty years, and the one hundred
and thirty parts of the Risale-i Nur, and the thousands of people who have offered me
their sincere friendship testify that at no time have I overstepped my mark in such a
way and made the truths of belief a means of winning rank, fame, and renown for
myself.
Yes, the Risale-i Nur students know and I have pointed out proofs of it in the
courts that, not to gain for myself any position or fame, and win spiritual rank and a
high rank in the hereafter, but in order to serve the believers with all my conviction and
strength in the question of belief, I am ready to sacrifice not only my life in this world
and its transient ranks, but —if necessary— my life in the hereafter and its everlasting
ranks, which everyone seeks; and even, in order to be a means of saving certain
unfortunates from Hell, —if necessary— to forgo Paradise and myself go to Hell. Just
as my true brothers know this, so I have proved it in some respects in the courts.
Accusing me in this way of insincerity in my service of the Risale-i Nur and belief, and
depreciating the Risale-i Nur and devaluing it, will deprive this nation of its sublime
truths.
If, because they imagine this world is eternal and that like themselves everyone
exploits religion and belief for the world, these wretches ascribe

21 In the eightieth of the hundred errors about these works in the indictment, the prosecution
says: “The interpretations in the Fifth Ray are incorrect.”
The Answer: In the Fifth Ray, it is said: “God knows best, one interpretation is this.” What this
means is: “It is possible that one meaning of the Hadith is this.” Logically, this cannot be proved
wrong. It can be proved wrong only by proving its impossibility.
Secondly: Although for the past twenty years, indeed forty years, those who opposed me, and
then those who tried to oppose the Risale-i Nur, have not refuted my interpretations on grounds of
either logic or scholarship, and thousands of learned people —the religious scholars who oppose me
together with the Risale-i Nur students— have confirmed them, and have not said “he’s been smitten
by the evil-eye,” I refer it to your fair-mindedness to judge just how unjust it is for those who do not
know how may Suras there are in the Qur’an to meet them incredulously.
In Short: The meaning of interpretation is one probable or possible meaning of a Hadith or
Qur’anic verse out of many.

--- Sayfa 400 ---
411
worldly motives to someone who challenges all the people of misguidance in this
world, is ready to sacrifice his lives both in this world, and if necessary, in the next;
and as he claimed in the courts would not exchange a single truth of belief for rule of
the whole world; and out of sincerity and its mystery flees with all his strength from
politics and all ranks, material and spiritual, which hint of politics; and has endured
unequalled torments for twenty years; and due to his way, has not condescended to
any involvement in politics; and with respect to himself considers himself far inferior to
his students, and believes himself to be truly wretched and unimportant — if because
of the extraordinary strength of belief they have obtained from the Risale-i Nur, some
of his sincere brothers ascribe to him in their private letters some of the virtues of the
Risale-i Nur, because he is their ‘interpreter’; and in consequence of a custom which
has absolutely no political overtones they afford him a high rank —like people call
ordinary persons they love “My lord! My benefactor!,”— and they think much better
of him than is his due; and follow the old, acceptable custom practised between master
and students, which is not objected to and has the meaning of thanks, and praise him
excessively; and write exaggerated eulogies, which has long been the custom to write
at the ends of acceptable books; if they do these things, can it in any way be
considered a crime? For sure it is opposed to the truth in a way since it is
exaggeration, but he is a stranger, alone, with numerous enemies, and there are
numerous things to make him lose his helpers. So purely in order to strengthen their
morale in the face of so many opponents and to prevent them fleeing and not to
destroy the enthusiasm of those who praised him excessively, he changed part of what
they had written so that it referred to the Risale-i Nur and did not reject it outright. It
may be understood therefore just how far from the truth, the law, and fair-mindedness
certain officials have fallen when they try to make the above person’s service of belief
look to this world, despite his age and his being at the door of the grave. My last word
is:
And for every calamity: we belong to God, and to Him is our return.22
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i

22 Qur’an, 2:156.

--- Sayfa 401 ---
412
Supplement
I saw that it was written on the back of the last report concerning the
investigations of the examining magistrate: “On the pretext that its explanations of
three verses against civilization were not in conformity with the present Civil Code,
four months ago the decision was taken by the Cabinet to officially prohibit the
distribution of The Miraculousness of the Qur’an, that is, the Twenty-Fifth Word.”
My reply to this: The Miraculousness of the Qur’an is now part of Zülfikâr, and
on only two pages of the four hundred pages of Zülfikâr are explanations of the three
verses, which reply in a way that cannot be objected to, to some of civilization’s
criticisms of the Qur’an, and were included in three of my old treatises. One of the
verses is about the veiling of women; the second, And to the mother, a sixth,23 is about
inheritance; as is the third, And for the man a portion equal to that of two women.24 I
expounded the wisdom of these verses’ meanings in a way that would silence the
philosophers, in two pages twenty years ago, and in my other treatises thirty years ago.
It is therefore our legal right, instead of banning the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr on the
suspicion that it was written now, to excise those two pages from it and return the
book to us — just as if a letter contains one or two harmful words, those words are
cut out and the publication of the rest is permitted. We seek our rights from your just
court in this matter.
Since nobody could find the opportunity to come to read to me the forty-page
indictment, which was given me a month ago, they read it to me today, 11th June, for
the first time. I listened to it, and I saw that the list of my objections which I wrote for
you two months ago, and the Appendix and Addendum to my objections of nearly a
month ago, had been given to both six departments of government in Ankara, and to
your office. Those objections refute and demolish that indictment. I see absolutely no
necessity to rewrite the objections to it. I only say now, in order to recall to the
prosecution, the following two or three points:
The reason I did not take the indictment into consideration and reply to it was to
avoid insulting the honour of the three just courts that had acquitted us and being in
contempt of them. For those courts acquitted us after studying in the minutest detail
all the points in the present indictment. To completely disregard their acquittals is to
insult the honour of the judiciary.

23 Qur’an, 4:11.
24 Qur’an, 4:176.

--- Sayfa 402 ---
413
Second Point: Due to its gross misrepresentations, attaching unimaginable
meanings to one or two matters out of thousands, the prosecution accuses us of
certain offences. However, those matters are in the large collections of the Risale-i
Nur. The ‘ulama of al-Azhar University in Cairo, the leading scholars of Damascus,
the exacting scholars of Mecca and Medina, and of Aleppo and so on, and especially
the investigative scholars of the Directorate of Religious Affairs, have all seen them
and have praised them appreciatively and put their signatures to them. So it was with
astonishment and bewilderment that I saw the pseudo-scholarly objections in the
indictment. Even if I had made some errors and the indictment was correct in what it
imputed, although thousands of scholars had not spotted them or objected to them,
they still would not constitute a crime; they would only be scholarly errors. Moreover,
three courts have acquitted the entire Risale-i Nur and ourselves. Only Eskişehir Court
gave light sentences to myself and fifteen out of a hundred of my companions because
of fifteen words in the Twenty-Fourth Flash, which is about the veiling of women. I
wrote in the addendum to my objections that if there is justice on the face of the earth,
it would not accept my being convicted for expounding that verse and complying with
what was laid down in three hundred and fifty thousand Qur’anic commentaries. As
though collecting water from a thousand streams and in its cleverness, the prosecution
tried to use against us a number of points in books and letters written over twenty
years. That makes the, not three, but five or six courts which acquitted us on this point
our accomplices in this imaginary crime. I am reminding the prosecution not to insult
the honour of those just courts.
The Third: Even if explicitly, to criticize and object to a leader who is dead and
gone, whose relations with the Government have ceased, and who was the cause of
certain faults in the reforms, cannot be a legal offence. But there was not anything
explicit; the prosecution applied my general statements to him through its
misrepresentations. It publicized those confidential meanings, which we do not tell to
everyone, and drew everyone’s attention to them. If there is any crime involved, the
prosecution is guilty. Because it is inciting the people, and attracting their attention to
those meanings.
The Fourth: Due to baseless suspicions, repeating the same old story, collecting
water from a thousand streams, the prosecution investigated hints of a secret society,
despite our unequivocal acquittal on this point by three courts. However, while there
are numerous political societies which are harmful for this nation and country, which
they permit and look on tolerantly, to call a secret society the solidarity of the Risale-i
Nur

--- Sayfa 403 ---
414
students with their fellow-students, which as established by the testimony of thousands
of witnesses and signs and the fact that six provinces did not interfere with us, is solely
for the good of the country, nation, and religion, on account of happiness in this world
and the next, and to strive against the currents from inside and outside the country
which are bent on corruption, and like the prosecution to accuse them of “exploiting
religion and inciting the people to disturb public order and breach security,” although
in twenty years not one single such incident has been recorded in connection with the
Risale-i Nur students, will bring not mankind, but the earth to anger, thus rejecting
such an accusation. However... there is no need to say anything further. My written
objections and its addendum, which were written long before the indictment, are my
reply to it.
                                                                         Prisoner  S a i d  N u r s i ,
                                                                                     Afyon Prison
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
I say this to Afyon Court and the Chief Criminal Judge:
Because since my early youth I could not endure to be dominated, I severed my
relations with the world. Now life has become a great burden for me with this
meaningless, unnecessary oppression. I do not have the power to endure the
persecution of thousands of officials outside. I am fed up with this sort of life. With all
my strength I am requesting of you that you sentence me. To enter the grave is not
within my power, and I have to remain in prison. You too know that the
unsubstantiated crimes the prosecution accuses me of are non-existent. I cannot be
convicted because of them. However, I have serious faults before my true duties, for
which I can in effect be convicted. If it is appropriate to ask, I shall reply to your
question. Yes, my only crime out of my serious faults is this: it occurred to me here in
Afyon Prison that in the view of reality it was an unforgiveable fault that, because I
had not looked to the world, I had not performed the weighty duty with which I had
been charged in the name of the country, nation, and religion, and my not knowing this
did not excuse me.
The fact that three courts have acquitted us in this respect shows just how far
from truth and justice those have fallen who give the name of a worldly, political
society to the Risale-i Nur students’ disinterested

--- Sayfa 404 ---
415
attachment to the Risale-i Nur and its interpreter, which looks purely to the hereafter,
and try to show that they are guilty of a criminal offence. We too say:
The basis and foundation of human society and particularly the Islamic nation are
the sincere bonds between relatives, and the concerned attachment between tribes and
groups, and due to Islamic nationhood the spiritual brotherhood and mutual assistance
between believers, and the devotion to one’s nation, and unshakeable attachment to
and partiality for the truths of the Qur’an and those who propagate them. It is only by
denying these bonds, which ensure the life of society, and by accepting the ‘red peril’
—which scatters the terrible seed of anarchy from the North, which ruins the younger
generation and nationhood, and drawing to itself everyone’s children, destroys kinship
and nationhood, and opens up the way to the complete corruption of human
civilization and the life of society— that the Risale-i Nur students can be called a
political society, which is an indictable offence. For this reason, true students of the
Risale-i Nur proclaim openly their sacred attachment to the truths of the Qur’an and
their unshakeable bonds of brotherhood which look to the hereafter. Because they are
happy to accept any penalty they may receive because of that brotherhood, they admit
in your just court the truth as it is. They do not stoop to defend themselves with lies,
sycophancy, and cunning.
                                                                                           Prisoner
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 405 ---
416
An Addendum to the Addition to My Written Objections
to the Indictment Presented to Afyon Court
Firstly: I tell the court that since the new indictment is based on the old
indictments of Denizli and Eskişehir Courts, and on the superficial investigations of the
superficial ‘committees of experts,’ who were opposed to us, I claim in your court that
if I cannot prove one hundred errors in this indictment, I shall be happy with a
hundred-year sentence. Now I have proved my case; if you wish I can present you
with the table of more than a hundred errors.
Secondly: When during the Denizli trial, our books and papers had been sent to
Ankara and I was full of anxiety and despair that the judgement would be given against
us, I wrote to my friends the following piece, which has been added to the end of some
of my defence speeches: “If the officers of the law who are studying the Risale-i Nur
with the idea of criticizing it strengthen or save their belief through it, bear witness that
I forgive them. For we are here to serve. The Risale-i Nur’s function is to strengthen
and save belief. We are charged with serving belief without differentiating between
friend and foe, and without taking sides.”
Judges of the Court! In consequence of this truth, the powerful, irrefutable proofs
of the Risale-i Nur have directed the hearts of the people of the court towards itself;
whatever you do against me, I forgive you; I will harbour no grudge. It is because of
this that although I have been riled by the extreme tyranny and repression I have
suffered, and the contemptuous treatment and defamation of my person, which have
been to an extent I have never previously experienced, I have endured it and have not
even spoken ill of those involved. The collections of the Risale-i Nur, which you have
in your possession, form my irrefutable, incontestable defence and my objections to all
the charges made against us and the crimes of which we are accused.
It is astonishing that although the leading scholars of Cairo, Damascus, Aleppo,
Medina and Mecca, and the exacting scholars of the Directorate of Religious Affairs
have studied the Risale-i Nur collections minutely, and offering no criticisms have
praised and applauded them, the ‘clever’ persons who compiled the indictment against
us showed through an extraordinary and obvious error —stating that the Qur’an
contains forty Suras— just how superficially they considered the matter. Despite
hundreds of thousands of the people of reality affirming the Risale-i Nur, under these
severe conditions, and myself in exile, alone

--- Sayfa 406 ---
417
and wretched and the object of fearsome attacks, that prosecutor, who does not even
know how many Suras there are in the Qur’an, said: “Although the Risale-i Nur
attempts to expound the Qur’an and interpret Hadiths, it has no scholarly substance or
value in teaching its readers in a part of it...” It is understood just how far his criticisms
are from the law, reality, justice and equity.
 I also make this complaint to you, that although for two hours you made us listen
to the entire forty-page indictment, which contains hundreds of errors and wounds our
hearts, despite my insistence you did not allow me two minutes to read one and a half
pages in reply, which were the complete truth. In the name of justice I therefore
request that you permit me to read my entire list of objections.
Thirdly: Every government has opponents. But so long as they do not disturb
public order, they may not be touched legally. Is it at all possible then that myself and
those like me who are disenchanted with the world and work only for the grave should
give up spending the remainder of their lives within the bounds taught by the Qur’an,
on the way our forefathers followed for one thousand three hundred and fifty years, in
a way permitted by the rules sanctified at all times by three hundred and fifty million
believers, — that we should give up that way, and being coerced by our enemies and
their subterfuges, merely for this brief and fleeting worldly life, support the savage
laws and principles of an immoral, dissolute civilization, indeed, of a sort of
communism, and adopt them as our way? No law anywhere, and no one the tiniest bit
fair, would force us to accept them. We only say to those who oppose us: Don’t
bother us and we won’t bother you!
It is due to this fact that I support neither intellectually nor on scholarly grounds
the arbitrary commands of a commander, called laws, which have made Aya Sophia
into a house of idols and the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school. And for
myself I do not act in accordance with them. But although for twenty years I have
been severely oppressed during my tortuous captivity, I have not become involved in
politics, nor provoked the authorities, nor disturbed public order. Although I have
hundreds of thousands of Risale-i Nur friends, not a single incident has been recorded
involving the disturbance of the peace. I am fed up with life due to the utterly
humiliating and unjust treatment directed at my person here in my exile in the last
period of my life, such as I have never before suffered and which has galled me. I feel
disgust at freedom even, under this oppression. I have written you a petition saying
that contrary to everyone else, I want not my acquittal but to be convicted and given
not a light sentence, I want the heaviest penalty. For in order to be saved from

--- Sayfa 407 ---
418
this unparalleled, extraordinarily tyrannical treatment, there is no solution for me other
than entering either the grave or prison. But since suicide is not permitted, and the
appointed hour of death is unknown and outside my power, I am resigned to the
imprisonment I now suffer in absolute solitary confinement.25 However, I am not
presenting this petition for the present, for the sake of my innocent companions.
Fourthly: Confirmed by all that I have written in the Risale-i Nur these thirty
years of my life, the period I have called that of the New Said, and the facts
concerning my person, and testified to by the fair-minded people and friends who have
met with me with serious intention, I state this: As far as I have been able I have tried
to restrain my evil-commanding soul from indulging in self-advertisement, fame-
seeking, and pride, and perhaps a hundred times I have wounded the feelings of the
Risale-i Nur students who have excessively good opinions of me. As is confirmed by
both my close friends and my brothers, and the signs they have observed, I told them:
“I possess nothing, I am the wretched herald of the jeweller’s shop of the Qur’an.” It
is not winning worldly rank for myself and high position and fame, even supposing I
was given high spiritual rank, being frightened of the possibility of my soul taking a
share in the service I perform and spoiling my sincerity and pure intention, I decided to
sacrifice those ranks and positions for my service. Yet despite my acting in this way,
and my not accepting the gratitude of some of my brothers for their benefiting from
the Risale-i Nur —which has been presented in your high court as though it was some
political matter of great moment— you have made their respect for me, which is
greater than that of a son for his father, the subject of interrogation. You have driven
some of them to deny it. You have made us listen in astonishment. Can it be imagined
a crime for some unfortunate to be praised although he himself is not happy at this and
does not consider himself worthy?
Fifthly:  I tell you certainly that to accuse the Risale-i Nur students of belonging
to a political society and of political involvement when they have absolutely no
connection with any society, association, or political movement, is knowingly or
unknowingly to struggle against us on account of a secret atheistic organization which
for forty years has been working directly against Islam and belief, or in the name of a
sort of communism which produces anarchy in this country. For three courts of law
have acquitted in that respect all the Risale-i Nur students and the treatises of the
Risale-i Nur. Only, Eskişehir Court gave me one year, and out of one hundred and
twenty others, fifteen of my friends six months each

25 The same situation has now continued for seventeen months.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
419
because of a single matter in a short treatise about the veiling of women, or perhaps
because of the sentence: “According to what I have heard, in the centre of government
a shoe-shiner behaved impudently towards the semi-naked wife of an important
person, and his astonishing unmannerliness dealt a slap in the shameless face of
someone opposed to the veiling of women,” which was written long ago. That means,
to accuse the Risale-i Nur and its students now is to charge and convict three courts,
and to be contemptuous of them.
Sixthly: The Risale-i Nur cannot be combated. All the Islamic scholars who have
seen it have confirmed that it is a veracious commentary on the Qur’an, that is, it
consists of powerful proofs of its truths. It is a miracle of the Qur’an this century, and
a firm barrier for this nation and country against the perils from the North. I have
understood therefore that it is a duty of your court not to scare off its students, but
with regard to general rights, to encourage them, and I await this from you. Thanks to
freedom of scholarship, the books and journals of those with no religion and some
political atheists, who are harmful for the nation, country, and public security, are not
interfered with, so it surely is not a crime to be a student of the Risale-i Nur and save
the belief of the innocent, needy youth and preserve them from immorality; indeed, the
Government and Ministry of Education should applaud and encourage it.
My last word: May Almighty God allow the judges to execute the law with true
justice. Amen.
For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.26 * The best of
lords and the Best of Helpers.27
All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds.
                                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i

26 Qur’an, 3:173.
27 Qur’an, 8:40.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
420
My Last Word
I say this to the Judges of the Court:
I have understood from both the indictment and from my long solitary
confinement that in this matter it is mostly my person that is under consideration, and
it has been seen fit to destroy my character. As though my person was harmful to the
government, public security, and the country, and making religion a screen, I
harboured worldly aims, and was pursuing some sort of politics. In the face of this, I
tell you the following with complete certitude:
Because of these unfounded suspicions, do not injure the Risale-i Nur students by
means of slandering my person, for they are devoted to the Risale-i Nur and to this
country and nation, and are of great value for them. For if you do, it could open up the
way to much immaterial harm for this country and nation, indeed, to their being
exposed to danger. I tell you this certainly too: whatever is visited on my person in the
way of insult, humiliating treatment, slander, torture, and prison sentences, on account
of the way I now follow I have decided to accept it — on condition no harm comes to
the Risale-i Nur and its students because of me. There is also reward in this for me in
the hereafter. While weeping, I am also pleased since in this way I may be saved from
the sins of my evil-commanding soul. If these wretched innocent people had not been
sent to prison along with me, I would have spoken out with great vehemence in your
court. You have seen too that the person who wrote the indictment wants to destroy
my character with his misrepresentations and exaggerations, and partly misinterpreting
what is written, by showing that all my books and letters, confidential and otherwise,
written over these twenty to thirty years of my life were written this year, and had
never been seen by any court, or been pardoned, or been subject to the passage of
time. I have said a hundred times that my person is faulty, and the reason that although
they have defamed me on every occasion it has had no effect on public regard for me,
which is enough to perturb the politicians, is this: there is an intense and overwhelming
need here at this time for a number of people to teach religion and strengthen belief,
people who will sacrifice the truth for nothing, make it a tool of nothing, and take no
share for their own souls. Only in this way may what they teach about faith be profited
from and come to be believed in with complete certainty.
Yes, it seems that at no time or place was the need so great, for the danger has
come in full force from outside. Although I have admitted and proclaimed that I myself
have not met this need, they have supposed that I have met the need to an extent not
because of any virtue of mine, but

--- Sayfa 410 ---
421
because of the severity of the need and others not being in the forefront. For a long
time I have looked on in astonishment and wonder, but only now understood the
wisdom in this public regard, of which I am in no way worthy — despite my fearsome
faults. The wisdom in it is this:
Here at this time, the Risale-i Nur and the collective personality of its students
have directed that severe need to themselves. They have supposed my person to be a
representative of the Risale-i Nur’s wondrous reality and its sincere and pure
personality —despite my share of its work and service being only a thousandth— and
they have given me the attention. But this is both harmful for me, and a burden. It is
also not my right. But I have remained silent and have accepted the harm for the sake
of the Risale-i Nur and its collective personality. Also, because of my service to it,
they have considered my unimportant person to be included in the predictions about
the Risale-i Nur, which is a mirror reflecting the All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculousness at
this time, and the collective personality of its sincere students, made through Divine
inspiration by some of the saints such as Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him)
and Gawth al-A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified). It seems I was mistaken, for in
some places I attributed some of their kind attention to my person, and did not direct it
towards the Risale-i Nur. The reason for this was my weakness; I apparently accepted
part of it for myself to prevent the things that might scare away those who help me
multiplying and to increase their confidence in what I said. I warn you! There is no
need to defame my transitory person, which is at the door of the grave; there is no
necessity to give it so much importance. In any event you cannot combat the Risale-i
Nur, so do not combat it! You cannot defeat it. You will cause great harm to this
nation and country by combating it. Anyway you cannot scatter its students. For the
defender of the Qur’an at this time and its heroic actions —which in the view of the
Islamic world are like those of former times— will not allow the sons of this land’s
forefathers, who gave forty to fifty million martyrs on the way of defending the
Qur’an, to abandon it. Even if they apparently withdraw, those sincere students are
still bound to it with all their lives and spirits. They will not abandon the Risale-i Nur,
which is a mirror of that reality, thereby harming this nation, country, and public
security.
My last word is:
But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him
do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!”28

28 Qur’an, 9:129.

--- Sayfa 411 ---
422
A Petition Sent to the Cabinet
I have a request of the greatest importance to present to the Cabinet.
I request the Cabinet that the fifteen-page Fifth Ray, which was originally written
years ago, and was later included at the end of the more than three-hundred-page
collection called The Illuminating Lamp (Siracü’n-Nur), and was the reason for the
collection being collected up by the Cabinet, be removed from The Illuminating Lamp.
For it has been established that the work is in many ways useful for the disaster-
stricken, the elderly, and those who have fallen into doubt concerning their faith. I
request that the piece which is imagined to be harmful is banned, but permission is
given for the remaining three hundred pages to be published, so that the calamity-
stricken and the elderly can receive solace from it and the needy can profit from the
truths of belief that it contains.
Moreover, in the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr, two pages written thirty years ago
expounding two verses about inheritance and the veiling of women in reply to the
philosophers of Europe, and one line about banks in Signs of Miraculousness (Isharat
al-I‘jaz ), published thirty years ago, about the verse But God has permitted trade and
forbidden usury,29 and approximately a line written thirty years ago while I was in the
Darü’l-Hikmet, among the six questions asked of the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office by the
head cleric of the Anglican Church — I request that these passages are excised and the
Zülfikâr collection, which has been confiscated on the pretext of those two pages and
one line —because they are not in conformity with the present Civil Code— is
returned. For it has been highly praised by the Islamic world and its benefits have been
seen in fact, and it proves wonderfully three of the pillars of belief. This is what we
request and it is our right. Just as if five words of a letter are censored, the remainder
are permitted, so we are seeking this important legal right of ours. We demand that
together with the Qur’an and the lovers of faith who through the Risale-i Nur serve
the nation, country and public security, we are delivered from the oppression of those
who make mountains out of molehills concerning us. Also, I have not seen a copy of
The Six Attacks for eighteen years, which I wrote when full of anger at the severe
repression I was suffering at that time; saying it was confidential I did not give
permission for it to be published. Anyway it came into the hands of three or four
courts, and they returned it to its owners.
                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i

29 Qur’an, 2:275.

--- Sayfa 412 ---
423
In His Name, be He glorified!
 [This is written to thank the experts’ committee of the Directorate of
Religious Affairs. I shall explain three ‘Points’ in order to assist in amending
their minor criticisms, the answer of which is clear.]
The First: I thank those scholars in three ways. For myself I am grateful to them.
Firstly: Apart from the Fifth Ray, their summarizing appreciatively the other
thirteen parts of The Illuminating Lamp Collection.
Secondly: Their refuting the allegations made against us of founding a sufi order,
setting up a political society, and breaching security.
Thirdly: Their corroborating my case in court. That is, I told the court: If there is
any fault, it is mine. The Risale-i Nur students are sincere and innocent, and work at
the Risale-i Nur for their faith. Thus, their committee of experts also exonerates the
Risale-i Nur students, and ascribes all the fault to me. So I say to its members: May
God be pleased with you! Only, they made partners in my crime the late Hasan Feyzi
and the late Hafiz Ali, and two or three others who are the heirs of those two blessed
martyrs and work according to their system. But they were wrong in one way. For
they were ahead of me not in faults but in the service of belief, and were given to me
by Divine grace as assistants, out of mercy for my weakness, and were free of my
faults.
Second Point: The committee of experts said that some of the narrations in the
Fifth Ray are ‘dubious’ and others are ‘false,’ and that some were misinterpreted. This
was written in the same way as the indictment in Afyon, which was against us. But I
proved in a table fifteen pages long that it contained eighty-one mistakes. The
respected committee of experts should see the table. An example of one of the
mistakes is as follows:
The prosecutor said: “All the interpretations are wrong, and the narrations are
either false (mawdu’) or dubious.”
And I say: To interpret a Hadith means saying that such-and-such a meaning is
possibly or probably intended by the Hadith. According to logic, it is possible to refute
the possibility of that meaning only by proving its impossibility. But just as the
meaning has been seen this century and has been realized, so one aspect of the
universality of the Hadith’s

--- Sayfa 413 ---
424
allusive level of meaning has observedly shown one flash of its miraculous predictions
to be true at this time, and can therefore in no way be denied or objected to. It has also
been proved in the table that the prosecutor’s saying that “all the narrations are either
false or dubious” is wrong in three respects.
The First: It is wrong in ten respects to deny such narrations in their entirety, for
Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who memorized a million Hadiths, and Imam Bukhari, who
memorized five hundred thousand, did not have the courage to deny them, and anyway
such a denial is not possible; and the prosecutor has not seen all the books of Hadiths;
and most of the Umma every century have awaited the appearance of what those
narrations signify or to witness one aspect of their general meanings; and they have
just about been accepted by the Umma; and a number of aspects and samples of them
which are completely true have appeared and been seen.
The Second Respect: The meaning of mawdu’ is that a narration is not a Hadith
with an authenticated chain of authorities. It does not mean that its meaning is wrong.
Since among the Umma, especially the people of reality and those who have had
uncovered to them the realities, and some of the Hadith scholars and those qualified to
interpret the law, have accepted them and awaited the appearance of what they
indicate, surely those narrations contain truths which look to everyone, like proverbs.
The Third Respect: What question or narration is there that in one of their books
the scholars, whose ways and schools are all different, have not objected to it? For
example, one of the narrations about the appearance of several Dajjals (Antichrists)
within Islam is the following Hadith, which foretells explicitly the dissension of Hulagu
and Jenghiz: “The ‘Abbasid Caliphate will long continue, until it falls into the hands of
the Dajjal.”30 Like this Hadith, which states that after five hundred years a Dajjal will
appear in Islam, numerous narrations give news of the figures that will appear at the
end of time. Nevertheless, some of the mujtahids who were of different schools, or
whose ideas were extreme, did not accept them, saying they were either
unauthenticated or dubious. Anyway... the reason I have cut this long story short is
related to the Risale-i Nur, for just as four severe earthquakes ‘coincided’31 with the
Risale-i Nur being attacked, demonstrating the earth’s wrath, so during the hours I
was writing this reply, two severe earthquakes occurred here. It was like this:
It was two earthquakes ‘coinciding’ with the suffering I was experi

30 See, al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xiv, 271, No: 33,436; Musnad al-Firdaws, iii, 447;
Majma’u’l-Zawa’id, v, 186; Jam’u’l-Fawa’id, i, 849.
31 ‘Tevâfuk’: See page 407, fn. 20 above.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
425
encing from the wounds caused by the surgical operation of the experts’ report, which
had been given me that evening, and from my pitiful difficulties at having no contact
with others and having to write myself with my wretched pen. Yes, I received that
evening the report from the Directorate of Religious Affairs, on which I had placed
most trust during my eight months of distress in solitary confinement, and had
expected would come to our assistance. This morning I understood that with the most
trivial matters they had helped not me but the public prosecutor. I saw that they said:
“Said said that the last four earthquakes were instances of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-
working.” Then, when intending to write, as I had written in the table of errors: “Like
acceptable alms-giving, the Risale-i Nur is a means of calamities being repulsed.
Whenever it is attacked, calamities seize the opportunity and occur. Sometimes too the
earth rages,” two severe earthquakes32 occurred here, which made me give up writing
the piece, so I am leaving it and passing on to the third Point.
Third Point: Exacting, veracious, and fair-minded scholars of the experts’
committee! A long-standing and acceptable practice among scholars is their writing
eulogies and praises, sometimes exaggerated, sometimes the opposite, at the ends of
fine works written by others, and publishing them, and the authors in question being
grateful and pleased at the writers of such eulogies, and their rivals also not accusing
them of boasting. So I have been unable to equate it with careful study, precise
knowledge, kind assistance, and fairness, that you should have considered it self-
advertisement that I did not altogether reject the eulogies written by some special and
sincere students of the Risale-i Nur in the style of the late Hasan Feyzi and the martyr
Hafiz Ali, which they wrote with the idea of assisting me in my helplessness, weakness,
aloneness, and exile in the face of so many unfair people attacking and objecting to me
savagely, and to encourage the needy to embrace the Risale-i Nur. I was sorry at this.
Those pure-hearted friends of mine never thought of politics, but verified by
mathematical reckoning said: “One aspect and minor meaning of the Hadith’s universal
allusive meaning at this time is the Risale-i Nur,” which cannot be said to be wrong.
For time is proving it right. In any event, even if it was very exaggerated or even
wrong, it would still only be a scholarly mistake. And everyone can write his own
opinions. You know how many various views and opinions are written in the works of
the twelve schools of the Shari‘a, and particularly in the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi‘i, and
Hanbali Schools, and of the nearly seventy authori

32 These two earthquakes coincided with Friday, 18.9.1948, in the morning.
Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students being held in Afyon Prison, Halil Mustafa
Mehmed Feyzi Husrev

--- Sayfa 415 ---
426
ties of the sciences of theology (kalam) and the principles of religion. However, never
at any time has the need for agreement between the scholars of religion been as great
as it is at present, and for them to avoid dispute. Now we are compelled to leave aside
conflict in secondary matters and not to make them the subject of dispute.
I have three questions to ask of the equitable hojas of the committee of experts:
The First: Is a person guilty of an offence if someone praises him with a good
intention? Especially if he does not want it — could it be thought self-love if as far as
he can he either rejects such praise or directs it towards someone else, but in order not
to lose his sincere friend, does not scold him, and responds with silence and saying that
the praise is a hundred times greater than his due?
The Second Question: At this time of terrible attacks on religion and momentous
religious questions, should a lover of the truth from among the Risale-i Nur students
be deserving of such blame and insult because of a harmless, minor scholarly error and
a mistaken view? Is it permissible that while awaiting from masters like yourselves a
gentle warning, the student who wrote the eulogy should be dealt a blow in this way
with the hand of the judiciary?
The Third Question: Are these criticisms of yours, related to only one or two
matters, fitting for the Risale-i Nur, which these twenty years has never been shaken
by its innumerable opponents and has strengthened the belief of thousands of needy
people? Also I remind those exact scholars of the following: because they saw a letter
of mine at the top of Ahmed Feyzi’s eulogy, they criticize me in their report as though
I had written the eulogy to myself. But the letter was written in order not to accept the
praises for myself, and to have them cut out of the eulogy, and I did cut out a part of
them. Others I was going to modify, but being forced to hurry, I sent the letter to one
of my brothers without completing it. He then put the letter at the beginning of the
eulogy. Then when it was being sent to a private person, it was seized by the
government. Is such a private eulogy, which was purely scholarly and a personal view,
and was sent from friend to friend with the idea of consulting about modifying it,
deserving of such vehement objections? Moreover, the two small collections bound in
red and black consisted of a number of confidential letters written privately to friends
in order to congratulate, encourage, and

--- Sayfa 416 ---
427
gratify them. Anyway, one or two people had been interested in them, and had
gathered them together in a book so they should not get lost. In the searches it fell into
the hands of the police. Is there any need to put forward absurd suppositions about
such letters, make them the subject of interrogation, and try to relate them to politics?
Is it not like being blind to the terrible dragons assaulting the Qur’an, and not even
looking at them, and trying to combat pestilential mosquitoes?
Does it not infer by ignoring Saraçoglu, who calls religion and the training of
Muhammad “poison”, and by disputing The Illuminating Lamp, which demonstrates
the Qur’anic reality as clearly as the sun and proves it to be the perfect cure for
mankind’s wounds, assisting in the confiscation of that collection? We await from
persons like yourselves balm for our wounds, and your insight and assistance, and we
are not offended at your minor criticisms.
                                                                                              Prisoner,
                                                                                       S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
 [This forms the introduction to the pieces that follow it.]
With the idea of helping a little to refute with true, fair evidences Afyon Court’s
decision against us and turn the Appeal Court in our favour, and in order to indicate
briefly some of the errors in the indictment, we have written exactly the pieces from
the confidential treatises which they mentioned as being offences; pointing out the
errors, we show those who are convicting us to be guilty of an offence.
For instance: In order to have me sentenced to the heaviest penalty, they wrote at
the end of the indictment as an index of all my crimes: “The matters Said Nursi rejects:
One: the abolition of the Empire and Caliphate.” This is both wrong and an oversight.
For fifteen years ago in Eskişehir Court I replied to a question about my writing in the
Twenty-Sixth Flash, the Treatise For the Elderly: “I was grieved at the passing of the
sovereignty of the caliphate,” and my reply silenced the court. Anyone who considers
to be a crime an unimportant memory, faded with time, which was covered by the
pardon and has been acquitted, is himself guilty.
 As documentary evidence for this imaginary crime, they showed a Hadith from
one of the Flashes, which is also found in The Miracles of

--- Sayfa 417 ---
428
Muhammad (PBUH): “After me the caliphate will last thirty years, then it will be
rapacious monarchy, then corruption and tyranny.”33 That is, after the four Rightly-
Guided Caliphs there will be corruption. I wrote in one of my old treatises that this
Hadith contained three miraculous prophecies. Then in the indictment, it gave as my
crime: “In one of his treatises Said says: ‘After the caliphate will be tryanny and
corruption.’” You superficial committee! Anyone who considers it a crime to explain
the miraculous prediction of a Hadith which foretells the widespread spiritual and
material corruption among mankind of the present and an event that will cause chaos
on the earth, is himself guilty both spiritually and materially.
They also wrote that “a person is guilty of political reaction if he calls innovation,
misguidance, and atheism, the reforms, such as the closure of the sufi tekkes and
zaviyes and the religious schools; the acceptance of secularism; the establishment of
nationalist principles instead of Islam; the wearing of the brimmed hat; the banning of
Islamic dress for women; the enforced use of the Latin alphabet in place of the
Qur’anic alphabet; the ezan and iqama being recited in Turkish; the prohibition of
religious instruction in schools; the recognition of equal rights for women and in
inheritance; and the abolition of polygamy.
Unfair committee! The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition has every century been
the sacred, heavenly guide of three hundred and fifty million people, the programme of
all their happiness, and the sacred treasury of the life of this world and the next. If it is
possible to deny numerous of its explicit verses, which do not bear interpretation,
about the veiling of women, inheritance, polygamy, the recollection of God,
instruction in religious knowledge and its dissemination, and the preservation of the
marks of religion, and to make guilty of crimes all the authoritative Islamic interpreters
of the law and all the Shaykh al-Islam’s, and if you can annul the passage of time,
quash the numerous court acquittals, and the legal pardons, and abolish confidentiality
and the private side of things, and freedom of conscience and freedom of thought, and
intellectual and scholarly opposition, and remove them from this country and its
governments, you can make me guilty of these things. Otherwise in the court of truth,
reality, and justice you will be awesomely guilty!
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i

33 .Musnad, iv, 273; v, 220, 221; Qadi Iyad, al-Shifa, i, 340.

--- Sayfa 418 ---
429
[Although it is against them, a piece the court astonishingly showed to be
against us.]
I say in this court of law that if there is any justice on the face of the earth, it will
reject the unjust decision to convict a man who, basing it on the agreement and
confirmation of three hundred and fifty thousand Qur’anic commentaries and following
the beliefs of our forefathers for one thousand, three hundred and fifty years,
expounded a Divine rule that has been considered most sacred and genuine in the
social life of three hundred and fifty million Muslims every century for one thousand
three hundred and fifty years; it should quash the judgement.
* * *
 [A piece which the court wrote with astonishment and appreciation in its
decision, as though it was against us, but which in fact condemns them.]
In the Twenty-Sixth Letter, Said Nursi speaks of himself like this: “This wretched
brother of yours has three personalities which are far from each other.
“T h e  F i r s t :  In regard to being the herald of the elevated treasury of the All-
Wise Qur’an, I have a temporary personality which pertains solely to the Qur’an. The
extremely exalted character demanded by the position of herald is not my character; I
do not possess such a character. It rather consists of the qualities necessitated by the
position and the duty. Whatever you see in me of this sort of quality, is not mine, so
do not consider me as possessing it; it belongs to the position.
“T h e  S e c o n d  P e r s o n a l i t y : Through Almighty God’s grace, a
personality is given me at the time of worship, when I am turned towards the Divine
Court; this personality displays certain marks. These marks arise from “knowing one’s
faults, realizing one’s want and impotence, and seeking refuge in utter humility at the
Divine Court,” which are the basis and meaning of worship. Through this personality, I
know myself to be more wretched, powerless, wanting, and faulty than everyone.
Should the whole world praise and applaud me, they could not make me believe that I
am good or possess perfection of any sort.
“T h e  T h i r d : I have my true personality, that is, the degenerate personality of
the Old Said, that is, certain veins of character inherited from the Old Said. Sometimes
it inclines to hypocrisy and desires rank and position. Also, because I do not come of a
noble family, lowly

--- Sayfa 419 ---
430
characteristics are to be observed, like my being frugal to the point of miserliness. My
brothers! I am not going to describe the many secret faults and ills of this personality,
lest I chase you away altogether. ...  Almighty God has compassionately demonstrated
His power in me so that He employs my personality, which is like that of the lowest
common soldier, in serving the mysteries of the Qur’an, which resembles the most
exalted position of field marshal. Thanks be to God a hundred thousand times! The
soul is baser than everything, and the duty higher...”
All praise be to God, this is from the bounty of my Sustainer!
* * *
 [This is a piece that badly scared the court, so that they recorded it against
us in the judgement. However, those vehement words were written fifteen
years ago and were afterwards softened with the following.]
This sentence should make them see fairly: “My brothers! For the sake of the
innocent and the elderly, don’t take revenge on those who kill me wrongfully. The
torments of the grave and Hell are enough for them.”
“In view of the treatment you have meted out to me, and your beliefs, I oppose
you in general fashion. You are sacrificing your religion and life in the hereafter for the
sake of your lives in this world. According to you, due to the opposition between us
and contrary to you, we are always ready to sacrifice our lives in this world for our
religion and for the hereafter. To sacrifice two or three years of humiliating life under
your domination in order to win sacred martyrdom, is like the water of Kawthar for
us. However, in order to make you tremble, relying on the effulgence and indications
of the All-Wise Qur’an, I tell you this with certainty:
“You shall not live after killing me! You shall be driven out of the world, your
Paradise and your beloved, by an irresistible hand, and swiftly cast into everlasting
darkness. Behind me, your Nimrod-like chiefs will be quickly killed and sent to me. In
the Divine presence I shall grasp hold of the scruffs of their necks, and on Divine
justice casting them down to the lowest of the low, I shall take my revenge!
“O you miserable wretches who sell religion and your lives in the hereafter for this
world! If you want to live, do not interfere with me! Know that if you do, vengeance
shall be taken on you many times over, and tremble! I hope from Divine mercy that my
death will serve religion more than my life, and my death explode over your heads like
a bomb,

--- Sayfa 420 ---
431
scattering you! Cause me trouble if you have the courage! If you do anything, you
shall see!” It concludes with a Qur’anic verse.
* * *
 [The court recorded this against me, despite being a passage which accuses
them of being extreme.]
In Ankara, Mustafa Kemal entered the office of the Speaker of the Assembly
furiously angry. He said: “We summoned you here in order to explain your important
ideas to us. But you came and wrote things about the five daily prayers, and sowed
discord amongst us.” Although Said told him: “Those who do not perform the prayers
are traitors, and the pronouncements of traitors are to be rejected,” by way of apology
Mustafa Kemal swallowed his anger. Although his feelings and principles had been
wounded, no one laid a finger on the Old Said, those imperious commanders were
even frightened of him. It is written that this occurred through the wondrous power of
the future collective personality of the Risale-i Nur’s future heroic students, and was a
shining instance of the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working.
* * *
 [A passage which was recorded against us, but which makes the court
guilty.]
It is said “We do not support either intellectually or on scholarly grounds the
arbitrary commands, called laws, of the commander who made Aya Sophia into a
house of idols and the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school, and in respect
of my person, I do not act in accordance with them.”
It is said in his petition dated 29.8.1948: “An idea occurred to me, it was like this:
the fact that although for the good of the nation and country the Government should
be protecting and helping me, it is oppressing me, suggests that the secret atheistic
organization which struggles against me together with the section of the communist
organization which has combined with that organization have gained hold of important
official positions and are now confronting me. As for the Government, either it is
uninformed of this, or it permits it. Could it possibly be a crime not to love a man who
has turned Aya Sophia into a house of idols, which is an

--- Sayfa 421 ---
432
eternal source of pride for an heroic nation, and a shining decoration in the world
showing its service of the Qur’an and jihad, and a vast and precious souvenir of their
swords, and has turned too the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office into a girls’ high school?”
* * *
[The piece the court reckoned was the most likely to have Said convicted. It
attached entirely the wrong meaning to these words, which Said had used in
Denizli Court against his covert enemies; and altering it to refer to the
Government, put it forward as a reason for his conviction.]
He called “some of the new laws of the State, which has carried out the reforms,
‘arbitrary compulsion on account of disbelief;’ the Republic, ‘absolute despotism;’ the
regime, ‘absolute apostasy and communism;’ and civilization, ‘absolute dissipation.’”
* * *
[A piece included with astonishment and appreciation in the court’s
decision.]
Writing out the Risale-i Nur yields numerous benefits, both in this world and
in the next. These are:
1. To strive morally against the people of misguidance.
2. To assist Üstad Bediuzzaman in disseminating the truth.
3. To serve Muslims in respect of belief.
4. To acquire knowledge through the pen.
5. To practise worship in the form of reflective thought, one hour of which may
on occasion be the equivalent of a year’s worship.
6. To enter the grave in a state of belief.
It also yields five sorts of worldly benefits:
1. Plenty in one’s sustenance.
2. Ease of mind and happiness.
3. Plenty in one’s livelihood.
4. Success in what one does.
5. By virtue of being a Risale-i Nur student, to share in the prayers and
supplications offered by all Risale-i Nur students. This will soon be understood by the
young, and the university will turn into a Risale-i Nur school.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
433
 [It is astonishing but they considered this sincere devotion to be a crime.]
One of the two plans followed by the covert dissemblers: To destroy my good
name; as though in that way the Risale-i Nur would be depreciated.
The Second:  To prevent the spread of the Risale-i Nur by causing the Risale-i
Nur students to become anxious and slack. Never fear! Let the heads of wretches like
ourselves be sacrificed for a sacred truth for which millions of heroic heads have been
sacrificed!
* * *
 [It is extraordinary but Hasan Feyzi’s most sincere and entirely true preface
and eulogy, which was conformable with reality and of no harm but great
benefit to many, was said to constitute an offence, and on its being included
at the end of one of the collections of the Risale-i Nur, was given as the
reason for the collection’s seizure.]
Hasan Feyzi wrote a letter, a summary of which is this:
“O Risale-i Nur! There is no doubt that you are the tongue of Truth, and
inspiration of Truth, and have been written with His permission.” “I am no one’s
property. I was taken from no book, I was stolen from no work. I belong to the
Sustainer and to the Qur’an. I am a wondrous Light pouring forth from an immortal
work.” “You are a most effulgent book of truth and mercy. You adorn and honour
some of your special, sincere students with the decorations of the saints and purified
scholars. Moreover, your treatises have not entered the courts as a criminal or suspect,
but as a teacher, instructor, and guide. In every session of justice you have displayed
splendidly, brilliantly, your power and forcefulness, your greatness and pride. You
laved them with the water of belief and the Qur’an.”
“O Ustad, the Risale-i Nur’s Servant and Interpreter! Ustad, God’s servant,
spiritual son of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), and disciple of Gawth al-
A‘zam (May his mystery be sanctified)! Raise me to the elevated degree of your
knowledge!” “Only a month’s worth of provisions, around a kilo, wrapped in paper
and hanging from a nail. He attains to an inexhaustible existence within his deprivation.
He abstains from accepting gifts. If he had accepted alms and charity, he would have
been a millionaire today.”

--- Sayfa 423 ---
434
[They questioned only one of the reasons for the naming of the Risale-i Nur.
They said that they saw no one with the name of Nur among his close
students. As it says in the reply in the footnote, Nuri Benli and Küreli Nuri
the Clockmaker are now distinguished in their service of the Risale-i Nur.
That is to say, they cannot criticize it, so are compelled to base their
allegations on the most trivial matters.]
The reason that in the Twenty-Sixth Word, the thirty-three Words, thirty-three
Letters, thirty-one Flashes, and thirteen Rays are called the Risale-i Nur is this:
throughout my life the word ‘Nur’ (light) has everywhere confronted me. For instance,
my village was Nurs, my late mother’s name was Nuriye, my Naqshi master was
Sayyid Nur Muhammad, one of my Qadiri masters was Nuruddin, one of my Qur’an
masters was Nuri, and of my students those most attached to me have been those with
Nur in their names. (But how strange it is that there is no one among the important
Risale-i Nur students with the name Nuri.)34 And what elucidates and illumines my
books most are the comparisons about light. And what has solved most of my
difficulties related to the Divine truths is the luminous Name of Nur, out of the Most
Beautiful Names. And my particular leader in my passionate enthusiasm for the Qur’an
and my restricting my service to it, is ‘Uthman Dhi’l-Nurayn (May God be pleased
with him).
* * *
[Hücumat-i Sitte (The Six Attacks) and its Addendum were both written
twenty years ago, and in the face of fierce and tyrannical aggression, and are
highly confidential, and were written when I was angry, and during the
Second World War, all of which justify the anger. So it is far from any
justice to look on it as a crime as though it had been written now, and to
seize it.]
Written at the head of the Addendum to the Six Attacks is this: “This Addendum
was written in order to avoid the disgust and insults that will levelled at us in the
future. That is to say, it was written so that when it is said: ‘Look at the spineless
people of that age!’, their spit should not hit us in the face, or else to wipe it off. Let
the ears ring of the leaders of Europe, savage beneath their humanitarian masks! And
let this be thrust in the unseeing eyes of those unjust oppressors who inflicted these
unscrupulous tyrants on us! It is a petition with which to hit over the head

34 At that time it was thus; now twenty years have passed.

--- Sayfa 424 ---
435
the followers of modern low civilization, who this century have a hundred thousand
times over necessitated the existence of Hell.”
“Recently, the concealed aggression of the irreligious has taken on a most ugly
form; tyrannical aggression against the unfortunate people of belief and against
religion. Our private and unofficial call to prayer and iqama was interrupted during the
private worship of myself and one or two brothers in the mosque I myself repaired.
‘Why are you reciting the iqama in Arabic and making the call to prayer secretly?’
they asked. My patience was exhausted in keeping silent. So I say, not to those
unscrupulous vile men who are not worth addressing, but to the heads of the Pharaoh-
like society who with arbitrary despotism plays with the fate of this nation: O you
people of innovation who have deviated from the straight path of religion, I want the
answer to six questions.
“The First:  Every government in the world, every people which rules, even
cannibals, and the chief of a band of brigands, have some principle, some law, by
which they rule. So according to which principle do you carry out this extraordinary
aggression? Show your law! Or do you accept as the law the arbitrary whims of a
handful of contemptible officials? Because no law can interrupt private worship in that
way; there cannot be such a law!”
* * *
[It is regretable that they objected to one or two sentences in Isharat-i Seb‘a
(The Seven Signs), which is both old, and confidential, and true, and that
they attempted to have it seized and us prosecuted. But the truth it contains is
so powerful it should be proclaimed to all the world and mankind for the
good of society.]
“The biggest fool in the world is he who expects progress, prosperity, and
happiness from irreligious anarchists like them. One of those fools who occupied a
high position, said: ‘We said “Allah! Allah!” and remained backward. Europe said
“Guns and cannons,” and advanced.’
“According to the rule, ‘a fool should be answered with silence,’ the answer for
such people is silence. But because behind certain fools are inauspicious clever people,
we say this:
“O you wretches! This world is a guest-house. Every day with their corpses, thirty
thousand witnesses put their signature to the decree ‘Death is a reality’ and they testify
to the assertion. Can you kill death? Can you contradict these witnesses? Since you
can’t, death causes people to say: ‘Allah! Allah!’ Which of your guns and cannons can
illuminate the ever

--- Sayfa 425 ---
436
lasting darkness confronting someone in the throes of death in place of ‘Allah! Allah!’,
and transform his absolute despair into absolute hope? Since there is death and we
shall enter the grave, and this life departs and an eternal life comes, if guns and
cannons are said once, ‘Allah! Allah!’ should be said a thousand times.”
*  *  *
 [It is amazing but they turned around a sentence in the Sixteenth Flash
which was in our favour, so that it was against us, and showed they were
inclined to seize that valuable treatise.]
From the Sixteenth Flash: “As for the calamity of war, it would cause great harm
to our service of the Qur’an. ...  Like the One Powerful Over All Things sweeps and
cleans in a minute the atmosphere filled with clouds and shows the shining sun in clear
skies, so He may also dispel these black and merciless clouds and show the truths of
the Shari‘a like the sun, and give them without expense or trouble. We await it from
His mercy that He will not sell them to us expensively. May He give intelligence to the
heads of those at the top, and belief to their hearts; that would be enough. Then
matters would put themselves to rights.”
“Since what you hold in your hand is light, not a club, and light cannot be
objected to, nor fled from, nor can harm come from showing it, why do you advise
caution to your friends, and prevent them showing many light-filled parts of the
Risale-i Nur to people?”
“The heads of most of those at the top are drunk and they cannot read them. And
even if they do read them, they cannot understand them; they give them the wrong
meaning, and interfere. In order that they do not interfere, they should not be shown
them until they come to their senses. ...  Therefore, I advise my brothers to be cautious
and not to give the truths to those who are unfit...”
* * *
[Although the veiling of women is a Qur’anic command, and a most
powerful reply has been given concerning it, and the piece was written long
ago, and a prison-sentence has been served for it, they are again citing it as
an offence. They are also calling a criminal offence, and attempting to
confiscate, a truth written on its own from the Treatise For The Elderly
which is of the greatest value and useful for everyone and was included in A
Guide For Youth. These show that they have been unable to find anything.]

--- Sayfa 426 ---
437
After explaining that the veiling of women is a command of the Qur’an, it says in
the Twenty-Fourth Flash, which is about that subject: “The fact that, according to
news received, the bare-legged wife of a high-ranking man in the world was accosted
by a common shoe-shiner in the country’s capital, in the market-place in daylight in
front of everyone, deals a slap in the shameless faces of those opposed to the veiling of
women!”
While in the Twenty-Sixth Flash, about the Elderly, it says: “I climbed to the top
of Ankara citadel, which was far more aged, dilapidated, and worn out than me. It
seemed to me to be formed of petrified historical events. The old age of the season of
the year together with my old age, the citadel’s old age, mankind’s old age, the old age
of the glorious Ottoman Empire, and the death of the Caliphate’s rule, and the world’s
old age all caused me to look in the most grieved, piteous and melancholy state in that
lofty citadel at the valleys of the past and the mountains of the future. ... As I sought
consolation looking to the right, that is, to the past, my father and forefathers and the
human race appeared in the form of a vast grave and filled me with gloom rather than
consoling me. ... I looked at the present day. It appeared ...  as a coffin bearing my
half-dead, suffering and desperately struggling corpse.”
* * *
 [They criticized the following where they should have applauded it, citing it
as an offence.]
“I spent most of the salary I had received from the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye, and
had put aside a small amount to go on the Hajj. Through the plenty resulting from
frugality and contentment, that scanty money was sufficient for me. It prevented me
being humiliated. There is still a little left of that blessed money.”
It is written that the Twenty-Second Flash is marked as confidential and is for my
closest and most sincere and loyal students: “First Indication: Why is it that although
you do not interfere in the world of the worldly, they interfere in your hereafter on
every opportunity?” “It is the authorities of the province of Isparta and its people that
should answer this question.”

--- Sayfa 427 ---
438
 [Those who deemed a crime this innocent, sincere, astonishing hope and
desire, born of the compassion resulting from belief, are surely themselves
guilty of a crime.]
Said says in one of his signed letters: “I used to be astonished at the innocent
seven to ten-year-old children who would run up to me when they saw me driving
around in the phaeton and hold onto my hands, and I wondered what the reason was.
Then suddenly it was imparted to me that “with a premonition of the future, the group
of young innocents sensed that through the Risale-i Nur they would find happiness and
would be saved from spiritual dangers.”
* * *
 [To deem this piece a crime although the beginning is in my favour and the
end is a wish and hope, is beyond all fairness.]
It is written that a number of verses and Hadiths allude unanimously to a luminous
truth this century, and point to a supreme regenerator of religion who is to come at the
end of time; that the most important of the three duties of that person and community
will be to save belief, and that there will be no harm in their disregarding the two
duties which dominate the broad sphere, such as reviving the Shari‘a and setting up the
caliphate. However, this might lead the Risale-i Nur’s opponents, particularly the
politicians, to criticize and attack it, for which reason he has cut out a part of the short
treatise of our precise brothers, together with some of its sentences, and will send it in
amended form.
In a signed letter, Said Nursi writes: “The fact that the verses Verily We have
granted you a manifest victory; * And that God may help you with powerful help35 in
Qur’anic script over the gate of War Ministry, which was made into the University,
were covered over by marble slabs and have now been brought to light, is a sign of the
Qur’anic script again being permitted, and the aim followed by the Risale-i Nur being
achieved. It is also a sign that the university will become a Risale-i Nur ‘Medrese’.”

35 Qur’an, 48:1, 3.

--- Sayfa 428 ---
439
 [This is Husrev’s footnote at the end of my letter entitled The ‘Takbirs’ of
the Hajjis, which furnishes a perfect reply to their criticisms of my
explanations.]
In the letter signed by Said Nursi, with the heading ‘The takbirs of the Hajjis on
Arafat,’ is the reply to “a significant number of the Risale-i Nur students asking
persistently about a prominent guide from the Family of the Prophet who is to come at
the end of time; they suppose you to be him. For your part, you consistently refuse to
accept their ideas, and shrink from such a suggestion. This is a contradiction. We want
the answer to this matter.”
The reply: The collective personality of the sacred community which the Mahdi
descended from God’s Messenger will represent will have three functions: to save
belief, to revive the marks of Islam under the title of the caliphate of Muhammad
(PBUH), and to modify to some extent the laws of the Shari‘a of Muhammad
(PBUH). He will attempt to carry out this vast duty. Since the Risale-i Nur students
see the first duty completely in the Risale-i Nur, saying that the second and third
duties are in second and third place, they rightly suppose the Risale-i Nur’s collective
personality to be a sort of Mahdi. Since some of them suppose its wretched Interpreter
is a representative of that collective personality, they sometimes call him by the same
name. Indeed, they say that through interpretation and investigation it is understood
from the predictions of some of the saints that the Risale-i Nur is that very guide of
the end of time. There is confusion on two points, and they have to be interpreted.
The First: In reality the latter two duties are not of the same degree as the former.
However, influenced by this century’s ideas in particular the mass of people and the
politicians consider the caliphate of Muhammad (PBUH) and Islamic Unity to be
immeasurably more extensive than the first duty. Every century a sort of Mahdi and
Regenerator who gave guidance has appeared, but since they have performed only one
of the three functions, they have not been given the title of the Great Mahdi.
The Second: That supreme person of the Last Days will be a descendant of the
Prophet (PBUH). For sure I am like a spiritual son of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with him), and I have received instruction from him in the realities; and since in one
sense the Family of Muhammad (PBUH) includes true Risale-i Nur students, I too
may be thought of as belonging to the Prophet’s Family. But it is not permissible in the
Risale-i Nur way to desire any sort of egotism or personality or personal rank, or to
win fame and renown. Even if rank in the hereafter were given me, I would feel myself
compelled to leave it aside in order not to spoil the

--- Sayfa 429 ---
440
sincerity of the Risale-i Nur. A semi-consenting reply is given,36 and the ascription of
Mahdiship is clearly and decisively rejected.
* * *
[The events in this piece are facts, and since in extraordinary fashion three
minutes after my saying: Don’t upset me, the earth will become angry!, there
was an earthquake, this should be applauded in amazement, as is demanded
by compassion, and not be made the object of criticism.]
It is said: “Ten hours after having given my statement for four hours and suffering
considerable discomfort, virtually at the same time, the fire in the Ministry of
Education broke out, which caused loss worth two million liras and demonstrated that
the Risale-i Nur is a means of repulsing calamities. For if it is attacked, the calamities
find a way and strike.”
In letter number one hundred and forty-one, it proves that the fires in the Ministry
of Education in Ankara and in a garage, in a factory in Izmir, and a large building in
Adana being burnt to the ground after I had given my statement for four and a half
hours were not coincidence, then it says: “Don’t deprive me of my treatises, or both I
and this country will pay for it; the earth will vent its anger with earthquakes. Three
minutes after saying this an earthquake occurred which lasted three seconds, and the
Ministry of Education was engulfed in flames; numerous earthquakes have coincided
with aggression against the Risale-i Nur and its students, as has been proved four
times by courts of law, which cannot be chance or coincidence. Numerous incidents
have shown that the Risale-i Nur is a means of calamities being repulsed in this
country.”
In letter number one hundred and forty-seven: “This time, the winter displayed its
fury when we were attacked. The weather raged with storm and was bitterly cold, but
when the assaults ceased and the Nurjus experienced an expansiveness, those bitterly
cold days began to smile like the first days of spring. ... The burning down of the
Ministry of Education was a universal blow.

36 Inequitable Court! Could there be any reply more decisive than this? Signed, Husrev, in the
name of the Risale-i Nur students.

--- Sayfa 430 ---
441
 [A situation worthy of congratulation should not be objected to.]
One of the numerous meaningless questions they asked me this time in court, was:
“How do you live?” I replied: “Through the plenty resulting from frugality. A person
who one Ramadan in Isparta lived on one loaf of bread, a one-kilo bag of yoghurt, and
one kilo of rice would not stoop to embracing the world for his livelihood and would
not be obliged to accept gifts.”
* * *
[As with the defence Zübeyir37 read in court, his brilliant eulogy drove them
to appreciate it, God willing, for amazed, they included it in the judgement.]
In a section with the heading: “Our young people want to be taught truth and
realitiy, and to have the highest morality,” on page thirteen, Zübeyir Gündüzalp wrote
by typewriter: “The Risale-i Nur is a masterpiece written not through the author’s will,
but inspired by the Creator, in order to save the Muslims of the 20th century and all
humanity from the dark, oppressive ideas.”
On page twelve: “If it was said to a person serving the Risale-i Nur: ‘Copy out
these books instead of the Risale-i Nur, and I’ll give all the wealth of Ford,’ he would
reply, without even raising the nib of his pen: ‘If you gave me all the world’s wealth
and its sovereignty too, I would not accept it.’”
On page fifteen: “If we are attached to honest writers a hundred times over, our
attachment to a great person like Bediuzzaman who guides us in this world and the
next, is immeasurable, total.”
On page twelve: “The collective personality of the Risale-i Nur has diagnosed the
social, spiritual, and religious sicknesses of this age, and at a Divine command has
offered to all humanity at this time the All-Wise Qur’an’s truths in a way that will cure
its chronic social ills.”
On page forty-four: “Bediuzzaman said that someone who studies these treatises
for a year may become an important scholar. Yes, that is how it is.”
On page fifty-four: “The judges who study the Risale-i Nur do not make incorrect
judgements.”

37 Zübeyir Gündüzalp (1920-1971) was born in Konya Province, and became a student of
Bediuzzaman while working as a telegraphist for the Post Office. He later became one of his closest
students, displaying complete devotion to Bediuzzaman and sincerity in his service of the Risale-i
Nur. He became one of the leading figures of the movement after Bediuzzaman’s death. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 431 ---
442
 [This piece is entirely in my favour and is the exact truth, and should not
have been included with the offences in the court’s decision.]
Ahmed Feyzi amended part of his work, but having to hurry he sent it without
completing the corrections. In it, it is said: “Does it not infer by ignoring Saraçoglu,
who calls religion and the training of Muhammad ‘poison’, and disputing The
Illuminating Lamp, which demonstrates the Qur’anic reality as clearly as the sun and
proves it to be the perfect cure for mankind’s wounds, that you are assisting in the
confiscation of that collection?”
It says the following in the conclusion of one of his defence speeches, presented to
the court on an unknown date. He stated that neither himself nor the students were
occupied with politics; the writings shown to be aggressive were confidential; there
was freedom of thought and of conscience; that even if the above appeared to be
criticism of some laws, this did not constitute a crime; many of the treatises under
consideration were written a long time previously; they had been scrutinized by
committees of experts and had been found to be harmless; that just as there had
previously been convictions for them in Eskişehir Court, so they had been acquitted in
Denizli Court, so it was not right that they should be tried again for the same offence;
the Risale-i Nur students had up to now been involved in no activities that would
disturb public order; and that since no one was named explicitly in the Fifth Ray and its
purpose was only to inform, this did not constitute a crime either.
Further examples may be thought of in the same way.
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 432 ---
443
To the Judges of the Court of Appeal
[Again they did not permit me to speak in the session held to discuss the
possible quashing by the Appeal Court of Afyon Court’s unjust decision
concerning us. They made us listen to a third severe indictment. They also
did not allow anyone to come to help me with writing. Despite my poor
handwriting and my being ill, I am presenting this complaint to your Court
—which has acted justly towards us twice previously— as a supplement to
my petition concerning the appeal.]
In His Name, be He glorified!
A petition to the Supreme Tribunal of the Resurrection; and a complaint to the
Divine Court; the Appeal Court of the present should also listen as well as coming
generations and the enlightened future teachers and students of the universities. Of the
hundreds of torments and calamities I have suffered these twenty-three years, I am
setting ten before the court of justice of the All-Glorious Sovereign together with my
complaints.
The First: Despite my faults, I have dedicated my life to this nation’s happiness
and the saving of its religious belief. Saying, let my head too be sacrificed for a truth,
that is, the truth of the Qur’an, for which millions of heroic heads have been sacrificed,
I worked with the Risale-i Nur with all my strength. Through Divine assistance, I
persisted in the face of all the cruel torments. I did not withdraw.
For example: One instance of the exceedingly cruel treatment I have received
during my trial and imprisonment in Afyon: although three times, and every time for
nearly two hours, they forced myself and the innocent Risale-i Nur students, who were
awaiting solace from justice, to listen to the slanderous, malicious indictments, they
did not allow us more than one or two minutes to defend our rights, despite my
repeated requests for five or ten minutes.
I have been kept for twenty months in total isolation, with only one or two of my
friends being permitted to visit me for three or four hours. For only a small part of my
defence speeches did I have anyone to help me with the writing. Then they were
forbidden as well, and punished exceedingly brutally. They compelled us to listen to
the prosecutor’s biased indictment, which was like water gathered from a thousand
streams, and which I proved contained eighty-one errors in fifteen pages arising from

--- Sayfa 433 ---
444
twisted meanings and slander and lies. They did not permit me to speak. If they had
permitted me, I would have said:
Although as required by freedom of thought and freedom of conscience, you do
not interfere with Jews, Christians, and Zoroastrians, and particularly now with
anarchists, apostates, and dissemblers, hiding behind the screen of communism, who
both deny your religion, and insult your forefathers accusing them of misguidance, and
accept neither your Prophet (PBUH) nor the laws of the Qur’an; and although through
the Qur’an’s instruction millions of Muslims in the lands and under the rule of an
imperious, bigoted Christian state like Britain, reject all the false beliefs and infidel
rules of the English, their courts do not interfere with them; and although opponents of
all governments openly publish their ideas without those governments bothering them;
and although both the Isparta authorities, and Denizli Court, and Ankara Criminal
Court, and the Directorate of Religious Affairs, and the Appeal Court twice, no, three
times, have all scrutinized these forty years of my life, and my one hundred and thirty
treatises, and my most private treatises and letters, and they had in their possession for
two or three years all the copies of the Risale-i Nur, confidential and otherwise, yet
they could not show a single matter necessitating the smallest penalty; and although
despite the fact I am extremely weak, oppressed, defeated, and am enduring the
harshest conditions, our innocence has been proved by the Risale-i Nur collections you
hold as well as our four-hundred-page defence, which have been shown to be a most
powerful, sound, and veracious guide for two hundred thousand true and devoted
students benefiting this country, nation, and public security; — in spite of all these,
under which law, what conscience, what good, what crime do you convict us,
contemptuously giving us the harshest sentences and severest solitary confinement?
Certainly you shall be questioned about this at the Last Judgement.
The Second: One reason they put forward for punishing me was my expounding
the Qur’an’s explicit verses about veiling, inheritance, recitation of the Divine Names,
and polygamy, written to silence those who object to them in the name of civilization.
Fifteen years ago I wrote the following piece to Eskişehir Court and the Appeal
Court, which was also included in the court’s decision. I repeat the piece as a
complaint to the Supreme Tribunal at the Last Judgement, and as a warning to the
enlightened teachers of the future, and together with Elhüccetü’z-Zehrâ (The Shining
Proof) as a sort of addition to my petition to the Appeal Court, which twice has acted
fairly in acquitting me and has listened to my cry for justice, and to the committee of

--- Sayfa 434 ---
445
judges who did not permit me to speak and due to the malicious indictment which I
proved contained eighty errors, convicted me to two year’s hard labour and solitary
confinement together with two year’s further exile elsewhere under close surveillance:
I say this that if there is any justice on the face of the earth, the Appeal Court will
quash this decision which convicts someone who expounded Qur’anic verses which in
each century for one thousand three hundred and fifty years have acted as sacred, true
Divine principles in the social life of three hundred and fifty million Muslims, and
expounded them relying on the consensus and affirmation of three hundred and fifty
thousand Qur’anic commentaries and following the beliefs of our forefathers for one
thousand three hundred years. Is it not a denial of Islam and a betrayal of our millions
of religious and heroic forefathers to convict, because he expounded those verses,
someone who according to reason and learning does not accept certain European laws
applied temporarily due to certain requirements of the times and who has given up
politics and withdrawn from social life, and is it not to insult millions of Qur’anic
commentaries?
The Third: One reason they cited for our conviction was breaching security and
disturbing public order. Putting forward the remotest possibility, one in a hundred or
even a thousand, in place of actual events, and putting the wrong meanings on forty to
fifty words from some confidential treatises and private letters out of the hundred
thousand words and sentences of the Risale-i Nur, they present these as evidence, and
accusing us want to have us punished.
Calling to witness those who have known my life these thirty to forty years and
the thousands of ‘special’ (has)38 students of the Risale-i Nur, I say: to accuse of
disturbing public order someone who, —at a time the commander of the British
occupation forces in Istanbul was sowing discord among Muslims, even deceiving the
Shaykh al-Islam and some leading men of religion and inciting the Committee of Union
and Progress and the Freedom and Accord Party to struggle against each other, thus
paving the way for the Greek victory and defeat of the National Movement,— foiled
that insidious plan of the commander by printing and publishing through the efforts of
Eshref Edib his work Hutuvat-i Sitte (The Six Steps) against the British and Greeks,
not retreating even in the face of threat of execution; who did not flee to Ankara even
when summoned

38 In his writings, Bediuzzaman mentions ‘has’ (special) by which he probably meant those that
loyally and devotedly served the Risale-i Nur, and ‘erkan’ (leading; lit. ‘pillars’), those who in
addition to their devoted service played a more organizing role. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 435 ---
446
because of the above service by the leaders there; who attached no importance when a
prisoner-of-war to the Russian Commander-in-Chief’s order for his execution; who
with a speech during the Thirty-First of March Incident induced eight regiments to
obey their officers;39 and in the Military Court, disregarding the threat of execution
said in reply to the presiding pashas’ questions of: “You too are a reactionary, you too
wanted the Shari‘a?”, “If constitutionalism consists of one party’s despotism, then let
all men and jinn witness that I am a reactionary and ready to sacrifice my very soul for
a single matter of the Shari‘a,” causing those high-ranking officers to appreciate and
admire him, and while expecting his execution, they decided on his acquittal, then on
being released, he did not thank them but went on his way shouting: “Long live Hell
for all tyrants!”; and as is written in the decision of Afyon Court, when Mustafa Kemal
angrily said to him in the office of the Speaker of the Assembly:40 “We summoned you
here so you would tell us of your elevated ideas, but you came and wrote some things
about the five daily prayers and sowed conflict among us,” he replied: “After belief,
the obligatory prayers are the most elevated question. Those who do not perform the
prayers are traitors, and the pronouncements of traitors are to be rejected;” who said
this in the presence of forty to fifty deputies, and forced that fearsome commander to
swallow his anger and make a sort of apology; and in connection with whom not one
matter has been recorded by the police and authorities of six provinces connected with
the disturbance of public order; and among whose hundreds of thousands of students
not the smallest incident has been witnessed (apart from one insignificant incident
concerning a rightful defence in which one unimportant student was involved); in
connection with none of whose students any crime has been heard; and whichever
prison he has been sent to has there reformed the other prisoners; and as testified to by
these twenty-three years of his life and three provincial authorities and three courts
acquitting him and a hundred thousand of his students, who know the value of the
Risale-i Nur, affirming it verbally and by action, despite hundreds of thousands of
copies of it being distributed throughout the country, the Risale-i Nur has produced
only benefits and caused no harm; and who is a recluse, single, a stranger, elderly,
poor, and sees himself at the door of the grave; and who with all his strength has given
up transitory things, and has sought ways of atoning for his former sins and making his
life eternal, and attaches not the slightest importance to worldly rank, and who, so that
no harm will come to the

39 See page 384, fn. 10.
40 Before finally going there sometime in the final months of 1922, Bediuzzaman was on several
occasions secretly summoned to Ankara by Mustafa Kemal during the Independence Struggle, in
recognition of his effective struggle against the occupying forces. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 436 ---
447
innocent and the elderly, out of his compassion does not curse those who torment and
torture him; — those who say about such a man: “This old recluse disturbs the peace
and breaches public security; his aims are the intrigues of this world, and his
correspondence is for this world, in which case he is guilty” and who convict him
under such severe conditions are surely themselves guilty from the ground to the
heavens, and they shall give their account at the Last Judgement!
Can it be said about a man who with a speech induced eight mutinying regiments
to obey their officers, and with a single article persuaded thousands of people to
support him, and was not frightened before the three above-mentioned formidable
commanders, and did not fawn to them, and in courts of law declared: “If I had heads
to the number of hairs on my head and every day one was cut off, I would not
surrender to atheism and misguidance and betray my country and nation and Islam; I
would not bow this head, which has been dedicated to the Qur’an, before tyrants,” and
was concerned with no one in Emirdağ apart from five or ten brothers of the hereafter
and three or four servants — could it be said about such a man, as it does in the
indictment: “This Said was working secretly in Emirdağ; he poisoned the minds of
some of the people giving them the idea of disturbing the peace; twenty men gathered
round him and wrote private letters praising him, which shows that he was hatching a
revolt and was involved in covert politics against the government”? I refer it to your
consciences to understand just how far from right, justice, and fairness those who
torment him have deviated by, with unprecedented animosity and hatred, throwing him
into prison for two years, in solitary confinement, and by not allowing him to speak in
court.
Is it at all possible that someone who has received public attention a hundred
times greater than is his due, and brought thousands of men to obedience with one
speech, and induced thousands of people to join the Ittihad-i Muhammedî Society
with one newspaper article, and made fifty thousand people listen admiringly to his
address in Aya Sophia Mosque41 — that such a man should work at it for three years
in Emirdağ and deceive only five or ten people, and fill his grave, which he is
approaching, with unnecessary darkness rather than with light? Is it at all possible that
he should do this? Satan himself could not make anyone accept it!
The Fourth is their citing my not wearing the brimmed hat as an important reason
for my conviction.42 They did not allow me to speak,

41 These events occurred in early 1909. [Tr.]
42 According to the famous Hat Act passed 25 November 1925, the wearing of European
headgear became compulsory, and all other headgear was banned. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 437 ---
448
otherwise I would have said this to those who were trying to punish me: I stayed as a
guest for three months in the police station in Kastamonu. At no time did they say to
me: “Wear the brimmed hat!” And although in three courts of law I did not wear the
hat and did not remove my own headgear, they did not interfere with me. And on that
pretext for twenty-three years a number of irreligious tyrants have inflicted a very
distressing and severe penalty on me unofficially. And children, women, villagers,
officials in their offices, and those who wear the beret are not compelled to wear the
hat. And there is no physical benefit in wearing it. Yet because of their fabrications and
allegations a recluse like myself has paid a twenty-year penalty for not wearing
headgear that all the mujtahids and Shaykh al-Islams have prohibited. Those who are
trying to have me punished again because of a meaningless custom related to dress;
and with such force, repetition, and insistence to have me found guilty because of my
dress —despite, saying there is personal freedom, their comparing to themselves those
who drink raki in public in Ramadan during the day and do not perform the obligatory
prayers, and not bothering them— surely after suffering the everlasting extinction of
death and perpetual solitary confinement of the grave, at the Last Judgement they will
be questioned concerning this error.
The Fifth: Those who have heard this third indictment and seen the judgement
that we published will confirm that on pretexts as flimsy as a fly’s wing, they are trying
to confiscate some of the treatises of the Risale-i Nur, which is alluded to favourably
by thirty-three Qur’anic verses, was applauded by such saints as Imam ‘Ali (May God
exalt him) and Gawth al-A‘zam ( May his mystery be sanctified), is affirmed by a
hundred thousand believers, and in twenty years has won a highly beneficial rank for
this nation and country without causing any harm. Even, making a pretext two pages
about two correct explanations of two verses, which were written long ago and have
been covered by pardons, it was even the cause of the four-hundred-page Zülfikâr and
The Miracles of Muhammad (Mu’cizat-i Ahmediye) being seized, which has
strengthened and saved the belief of a hundred thousand people and is extremely
beneficial and valuable. And now, giving the wrong meaning to one or two words out
of a thousand, they are trying to have that infinitely useful treatise seized. As for us,
we say:
And for every calamity, we belong to God, and to Him is our return.43 * For
us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs.44

43 Qur’an, 2:156.
44 Qur’an, 3:137.

--- Sayfa 438 ---
449
The Sixth: To those who deem me guilty of a crime because some of the Risale-i
Nur students have seen the wondrous proofs of the Risale-i Nur and profited from its
irrefutable teachings about belief, which are at the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty,’
and as encouragement, congratulations, appreciation, and gratitude, praise me
excessively and have an over-favourable opinion of me, I say this: when a powerless,
weak, semi-literate, lonely exile subject to derogatory propaganda designed to scare
the people away from me, I found for myself some of the cures of the Qur’an and its
sacred truths related to belief which were a perfect remedy for my ills. Then
concluding that they were also just the medicine for this nation and the sons of this
land, I wrote down those valuable truths. Since I have very poor handwriting and I
was much in need of assistants, Divine favour sent me loyal and staunch helpers.
If I had completely rejected their good opinion of me and sincere praise and
offended them by rebuking them it would have been like contempt for and hostility
towards those Lights taken from the treasury of the Qur’an. Thinking too it would
cause those diamond-penned stout-hearted assitants to leave me, I directed their praise
and applause for my bankrupt person to the Risale-i Nur, a miracle of the Qur’an to
which in truth the praise is due, and to the collective personality of its leading students.
But I did offend them in a way by saying that they were affording me a share a
hundred times greater than my due. Could any law impute guilt to a man because
others praise him although he eschews it and is not happy at it? For this is what the
officials are doing, who act in the name of the law.
Although it was written on page fifty-four of the court’s judgement, which was
written against us but which we published: “That great person of the end of time will
be a descendant of the Prophet (PBUH), and we students of the Risale-i Nur can be
considered to be members of the Prophet’s Family only in meaning. Also, there can be
no egotism of any sort in the way of the Risale-i Nur, nor any wish for position and
personal rank, or fame and renown. Even if I was offered high rank in the hereafter, I
would feel myself compelled to refuse it in order not to damage the sincerity of the
Risale-i Nur;” and although on pages twenty-two and three it is written: “Knowing
one’s faults and realizing one’s poverty and impotence, and humbly seeking refuge at
the Divine Court; with that personality I know myself to be more wretched, impotent,
and faulty than everyone. So even if all the people praised and lauded me, they could
not make me believe that I am someone good, of high spiritual and moral rank. Lest I
frighten you off, I shall not say the many secret ills and bad characteristics of my third,
true, personality. Out of His grace, Almighty God employs this personality in the
mysteries of the Qur’an like a lowly

--- Sayfa 439 ---
450
private soldier. Endless thanks be to God. The soul is lower than everything, and the
duty higher,” — although this is written in the Court judgement, they find me guilty of
being called a supreme guide due to the praises of others, which in fact refer to the
Risale-i Nur, and are thus deserving of paying an awesome penalty due to the error.
The Seventh: Although Denizli Court and Ankara Criminal Court and the Appeal
Courts unanimously acquitted us and all the treatises of the Risale-i Nur and returned
them and our letters to us, and they said “Even if the Appeal Court’s decision to quash
the decision and Denizli’s acquittal were wrong, since they have been made final, the
case cannot be retried,” I was sent to Emirdağ, where I spent three years as a recluse.
There, so long as there was no necessity, I spoke only with the two or three tailor
apprentices who were assisting me, and rarely, for five or ten minutes with certain
religiously-minded people. I wrote no letters other than once a week to one place as
encouragement in the Risale-i Nur, and wrote only three letters in three years to my
Mufti brother. I gave up writing pieces, which I had been doing for twenty to thirty
years, except for two points, twenty pages in length, which were useful for the people
of the Qur’an and for belief. One was about the wisdom in the repetitions in the
Qur’an, and the other, about the angels; I wrote no other treatise. Only, I gave
permission for the treatises which the courts had returned to be made into large
collections, and since five hundred copies of The Supreme Sign, which had been
printed in the old letters, had been handed over to us by the court, and since
duplicating machines were not officially banned, I gave permission to my brothers to
duplicate them so they could be published for the benefit of the Islamic world, and I
busied myself with correcting them. I was certainly not concerned with politics in any
way. Moreover, although official permission had been given for us to return to our
native region, contrary to all the other exiles I accepted the hardship of exile in order
not to become involved in politics and the world, and did not return. The treatment I
have received these last twenty months proves that the person who is trying in this
third indictment to find guilty such a man through the baseless accusations, lies, and
misinterpretations is ruled by two fearsome meanings, which I shall not utter for now.
What I do say is this: the grave and Hell are sufficient, and I refer it to the Last
Judgement.
The Eighth: Since the Fifth Ray was returned to us after remaining for two years
in the hands of Denizli and Ankara Courts, it was added at the end of the large
collection called The Illuminating Lamp together with my defence, which had led to
our acquittal in Denizli Court. For sure, previously we had held it to be confidential,
but since the courts had

--- Sayfa 440 ---
451
advertised it and returned it after acquitting us, I permitted its duplication seeing that it
was thus harmless. The original of the Fifth Ray was about allegorical Hadiths and was
written thirty to forty years ago. For sure some Hadith scholars stated that some of the
Hadiths that were well-known by the Umma were ‘dubious,’ but since it was their
apparent meanings that had been objected to, the piece was written solely to save the
believers from doubting them. Then since some time later some of its wondrous
interpretations became clear for all to see, I held it to be confidential so that it should
not be given the wrong meaning. Then numerous courts studied it minutely, and
together with publicizing it, returned it to us. So I refer it to the consciences of those
who have convicted us arbitrarily to see just how far it is from justice, right, and
fairness to now again find us guilty because of it. And saying, For us God suffices, and
He is the Best Disposer of Affairs, I refer them to the Last Judgement.
The Ninth: This is very important, but since those who have convicted us have
studied the Risale-i Nur, I have not written it so as not to upset them.
The Tenth: This is powerful and important, but again so as not to offend them, I
have not written it for now.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i ,
                                               who is being held in absolute solitary confinement.
* * *
 [Part of a petition written during the Eskişehir trial fifteen years ago and
sent to the Cabinet.]45
You who “bind and loose”!
I have suffered an injustice the like of which has rarely been seen in the world. To
remain silent before such an injustice is disrespect for right. I am compelled therefore
to divulge a most important fact. Demonstrate the fault I have committed so that the
law demands either my execution or a hundred and one year’s imprisonment, or prove
that I am completely mad, or else give complete freedom to myself, my treatises, and
my friends, and collect our losses from those who caused them.
Yes, every government has a law and a principle according to which

45 A petition was sent to the Cabinet fifteen years ago concerning this same matter. Now, since it
has again arisen, I am obliged to send it again to the departments of government concerned.

--- Sayfa 441 ---
452
penalties are given. If there is nothing in the laws of the Government of the Republic
to necessitate the heaviest penalty for myself and my friends, we should be given our
complete freedom, as well as recompense and appreciation and an apology. For if my
important service of the Qur’an, which is clear and open, is against the Government, I
should receive not a year’s sentence in this way and a number of my friends, six
months each, I should be given the death sentence or a hundred and one year’s
imprisonment and those earnestly attached to me and my work should be given the
heaviest penalties. But if our service is not against the Government, we should receive
not penalties, charges and imprisonment, but appreciation and recompense. For it is
service the nature of which may be understood through its one hundred and twenty
treatises, and its challenging the great philosophers of Europe and overthrowing their
principles. Certainly, such effective service will either produce ghastly results inside
the country, or it will yield most advantageous, elevated, and scholarly fruits. In which
case, I cannot be given a year’s sentence for playing a childish game of hoodwinking,
and deceiving public opinion, and concealing the intrigues of tyrants and their lies
about us. Those like me either receive capital punishment, proudly climbing the
gallows, or they remain free in the position of which they are worthy.
Yes, a clever thief can steal diamonds worth thousands, so he would not sentence
himself to the same penalty for stealing a fragment of glass worth virtually nothing. No
thief would do that, indeed, no conscious creature. Such a thief is cunning, not utterly
stupid in that way.
Sirs! According to your delusions, I am like that thief. Rather than living in
seclusion in a poor village in one of the districts of Isparta for nine years and putting in
danger myself and my treatises which are the aim of my life by turning against the
Government the ideas of five to ten ingenuous unfortunates, who have been given very
light sentences along with me, I could have held a high position in either Ankara or
Istanbul like formerly and manipulated thousands of people towards the aim I was
following. Then I would not have been convicted so abjectly, but would have been
involved in the world with the pride and dignity befitting my way and duty.
I do not say this out of pride or to boast, but ashamedly, to point out the errors of
those who, recalling some of my old self-advertisement and hypocrisy, want to abase
me so that the position I hold lacks all importance and cannot be profited from. So I
say to them:
As someone who, as confirmed by his old defence, which was published under the
name of The Testimony of Two Schools of Misfortune,

--- Sayfa 442 ---
453
reduced to obedience with a speech eight rebelling regiments during the Thirty-First of
March Incident; and as was reported in the newspapers of the time, with an article
called The Six Steps performed the important service of turning the ideas of the
Istanbul ‘ulama against the British and in favour of the National Movement; and
delivered an address to thousands in Aya Sophia, making them listen to him; and was
greeted with tumultuous applause by the Assembly and deputies in Ankara, and had
one hundred and sixty-three deputies assign one hundred and fifty thousand liras for
his religious school and university; and without quailing responded completely firmly
to the angry President in the Speaker’s office and invited him to perform the obligatory
prayers; and while in the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye was unanimously considered
worthy by the Union and Progress Government of the duty of effectively inviting the
philosophers of Europe to accept Islamic wisdom; and Isharat al-I‘jaz (Signs of
Miraculousness), the work he wrote on the front during the War and has now been
seized, appeared so valuable to Enver Pasha, who was Commander-in-Chief at the
time, that with respect shown by no one else and the idea of sharing in the good and
glory of that memento of the War, which was racing to the future, he contributed the
paper to have the work printed so that the exploits of its author during the War would
be remembered — such a man would not descend to disgracing the dignity of his
learning, the sacredness of his service, and his thousands of valuable friends by tainting
himself with a petty crime like a horse-thief, abductor of girls, or pickpocket so that
you could sentence him to a year’s imprisonment and treat him like a stealer of goats
or sheep. He would prefer execution to suffering under the arbitrary persecution of a
malicious detective or common policeman the year’s sentence now given him together
with being held under supervision for a year, after having been tormented for ten years
without reason with oppressive surveillance — although he could not endure to be
dominated by the Sultan. If such a man had been involved in the world and if he had
harboured such a wish and if his sacred service had permitted, he would have
interfered in it to an extent ten times greater than the Menemen Affair and Shaykh Said
Revolt.46 The booming sound of a cannon heard by all the world would not have
subsided to the buzz of a fly.
Yes, I make the following point for the attention of the Government of the
Republic: this situation has been brought about through the intrigues, machinations
and propaganda of the covert organization which drove me to this misfortune. The
evidence that widespread propaganda and terror and a conspiracy have been
orchestrated against us in a way never before

46 See page 385, fns. 11, 12.

--- Sayfa 443 ---
454
seen in any event is this, that although I have a hundred thousand friends, not one of
them has been able to write me any letter for six months, or to send any greetings, and
the fact that due to the informing of plotters who are trying to deceive the
Government, interrogations and searches have been continually carried out from the
eastern provinces to those in the west.
The plan these intriguers hatched was evidently to organize an ‘incident’ that
would be the cause of thousands like me receiving the heaviest penalties. However, the
result was a penalty that recalled an incident of petty pilfering perpetrated by the
commonest person. Of one hundred and fifteen people, fifteen innocent men were
given sentences of five or six months. Would any rational creature in the world prick
the tail of a fierce lion or terrible dragon with his brilliantly sharp diamond sword, and
make it turn on him? If his intention was self-defence or combat, he would use his
sword somewhere else.
With your deluded view, you conceive of me as such a man, for that is the way
you have charged me and sentenced me. If I act in a manner so contrary to
consciousness and reason, this great country should not be terrorized and public
opinion turned against me with propaganda, I should be sent to a lunatic asylum like a
common madman. But if I am someone of the importance you afford me, my keen
sword would not be pointed at the tails of the lion or the dragon to make them attack
him, he would rather defend himself as far as he could. Just as I have voluntarily
chosen seclusion these last ten years, and tolerating difficulties beyond human
endurance, have interfered in no way whatsoever in matters of government, nor have I
wanted to interfere. Because my sacred duty prohibits me.
O you who bind and loose! Is it at all possible that in the one hundred and twenty
treatises of a person who, as was written in the newspapers twenty-five years ago,
with one newspaper article caused thirty thousand people to accept his ideas, and drew
the attention of the huge ‘Operation Army’ on himself, and replied with six words to
the questions of the chief cleric of the English, who wanted six hundred, and gave a
speech after the Constitutional Revolution as though he was a leading diplomat, —
would only fifteen words related to politics and the world be found in the one hundred
and twenty treatises of such a man? Is it at all reasonable to accept that this man
follows politics and his aim is this world and he is troubling the Government? If his
mind was set on meddling in politics and the Government, such a person would have
made it clear in a single of his treatises, and indicated it in a thousand places. If his
purpose had been criticism with political intent, would he not have found anything to

--- Sayfa 444 ---
455
criticize other than one or two rules about the veiling of women and inheritance,
which have long been in force?
Yes, the politically-minded opponent of a ruling regime which had enacted far-
reaching reforms would have found not those one or two to object to but thousands.
As though the reforms of the Government of the Republic consisted only of one or
two minor matters. Although I had no intention to criticize it whatsoever, because of
one or two words in one or two of my books which I had written long previously, it
was said: “He is attacking the ruling regime and its reforms.” So I ask: Should the
whole country be busied with a scholarly matter which demands not the smallest
penalty, in a way to cause anxiety?
Thus, myself and five to ten of my friends being given the most minor, trivial
sentences; and the whole country being intimidated by powerful propaganda against us
and being made to hate us; and Sükrü Kaya, the Interior Minister, being called to
Isparta with a significant force of soldiers in order to perform a task a single private
soldier could perform, that is, to arrest me; and Ismet, the head of the Cabinet, going
to the eastern provinces in that connection; and for two months in prison my being
prohibited from speaking with anyone; and no one asking after me or sending me
greetings while alone in this exile; — all these show that it is a meaningless, pointless,
illegal situation like a tree as huge as a mountain producing a fruit the size of a pea.
Seeing that ‘government’ means ‘to govern with wisdom,’ it is not something any
government would be involved in, especially a legal government like the Government
of the Republic, which adheres more closely to the law than any other.
I want my rights within the bounds of the law. I accuse of being criminals those
who act against the law in the name of the law. The laws of the Government of the
Republic certainly reject the arbitrary acts of such criminals. I am hopeful that my
rights will be restored to me.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 445 ---
456
An Example of the Risale-i Nur’s Veracity
N O T E
As the fair-minded and enlightened who read the following treatise,47 which was
written nineteen years ago, will clearly understand, the Risale-i Nur, with all its one
hundred and thirty parts, is concerned only with belief and the hereafter and was
written in that spirit, completely free of all political and worldly motives. This clear
and definite fact was corroborated by the lengthy investigations and minute studies
carried out by the Courts of Eskişehir, Isparta, Denizli, and Afyon. In this connection,
we are requesting your concern and assistance in having all our books returned to us,
which for more than twenty months have been held by Afyon Court, and not the
smallest point of which was shown by the Appeal Court as constituting an offence, and
which have saved the belief of thousands of people, and have been praised and
applauded by their readers, and scholars, and the Islamic world.
The greater part of the books held by Afyon Court were collected by the first of
our companions to be released. Saying: “We gave these books of ours to Ustad, their
owner; they should be handed over to him,” they referred them to me. In particular,
they left in the court the gilded Qur’an which was written showing the miraculous
‘coincidences’ of letters,48 which was among the confiscated books. Before everything
we await the swift return to us of those books and our Qur’an, which were previously
returned to us by Denizli and Ankara Courts.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i

47 The Sixteenth Letter was written several years previously to Eskishehir and Denizli Courts,
yet its rebuffing all the points of objection as though it had seen the three courts demonstrates clearly
that it was the object of Divine bestowal and grace.
48 Tevafuk: See page 407, fn. 20.

--- Sayfa 446 ---
457
The Sixteenth Letter
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Men said to them: “A great army is gathering against you,” and frightened
them. But it [only] increased their belief; they said: “For us God suffices,
and He is the best Disposer of Affairs.”49
This letter manifested the meaning of the verse, But speak to him mildly,50 and
was not written vehemently. It is the answer to a question asked me both explicitly and
implicitly by many people.
[To reply is not agreeable to me and I do not want to, for I have bound
everything to reliance on God. But since I have not been left in peace to
myself in my own world and since they have directed my attention towards
the world, I am compelled to propound five ‘Points’ in the language of the
Old Said in order to explain the reality of the situation both to my friends,
and to ‘the worldly,’ and to those in authority, so as to save not myself, but
my friends and my Words, from the suspicions and ill-treatment of ‘the
worldly.’]
FIRST POINT
It is asked: “Why have you withdrawn from politics and now have nothing to do
with them?”
T h e  A n s w e r : The Old Said of nine or ten years ago was involved in politics
a certain amount; indeed, thinking he would serve religion and learning by means of
politics, he was wearied for nothing. He saw that it is a dangerous way which is
doubtful and full of difficulties and for me superfluous, as well as forming an obstacle
to the most necessary duties.

49 Qur’an, 3:173.
50 Qur’an, 20:44.

--- Sayfa 447 ---
458
It is mostly lies and there is the possibility of unknowingly being a tool in the hand of
Europe. Furthermore, one who enters politics is either successful or is in opposition.
As for being successful, since I am neither an official nor a deputy, to work in politics
is unnecessary and nonsense for me. Politics has no need for me so that I should
interfere for nothing. If I join the opposition, I would do so either with ideas or with
force. If it was with ideas there is no need for me, for the questions are all clear, and
everyone knows them as I do. To wag one’s chin pointlessly is meaningless. If I join
the opposition with the use of force in view and to provoke an incident, there would
be the possibility of committing thousands of sins in order to reach a doubtful goal.
Many people would be afflicted by disaster on account of one. So saying that in
conscience he could not accept committing sins and causing the innocent to commit
sins due to a one or two in ten possibility, the Old Said gave up cigarettes together
with the newspapers, politics, and worldly conversation about politics. Decisive
evidence for this is the fact that for the past eight years I have not read a single
newspaper nor listened to one being read. Let someone come forward and say that I
have read one or listened to one. Whereas eight years ago the Old Said used to read
perhaps eight newspapers every day. Furthermore, for the past five years I have been
under the closest scrutiny and surveillance. Anyone who has observed the slightest hint
of political activity should say so. But for someone like me who is nervous, fearless,
and without attachment, who considers the best stratagem to be without stratagem, his
ideas will not remain secret for eight days, let alone eight years. If he had had the
appetite and desire for politics, he would not have left any necessity for investigation
and scrutiny, he would have given voice like the firing of a cannon.
SECOND POINT
Why does the New Said avoid politics with such vehemence?
T h e  A n s w e r :  He avoids it so vehemently in order to serve belief and the
Qur’an, which is of the greatest importance, the greatest necessity and is the most pure
and most right, in order not to sacrifice unnecessarily and officiously for one or two
doubtful years of worldly life the working for and gaining of more than millions of
years of eternal life. For he says: I am getting old and I do not know how many more
years I shall live, so the most important question for me must be to work for eternal
life. The prime means of gaining eternal life and the key to everlasting happiness is
belief, so one has to work for that. But since I am obliged by the Shari‘a to serve
people in respect of learning so that they may profit also, I want to perform such a
duty. However, such service will either concern

--- Sayfa 448 ---
459
social and worldly life, which I cannot do, and also in stormy times it is not possible to
perform such service soundly. Therefore, I left aside that aspect and chose the aspect
of service to belief, which is the most important, the most necessary, and the soundest.
I leave that door open so that the truths of belief I have gained for myself and the
spiritual remedies I have myself experienced may be acquired by others. Perhaps
Almighty God will accept this service and make it atonement for my former sins. Apart
from Satan the Accursed, no one, be it a believer or an unbeliever, one of the
veracious or an atheist, has the right to oppose this work. For unbelief resembles
nothing else. In tyrannizing, vice, and grievous sins there may be an inauspicious
satanic pleasure, but in unbelief there is no sort of pleasure at all. It is pain upon pain,
darkness upon darkness, torment upon torment.
Just how contrary to reason it would be for someone like me who is unattached,
alone, and compelled to atone for his former sins to leave aside working for an endless
eternal life and serving a sacred light like belief, and to cast himself in old age into the
unnecessary, perilous games of politics—just how contrary to wisdom, just what a
lunacy it would be even lunatics would understand!
But if you ask why service of the Qur’an and belief prohibit me, I would say:
Since the truths of belief and the Qur’an are each like diamonds, if I was polluted by
politics, the ordinary people who are easily deceived, would wonder about those
diamonds I was holding, “Aren’t they for political propaganda to attract more
supporters?” They might regard the diamonds as bits of common glass. Then by being
involved with politics, I would be wronging the diamonds and as though reducing their
value. O you whose view is restricted to this world! Why do you struggle against me?
Why do you not leave me to myself?
If you say: The shaykhs sometimes interfere in our business, and they sometimes
call you a shaykh.
I reply: Good sirs! I am not a shaykh, I am a hoja [teacher]. The evidence is this:
I have been here four years and if I had taught a single person the sufi way, you would
have had the right to be suspicious. But I have told everyone who has come to me:
Belief is necessary, Islam is necessary; this is not the age of sufism.
If you say: They call you Said-i Kurdi; perhaps you have some nationalist ideas,
and that doesn’t suit our interests.
I would reply: Sirs! The things the Old Said and the New Said have written are
clear. I cite as testimony the certain statement, “Islam has

--- Sayfa 449 ---
460
abrogated the tribalism of the Age of Ignorance.” For years I have considered negative
nationalism and racialism to be fatal poison, since they are a variety of European
disease. And Europe has infected Islam with them thinking it would cause division,
and Islam would break up and be easily swallowed. My students and those who have
had anything to do with me know that for years I have tried to treat that disease. Since
it is thus, good sirs, I wonder why you make every incident a pretext to harass me?
According to what principle do you cause me distress at every worldly incident, like
punishing and inflicting trouble on a soldier in the west because of a mistake made by a
soldier in the east due to the connection of the army, or convicting a shopkeeper in
Baghdad because of a crime committed by a tradesman in Istanbul due to their being in
the same line of business? How can the conscience demand this? What benefit can
require it?
THIRD POINT
My friends who wonder how I am and are astonished at my meeting every
calamity silently with patience ask the following question: “How can you endure the
difficulties and troubles with which you are faced, whereas formerly you were very
proud and angry and could not endure even the least insult?”
T h e  A n s w e r : Listen to two short incidents and stories and you shall receive
your answer:
The First Story: Two years ago an official spoke insultingly and contemptuously
about me behind my back. They later told me about it. For about an hour I was
affected due to the Old Said’s vein of temperament. Then through Almighty God’s
mercy the following fact occurred to me; it dispelled the distress and made me forgive
the man. The fact is this:
I addressed my soul saying: if his insults and the faults he described concern my
person and my soul, may God be pleased with him, because he recounted the faults of
my soul. If he spoke the truth, he drove me to train my soul and he helped in saving
me from arrogance. If he spoke falsely, he has helped to save me from hypocrisy and
undeserved fame, the source of hypocrisy. No, I have not been reconciled with my
soul, for I have not trained it. If someone tells me there is a scorpion on my neck or
breast or else points it out to me, I should be grateful to him, not offended. But if the
man’s insults were directed towards my belief and my attribute of being servant of the
Qur’an, it does not concern me. I refer him to the Qur’an’s Owner, Who employs me.
He is Mighty, He is Wise. And if it was merely to curse at me, insult me, and destroy
my character, that does not concern me either. For I am an exile, a prisoner, a

--- Sayfa 450 ---
461
stranger, and my hands are tied, and it does not fall to me to try to restore my honour
myself. It rather concerns the authorities of this village where I am a guest and under
surveillance, then of the district, then of the province. Insulting the prisoner of a
person, concerns the person; he defends the prisoner. Since the reality of the matter is
this, my heart became easy. I said,
My [own] affair I commit to God; for God [ever] watches over His
servants.51
I thought of the incident as not having happened. But unfortunately it was later
understood that the Qur’an had not forgiven him...
The Second Story: This year I heard that an incident had occurred. Although I
only heard a brief account of it after it had happened, I was treated as though I had
been closely connected with it. Anyway I do not correspond with anyone, and if I do, I
only write extremely rarely concerning some question of belief to a friend. In fact I
have written only one letter to my brother in four years. Both I prevent myself from
mixing with others, and ‘the worldly’ prevent me. I have only been able to meet with
one or two close friends once or twice a week. As for visitors to the village, once or
twice a month perhaps one or two used to meet with me for one or two minutes
concerning some matter to do with the hereafter. In exile, a stranger, alone, with no
one, I was barred from everything, from everyone, in a village which was unsuitable
for someone like me to work for a livelihood. Even, four years ago I repaired a
tumble-down mosque. Although with the certificate I had from my own region to act
an imam and preacher I acted as imam in the mosque for four years (May God accept
it), this past Ramadan I could not go to the mosque. Sometimes I performed the five
daily prayers alone. I was deprived of the twenty-fivefold merit and good of
performing the prayers in congregation.
I displayed the same patience and forbearance in the face of these two incidents
that befell me as I did towards the treatment of that official two years ago. God willing
I shall continue to do so. I think like this and say: if this ill-treatment, distress, and
oppression inflicted on me by ‘the worldly’ is for my faulty soul, I forgive it. Perhaps
my soul will be reformed by means of it, and perhaps it will be atonement for its sins. I
have experienced many of the good things in this guest-house of the world; if I
experience a little of its trials, I shall still offer thanks. If ‘the worldly’ oppress me
because of my service of belief and the Qur’an, it is not up to me to defend it. I refer it
to the Mighty and Compelling One. If

51 Qur’an, 40:44.

--- Sayfa 451 ---
462
the intention is to destroy the regard in which I am held generally, to expunge
undeserved fame, which is baseless and causes hypocrisy and destroys sincerity, then
may God bless them! For I consider being held in regard by people generally and
gaining a name among them to be harmful for people like me. Those who have
dealings with me know that I do not want respect to be shown to me, indeed, I can’t
abide it. I have even scolded a valuable friend of mine perhaps fifty times for showing
me excessive respect. If their intention in slandering me, belittling me in the eyes of the
people, and defaming me is directed towards the truths of belief and the Qur’an of
which I am the interpreter, it is pointless. For a veil cannot be drawn over the stars of
the Qur’an. “One who closes his eyes only himself does not see; he does not make it
night for anyone else.”
FOURTH POINT
The answer to a number of suspicious questions:
T h e  F i r s t : ‘The worldly’ say to me: “How do you live? What do you live on
since you do not work? We don’t want people in our country who sit around idly and
live off the labour of others.”
T h e  A n s w e r : I live through frugality and the resulting plenty. I am not
obliged to anyone other the One Who provides for me and I have taken the decision
not to become obliged to anyone else. Yes, someone who lives on a hundred para, or
even forty para, does not become obliged to anyone. I do not want to explain this
matter. To do so is most disagreeable to me, as it may make me feel a sort of pride or
egotism. But since ‘the worldly’ ask about it suspiciously, I reply as follows: since my
childhood, throughout my life, it has been a principle of my life not to accept anything
from the people, even zakat, not to accept a salary —only I was compelled to accept
one for one or two years in the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islamiye on the insistence of my
friends— and not to become obliged to people for a worldly livelihood. The people of
my native region and those who have known me in other places know this. During
these five years of exile, many friends have tried earnestly to make me accept their
gifts, but I have accepted none of them. If, therefore, it is asked me, “So how do you
manage to live?”, I reply: I live through Divine bestowal and blessings. For sure, my
soul deserves all insults and contempt, but as a wonder resulting from service of the
Qur’an, I receive plenty and blessings which are a Divine bestowal in the matter of
sustenance. In accordance with the verse,
But the bounty of your Sustainer rehearse and proclaim,52

52 Qur’an, 93:11.

--- Sayfa 452 ---
463
I shall recall the bounties Almighty God has bestowed on me, and mention a few
examples by way of thanks. But together with being thanks, I am frightened that it will
induce hypocrisy and pride so that blessed plenty will be cut. For to make known a
secret Divine gift of plenty causes it to cease. But what can I do, I am compelled to
tell them.
The First: This six months one bushel (kile)53 of wheat, consisting of thirty-six
loaves of bread, has sufficed me. There is still some left, it is not finished. How much
longer54 it will last, I do not know.
The Second: This blessed month of Ramadan I received food from only two
houses, and both of them made me ill. I understood that I am prohibited from eating
the food of others. The rest of the time, in the whole of Ramadan, three loaves of
bread and one okka55 of rice sufficed me, as was witnessed and told by Abdullah
Çavus, the owner of a blessed house and a loyal friend who saw my economizing. The
rice even was finished two weeks after the end of Ramadan.
The Third: For three months on the mountain one kiyye56 of butter was enough
for me and my guests, eating it every day together with bread. On one occasion even I
had a blessed visitor called Süleyman. Both his bread and my bread were about to be
finished. It was Wednesday. I told him to go and get some bread. For two hours’
distance on every side of us there was no one from whom he could have got any
bread. He said that he wanted to stay with me on the mountain on Thursday night so
that we could pray together. Saying, Our reliance is on God, I told him to stay. Later,
although it had no connection with this and there was no reason for it, we both began
walking till we reached the top of the mountain. There was a little water in the ewer,
and we had a small piece of sugar and some tea. I said to him: “Brother! Make some
tea!” He set about making it and I sat down under a cedar-tree overlooking a deep
ravine. I thought regretfully to myself: we have a bit of mouldy bread which will only
just be enough for us this evening. What shall we do for two days and what shall I say
to this ingenuous man? While thinking this, I suddenly turned my head involuntarily
and I saw a huge loaf of bread on the cedar-tree in among the branches; it was facing
us. I exclaimed: “Süleyman! Good news! Almighty God has sent us food.” We took
the bread, and looking at it saw that no bird or wild animal had touched it. And for
twenty or thirty days no one at all had climbed to the top of that mountain. The bread
was sufficient for us for the two days. While we

53 36.5 lbs. [Tr.]
54 It lasted a year.
55 About 2.8 lbs. or 1,300 grammes.  [Tr.]
56 About 2.8 lbs. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 453 ---
464
were eating and it was about to be finished, righteous Süleyman who had been the
most loyal of loyal friends for four years, suddenly appeared from below with more
bread.
The Fourth: I bought this sack coat that I’m wearing seven years ago second-
hand. In five years I have spent only four and a half liras on clothes, underwear,
slippers, and stockings. Frugality and Divine mercy and the resulting plenty have
sufficed me.
Thus, there are numerous things like these examples and numerous sorts of Divine
blessings. The people of this village know most of them. But do not suppose I am
mentioning them out of pride, I have been forced to, rather. And do not think they
were due to my goodness. These instances of plenty were either bestowal to the
sincere friends who have visited me, or a bestowal on account of service to the
Qur’an, or an abundance and benefit resulting from frugality, or they have been
sustenance for the four cats I have which recite the Divine Names “O Most
Compassionate One! O Most Compassionate One!”, which comes in the form of
plenty and from which I benefit too.
Yes, if you listen carefully to their mournful miaowings, you will understand that
they are saying, “Ya Rahim! Ya Rahim! O Most Compassionate One!  O Most
Compassionate One!” We have arrived at the subject of cats and it has recalled the
hen. I have a hen. This winter every day almost without exception she brought me an
egg from the treasury of Mercy. Then one day she brought me two eggs and I was
astonished. I asked my friends “How can this be?” They replied: “Perhaps it is a Divine
gift.” The hen also has a young chick she hatched in the summer. It started to lay at
the beginning of Ramadan and continued for forty days. Neither I nor those who assist
me have any doubt that, being both young, and in winter, and in Ramadan, this blessed
situation was a Divine gift and bestowal. And whenever the mother stopped laying, it
immediately started, not leaving me without eggs.
S e c o n d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n :  ‘The worldly’ ask: How can we be
confident that you will not interfere in our world? If we leave you free, perhaps you
may interfere in it. Also, how do we know that you are not being cunning? How do we
know that it is not a stratagem, showing yourself to have abandoned the world and not
taking things from the people openly, but secretly?
T h e  A n s w e r : My attitude and situation in the Court Martial and in the
period before the proclamation of the Constitution, which are known by many, and my
defence in the Court Martial at that time called The Testimony of Two Schools of
Misfortune, show decisively that the

--- Sayfa 454 ---
465
life I lived was such that I would not resort to the tiniest wiles, let alone cunning and
subterfuge. If trickery had been resorted to in this last five years, application would
have been made to you in sycophantic manner. A wilely man tries to ingratiate himself.
He does not hold back; he always tries to deceive and hoodwink. Whereas I have not
condescended to lower myself by responding to the severest attacks and criticisms
levelled at me. Saying, I place my trust in God, I turned my back on ‘the worldly.’
Moreover, one who discovers the reality of this world and knows the hereafter, is not
sorry if he is sensible; he does not turn back to the world and struggle with it again.
Someone after the age of fifty who has no connection with anything and is alone, will
not sacrifice eternal life for one or two years of the chatter and deception of this
world. If he does so, he is not cunning, but foolish and crazy. What can a crazy lunatic
do so that anyone should bother with him? As for the suspicion of outwardly
abandoning the world while inwardly seeking it, in accordance with the verse,
Nor do I absolve my own self [of blame]; the [human] soul is certainly
prone to evil,57
I do not exonerate my soul, for it wants everything bad. But in this fleeting world,
this temporary guest-house, during old age, in a brief life, it is not reasonable to
destroy eternal, everlasting life and eternal happiness for a little bit of pleasure. Since it
is not profitable for the reasonable and the aware, my soul has willy-nilly had to follow
my reason.
T h e  T h i r d  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n : ‘The worldly’ say: Do you like
us? Do you approve of us? If you do like us, why are you stand-offish and have
nothing to do with us? If you do not like us, that means you object to us, and we crush
those who object to us.
T h e  A n s w e r : Not you, if I had loved your world, I would not have
withdrawn from it. I don’t like either you or your world. But I do not interfere with
them. For I have different goals, different points have filled my heart; they have left no
place in my heart to think of other things. Your duty is to look to the hand, not to the
heart. For you seek your government and your public order. So long as the hand does
not interfere, what right do you have to interfere in the heart and say, “the heart should
love us too,” although you are in no way worthy of it? Yes, just as I desire and long
for the spring during this winter, but I cannot will it nor attempt to bring it, so I long
for the world to be righted and I pray for it and I want the worldly to be reformed, but
I cannot will these

57 Qur’an, 12:53.

--- Sayfa 455 ---
466
things, because I do not have the power. I cannot attempt them in fact, because it is
neither my duty, nor do I have the capacity.
F o u r t h  S u s p i c i o u s  Q u e s t i o n :  ‘The worldly’ say: we have
experienced so many calamities, we no longer have confidence in anyone. How can we
be certain that given the opportunity you won’t interfere as you wish?
T h e  A n s w e r :  The previous points should give you confidence. In addition,
since I did not interfere in your world while in my native region among my students
and relatives, in the midst of those who heeded me and of exciting events, for someone
who is alone in exile, with no one, a stranger, weak, powerless, turned with all his
strength towards the hereafter, cut off from all social relations and correspondence,
who has only found a few friends from far afield who are also turned to the hereafter,
and who is a stranger to everyone else and whom everyone else regards as a stranger
— for such a person to interfere in your fruitless and dangerous world would surely be
a compounded lunacy.
FIFTH POINT
This concerns five small matters.
T h e  F i r s t :  ‘The worldly’ ask me: Why do you yourself not practise the
principles of our civilization, our style of life, and our manner of dressing? Does this
mean you oppose us?
M y  r e p l y :  Sirs! What right do you have to propose to me the principles of
your civilization? For as though casting me outside the laws of civilization, you have
wrongfully forced me to reside in a village for five years prohibited from all social
relations and correspondence. While you left all the exiles in the town with their
friends and relations, then gave them the papers granting them an amnesty, without
reason you isolated me and did not allow me to meet with anyone from my native
region with one or two exceptions. That means you do not count me as a member of
this nation and a citizen. How can you propose to me that I apply your civil code to
myself? You have made the world into a prison for me. Such things cannot be
proposed to someone in prison. You closed the door of the world on me, so I knocked
on the door of the hereafter, and Divine mercy opened it to me. How can the confused
customs and principles of the world be proposed to someone at the door of the
hereafter? Whenever you set me free and return me to my native region and restore my
rights, then you can require me to conform to your principles.
S e c o n d  M a t t e r  : ‘The worldly’ say: “We have an official department for
instructing in the precepts of religion and truths of Islam.

--- Sayfa 456 ---
467
With what authority do you publish religious works? Being a convicted exile, you have
no right to mix in these matters.”
T h e  A n s w e r :  Truth and reality cannot be restricted. How can belief and the
Qur’an be restricted? You can restrict the principles and laws of your world, but the
truths of belief and Qur’anic principles cannot be forced into the form of worldly
dealings, be given an official guise and offered in return for a wage. Those mysteries
which are Divine gifts, those blessings, come rather through a sincere intention and
giving up the world and carnal pleasures. Moreover, that official department of yours
accepted me and appointed me as a preacher while I was in my home region. I
accepted the position, but rejected the salary. I have the document in my possession.
With the document I can act as an imam and preacher everywhere, because my being
exiled was unjust. Also, since the exiles have been returned, my old documents are still
valid.
Secondly: I addressed the truths of belief which I have written directly to my own
soul. I do not invite everyone. Rather, those whose spirits are needy and hearts
wounded search out and find those Qur’anic remedies. Only, to secure my livelihood I
had printed a treatise of mine about the resurrection of the dead before the new script
was introduced. And the former governor, who was unfair to me, studied the treatise,
but did nothing against it since he could find nothing in it to criticize.
T h i r d  M a t t e r : Some of my friends remain apparently aloof from me
because ‘the worldly’ consider me with suspicion and in order to appear favourable to
‘the worldly,’ indeed, they criticize me. But the cunning ‘worldly’ attribute their
aloofness and avoiding me not to their loyalty to ‘the worldly’ but to a sort of
hypocrisy and lack of conscience, and they look on those friends of mine coldly.
So I say this: O my friends of the hereafter! Don’t stand aloof from my being a
servant of the Qur’an and run away. Because, God willing, no harm will come to you
from me. Suppose some calamity is visited on you or I am oppressed, you cannot be
saved by avoiding me. By doing that you will make yourselves more deserving of
calamity and a blow. What is there, that you should have these groundless fears?
F o u r t h  M a t t e r :  I see during this time of my exile that certain boastful
people who have fallen into the swamp of politics regard me in a partisan manner, with
rivalry, as though I am connected with the worldly currents like they are.
Sirs! I am in the current of belief. Before me is the current of unbelief. I have no
connection with other currents. Perhaps some of those who work for a wage see
themselves as excused to a degree. But to take up a

--- Sayfa 457 ---
468
position opposed to me in rivalry for no wage in the name of patriotism, and harass
me, and oppress me, is a truly grievous error. For as was proved above, I have no
connection at all with world politics. I have dedicated and vowed all my time and my
life to the truths of belief and the Qur’an. Since it is thus, let the one who torments and
harasses me in rivalry think that such treatment of his is similar to causing harm to
belief in the name of atheism and unbelief.
F i f t h  M a t t e r :  Since this world is transitory, and since life is short, and
since the truly essential duties are many, and since eternal life will be gained here, and
since the world is not without an owner, and since this guest-house of the world has a
most Wise and Generous director, and since neither good nor bad will remain without
recompense, and since according to the verse,
On no soul does God place a burden greater than it can bear58
there is no obligation that cannot be borne, and since a safe way is preferable to a
harmful way, and since worldly friends and ranks last only till the door of the grave,
then surely the most fortunate is he who does not forget the hereafter for this world,
and does not sacrifice the hereafter for this world, and does not destroy the life of the
hereafter for worldly life, and does not waste his life on trivial things, but considers
himself to be a guest and acts in accordance with the commands of the guest-house’s
Owner, then opens the door of the grave in confidence and enters upon eternal
happiness.59

58 Qur’an, 2:286.
59 The reason for these ‘sinces’ is this: I take no notice of the wrongs and tyranny perpetrated
against my person and give them no importance. I say, “They are not worth worrying about,” and I do
not interfere in the world.

--- Sayfa 458 ---
469
The Addendum to the Sixteenth Letter
In His Name!
There is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
Without reason ‘the worldly’ became suspicious of a powerless stranger like
myself, and imagining me to have the power of thousands of people, put me under
numerous restrictions. They did not give permission for me to stay one or two nights
in Bedre, a district of Barla, or on one of the mountains of Barla. I heard that they say:
“Said has power equal to that of fifty thousand soldiers, we cannot therefore set him
free.”
So I say: You unhappy people whose view is restricted to this world! How is it
that you do not know the matters of the world, despite working for the world with all
your strength, and govern it like lunatics? If it is my person you fear, it is not fifty
thousand soldiers, one soldier even could do more than me. That is, he could be
posted at the door of my room and tell me: “You can’t go out!”
But if it is my profession and my being herald of the Qur’an and the moral
strength of belief that you fear, then you are wrong, it is not fifty thousand soldiers,
you should be aware that in respect of my profession I have the strength of fifty
million! For through the strength of the All-Wise Qur’an, I challenge all Europe
including your irreligious people. Through the lights of belief I have published I have
razed the sturdy bastions they call the physical sciences and Nature. I have cast down
lower than animals their greatest irreligious philosophers. If all Europe was to gather,
of which your irreligious people are a part, through God’s assistance, they could not
make me recant a single matter of that way of mine. God willing, they could not defeat
me....
Since the matter is thus, I do not interfere in your world, so don’t you interfere in
my hereafter! If you do, if it will be of no avail.
What is determined by God cannot be turned by force;
A flame that if lit by God, cannot be extinguished by puffing.

--- Sayfa 459 ---
470
‘The worldly’ are exceptionally and excessively suspicious of me; quite simply,
they are frightened of me. Imagining things non-existent in me, which even if they
were existent would not constitute a political crime and could not be the cause of
accusation, like being a shaykh, or of significant rank or family, or being a tribal leader,
and influential, and having numerous followers, or meeting with people from my native
region, or being connected with the affairs of the world, or even entering politics, or
even the opposition; imagining these things in me, they have been carried away by
groundless fears. At a time even that they are discussing pardoning those in prison and
outside, that is, those that according to them cannot be pardoned, they have quite
simply barred me from everything. A bad and ephemeral person wrote the following
good and enduring words:
If tyranny has cannon, shot, and forts,
Right has an untwistable arm, a constant face.
And I say:
If the worldly have rule, power, and strength,
Through the Qur’an’s effulgence, its servant
Has unfaltering knowledge, an unsilenceable voice;
He has an unerring heart, an unquenchable light.
Many friends, as well as a military commander under whose surveillance I was,
repeatedly asked: “Why don’t you apply for the release papers and put forward a
petition?”
T h e  A n s w e r :  I do not apply and I cannot apply for five or six reasons:
The First: I did not interfere in ‘the worldly’s’ world so that I should have been
convicted and apply to them. I was convicted by Divine Determining; my faults are
before it, and I apply to it.
The Second: I believe and have certain knowledge that this world is a swiftly
changing guest-house. Therefore, it is not the true homeland and everywhere is the
same. Since I am not going to remain permanently in my homeland, it is pointless to
struggle for it; it is not worth going there. Since everywhere is a guest-house, if the
mercy of the guest-house’s Owner befriends one, everyone is a friend and everywhere
familiar. Whereas if it does not befriend one, everywhere is a load on the heart and
everyone hostile.
The Third: Application is made within the framework of the law. But the way I
have been treated these six years has been arbitrary and outside the law. The Exiles’
Law was not applied to me. They looked on me as

--- Sayfa 460 ---
471
though I had been stripped of all the rights of civilization and even of all worldly
rights. To apply in the name of the law to those whose dealings with me have been
thus outside the law is meaningless.
The Fourth: This year, the local official applied in my name for me to stay for a
few days in the village of Bedre, which is a sort of district of Barla, for a change of air.
How can those who reject such an unimportant need of mine be applied to? If they are
applied to, it would be a futile and degrading abasement.
The Fifth: To claim a right before those who claim a wrong to be right, and to
apply to them, is a wrong. It is disrespectful towards right. I do not want to perpetrate
such a wrong and show disrespect for right. And that is that.
The Sixth: The distress and difficulty ‘the worldly’ have caused me has not been
due to politics, because they know I do not meddle in politics and flee from it. Rather,
knowingly or unknowingly, they torment me on account of aggressive atheism because
I am bound to religion. In which case, to apply to them infers regretting religion and
flattering the cause of aggressive atheism.
Moreover, Divine Determining, which is just, would punish me through their
tyrannical hand on my applying to them and having recourse to them, for they oppress
me because of my being bound to religion. As for Divine Determining, from time to
time it represses me due to my hypocrisy before ‘the worldly,’ because of my
deficiency in religion and in sincerity. Since this is so, for the time being I cannot be
saved from this distress. If I apply to the worldly, Divine Determining would say:
“Hypocrite! Pay the penalty for applying!” And if I do not apply, ‘the worldly’ say:
“You don’t recognize us, go on suffering difficulties!”
The Seventh Reason: It is well-known that an official’s duty is to give harmful
individuals no opportunity to cause harm and to assist those who are beneficial.
Whereas the official who took me into custody approached me, an elderly guest at the
door of the grave, when I was expounding a subtle aspect of belief contained in There
is no god but God as though I was perpetrating some misdemeanour, although he had
not been to me for a long time previously. He caused the sincere unfortunate who was
listening to be deprived, and me to be angry. There were certain people here, and he
attached no importance to them. Then when they acted discourteously in a way that
would poison the life of the village, he started to be gracious and appreciative towards
them.
Furthermore, it is well-known that someone in prison who has

--- Sayfa 461 ---
472
committed a hundred crimes can meet with the person who supervises him whether the
official be of high or low rank. But in this last year, although two important people in
the national government charged with supervising me have passed by my house several
times, they have absolutely neither met with me nor asked after my condition. At first I
supposed that they did not come near to me due to enmity, then it became clear that it
was due to their fearful suspicions; they were fleeing from me as though as I was
going to gobble them up. Thus, to recognize a government whose members and
officials are like those men and have recourse to it and apply to it, is not sensible, but a
futile abasement. If it had been the Old Said, he would have said, like ‘Antara:
The very water of life becomes Hell through abasement,
Whereas Hell with dignity becomes a place of pride.
The Old Said no longer exists, and the New Said considers it meaningless to talk with
‘the worldly.’ Let their world be the end of them! They can do what they like. He is
silent, saying, we shall be judged together with them at the Last Judgement.
The Eighth Reason for my not applying: According to the rule, “The result of
illicit love is merciless torment,” Divine Determining, which is just, torments me
through the tyrannous hand of ‘the worldly’ because I incline towards them, since they
are not worthy of it. Saying, I deserve this torment, I am silent. For in the Great War I
fought and strove as a Commander of a volunteer regiment. Applauded by the
Commander-in-Chief of the army and Enver Pasha, I sacrificed my valuable students
and friends. I was wounded and taken prisoner. Returning from captivity, I cast myself
into danger through works like The Seven Steps, aiming them at the heads of the
British, who had occupied Istanbul. I assisted those who hold me without reason in
this torment and captivity. As for them, they punish me in this way for that help. Those
friends here cause me in three months the hardship and distress I suffered in three
years as a prisoner-of-war in Russia. And the Russians did not prevent me from giving
religious instruction, although they regarded me as a Kurdish Militia Commander, a
cruel man who had slaughtered Cossacks and prisoners. I used to instruct the great
majority of my ninety fellow officer prisoners. One time, the Russian commander came
and listened. Because he did not know Turkish, he thought it was political instruction,
and put a stop to it. Then later he gave permission. Also, in the same barracks, we
made a room into a mosque, and I used to lead the prayers. They did not interfere at
all. They did not prevent me from mixing, or from communicating, with the others.
Whereas my friends here, my fellow citizens and co-religionists

--- Sayfa 462 ---
473
and those for whose benefits in the form of religious belief I have struggled, have held
me in a tortuous captivity not for three years, but for six, for absolutely no reason and
although they know I have severed all my relations with the world. They have
prevented me mixing with others. They have prevented me from giving religious
instruction, despite my having a certificate, and even from giving private instruction in
my room. They have prevented me from communicating with others. They have even
barred me from the mosque which I repaired and where I acted as prayer-leader for
four years, although I had the necessary certificate. And now, to deprive me of the
merit of performing the prayers in congregation, they do not accept me as prayer-
leader even for three private individuals, my permanent congregation and brothers of
the hereafter.
Furthermore, if, although I do not want it, someone is to call me good, the official
who holds me in surveillance is jealous and angry. Thinking he will destroy my
influence, he entirely unscrupulously takes precautions, and pesters me in order to
curry favour with his superiors.
To whom can someone in such a position have recourse other than God
Almighty? If the judge is also the claimant, of course he cannot complain to him.
Come on, you say! What can we say to this? You say what you like, I say this: there
are many dissemblers among these friends of mine. A dissembler is worse than an
unbeliever. For that reason they make me suffer what the infidel Russian did not make
me suffer.
You unfortunates, what have I done to you and what I am doing? I am trying to
save your belief and am serving your eternal happiness! It means that my service is not
sincere and purely for God’s sake so that it has the reverse effect. In return, you
torment me at every opportunity. For sure, we shall meet at the Last Judgement. I say:
God is enough for us and the best of protectors.60 * The best of lords and the
best of helpers.61
The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One!
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i

60 Qur’an, 3:173.
61 Qur’an, 8:40.

--- Sayfa 463 ---
474
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I shall explain in three ‘Points’ an effective solace for those who are experiencing
the calamity of prison, and for those who kindly help them and faithfully supervise
their food, which comes from outside.
First Point: Each day spent in prison may gain as much as ten days’ worship, and,
with regards to their fruits, may transform those transient hours into enduring hours,
and through five or ten years’ punishment may be the means of saving a person from
millions of years of eternal imprisonment. For the believers, the condition for gaining
this most significant and valuable advantage is to perform the obligatory prayers,
repent for the sins that were the cause of their imprisonment, and offer thanks in
patience. For sure, prison is an obstacle to many sins; it does not provide the
opportunity for them.
Second Point: Just as the cessation of pleasure causes pain, so does the cessation
of pain give pleasure. Yes, on thinking of past happy, enjoyable days, everyone feels a
pang of regret and longing, and says: “Alas!”, and recalling calamitous, unhappy days
of the past, experiences a sort of pleasure since they are passed, and says: “Praise and
thanks be to God, that calamity has left its reward and departed.” He breathes a sigh of
relief. That is to say, an hour’s temporary pain and sorrow leave behind a sort of
pleasure in the spirit, while a pleasurable hour leaves a pain.
Since the reality is thus; and since past calamitous hours together with their pains
are no longer existent, and future distressing days are at the present time non-existent,
and there is no pain from nothing, to continually eat bread and drink water today, for
example, because of the possibility of being hungry and thirsty in several days’ time, is
most foolish. In just the same way, to think now of the past and future unhappy hours,
which simply do not exist, and to display impatience, and ignoring one’s faulty self, to
moan as though complaining about God is also most foolish. So long as the power of
patience is not scattered to left and right, that is, to the past and future, and is held
firm in the face of the present of hour and day, it is sufficient. The distress is reduced
from ten to one.
In fact, but let it not be complaining, Divine favour pointed out the above fact to
me while, during a few days of material and spiritual affliction, illness and trial the like
of which I had never before experienced in my life, I was being crushed in particular by
the despair and distress of

--- Sayfa 464 ---
475
the heart and spirit which resulted from my being unable to serve the Qur’an and belief
with the Risale-i Nur. I was then content with my distressing illness and imprisonment.
For, saying: “It is great profit for an unfortunate like myself who waits at the door of
the grave to make one hour which might be passed in heedlessness ten hours’ worth of
worship,” I gave thanks.
Third Point: There is great gain in compassionately aiding and assisting prisoners,
in giving them the sustenance they need, and in soothing their spiritual wounds with
consolation. Giving them their food which comes from outside is like alms-giving
which, exactly to the amount of the food, is written in the book of good deeds of
those, outside and inside, who do this, together with the warders concerned.
Especially if the unhappy prisoner is old, ill, poor, or a stranger, then the reward of this
alms-giving increases many times over.
The condition of this high profit is to perform the obligatory prayers so that such
service is for God’s sake. Another condition is to hasten to their assistance with
sincerity, compassion and joy, and in such a way as to not make them feel obliged.
*  *  *
A Short Addendum from A Guide For Youth
In His Name, be He glorified!
Those in prison are in great need of the true consolation of the Risale-i Nur.
Particularly those who having suffered the blows of youth, are passing their sweet,
young lives in prison; they need the Risale-i Nur as much as they need bread.
Indeed, youth heeds the emotions rather than reason, and emotions and desires are
blind; they do not consider the consequences. They prefer one ounce of immediate
pleasure to tons of future pleasure. They kill for the one minute pleasure of revenge,
then suffer for eighty thousand hours the pain of prison. And one hour’s dissolute
pleasure in questions of honour may result in life’s enjoyment being utterly destroyed
due to distress at the fear of both prison and enemies. There are many other examples,
many pitfalls for the unfortunate young because of which they transform their sweet
lives into the most bitter and pitiable lives.
Consider a vast state to the north;62 it has gained possession of the

62 This refers to Russia. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 465 ---
476
passions of its young people and is shaking this century with its storms. For it has
made lawful for its youths the pleasing daughters and wives of upright people, and
these youths act only according to their feelings, which are blind to all consequences.
By permitting men and women to go together to the public baths, they are even
encouraging immorality. And they consider it lawful for vagabonds and the poor to
plunder the property of the rich. All mankind trembles in the face of this calamity.
It is therefore most necessary in this century for all Muslim youths to act
heroically, and to respond to this two-pronged attack with keen swords like The Fruits
of Belief and A Guide For Youth from the Risale-i Nur. Otherwise those unfortunate
youths will destroy utterly both their futures in this world, and their agreeable lives,
and their happiness in the hereafter, and their eternal lives, and transform them into
torment and suffering. Furthermore, through their abuses and dissoluteness, they will
end up in hospitals, and through their excesses in life, in prisons. In their old age, they
will weep copiously with a thousand regrets.
If, on the other hand, they protect themselves with Qur’anic training and with the
truths of the Risale-i Nur, they will become truly heroic youths, perfect human beings,
successful Muslims, and in some ways rulers over animate beings and the rest of the
animal kingdom.
When a youth in prison spends one hour out of the twenty-four each day on the
five obligatory prayers, and repents for the mistakes that were the cause of his disaster,
and abstains from other harmful, painful sins, this will be of great benefit for both his
life, and his future, and his country, and his nation, and his relatives, and he will also
gain with his fleeting youth of ten to fifteen years an eternal, brilliant youth. Foremost
the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, and all the revealed scriptures, have given this
certain good news.
If such a youth demonstrates through moderation and obedience, his gratitude for
the pleasing, delightful bounty of youth, it will both increase it, and make it eternal,
and make it a pleasure. Otherwise it will be both calamitous, and become painful,
grievous, and a nightmare, and then it will depart. It will cause him to become like a
vagrant, harmful for both his relatives, and his country, and his nation.
If the prisoner has been sentenced unjustly, on condition he performs the
obligatory prayers, each hour will be the equivalent of a day’s worship, and the prison
will be like a recluse’s cell. He will be counted among the pious hermits of olden times
who retired to caves in order to devote themselves to worship. If he is poor, aged, and
ill, and desirous of the truths of belief, on condition he performs the obligatory prayers
and

--- Sayfa 466 ---
477
repents, each hour will become the equivalent of twenty hours’ worship, and prison
will become like a rest-house for him, and because of his friends there who regard him
with affection, a place of love, training, and education. He will probably be happier
staying in prison than being free, for outside he is confused and subject to the assaults
of sins from all sides. He may receive a complete education from prison. On being
released, it will not be as a murderer or thirsting for revenge, but as someone penitent,
proven by trial, well-behaved, and beneficial for his nation. In fact, the Denizli
prisoners became so extraordinarily well-behaved after studying the Risale-i Nur for
only a short time that some of those concerned said: “Studying the Risale-i Nur for
fifteen weeks is more effective at reforming them than putting them in prison for
fifteen years.”
Since death does not die, and the appointed hour is unknown, it may come at any
time; and since the grave cannot be closed, and troop after troop enter it and are lost;
and since it has been shown through the truths of the Qur’an that for those who
believe death is transformed into the discharge papers releasing them from eternal
annihilation, while for the corrupt and the dissolute it is disappearing for ever into
eternal annihilation, and is unending separation from their loved ones and all beings,
most certainly and with no doubt at all, the most fortunate person is he who with
patience and thanks fully benefits from his time in prison, and studying the Risale-i
Nur works to serve the Qur’an and his belief on the straight path.
O man who is addicted to enjoyment and pleasure! I am seventy-five years old,
and I know with utter certainty from thousands of experiences, proofs, and events that
true enjoyment, pain-free pleasure, grief-free joy, and life’s happiness are only to be
found in belief and in the sphere of the truths of faith. While a single worldly pleasure
yields numerous pains; as though dealing ten slaps for a single grape, it drives away all
life’s pleasure.
O you unfortunates who are experiencing the misfortune of prison! Since your
world is weeping and your life is bitter, strive so that your hereafter will not also weep,
and your eternal life will smile and be sweet! Benefit from prison! Just as sometimes
under severe conditions in the face of the enemy, an hour’s watch may be equivalent to
a year’s worship, so in the severe conditions you are experiencing, the hardship of
each hour spent as worship becomes the equivalent of many hours, it transforms that
hardship into mercy.

--- Sayfa 467 ---
478
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I offer you not my condolences but my congratulations. Since for some instance
of wisdom Divine Determining has sent us to this third School of Joseph (Medrese-i
Yusufiye),63 and has specified that we should eat some of the sustenance allotted us
here and it is that sustenance that has summoned here; and since as we have
understood certainly from our past experiences, Divine favour has manifested on us
the meaning of the verse, It is possible that you dislike a thing which is good for
you;64 and since our new brothers here in this School of Joseph are in more need of the
solace of the Risale-i Nur than anyone, and the members of the judiciary are more in
need of the rules and other sacred laws set out in the Risale-i Nur than other officials;
and since the very numerous copies of the Risale-i Nur are performing your duty
outside and their conquests do not cease; and since each fleeting hour passed here is
the equivalent of eternal hours passed in worship; surely, because of these points, we
should joyfully offer thanks for this affair in perfect patience and with fortitude. I am
going to repeat exactly to you all the short letters I wrote as consolation in Denizli
Prison. God willing, those apposite notes will comfort you too.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: I offer Almighty God endless thanks that heroes have emerged from
among the Muftis, preachers, imams, and hojas, for it is they who in fact should lay
claim to the Risale-i Nur. Up to now, it has been the youth, those educated in the
secular schools, and their teachers who have been devoted to the Risale-i Nur. Now,
thanks be to God, Ethem, the Ibrahim’s and Ali Osman’s have cleared the names of
the students and teachers of the religious schools, and transformed their timidity into
courage.
Secondly:  They should not worry about this incident, which occurred due to their
whole-hearted activities and excitement. For in respect of its consequences, Denizli
Prison caused those who had acted incautiously to be congratulated. Its difficulties
were few and immaterial benefits, numerous. This third School of Joseph will not lag
behind the second, God willing.
Thirdly: Since the merit increases proportionately to the hardships, we

63 Recalling the imprisonment of Yusuf, related in the Qur’an, Bediuzzaman called prison
‘Medrese-i Yusufiye’, the School of Joseph, impressing on his students that prison was essentially a
place of study and training. [Tr.]
64 Qur’an, 2:216.

--- Sayfa 468 ---
479
should offer thanks for these conditions. We should try to perform our duties of
serving religious belief with sincerity, which is our duty, and not concern ourselves
with being successful or obtaining good results, which is God’s concern. We should
say: “The best matters are the most difficult,”65 and patiently offer thanks in the face of
our difficulties in this place of trial. We should understand that it is a sign of the
acceptability of our actions and a diploma for having passed the examination of our
sacred struggle.
* * *
I have a petition I want to put before the prison administrators,
and chiefly the Prison Governor, which is apparently unimportant, but has great
importance in my eyes
After spending twenty-two years in total isolation, my seventy-five-year-old body
cannot sustain inoculations. In fact, long ago they inoculated me, and it left a
suppurating wound which persisted for twenty years. It was like a chronic poisoning.
Two doctors in Emirdağ and my friends there know this. Also, four years ago in
Denizli they inoculated me together with all the other prisoners. Although it had no
harmful effects on any of them, it made me ill for three weeks. Through Divine
preservation, I was not forced to go to the hospital, which for me is dangerous. It is
absolutely certain that my body cannot take inoculations. Both my excuses are
powerful, and being extremely weak at the age of seventy-five, I can take the
inoculation only of a ten-year-old child. Moreover, because I am in perpetual solitary
confinement, I do not have contact with anyone. Also, two months ago the provincial
governor sent two doctors to Emirdağ to give me a thorough examination. They could
find no trace of any contagious disease, only that I had lumbago, and was extremely
weak, elderly, and alone. This condition of mine certainly does not oblige me to be
inoculated.
I also have a very important request of you: Don’t send me to hospital. Don’t
force me into a situation I could never have endured these twenty-two years of solitary
confinement, that is, to be put under the command of nurses I do not know. I have
started to think of entering the grave as being pleasant, but for now I have chosen
prison, for the sake of the prison administrators, whose humanity I have witnessed,
and to console the other prisoners.

65 ‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 55; Muhammad al-Shaybani, Sharh al-Sirat al-Kabir, i, 11.

--- Sayfa 469 ---
480
My Dear , Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: Don’t be upset at my being ill-treated or at the contempt directed at my
person. For they can find no fault in the Risale-i Nur so struggle against my
unimportant and faulty self instead. I am pleased at this. I am bound by what I have
learnt from the Risale-i Nur to proudly offer thanks, if for its well-being and honour, I
suffer pains, misfortune, and insults even a thousand times greater. So you should not
pity me in this respect.
Secondly: The widespread, fierce, and merciless attack has for now abated
twentyfold. They rounded up a few people in place of thousands of ‘special’ (has)66
Risale-i Nur students, and a handful of new brothers instead of hundreds of thousands
of people who are concerned. That is, Divine grace made the assault very insignificant.
Thirdly: Through Divine grace, the former provincial governor, who for two
years was conspiring against us, has been repulsed, and there is a strong possibility
that the Interior Minister, whose suspicions had been excessively aroused about us, has
ameliorated this fierce assault due to his being from the same place and his forefathers
having been very religious. So do not despair or be alarmed!
Fourthly: Numerous experiences and events have shown in a way to make one
completely certain that if the Risale-i Nur weeps, either the earth quakes or the skies
weep too. As we have often seen with our own eyes and in part proved in court, the
start of winter smiling like summer in unprecedented fashion coincided with the
Risale-i Nur smiling at its being secretly duplicated by machine and published, and
then on its weeping when it came to a standstill with the widespread searches and
confiscations, this coincided with the sudden severe wrath and weeping of winter. It is
my guess that this is a powerful sign that the Risale-i Nur is a supreme, shining miracle
of the Qur’an’s reality this age, and that the earth and universe are concerned with it.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It suddenly occurred to me today that rather than offering condolences to those
sent by Divine Determining and destiny to this ‘school’ in connection with the Risale-i
Nur, I should congratulate them. For each has come in place of perhaps a thousand of
our innocent brothers, saving them to an

66 See, page 445, footnote 38.

--- Sayfa 470 ---
481
extent from trouble. Moreover, together with continuing to serve belief, they are
performing a huge service in a short time, like doing a hundred year’s work in ten
years. Also, they are embarking on this exacting struggle and the trial of this new
‘School of Joseph,’ in order to have a active share in its universal, far-reaching and
valuable consequences. They are also meeting with their loyal, sincere brothers
without difficulty, whom they were eager to see, and they are studying together. Since
the easy times in this world do not continue and go for nothing, surely the people who
make high gains with such little trouble should be congratulated.
My brothers! This widespread attack is against the Risale-i Nur’s conquests. But
they have understood that the more the Risale-i Nur is attacked, the more brilliantly it
shines; the circle of those it teaches is expanded and gains in importance; it is not
defeated; it only slips behind the veil of sirran tanawwarat.67 For this reason they have
changed their tactics and no longer attack the Risale-i Nur openly. But Divine favour
overspreads us, so we should offer thanks in perfect patience.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
It has become necessary to explain two of my strange and subtle states of mind.
The First: When, being in solitary confinement, I was unable to meet with my
brothers such as yourselves, whom I love more than my life, it was imparted to me that
there was a Divine favour and a benefit in this. For numerous of our brothers of the
hereafter were spending fifty liras coming to Emirdağ to see me, for fifty minutes,
some for ten minutes, and some returned without seeing me at all, and these they
would have thrown into this School of Joseph on some pretext. Even if with my little
available time and the state of mind arising from my seclusion I had been able to, the
work of serving the Risale-i Nur would not have permitted me to converse at length
with those devoted friends.
Secondly: One time a famous scholar was seen on numerous fronts in the War by
those who had gone to the jihad. They said to him... And he replied: “Certain saints
are doing this in my place in order to gain reward for me and allow the people of belief
to benefit from my teaching.” In

67 Sirran tanawwarat: a phrase taken from the qasidat al-Jaljalutiyya, attributed to Imam ‘Ali
ibn Abi Talib.

--- Sayfa 471 ---
482
exactly the same way, in Denizli it was even made known officially that I had been
seen in mosques there, and the governor and warders were informed. Some of them
became alarmed, asking, “Who opened the prison gates for him?” Exactly the same
thing happened here. But rather than attributing a very minor wonder to my own very
faulty and unimportant self, The Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen Collection, which
proves and demonstrates the Risale-i Nur’s wonders, wins confidence in it a hundred
or rather a thousand times more, and ratifies its acceptance. And the heroic students of
the Risale-i Nur in particular ratify it with their pens and states, which are truly
wonders.
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Don’t worry about me, I am pleased and happy just to be together with you in the
same building.
Our task now: one set of my defence speeches should be sent to Isparta. If
possible, twenty copies should be made both in the new letters, and by duplicating
machine in the old. It should even be shown to the public prosecutor there. A copy
should also be given to our lawyer in person, and another copy given to the prison
governor, which he should give to our defence lawyer. It should also be sent in both
the new letters and the old to the departments of government in Ankara, as it was sent
while we were in Denizli. If possible, five copies should be prepared to send to
Ankara. For the copies of the Risale-i Nur in the old letters which were seized, were
sent to those departments, and particularly to the Directorate of Religious Affairs,
before being sent here. Also, tell our lawyer, Ahmed Bey, that when writing out my
defence on the typewriter to pay especial attention to its being correct. For my manner
of expression does not resemble anyone else’s. Sometimes a wrong letter, or even a
wrong point, changes the matter in question and spoils the meaning. Also, if you are
not given permission to use the two typewriters that have been sent, they should be
returned. Also don’t become alarmed or dismayed. And don’t despair. As the verse
Verily with every difficulty, there is relief68 infers, Divine favour will swiftly come to
our aid, God willing.

68 Qur’an, 94:6.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
483
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The Risale-i Nur meets with you in my place and gives excellent instruction to the
new brothers who are eager for it. We have seen from experience that to be occupied
with the Risale-i Nur by either studying it, or reading it out loud, or writing it out,
affords an expansiveness to the heart, an ease to the spirit, health to the body, and
makes sustenance plentiful. Now a hero of the Risale-i Nur like Husrev has been
bestowed on you. God willing, this School of Joseph will be another blessed place of
study, part of the Medresetü’z-Zehra.69 Up to now, I had not shown Husrev70 to ‘the
worldly,’ and I was hiding him. But the published collections have shown him up
completely to the politicians, and nothing secret has remained. I have therefore
described two or three of his tasks to my ‘special’ (has) brothers. But now before us
among those who will listen to the truth are two awesomely obdurate people. One of
them emerged in Emirdağ, on account of both atheism and communism, and the other
here. They are trying with extreme cunning to alarm the officials and turn them against
us with slander. At present we have therefore to act with the greatest caution and not
be scared, and to bide our time relying on God till His grace comes to our assistance.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
My friends in prison and brothers in religion!
It occurred to me to explain a truth to you which will save you from both worldly
torment and the torment of the hereafter. It is as follows:
For example, a person killed someone’s brother or one of his relatives. A murder
which yields one minute’s pleasure of revenge causes millions

69 Medresetü’z-Zehrâ: the Islamic university Bediuzzaman had since his early youth
endeavoured to found in eastern Anatolia, in which the modern and religious sciences would be
taught side by side, and which he intended would play the central and unifying role in Asia that al-
Azhar plays in Africa. Despite twice receiving funds for it and actually laying the foundations, it was
never completed due to the vicissitudes of the times. Although it was not realized in the form he had
originally foreseen, while in Kastamonu (1936-’43), he wrote: “Endless thanks be to Almighty God
for He has made the province of Isparta into a Medresetü’z-Zehrâ, which has long been the goal of
my dreams, —into an al-Azhar University.” See, Kastamonu Lahikase (1960), 172. [Tr.]
70 Husrev Altinbasak (1899-1977) was from Isparta and became one of Bediuzzaman’s leading
students. With his fine handwriting he wrote out hundreds of copies of the treatises of the Risale-i
Nur. He is reputed to written nine copies of the Qur’an showing the ‘coincidences’ of the name of
‘Allah’. He was together with Bediuzzaman in the prisons of Eskishehir, Denizli, and Afyon. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 473 ---
484
of minutes of both distress for the heart and the anguish of prison. And the fear of
revenge by the murdered man’s relatives, and anxiety of finding himself face to face
with his enemy drives away all his pleasure in life. He suffers the torment of both fear
and anger. There is only one solution for this, and that is reconciliation, which the
Qur’an commands, and truth, reality, benefit, humanity, and Islam require and
encourage.
Certainly, in reality what is required is peace, because the appointed hour is set, it
does not change. Since his appointed hour had come, in any event the murdered man
would have stayed no longer. As for the murderer, he was the means of God’s decree
being carried out. So long as there is no reconciliation, both sides perpetually suffer
the torments of fear and revenge. It is because of this that Islam commands that “one
believer should not be vexed with another believer for more than three days.” If the
murder was not the result of a vindictive grudge and enmity, and a two-faced
troublemaker instigated the discord, it is essential to make peace quickly. Otherwise,
the minor disaster becomes a large one, and continues. If they make peace, and the
murderer repents and prays continuously for the man he killed, then both sides will
gain much and become like brothers. In place of one departed brother, he will gain
several religious brothers. He will be resigned to Divine Decree and Determining and
forgive his enemy. Especially since they heed the lessons of the Risale-i Nur, both
individual and public peace and well-being, and the brotherhood that there is in the
sphere of the Risale-i Nur, require that they put aside all the hard feelings that exist
between them.
It was thus in Denizli Prison; all the prisoners who were enemies became brothers
through the lessons of the Risale-i Nur. It was one reason for our acquittal, and
caused even the irreligious and ungodly to say about those prisoners: “Masha’llah!
Barakallah!” Also it was an utter relief for those prisoners. I myself have seen here a
hundred men suffer inconvenience on account of one man and not go out to take
exercise together. It is oppression towards them. A manly believer of sound
conscience will not cause hundreds of other believers harm because of some petty
error or benefit. If he makes a mistake and does cause harm, he should repent
immediately.

--- Sayfa 474 ---
485
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I congratulate both the Risale-i Nur, and you all, and myself, and give you the
good news of Husrev, Hıfzı, and Bartinli Seyyid. Those who went on the Hajj this year
learnt that prominent scholars in Mecca were translating the main collections of the
Risale-i Nur into both Arabic and Hindustani and were trying to have them published.
They had also found such favour in Medina that they had been placed on the blessed
tomb of the Prophet (PBUH) in the Rawdat al-Mutahhara. Haji Seyyid saw with his
own eyes The Staff of Moses (Asâ-yi Mûsa) on the Prophet’s tomb. That means it has
been found acceptable by the Prophet (PBUH) and was met with pleasure by him
(PBUH). As we told those who were going from here to make the Hajj, we had made
the intention and the Risale-i Nur was going to visit those blessed places in our stead.
Endless thanks be to God, one of the many benefits of the Risale-i Nur heroes
publishing those collections after having corrected them, is that they saved me both
from the task of correcting them myself and from that anxiety; so too, since those
copies will form the source for others written out by hand, they have become like
hundreds of ‘correctors.’ May the Most Merciful of the Merciful have written in the
records of their good works, a thousand merits for each letter of those collections.
Amen. Amen. Amen.
* * *
An Auspicious Dream
which turned out to be true
Ali, who assists me, came to me and said: “I had a dream in which you and
Husrev kissed the hand of the Prophet Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon
him).” Then I received the letter telling me that the Hajjis had seen The Staff of Moses
Collection, which had been written out by Husrev, on the Prophet’s  (PBUH) tomb.
This is to say, in effect The Staff of Moses kissed the Prophet’s (PBUH) hand in my
place by means of Husrev’s pen, and was found acceptable by the Prophet (PBUH).

--- Sayfa 475 ---
486
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Companions in Prison!
Firstly: Do not worry that we have not been able to meet in person. We are
constantly together in spirit. Whichever of the treatises of the Risale-i Nur you are
able to get hold of and read, and which you listen to, you will see me within it, but as a
servant of the Qur’an instead of my insignificant person, and you may converse with
me. For my part, I meet with you in imagination in all my prayers and in what you
have written, and it is as though we are all the time together in some sphere of
existence.
Secondly: We say this to the new students of the Risale-i Nur in this new School
of Joseph: as indicated by the Qur’an, and as even the committee of experts had to
admit, “The faithful Risale-i Nur students will enter their graves in a state of belief.
And through the effulgence its collective personality, according to his degree, each
student receives a share of the spiritual gains and supplications of all his brothers. It is
as though each seeks Divine forgiveness and worships with thousands of tongues.”
These two profits and results reduce to nothing all the difficulties and hardships of this
extraordinary time; the two high profits are given their faithful customers at a very lost
cost.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The Afyon defences contain important truths concerning both ourselves, and the
Risale-i Nur, and this country, and the Islamic world.
It is probably necessary to prepare five to ten copies of them in the new letters so
they may be sent to the departments of government in Ankara. Whether they release us
or punish us is of no importance, our task now is to inform both the Government, and
the courts, and the nation of the truths the defences contain. Perhaps that was one
reason Divine Determining sent us to this place of study. They should be written out
by typewriter as quickly as possible. Even if they were to release us today, we would
still be obliged to send them to Ankara. Don’t be deceived and put it off; enough now!
Let this be our last defence in the face of the extreme oppression and unprecedented
torments we have suffered three times in fifteen years for the same matter on trumped-
up charges. Since in

--- Sayfa 476 ---
487
the previous courts they legally gave us a typewriter so that we could defend
ourselves, they can cite no law for depriving us of the right here. If you find no
solution officially, our lawyer should write out five copies outside on a typewriter, but
he should pay great attention to their containing no mistakes.
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Loyal New Brothers and Old Prisoners!
I have formed the firm conclusion that, in respect of Divine favour, you are an
important cause in our entering here. That is to say, with its consolation and the truths
of belief, the Risale-i Nur is to save both you from the distress of this calamity of
prison and from much worldly harm, and your life from passing profitlessly and in vain
through grief and sorrow and being wasted on the winds of fancy, and your hereafter
from weeping like your world is weeping now; it is to provide you with true solace.
Since the reality of the matter is this, of course you must be brothers to one
another, like the Denizli prisoners and students of the Risale-i Nur. You can see that
they examine all your possessions, and food, bread, and soup which come from outside
so that a knife does not get in among you and you do not attack one another. The
warders who faithfully serve you suffer much trouble. Also, you do not go out to
exercise together, as though you were going to attack one another like wild beasts.
New friends, who are by nature bold and courageous! With great moral courage you
should say to the group at this time:
“If not knives, but Mausers and revolvers were given us, and the order to fire as
well, we would not hurt our friends who are unfortunate and suffering this calamity
like ourselves. Through the guidance and at the command of the Qur’an, and belief,
and Islamic brotherhood, and our interests, we have decided to forgive them and to try
not to offend them, even if formerly there were a hundred reasons for our hatred and
hostility,” so transforming this prison into an auspicious place of study.

--- Sayfa 477 ---
488
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Just as every group of the worldly engaged in politics, art, or some duty, or some
task related to the life of society, or some particular commercial activity, gathers
together in congresses of a sort to discuss its work, so the Risale-i Nur students, who
are engaged in the sacred service of certain, verified belief,71 have gathered together in
the congress of this School of Joseph at the order of Divine Determining, impelled by
dominical grace. God willing, numerous valuable, beneficial and significant results will
be bestowed in consequence, and that if the leading students have a value of ‘one’ in
other places like an alif,72 here coming shoulder to shoulder with three other alifs and
meeting with them, they will become one thousand one hundred and eleven, and in
consequence of this coming together their value, and God willing, their sacred service
and reward, will be a thousandfold; the single alif will become a thousand.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The reason they nailed up my window today was my greeting the prisoners in
connection with the trial. They apparently made something else the pretext. Don’t be
at all anxious. On the contrary, since they are preoccupied with my unimportant
person and not causing too much trouble to the Risale-i Nur and its students, I am
earnestly and sincerely pleased. Since they are persecuting me by insulting and
tormenting my person, it means they are not doing the same to you and the Risale-i
Nur, and lessens to an extent their interfering with the Risale-i Nur, so I offer thanks
in patience and am not anxious. You too should not be at all upset. I am of the opinion
that our covert enemies’ directing the attention of the officials towards my person is an
instance of Divine favour and a good thing from the point of view of the well-being of
the Risale-i Nur and its students. Certain of our brothers should not become angry and
speak sharply. They should act circumspectly and not become alarmed. They also
should not speak of this matter to everyone. For there are spies who attach the wrong
meanings to what our naive brothers and those who are not yet accustomed to being
cautious, say. The spies make mountains out of molehills

71 ‘Certain, verified belief’: an approximate translation of tahkikî  (Arabic: tahqiqi) iman. It also
has the meaning of ‘ascertained through enquiry,’ ‘resulting from investigation,’ and ‘confirmatory.’
See also, page 569, footnote 1. [Tr.]
72 Alif: the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, the numerical value of which is one, and which is
written as a vertical dash. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 478 ---
489
and may inform on them. Our situation now is no joking matter. Nevertheless, do not
be at all worried. We are under Divine protection and are resolved to meet all
hardships with perfect patience, indeed, with thanks. We are obliged to offer thanks,
for a small amount of hardship yields plentiful mercy and reward.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
For two important reasons, and in consequence of a powerful warning, I have
been obliged to leave, with respect to the heart, the task of all the defences to the
Risale-i Nur students who have been sent here and will be its leading students in the
future, especially H, R, T, F, S.73
First Reason: I understood certainly both in the examining magistrate’s office,
and from numerous other signs, that as far as they possibly can they are trying to make
difficulties for me and to prevent me defeating them intellectually, and that they have
received official communications. They are not allowing me to speak on various
pretexts as though if I do, I shall display political and scholarly prowess sufficient to
silence the court, and practised diplomats. In fact, while being questioned, I replied “I
don’t know” to one of the questions. In astonishment the judge asked: “How could
someone of your extraordinary intelligence forget something?” They suppose the
wondrous elevatedness of the Risale-i Nur and its scholarly findings to be the product
of my thought and they have taken fright. They do not want to let me speak. Also,
they think that anyone who meets with me immediately becomes a devoted Risale-i
Nur student, so they do not allow me to meet with anyone. The Head of the
Directorate of Religious Affairs even said: “Whoever meets with him is immediately
drawn to him; his power to attract is considerable.”
This means that the best thing for us now is for me to hand over my work to you.
And my old and new defence speeches, which you have, should take part in your
consultations in my place. That is sufficient.
The Second Reason: This is being left to another time. However, a brief indication
of that warning is this: an extremely powerful duty which looks to the hereafter and an
effective state of mind, which for twenty-five years have made me give up politics,
newspapers, and other transi

73 Husrev, Re’fet, Tahiri, Feyzi, and Sabri.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
490
tory things, and prevented me being occupied with them, are most definitely
preventing me being preoccupied with this question in detail. When consulting with
your two defence lawyers, you may sometimes discuss my duty too.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
This was imparted to me now as I was performing the prayers: because of their
excessively good opinion of you, your brothers await instruction and assistance, both
material and spiritual, from you. Just as in worldly affairs you have handed things over
to the ‘special’ (has) students, leaving them to the leading students (erkan) to confer
over, and you were right to do so, so you have appointed the Risale-i Nur and the
collective personality of its students to perform your scholarly work related to belief,
the Qur’an and the hereafter, and the collective personality of those purely sincere
‘special’ students performs that duty of yours much more completely than you, in
addition to the duties of its members. They always have done so up to now. For
instance, someone who meets with you and receives brief, minor instruction and a little
advice, may receive from a single part of the Risale-i Nur instruction a hundred times
greater. They may also receive advice from it. Thinking that their collective
personality, whose ‘station’ is extremely elevated and prayers acceptable, is an ‘Ustad’
and helper who, God willing, is always with them, it was consolation for my spirit, and
good news, and made me feel at peace.
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
There being two small explosions in two days in extraordinary and meaningful
fashion when there was no apparent reason for them, does not resemble chance.
The First: The cast-iron stove in my ward suddenly made a loud bang like a
revolver, and the thick, strong iron of its lower part exploded like bomb, splitting into
two pieces. Hamdi the Tailor was startled and we were left in astonishment. For on
numerous occasions this winter it had been red hot with the coal, and had withstood it.
The Second: The second day in Feyzi’s ward, for no reason at all the beaker on
top of the water pitcher suddenly disintegrated in extraordinary fashion. It occurred to
me that the terrible bombs prepared against us in

--- Sayfa 480 ---
491
Ankara caused our defence speeches, which had been sent to six departments of
government there, to explode, without causing us harm, God willing; and the angry
stove which had been lit against us split into two without harming us. It is also
possible that my beloved stove, my only and very useful companion, listened to my
sorrows and entreaties, and was giving me the news: “You’re going to depart from
this dark dungeon, no need remains for me...”
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Today, due to a spiritual warning, I felt a disquiet, a grief, on account of you. Just
when I was feeling upset at those of my brothers who being anxious about their
livelihoods want to be released quickly, a blessed memory occasioned a truth and some
good tidings to be imparted to me: the ‘Three Months’ will begin in five days time,
which are truly blessed and are the months of highly meritorious worship. For if the
reward yielded by good works at other times are tenfold, in the month of Rajab they
are more than a hundredfold, in Sha‘ban they exceed three hundredfold, and in
Ramadan they reach a thousandfold, while on Fridays in Ramadan they reach
thousands and on the Night of Power may reach thirty thousand. It is certainly highly
profitable therefore, to spend those three months —which are thus a sacred market for
the trade of the hereafter earning plentiful gains for it, and an exceptional exhibition
for the people of reality and worship, and in three months may secure for the believers
a life of eighty years— in this School of Joseph, which increases the profits tenfold.
Whatever the hardships suffered, they are pure mercy. As with worship, so with the
service of the Risale-i Nur; with respect not to quantity but quality, its profits are
fivefold. For people are continuously entering this guest-house, then being released,
and they are means of the Risale-i Nur’s lessons being disseminated. Sometimes one
man’s sincerity yields the benefits of twenty men. It is of no importance if such a man
suffers a little hardship and distress so that the mystery of the Risale-i Nur’s sincerity
might spread among the unfortunate prisoners, who are inclined to be political heroes
and are much in need of the Risale-i Nur’s solace. In regard to the problem of
livelihood, since these three months are a market for the hereafter, I felt perfectly easy
at it and understood that being here inside until the Bayram74 is a great bounty, for

74 Bayram: Arabic, ‘Id, the two big festivals in the Muslim calendar. Here, the festival marking
the end of Ramadan. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 481 ---
492
since all of you were sent to this prison in place of numerous other Risale-i Nur
students, and some of you in place of a thousand, they will help out in your business
outside.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: I offer you congratulations with all my heart and soul for the month of
Rajab and the holy night of Ragha’ib tomorrow.
Secondly: Don’t give up hope, and don’t worry or be alarmed. God willing,
Divine grace will come to our aid. The bomb that was being prepared these last three
months exploded. The news given by my stove, Feyzi’s beaker, and Husrev’s two
drinking-cups turned out to be true. But it was not terrible, it was slight. God willing,
the fire will be extinguished completely. All their assaults are to discredit my person
and taint the Risale-i Nur’s conquests. The blow the man more harmful than the covert
dissembler in Emirdağ and merely a pawn in the hands of secret atheists, and the
‘semi-hoja’ who favours the innovations, were trying to strike us as hard as they could
was reduced twentyfold. God willing, they will cause us not even one wound, and
what they think and intend and their plans to scare us away from each other and from
the Risale-i Nur will come to nothing. It is absolutely essential that out of respect for
these blessed months, trusting that they are gaining abundant reward for us, we
steadfastly offer thanks in patience, and relying on God, submit to the rule ‘He who
believes in Divine Determining is saved from unhappiness.’
                                                           S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 482 ---
493
To the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Justice,
and Ministry of Home Affairs75
All members of the Government who saw the Proclamation of the Constitution,
the First World War, the Armistice Period, the setting up of the Nationalist
Government, and the Republic know me well. Nevertheless, with your permission, we
shall take a look at my life as though on a film.
I was born in the village of Nurs in the province of Bitlis. As a student, I debated
with the scholars I encountered, and through Divine favour, defeating in scholarly
debate all who opposed me, I came as far as Istanbul. In Istanbul, winning calamitous
fame, a victim of my rivals’ trouble-making, I was dragged to the lunatic asylum on the
orders of Sultan ‘Abdulhamid. On the Proclamation of the Constitution, I attracted the
attention of the government of the Committee of Union and Progress with my
activities during the Thirty-First of March Incident. I confronted them with the
proposal to open an Islamic university in Van called the Medresetü’z-Zehra,
resembling al-Azhar University. I even laid its foundations. On the outbreak of the
First War, I gathered together my students and took part in the War as the
Commander of a militia force. I fought on the Caucasian Front and was taken prisoner
at Bitlis. I escaped from where I was being held and returned to Istanbul. I was
appointed a member of the Darü’l-Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye. During the Armistice period, I
worked against the occupying forces with all my might, and on the victory of the
National Government, in appreciation I was summoned by it to Ankara, where I
repeated my proposal to open the university in Van.
The life I had lived up to then had been that of a patriot. I had wanted to serve
religion by means of politics. But from then on, I turned my back on the world
completely, and in my own words, buried the ‘Old Said’. As the ‘New Said’, devoting
myself entirely to the hereafter, I withdrew from the world. Retiring from social life, I
went into seclusion on the hill Yusha Tepesi in Istanbul. Later on I went to Bitlis and
Van, in my native region, where I lived in a cave. I remained alone with the pleasures
of my spirit and conscience. That is to say, taking as my principle “I seek refuge with
God from the Devil and politics,” I plunged into the depths of my own spiritual world.
Passing my time studying the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, I started to live as the ‘New
Said.’ But the manifestations of Divine

75 This piece was written by Ustad Bediuzzaman’s lawyers, with his permission while he was
being held in Afyon Prison, and was sent to the government ministries mentioned. Signed, Sungur

--- Sayfa 483 ---
494
Determining sent me as an exile to other places. Then, getting those with me to write
down the inspirations born in my heart from the effulgence of the Qur’an, a number of
treatises came to be written. I gave them the name of the Risale-i Nur. This name was
born in my conscience, for truly they were based on the light of the Qur’an. I believe
absolutely certainly that this was Divine inspiration, and I said to those who were
acting as scribes: “Barakallah!” For it is not possible to begrudge others the light of
belief.
Exchanging copies, these treatises of mine were written out by a number of
believers. I formed the opinion that they were driven on by God in order to strengthen
the injured belief of Muslims. I understood that just as no believer could obstruct this
Divine prompting, so I considered it a religious obligation to encourage it. Anyway
these treatises, which now number one hundred and thirty, consist entirely of
discussions of the hereafter and belief, and contain no deliberate mention of politics or
this world. Nevertheless, they became the object of interest of a number of
opportunists. Investigations were carried out into them, and I was arrested and sent to
the prisons of Eskişehir, Kastamonu, and Denizli. Trials were held. As a result, truth
was manifested and justice was executed, but those opportunists never wearied of
hounding us. This time they arrested me and sent me to Afyon. I am under arrest and
am being interrogated. They accuse me as follows:
1) You have founded a political society.
2) You publish ideas opposing the regime.
3) You harbour political aims.
The evidence for these are ten or fifteen sentences in two or three of my treatises.
Respected Minister! As Napoleon said: “Bring me a straightforward sentence to which
no second meaning can be attached, and I’ll have you executed for it!” There is no
sentence uttered by man which may not constitute an offence by having forced
meanings attached to it. Especially the writings of someone like me who has reached
seventy-five years of age, has withdrawn entirely from the life of this world, and has
dedicated his life here to that of the hereafter — they will certainly be free. Being close
to having a good intention, he will be fearless. It is unfair to study them simply in order
to seek out offences in them. It is nothing other than unjust. Not one of any of my one
hundred and thirty treatises comprises any purpose connected to the matters of this
world. Proceeding from the light of the Qur’an, they are all to do with the hereafter
and belief. In any event all the trials held up to now have come to the same conclusion
and have resulted in acquittals. It is therefore a shame to busy the courts unnecessarily
and take innocent believers away

--- Sayfa 484 ---
495
from their work and business in the name of the country and nation. While the Old
Said spent all his life for the sake of the happiness of the country and nation, how
could the New Said be preoccupied with politics when he is seventy-five years old and
has completely withdrawn from the world? This is your opinion too.
I have only one aim; it is this: at this time as I approach the grave, I hear the
hooting of the Bolshevik owls in this country, which is a Muslim land. The sound is
damaging the fundamentals of belief of the Islamic world. Making them lose their
belief, it binds the people, and particularly the youth, to itself. Struggling against it
with all my strength, I am calling the youth and all Muslims to believe. I am struggling
against these unbelieving masses. I want to enter the Divine presence with this struggle
of mine. This is all I do. As for those who prevent me from doing this, I am frightened
that they are communists! For me it is a sacred aim to co-operate with the forces of
religion who have embraced the struggle against these enemies of belief. Release me!
Let me work to reform the youth, poisoned by communism, and for this country’s
faith! Let me serve Divine unity!
                                                                                          Prisoner
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The most effective remedy for the ghastly troubles and hopelessness of the world,
especially at this time, especially those smitten by disaster and the Risale-i Nur
students in particular, is to console and enhearten one another and strengthen one
another’s morale, and like true, devoted brothers to pour balm on one another’s
sorrows and afflictions and with true compassion, soothe one another’s troubled
hearts. The true brotherhood between us which looks to the hereafter cannot sustain
anyone feeling offended or taking sides. I have placed all my trust in you and am
counting on you, and you know that I have decided to sacrifice happily not only my
comfort, self-respect, and honour for you, but also my very spirit, and indeed, you can
see this. I swear even that the torment caused these last eight days by the trifling
incident of two leading Risale-i Nur students apparently avoiding and upsetting each
other instead of consoling each other, has caused my spirit, heart, and mind to weep
and cry out: “Alas! Alas! Mercy! Succour us O Most Merciful of the Merciful!

--- Sayfa 485 ---
496
Preserve us and save us from the evil of satans from among jinn and men. Fill my
brothers’ hearts with loyalty, love, and fraternal feelings for each other!”
My brothers, as unyielding as steel! You help me. Our situation is extremely
sensitive. I relied on you to such an extent that I handed over all my duties to your
collective personality. So for your part, you should help me immediately. For sure, the
incident was trifling, temporary, and unimportant, but even a hair, a mote, on the
mainspring of our clock or the pupil of our eye causes pain. This point must be very
important, for three physical explosions and three non-physical observations gave
news of it exactly.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
My stove and the two drinking-cups of the Feyzi’s, Sabri, and Husrev
disintegrating foretold a terrible calamity. It is absolutely essential that we practise true
solidarity and disregard one another’s faults, our most powerful point of support, and
never take offence at a hero of the Risale-i Nur like Husrev, since he takes my place
and is an important representative of the Risale-i Nur’s collective personality. The last
few days I felt a terrible distress and despair, and said to myself in alarm: “Our enemies
have found a way to defeat us.” Both my stove and the absolutely correct observation
I made in my imagination gave correct news. Beware! Beware! Beware! Quickly
repair your solidarity, which up to now has been as strong as steel. There is a strong
possibility this incident will cause more harm —especially at this juncture— to our
service of the Qur’an and belief than our being sent to prison.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The night of the Prophet’s (PBUH) Ascension is the equivalent of a second Night
of Power. Working this night as much as one possibly can causes a thousandfold
increase in spiritual gains. In accordance with the mystery of spiritual partnership, on
this valuable night, God willing, like

--- Sayfa 486 ---
497
some angels who glorify God with forty thousand tongues, you will perform worship
and supplications with forty thousand tongues. This will yield much reward in this
place of tribulation, and you will be offering thanks through your worship tonight for
the coming storm involving us being reduced a thousandfold. Together with
congratulating you for your perfect caution and prudence, I give you the good news
that dominical grace is being manifested most clearly for us.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: I congratulate you with all my heart and soul for the Night of the
Ascension.
Secondly: It has been our claim for twenty years that as far as it is possible the
Risale-i Nur students do not disturb public order. As a Divine favour, and as a wonder
resulting from your loyalty and sincerity, the harm of our imprisonment has been
reduced a hundredfold. For there was a strong possibility that those who attack us
could have taken it as a sign supporting their main claim that we disturb public order
and breach security and made it a pretext for refuting our case. The mountain was
made into a molehill. Otherwise those who makes mountains out of molehills
concerning us could have taken advantage of it and induced many people to believe
their slanders against us.
Thirdly: Do not worry about me. My being in the same building as you reduces all
my difficulties and distress to nothing. In fact, our being gathered together here is
important in numerous respects, and it is in many ways beneficial for our service of
belief. Indeed, since a number of significant facts in the supplement to my written
objections have been sent to the six departments of government, and have come to
their attention and influenced them to an extent, it has reduced all our troubles to
nothing.
Fourthly: Busying oneself with the Risale-i Nur both dispels distress, and may be
counted as five sorts of worship.
Fifthly: The previous misfortune was lessened a hundredfold through the
teachings of the Risale-i Nur. Otherwise, because of the sensitivity of the time and
place, that single molehill would have become mountains, like putting a match to
gunpowder. In fact, some officials said: “Those who listen to the lessons of the Risale-
i Nur were not involved.” If only everyone had listened to its teachings, nothing would
have happened. As

--- Sayfa 487 ---
498
far as you can, don’t allow things to escalate; don’t let anything else be added to the
difficulties of prison. Like the Nurjus, the other prisoners should be brothers and not
be angry at each other.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal, Sincere Brothers!
It has become obligatory for us to practise as far as we can within the bounds of
possibility the principles of the Treatise On Sincerity and sincerity in its true sense
among ourselves and towards one another. I have received certain information that for
the past three months three men have been posted here to distance my ‘special’ (has)
brothers from one another by playing on differences in ideas or temperament. They are
also drawing out the court proceedings in order to make the resolute Nurjus fed up
and to shake them, and to make the sensitive and irresolute one’s suspicious and cause
them to give up their service of the Risale-i Nur. Beware! Beware! Don’t let the self-
sacrificing brotherhood and genuine love you have maintained up to now be shaken. If
they are shaken only a jot, it will cause us great harm. For only a small jolt in Denizli
caused hojas like... to keep their distance. Our service of the Qur’an and belief
necessitates that if necessary we sacrifice our very souls for one another; true devotees
do not become vexed with one another because of difficulties or irritability arising
from other things; with perfect humility, modesty, and resignation, they attribute the
faults to themselves, and try to increase their love and sincerity. Otherwise it will be
blown up out of all proportion, possibly causing irreparable harm. Leaving it to your
perspicacity, I cut this short here.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
In consequence of an important warning I received, there are now one or two
tasks connected with the Risale-i Nur, which are to try with all your might, through
the lessons of the Risale-i Nur, not to fall into dispute or take up biased sides in
among the other unfortunate prisoners in this third School of Joseph. For there are
terrible troublemakers who are concealed and attempting to take advantage of
differences, grudges, hatred, and obstinacy. Since if necessary the majority of our
fellow-prisoners manifest a vein of heroism which makes them ready to sacrifice their
lives for their country, nation, and friends, surely those brave men should sacrfice

--- Sayfa 488 ---
499
for the good of the nation and peace and quiet here in prison their obstinacy, hatred,
and enmity, which are entirely without benefit and extremely damaging in these stormy
times. For in this way they may be saved from the corruption of those who are
covertly inculcating communism, which turns into anarchy. It may otherwise lead to
significant difficulties and upsets at this time, like putting a match to gunpowder, both
for a hundred wretched prisoners, and for the innocent Risale-i Nur students, and for
the town of Afyon. It might also lead to the intervention of a secret society which is
here but whose roots are abroad. Since Divine Determining sent us here for their sake,
and because of their happiness and ease of mind some of us do not want to leave and
we sacrifice our comfort for them and endure every hardship patiently, certainly it is
absolutely essential that for the sake of those new brothers of ours, like the Denizli
prisoners, and out of respect for the months of Sha‘ban and Ramadan, we do not
become angry with one another and make peace like brothers. In any case, we and I
consider them to be within the circle of Risale-i Nur students and include them in our
prayers.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: In accordance with the meaning of “Good lies in what God wishes,” there
are many instances of good in our trial being delayed and those of our brothers who
have been released being here on the day it recommences.
Yes, since the Risale-i Nur question is of importance for the Islamic world in
general and this country in particular, there should be lively gatherings such as that in
order to attract everyone’s attention to its truths. For in its glittering fashion, beyond
all our hopes and precautions, and our concealing it, and our enemies belittling it, and
outside our wills, the Risale-i Nur teaches its truths openly to friend and foe alike. It
unhesitatingly divulges its most private secrets to the most distant stranger. Since the
truth is this, we should consider our trifling difficulties to be a bitter medicine like
quinine, and offering thanks in patience, say: “This too will pass, God willing.”
Secondly: I wrote this to the supervisor of this School of Joseph: just as when I
was a prisoner-of-war in Russia, the Bolshevik storm first

--- Sayfa 489 ---
500
erupted in the prisons, so the French Revolution first began in the prisons and with the
prisoners known in the histories as “vagabonds.” Because of this, in both Eskişehir and
Denizli we Risale-i Nur students tried to reform the other prisoners as far as we
possibly could. In both prisons it was extremely successful. Here it will be even more
useful, for as a result of the Risale-i Nur’s instuction at this sensitive time, the squall76
that blew up was only a hundredth of what it would have been. Otherwise the harmful
outside currents which take advantage of conflict and such incidents, and await such
opportunities, would have ignited the gunpowder and caused a conflagration.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable Brothers, who do not become dispirited at
difficulties and abandon us!
Due to some physical and spiritual tribulation, my evil-commanding soul was
feeling sad on your account when this was imparted to me: if you had suffered these
difficulties ten times over in order to meet with all your brothers here at close quarters
it still would have been cheap. It appears necessary that like in former times the people
of reality used to gather together and meet at least once or twice a year, the Risale-i
Nur students gather together every few years in the School of Joseph. In keeping with
the God-fearing and ascetic way of the Risale-i Nur, and its teaching those most in
need, everyone, even those who oppose it, and to allow its collective personality to
speak, if it entails a thousand difficulties and tribulations, it is of no importance
whatsoever. A few of our weak brothers becoming fed up in our previous prisons and
leaving the circle of the Risale-i Nur caused immeasurable loss to them but no harm to
the Risale-i Nur. More resolute and sincere students appeared in their stead. Since the
trials of this world are transient and pass swiftly, leaving us their fruits and rewards,
we should trust in Divine grace and offer thanks in patience.
                                                                        S a i d  N u r s i

76 The squall was a revolt that broke out in the prison, but none of the Risale-i Nur students was
involved.

--- Sayfa 490 ---
501
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: Send the last two pages, in either the old letters or written by typewriter,
unofficially to the Chairman of the Court by means of someone serious you consider
suitable. When you do so, give him also the following note, written separately: “Said
thanks you and says: ‘They’ve unnailed the windows, but the prosecutor does not
permit any of my brothers or those who attend me to come to me. And he requests
that you give him his precious, miraculous Qur’an, which is in the court, so that he can
read it during these blessed months. He sent three juz’77 of that wondrous Qur’an to
the Directorate of Religious Affairs as samples so that they could print it
photographically. Besides that, he requests one of the Risale-i Nur collections which is
in the court so that he can read it in his loneliness, solitary confinement and severe
distress, and it can comfort him and be a companion. In any event, three or four courts
of law have seen those collections and not objected to them. Similarly, they have been
much appreciated and praised by the leading scholars of Mecca, Medina, Damascus,
Aleppo, and the university of al-Azhar in Cairo, and none of them has criticized or
objected to them.’”
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Feyzi has two copies of the Hizb al-Nuri78 with him. If he is not in need of them,
let one of them be sent to me, or let Mehmed Feyzi write out another copy. Also, the
Treatise On Ramadan and the printed Supreme Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra) are needed here.
Quickly reduce the tension between you and repair the damage. Beware! Beware! The
slightest deviation causes enormous harm to the Risale-i Nur circle. Don’t get carried
away by feelings arising from the difficulties. My stove exploding was an indication of
this calamity.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i

77 A juz’ is a thirtieth part of the Qur’an. [Tr.]
78 Hizb al-Nuri: A forty-five-page Arabic piece which Bediuzzaman described as “manifesting
the meaning of the Hadith ‘An hour’s reflective thought may be better than a year’s [supererogatory]
worship,’ a luminous proof of the Risale-i Nur, a supreme invocation springing from it, and a small
sample of it.” [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 491 ---
502
My Dear, Loyal Brothers Husrev, Mehmed Feyzi, and Sabri!
Trusting in you with all my strength, I was expecting to enter the grave with
peace of mind and to leave to you the welfare of the Risale-i Nur. I was certain that
nothing at all could part you from each other. Now there is an official communication
concerning ghastly plans to create differences between the leading Risale-i Nur
students. Since, as necessitated by the strength of your loyalty and your intense
concern for the Risale-i Nur, you are ready to sacrifice your lives for one another if
necessary, certainly you are bound to sacrifice your extremely trivial, temporary, and
unimportant feelings. It will otherwise cause untold harm at this juncture, and I
tremble at the possibility of anyone leaving the Risale-i Nur circle. For the last three
days I have again been shaken by distress such as I have never before experienced. I
have now understood certainly that petulance as slight as a hair on the eye on the part
of those like yourselves has the effect of a bombshell on our lives with the Risale-i
Nur. I’ll tell you this even, much effort was made during that storm [revolt] to connect
us with it. Now they are trying to distance you from one another. Although I have
suffered ten times more than you for your sake, I have decided not to see the faults of
any of you. I ask of you in the name of our master, the Risale-i Nur’s collective
personality, not to insist on your own way, whether justified or not. If in that
extraordinary place hidden fingers are stirring things up with your being together, one
of you move to Tahiri’s ward.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Please do not be offended at the great importance I have given to the three of you
being annoyed at each other. For like me, Husrev and Feyzi are somewhat unsociable
and reserved. They also differ from each other in temperament. As for Sabri, he is
involved in the life of society through his relatives and manner of his livelihood, and is
obliged to be cautious. Since, due to these differences of ways and temperaments, the
three of you have probably been unable to maintain your patience and forbearance in
the uproar of the ward and its noisy crowd, I become alarmed and suspicious. For only
slight opposition at present causes much harm.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 492 ---
503
My Dear, Loyal Brothers and Fellow-Students in this School of Joseph!
The holy Night of Acquittal (Bera’at), tonight, is like a sacred seed of the whole
year and the programme of human destiny, and is therefore as holy as the Night of
Power. Just as all good works on the Night of Power yield thirty thousand merits, so
on this Night of Acquittal the merits of such acts and for each letter of the Qur’an rise
to twenty thousand. If at other times such merits are ten, during the three months [of
Rajab, Sha‘ban, and Ramadan] they rise to a hundred or a thousand. Then on the well-
known holy nights, they rise to tens of thousands or twenty or thirty thousand. These
nights may be the equivalent of fifty years of worship. It is highly profitable to be
occupied as far as one can with the Qur’an, seeking Divine forgiveness, and uttering
prayers for the Prophet (PBUH).
                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
May the peace of God be upon you, and His mercy and blessings!
I congratulate you with all my heart and soul for the Night of Acquittal, which
may gain for the believers the equivalent of fifty years of worship. I await with
complete certainty from Divine mercy that through the mystery of spiritual partnership
and the effulgence of solidarity, like some angels who utter glorifications with forty
thousand tongues, all the purely sincere Risale-i Nur students will be performing their
worship and seeking forgiveness as though with forty thousand tongues.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Firstly: At the suggestion of some hojas who support the innovations, the
indictment has objected to a matter in the Fifth Ray, as though it does not accept the
coming of the Islamic Antichrist (Dajjal), and numerous other Antichrists. An answer
to this is the sound Hadith, a brilliant and certain miracle of the Prophet (PBUH): “The
caliphate will continue with the sons of my uncle ‘Abbas until it passes into the
destructive hand of the Antichrist.”79 That is, the ‘Abbasid caliphate will continue for
the

79 Musnad al-Firdaws, iii, 447; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, xiv, 271, No: 33436; Suyuti, Ta’rikh
al-Hulafa’, 6, 16; Majma’u’l-Zawa’id, v, 187; Cam’u’l-Fawa’id, i, 849.

--- Sayfa 493 ---
504
lengthy period of five hundred years, then it will be wiped out by one of the three
Antichrists, known as Jenghiz and Hulagu, then he will treacherously rule within Islam.
That is, as is indicated by numerous Hadiths, there is clear evidence that three
Antichrists will appear in the Islamic world. The predictions made by the above Hadith
are two clear miracles.
The First is that the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, which was to come into existence, would
continue for five hundred years.
The Second was that it would come to an end at the cruel, destructive hand of an
Antichrist called Jenghiz and Hulagu. Is it at all possible that the Owner of the Shari‘a,
who in the books of Hadith foretold even the most minor things related to the Qur’an
and marks of Islam, should not have foretold the extraordinary events of our times?
And is it at all possible that there should be no allusions to the Risale-i Nur students,
who steadfastly serve the Qur’an in the midst of those strange events, in the widest
sphere and under the severest conditions, and the fruits of whose service are affirmed
by friend and foe alike?
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And they were covered by humiliation and misery.80
[One fine point about this verse]
My Dear Brother Re’fet Bey, Commander of the Risale-i Nur and Servant of the
Qur’an!
The Jewish nation has always been excessive in its love of life and this world, and
has therefore deserved the blows of abasement and misery it has received every
century. However, in the Palestine question it is not love of life and this world, but a
significant sort of national and religious feeling because Palestine is where the prophets
of the Children of Israel are buried, and the prophets belonged to their nation. In
consequence they have received no swift blows. A small group could never otherwise
have held out in the midst of the vast Arab lands; it would quickly have been
humiliated.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i

80 Qur’an, 2:61.

--- Sayfa 494 ---
505
Q u e s t i o n : Is there any verse stating that the earth is round, and if so, which
Sura is it in? I am hesitant as to whether it is flat or round. All countries are situated in
lands surrounded by sea. What is there to keep in the outer edges of these seas? I
request that you provide an explanation, and I kiss your hands.
                                                                                Emirdağlı Ali Hoca
The Risale-i Nur has solved questions of this sort. The Islamic scholars have
accepted that the earth is round, and this in no way contradicts religion. The word
‘sath’ in the verse81 does not indicate that the earth is not round. It has been laid down
by the learned authorities that to be turned towards the qibla (istikbal-i kible) while
performing the prayers is obligatory, and this is applicable to every part of the prayers,
including the bowing and prostrating. Since according to the Shari‘a, there is a
luminous line from the Ka‘ba upwards as far as the Divine Throne, and downwards to
the ground, performing all the actions of the prayers in the direction of the qibla is
possible with the earth being round.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.82
May God’s peace and mercy be upon you, and His blessings, for ever and ever
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I congratulate you with all my heart and soul on the blessed month of Ramadan.
May Almighty God make the Night of Power the equivalent of a thousand months for
all of you, and accept it as an eighty-year lifetime of worship. Amen.
Secondly: I am of the opinion that there are numerous benefits and instances of
good in our remaining here until the Festival. If we were to be released now, we would
both lose out on all the good of this School of Joseph, and spoil Ramadan, which
looks purely to the hereafter, and taint our spiritual states with worldly activities. In
accordance with “good lies in what God wishes,” we shall find great joy in this, God
willing.
You have also understood in the court that since they can in no way

81 See, Qur’an, 88:20.
82 Qur’an, 17:44.

--- Sayfa 495 ---
506
convict us with their laws, they discuss trifling things of no importance like some petty
matters in some petty letters which have less connection with the law than a fly’s wing.
For they have found no way to attack the significant, universal matters of the Risale-i
Nur. Also their slandering my person so as to deprive it of importance instead of the
widespread, general Risale-i Nur and its students is very advantageous for us; Divine
Determining does not allow them to interfere with the Risale-i Nur and its students,
and preoccupies them with myself. So I say to you and to all my friends: for the well-
being of you and the Risale-i Nur, I accept wholeheartedly, even with my evil-
commanding soul’s agreement, and with joy and gratitude, all the difficulties inflicted
on my person. Just as Paradise is not inexpensive, so Hell is not unnecessary. The
world and its tribulations are transitory and fleeting. Also, since we shall be avenged a
hundred times over at the Last Judgement, and in part in this world, for the ill-
treatment we receive at the hands of our covert enemies, we should feel sorry for them
rather than angry.
Since the reality is this, it is truly good fortune to submit without alarm, and with
caution, and perfect patience and thanks, to whatever Divine Determining has decreed
for us and to trust in Divine grace, which protects us, and with truly sincere,
consoling, and heartfelt friendliness and love for our brothers here, together with them
busy ourselves with our supplications, which in Ramadan yield a thousandfold reward;
and with our study and reading, try not to give importance to these minor passing
hardships. The Risale-i Nur’s giving instruction in this most important examination
and trial, and its making its enemies read it, is a significant victory for it.83
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: It is stated in sound narrations: “Seek the Night of Power in the second
half of Ramadan, especially in the last ten days.”84 It is therefore a great happiness to
try to profit from the Night of Power, which may

83 It is certainly bad that some of our brothers are unnecessarily denying that they are students of
the Risale-i Nur, especially .... , and that they are concealing their considerable past services. But
because of that service we should forgive them and not feel angry at them.
84 Bukhari, Fadl Laylat al-Qadr, 2, 3; Tahajjud, 21; Muslim, Siyam, 207-19.

--- Sayfa 496 ---
507
gain for a person an eighty-year lifetime of worship, and which is probably among the
coming nights.
Secondly: According to the meaning of “Whoever believes in Divine Determining
is saved from grief and sorrow,” and “Look on the good side of things,” and,
Those who listen to the Word and follow the best [meaning] in it; those are
the ones whom God has guided, and those are the ones endued with
understanding,85
we should now look on the good side of everything, the aspect that affords ease of
mind, so that meaningless, unnecessary, harmful, ugly, distressing, temporary
circumstances do not hold our attention and preoccupy our minds. In the Eighth
Word, one man entered a garden while another left it. The fortunate man looked at the
flowers and beautiful things, and relaxed and enjoyed himself. But the unfortunate one
looked only at the dirty, ugly things, although he was unable to clean them up, so he
was nauseated and upset instead of resting, and then went on his way. Now, the stages
of man’s social life, and especially the School of Joseph, resembles a garden. It
contains both ugly and beautiful things, and distressing and happy things. The sensible
person is he who busies himself with the beautiful, happiness-inducing things, and
ignores the ugly, distressing things, and offers thanks happily instead of complaining
querulously.
                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: There is a strong possibility that tomorrow night is the Night of Power.
Some of the scholarly authorities stated it is tomorrow. Even if it is not in fact, since
the Umma consider it to be so, God willing it will be accepted as such.
Secondly: I am anxious about the comfort of our brothers in Ward Six, where
there was a disturbance. There is a finger from outside which stirs up the prison, and
particularly Ward Six. Our brothers there should be careful and cautious, and not get
mixed up in anything.
Thirdly: Have you sent the piece to the lawyer, to have it read to the Chairman of
the Court? Also, because it is the same matter, Halil Hilmi is not only Sabri’s lawyer,
but everyone’s. That is how I look on him. He should now assist our first lawyer on
account of all of us.

85 Qur’an, 39:18.

--- Sayfa 497 ---
508
Fourthly: I gave Tasköprülü Sadik Bey’s introduction to Sabri to write out. If it
has already been written out, the part that has been corrected should be sent to him. A
newly written-out copy should be sent to me. I have a copy of Sadik’s short poem
here. If you do not have a copy, I shall send it to you.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: I send congratulations both for your Festival, and for that of your fellow-
prisoners. I consider those who exchange greetings with you to have greeted me. It is
as though I have made the Festival visits on all of them; you should know this and you
should tell them.
Secondly: Due to the warning of my cast-iron stove disintegrating without reason,
and our acting with complete caution and self-restraint in consequence, the force of
that ‘squall’ was reduced a hundredfold and the gunpowder did not ignite. Now again
my water-flask disintegrating extraordinarily without reason informs us that we should
again behave with perfect self-composure, patience, and caution. It was imparted to
me that covert dissemblers want to employ depraved profligates and apostacizing
communists against the religiously-minded people; they are even trying to interfere
here.86
* * *
My Dear, Loyal, and Unshakeable Brothers!
I congratulate you with all my heart at your quickly healing that wound of ours. I
felt completely easy last night as a result. In fact, the Medresetü’z-Zehrais expanding,
and the true sincerity, self-sacrifice and abandoning of egotism, and complete humility
of the Risale-i Nur circle are being adopted and are spreading. Certainly, very petty
and temporary sensitivity, irritability, and petulance cannot spoil its powerful teachings
and the bonds of brotherhood. The Treatise On Sincerity is the best

86 Yesterday I felt happy and joyful. Then I realized that my brother in Nurs had eight months
previously sent some Nurs honey in a flask to me in Emirdag. Yesterday it arrived here from
Emirdag. I told them to quickly bring it to me. I waited, but it was not brought. My happiness
suddenly turned into anger. It was the cause of that flask with the honey, which in my eyes was a
hundred times more precious than the flask, being given to a stranger and sent to the market, and
then the flask suddenly broke. I have sent an amount of that sweet honey, a gift from the village of
Nurs, my birthplace, so that all my brothers may have a taste of it as a ‘Festival sweet.’

--- Sayfa 498 ---
509
advice on this point. Their worst strategy now in striking at us and the Risale-i Nur
and agitating us, is to make the Risale-i Nur students look coldly on each other by
playing on differences in their ideas and temperaments, and to separate them from each
other. For sure, it was only a minor tiff, but only a hair on the eye causes as much pain
as a stone, so that my flask gave news of it as though it was a major incident. The late
Hafiz Ali (May God be pleased with him) complaining shortly before his death about a
very minor such situation has come to mind perhaps a hundred times, and saddened
me.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I gave the students’ written objections to the prison governor. I told him: “We
want to send this, together with the end part of my written objections, to the
Directorate of Religious Affairs and Ankara Criminal Court, which acquitted us and
our treatises, and if it’s appropriate, to send too the list of errors and corrections, but
privately and just for the information.” He said: “It is appropriate.” Now you may ask
the lawyer to prepare several copies of the students’ written objections and two copies
of the list.
Also, write to the Directorate of Religious Affairs and say: since you wrote
perfectly correctly in the report about Said and his friends you sent Afyon this time
that it is your duty to defend scholars of religion, both the oppressed Said and his
innocent companions are extremely grateful to your department. Anyway, our case is
related to religion and learning, so the Department of Religious Affairs should be
concerned with it before the police, judiciary, or any other department. For this reason,
both in Denizli and Afyon, we applied firstly to your department, sending our
complaints to the scholars there. Write a paragraph expressing this meaning.
                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey!
Out of respect for the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, and for the sake of your relations
with the Qur’an, and in honour of your twenty years of service to belief through the
Risale-i Nur, quickly put an end to this apparently small, but because of the sensitivity
of our situation, terrible and grievous quarrel between you. For it greatly assists the
covert dissemblers

--- Sayfa 499 ---
510
who are trying to destroy us, and is like putting a match to gunpowder. There is
otherwise a strong possibility that because of an ounce of personal rights tons of harm
will come to us and our service of the Qur’an and belief. I swear that if one of you was
to insult me most terribly and entirely trample my honour but not give up serving the
Qur’an, belief, and the Risale-i Nur, I would forgive him and make peace with him and
try not to be offended. You know that our enemies try to take advantage of the
slightest unmannerliness, so make it up quickly. Stop being petulant, which is
meaningless and so harmful. Otherwise, like Shemsi, Shefik, and Tevfik, some of us
will apparently join those who oppose us, causing great harm and deficiency to our
service of belief. Up to now Divine favour has made up for any losses by bestowing
numerous others who work on the same system. God willing, it will again come to our
aid.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
The governor evidently very much liked The Supreme Sign and A Guide For
Youth. Now he wants The Staff of Moses (Asâ-yi Musa) and Zülfikâr. I told him that I
would bring them to him. If there are copies of them here in Afyon, set aside one each
of The Staff of Moses, Zülfikâr (bound, large size), A Guide For Youth, and The
Supreme Sign.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: This report has had exactly the same result as the one in Denizli. They
have exonerated us on the points on which we have been charged, but in order to
ingratiate themselves with them and show that they are not Nurjus, and due to a vein
of Wahhabism, they have attacked us with a few scholarly criticisms. I reckon this
report arrived before the indictment was written, for the indictment includes some
points from it. In which case our list of errors and corrections answers them
completely. What do you think of this? Also, what are my new replies like? Are they
apt? I wrote them very hastily when in a wretched state.
Secondly: Up to now they were apparently preoccupied with our

--- Sayfa 500 ---
511
persons, and the questions of a political society, a sufi order, and a few unimportant
private letters. But now, with seizing The Illuminating Lamp (Siracü’n-Nûr) and The
Six Attacks (Hücumat-i Sitte), and the experts’ committee directing attention to the
Risale-i Nur, and the machinations of our covert enemies, the Risale-i Nur has been
attacked in a sort of way, which is a means of ensuring tranquillity in this country. So
as with many times previously, at exactly the same time as the country was being
attacked in this way, two severe earthquakes occurred, just as I was writing that
discussion. This affirmed  me, saying: “There is no need to write it.” So I did not write
any more. Then today I heard that there is fear of war. So I said to the person in
charge here: “Whenever the Risale-i Nur is attacked, the earth either becomes angry,
or there is fear of war. We have experienced numerous such events so that no
possibility of chance remained, and these have been pointed out to the courts.” That is
to say, my terrible anxiety about the Risale-i Nur recently, and the jealous criticisms of
the experts’ committee, and the confiscation of an important part of the Risale-i Nur,
although I did not realize it, coincided with The Illuminating Lamp —which is like
acceptable alms-giving and a means of repelling disaster— disappearing behind the veil
of concealment, the earthquake, and fear of the outbreak of war.
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Do not worry, we are under Divine protection. There are numerous instances of
mercy interspersed among the outward difficulties. The experts’ committee was
obliged to object to one piece, but certainly they have become Nurju’s at heart.
                                                                      S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable, Undismayed Brothers, who would never give up
working for the hereafter for this fleeting world!
Don’t be upset at remaining here a little longer and their wanting to extend our
case somewhat. On the contrary, be pleased, like me. For since life never stops and
rushes to extinction, in places of tribulation

--- Sayfa 501 ---
512
such as this it becomes eternal through the fruits its yields for the hereafter. Moreover,
the circle the Risale-i Nur teaches is expanding. For example, the scholars of the
experts’ committee are being obliged to study The Illuminating Light with close
attention. Also, it is possible that if we were released now, it would cause deficiencies
in our work for the cause of belief in one or two respects. Although the distress I
suffer far exceeds yours, I do not want to be released. So as far as you can, try to
endure it patiently and become accustomed to this sort of life, and to find solace and
ease of mind by writing out the Risale-i Nur and reading it.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: If necessary, I can send you two copies of the list of errors and
corrections from the end of the defences, which I have here in the new letters. They
are to be sent to the Directorate of Religious Affairs in addition to the reply to the
experts’ committee, and to the Ankara Criminal Court. A copy of the reply to the
experts’ committee should also be given to the court here.
Second: It’s good that they have expanded our case. Up to now they had made it
appear minor and unimportant in order to devalue it, but secretly were giving it much
importance. The situation now will be more advantageous for our work in the way of
belief and the Qur’an, God willing.
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: If it had been free this year perhaps some of us would have made the Hajj.
God willing, our intention will be accepted as though we had made it, and in these
distressing conditions our service of belief and the Risale-i Nur will yield the high
reward of the Hajj.
Secondly: Since we have repeatedly said that “the Risale-i Nur is a powerful and
true Qur’anic commentary,” it was imparted to me that I should explain a fact, since
some inattentive people do not know the full meaning of this. The fact is this:

--- Sayfa 502 ---
513
There are two sorts of Qur’anic commentaries:
The first is the well-known sort of commentary. Commentaries of this sort
expound and elucidate the Qur’an’s phraseology, words, and sentences.
The second sort explain, prove, and elucidate with powerful arguments the
Qur’an’s truths related to belief. This sort has great importance. Sometimes the well-
known, externalist commentaries include this sort in summary fashion. But the Risale-i
Nur has made it its basis directly, and is a commentary on the Qur’an’s meanings
which silences obstinate philosophers in unprecedented manner.
Thirdly: This morning I was going to write something, but did not. Now the same
matter has come up, and the clerk Sâlim Bey gave permission. Husrev and Tahiri
should come tomorrow in order to write a petition to the Cabinet.
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Is it us and the Risale-i Nur who are the most harmful things around so that all
other writers are free to write and all classes of people are free to meet together? But
without religious education, Muslims cannot be governed except by means of absolute
despotism and absolute bribery. For just as up to the present no Muslim has ever
become a true Christian or Jew, they rather become irreligious and completely
corrupted; so a Muslim cannot become a communist; he turns into an anarchist and
can be governed by nothing other than absolute despotism. We Risale-i Nur students
are working both for government, and public order, and the happiness of the country
and nation. Those opposed to us are irreligious anarchists and enemies of the country
and nation. It is essential that the Government should not interfere with us, but protect
and assist us.
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 503 ---
514
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: Their releasing publishers of the Risale-i Nur like Re’fet, Edhem, the
Çalışkan’s, and Burhan shows that it is not forbidden to disseminate the Risale-i Nur
and the court does not intervene. It is also a sign that it has decided that there is no
political society. Also, since in prolonging our case it has attracted widespread
attention to the Risale-i Nur, and is like a general invitation to read it and an official
advertisement, and it has excited the desire of the needy to study it, it has been led to
benefits for us and the believers far surpassing our tribulations and losses. It is a sign,
God willing, that this sacred instruction will have the effect of an atom bomb against
the aggressive troops of misguidance, who are on the assault at this time throughout
the earth in the most widespread and terrible fashion.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear Brothers Re’fet, Mehmed Feyzi, Sabri!
I received a severe warning and sign, and earnestly request of you for the sake of
the Risale-i Nur and out of respect for this Festival and for the sake of our old rights
that you try to heal this awesome new wound of ours. For our covert enemies are
following two plans: one is to destroy my character with insulting treatment, and the
second is to make us feel coldly towards each other. To criticize, object to, and be
offended at chiefly Husrev is to cause division amongst us. I tell you that if Husrev had
a thousand faults, I would still be chary of opposing him. For to oppose him now is to
directly oppose the Risale-i Nur and myself and to support those who have ruined us.
It is a terrible betrayal so that an extraordinary thing happened to me for no reason like
my stove disintegrating. I am also of the opinion that the last torments to have been
inflicted on me resulted from your meaningless and very harmful lack of solidarity. A
fearful finger is stirring things up here, especially in Ward Six. Don’t make me weep
this Festival. Quickly make heart-felt peace!
                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 504 ---
515
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I wanted only two or three of our brothers to be released today. But the Divine
favour that looks to us left them behind here for their own good. It is absolutely
essential that our present situation is maintained for around three weeks. For our being
together for this Festival is necessary both for us, and the Risale-i Nur, and for our
work, and for our physical and spiritual comfort, and so that we can receive a full
share of the Hajjis’ prayers, and to save the treatises that have been sent to Ankara
from being confiscated, and so that those who pity us in our plight and embrace the
Risale-i Nur may increase in number, and it can be a proof that we did not have
recourse to the traitors to the country, nation, and religion by consenting to serious
errors of the present.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Unable to endure —due to their vein of Wahhabism— Imam ‘Ali’s (May God be
pleased with him) earnest interest in and appreciation of the Risale-i Nur, and
influenced by the groundless suspicions that last year caused Zamzam water to be
poured away and this year prevented people going to make the Hajj, the experts’
committee directed their unfair, incorrect, and unjustifiable jealous criticisms at the
Fifth Ray. At this time of suspicion and alarm, the safest place for us is prison. God
willing, the treatises of the Risale-i Nur will win the freedom of both us and
themselves. Since under these harsh conditions in the face of so many opponents they
are making themselves read in unprecedented fashion, and making their students work
in prison in various ways, and through Divine favour not allowing them to be ruined;
we are bound to be content with this much and to offer thanks instead of complaining.
It is because of this contentment that I am able to endure all my severe distress. I do
not interfere in God’s concerns.
                                                                          S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 505 ---
516
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Of these two copies, one is mine and one is the governor’s. Correct the
governor’s copy according to the copy that has my handwriting on it. While studying
The Supreme Sign this time, I saw that the Second Station until the end, and the
‘conversation’ at the end, were of the greatest importance, and I profited from them
enormously. One of you should read and the other listen, so that you can profit too. In
addition to doing the corrections, our brothers should not remain idle, but should
study in pairs.
Secondly: My copy of the Tenth Word, the notebook here containing letters, and
the rest should not get lost nor remain idle. I am leaving it to Ceylan to supervise this.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
While reading Jaljalutiya now, it was imparted to me the moment this question
occurred to me: “I wonder what the relationship is between sura thumma nun in the
phrase Bi-haqqi tabaraka thumma nun wa sa’il, at the twenty-sixth degree, which
indicates the Treatise On Divine Determining?” I saw when reading the start of that
Sura, Nun. By the pen and by the [record] which men write,87 that it is the word Nun
that is the origin, basis, pre-eternal source, and eternal master of all pens, writing, and
books, and indicates the pen of Divine Determining, and light, and the light of pre-
eternal knowledge. That is, just as By the [winds] that scatter broadcast88 looks to the
Treatise On Minute Particles with a powerful relation inferring an indication, so does
the word Nun look to the Treatise On Divine Determining with a powerful indication.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i

87 Qur’an, 68:1.
88 Qur’an, 51:1.

--- Sayfa 506 ---
517
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable Brothers!
Firstly: In accordance with the meaning of “Good is in what God wishes,” there is
good in our case being delayed. My heart and the Risale-i Nur’s freedom demanded
that it should be thus. By consoling each other, strengthening each other’s morale, and
scholarly debate and pleasant conversation, and by writing out and studying the
Risale-i Nur, you will be successful in attracting Divine mercy, which erases the point
of difficulty, and transforming these transitory hours into eternal ones.
Secondly: Since we exchanged the Festival greetings in the temporary prison of
the court, as a Festival sweet I sent what is for me the very meaningful honey from the
village of Nurs together with the Zamzam water which Zübeyir, the hero from Konya,
brought me. Put the water in the flask of honey and mix them together. Then leave the
Zamzam in it, and drink it with good health.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
An important and meaningful question was asked by someone important. He
asked me: “You are not a political society and three courts of law have acquitted you
on that point, and this has also been established because six provinces which have kept
you under surveillance for twenty years have not made any accusations in connection
with it. Nevertheless, there is a wondrous attachment between Nurjus that is not found
in any political society or group. We would like to have this difficulty solved for us.”
In reply I said this: “That is true, the Nurjus are not a political society of any sort
or a group organized for any political, worldly, negative, personal, or communal
interests, and they could not be thus. They are the sons and daughters and
grandchildren of the old heroes of this land, the millions of Islamic devotees who with
perfect joy sacrificed their lives to win the rank of martyrdom. They have inherited
their vein of self-sacrifice so that they display this wondrous attachment, and in Denizli
Court caused this impotent, wretched brother of theirs to declare on their account:
“Let our heads also be sacrificed for a truth for which millions of heroic heads have
been sacrificed!” He said this in their name, leaving the court in astonished and
appreciative silence. That is to say, among the

--- Sayfa 507 ---
518
Nurjus are true, sincere, positive devotees who act solely for God’s pleasure and the
hereafter, so that the fearsome secret societies of the Masons, communists, corrupters,
atheists, godless, and Tashnaks have found no means to oppose them, and so want to
ruin and scatter them through ‘flexible’ laws by deceiving the Government and
judiciary. God willing, they can do nothing, only be the reason for the devotees of the
Risale-i Nur and of the faith increasing in number.”
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
I am going to relate to you a question and answer of forty years ago which
resembles that of yesterday. In those days of long ago, since the Old Said’s students’
passionate attachment to their Master was such they would sacrifice their very lives for
him, the Old Said was able to halt the Armenian Tashnak revolutionaries around Van
and Bitlis, where they were very active, and was able to suppress them to a degree. He
found Mauser rifles for his students, and for a while his medrese was like a barracks
with guns and books side by side. Then a General from the army came and saw them
and said: “This isn’t a medrese, it’s a barracks.” Because of the Bitlis Incident he
became suspicious, and ordered that they collected up our rifles. A month or two later,
the Great War broke out and I reclaimed my rifles. Anyway...
They asked me in connection the above: “The Armenian revolutionaries, among
whom are fervent devotees ready to sacrifice their lives, are frightened of you, so that
when you climb the mountain Erek Dagi near Van, they withdraw and go elsewhere.
What force do you have that makes them do that?”
In reply I told them: “Since the Armenian devotees display this wondrous self-
sacrifice for the fleeting life of this world and the temporary interests of trifling,
negative nationalism, and attack us, surely the students, who strive for everlasting life
and the positive interests of vast, sacred Islamic nationhood and believe that the
appointed hour cannot be changed, will not lag behind those devotees.89 If necessary,
they unhesi

89 Impotently, I say in the name of my brothers: if necessary, we shall overtake them and
advance far beyond them, God willing. We shall show that we are the heirs of our forefathers both in
religion, and in heroism.

--- Sayfa 508 ---
519
tatingly and proudly sacrifice the certain appointed hour and few years of illusory
outward life for millions of years of true life and the well-being and interests of
thousands of millions of their fellow believers.”
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Faithful, Kindly Brothers!
For two days I have felt an aching in my head and nerves from ’flu. And needing
the consolation and companionship in such circumstances of meeting with friends, I
was constricted by the terrible loneliness and isolation. Complaints like the following
occurred to me: “Why do we suffer this torment? How does it benefit our work?”
Then this morning the following was imparted to me: for us to be set this rigorous
examination, and to be struck on the touchstone numerous times to see clearly
whether we are gold or brass, and to be tried unfairly in every respect, and to be
passed through ever finer sieves three or four times to see whether our evil-
commanding souls take a share or are playing any tricks, is extremely necessary for
our service, which should be purely and solely in the name of truth and reality, so that
Divine Determining and dominical grace permit it. For by being exhibited in this field
of trial and examination confronted by obdurate, unjust enemies and their pretexts,
everyone has understood that there is no trickery, no egotism, no malice, no worldly
or personal interests, nor those that look to the hereafter, mixed in with our service,
and that it is completely sincere and proceeds from truth and reality. If it had remained
concealed, it could have been given numerous meanings. The mass of believers would
not have had confidence in it. They would have said: “Perhaps they are deceiving us,”
and the elite too would have had their suspicions. Thinking that “perhaps they are
acting the same as some of those who sell themselves to acquire spiritual rank for
themselves and to win confidence,” they would not feel completely certain about it.
Now, following the examination, even the most stubborn and obdurate person is
compelled to submit. If your hardship is one, your profits are a thousandfold. God
willing.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 509 ---
520
In His Name, be He glorified!
Just when with their stringent prohibitions they were trying to scare people
everywhere away from me, the advertisement in the newspaper about the incident
when I was a prisoner-of-war has increased their interest. Yesterday, three officials
who are in favour of insulting my person said in the prison yard: “The people gather
when Said appears at the window, and they look at him. He must not stand at the
window or we’ll change his ward.” The Chief Warder said this. But don’t you worry
at all. I have decided to endure all difficulties. God willing, through the blessings of
your prayers, the distress will turn into joy.
Essentially, the incident is true, but because I had no witnesses, I never described
it in detail. I did not realize that a squad had come to execute me; I understood later. I
did not know that the Russian Commander then said some things in Russian by way of
apology. That is to say, the Muslim Major who was present and who reported the
incident to the newspaper understood; apparently the Commander said several times:
“Forgive me!”
My brothers! When I am busy with the Risale-i Nur, the distress diminishes. That
means, our duty is to be occupied with its treatises and to give no importance to
passing things, and to offer thanks in patience.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
An Astonishing Trait in Bediuzzaman’s Character
 [This appeared in the 15th Teshrin-i Evvel, 1948 number of the magazine
Ehl-i Sünnet. It was written by the magazine’s owner, who is a lawyer.]
Bediuzzaman was taken prisoner the same day that I was wounded and captured
in Bitlis during the First World War. He was sent to Siberia, to one of the big prisoner-
of-war camps. I was on the island of Nangün near Baku. One day, Nicola Nicolayavich
visited the camp in order to inspect the prisoners. While passing in front of
Bediuzzaman, Bediuzzaman ignored him, not so much as stirring a finger. This
attracted the the Commander-in-Chief’s attention. On some pretext, he passed by a
second time, and again Bediuzzaman did not stir. He passed by a third time, and
stopped, then the following exchange ensued:
“Do you know who I am?”

--- Sayfa 510 ---
521
“Yes, I know. You are Nicola Nicolayavich, the Czar’s uncle and Commander-in-
Chief of the Caucasian Front.”
“So why do you insult me?”
“Forgive me, but I have not insulted you. I merely doing what my beliefs
demand.”
“What do your beliefs demand?”
“I am a Muslim scholar. I have belief in my heart. Someone with belief in his heart
is superior to one without belief. If I had risen to my feet, I would have been
disrespectful to my beliefs. I did not stand up for that reason.”
“In that case, by saying that I am without belief, you are insulting both my person,
and the army to which I belong, and my nation, and the Czar. A military court will be
set up at once and you shall be interrogated.”
On this command, a military court was set up. The Turkish, German, and Austrian
officers in the headquarters all pleaded with Bediuzzaman to apologize to the
Commander-in-Chief. He replied like this:
“I want to travel to the realm of the hereafter, to the presence of God’s
Messenger (PBUH), and I have to have a passport. I can’t act contrarily to my
beliefs.”
No one could open their mouths in the face of this, and awaited the results. The
interrogation ceased, and they passed a sentence of execution for insulting the Russian
Czar and army. Bediuzzaman said cheerfully to the officer leading the squad that came
to carry out the sentence: “Allow me fifteen minutes to perform my duties.” He took
the ablutions, then while performing two rak‘ats of prayers, Nicola Nicolayavich
appeared. He said:
“Forgive me! I supposed you acted as you did to insult me, so I had you tried
according to the law. But now I realize that you were merely acting out of your beliefs
and were carrying out what they enjoin. The judgement is quashed. You are worthy of
respect for the firmness of your belief. I disturbed you, again, forgive me.”
A Major, one of Bediuzzaman’s companions, described this high trait of his
character and firmness of religion, which is a worthy example for all Muslims, as he
himself witnessed it. When I heard it, involuntarily my eyes filled with tears.
                                                                              Abdurrahim90

90 Ustad did not ask for this article to be published in the newspaper, but being both of great
interest, and an instructive example, and very exciting, it has been included here. Husrev

--- Sayfa 511 ---
522
My Brothers!
I have no appetite, and because gifts upset me I have sent you my share, which
consists of three portions of butter, a basket of grapes, a bag of apples, two packets of
tea, and sugar. I was going to give them to you as a gift, but I asked, and you have
some too. With the money from them I am going to buy things like yoghurt, eggs, and
bread, so the Medresetü’z-Zehra is not displeased at me, saying that I did not eat the
gifts. Sell them to the needy, cheaply, and to the deserving, so that the gifts of the
Medresetü’z-Zehra and its branches will be blessed in two respects, and be healing for
both me and those who receive them. Let Husrev supervise it, and Ceylan and Hıfzı
sell them.
                                                                                      S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: The following was imparted to me in connection with the newspaper
article about me: an imperious Russian Commander swallowed his anger in the face of
the dignity of your belief, and apologized, so if the officials who have seen the truly
powerful, sincere teachings —a hundred times better than I could give— of the
Risale-i Nur which gain firm belief for a person, persist in their obduracy and do not
see the matter fairly, certainly no punishment other than Hell could purify them. The
penalty for such a vast crime could not be paid in a brief lifetime. For if oil goes bad, it
is inedible; it is not like milk and yoghurt. God willing, the Risale-i Nur will save most
of them, before they are corrupted.
Secondly: Let Mehmed Feyzi write to Bedri and tell him that I am including all
those he mentioned in his letter in my prayers. They too should pray for me.
                                                                                     S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: It has been imparted to me that I should describe the astonishing and
instructive treatment I have received during my two periods of captivity. As follows:
I was in a ward in Kosturma in Russia together with ninety other offi

--- Sayfa 512 ---
523
cers who were being held as prisoners-of-war. I used to give them religious instruction
from time to time. One day the Russian commander came and he saw this, and said:
“This Kurd was made a militia commander and he slaughtered many of our men. Now
he’s giving political instruction here. I am forbidding this. He must give no
instruction.” Two days later he again came, and this time permitted it, saying: “Since
what you are teaching is not political, but religious and moral, you may continue.”
During my second captivity, here in this prison, the court officials forbade one of
my close brothers to come to me, although he has listened to my reading from the
Risale-i Nur for twenty years, and himself reads better than I do. Neither did they
permit those who attend to my essential needs to come, lest they received instruction
from me. However, the Risale-i Nur leaves no need for other teaching, and we have
no other teachings, and we have no secrets that have not been divulged. Anyway,
certain circumstances have made me cut a long story short.
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Two or three times I have been afflicted with an important state of mind. Thirty
years ago it made me leave Istanbul’s glittering social life while I was in the Darü’l-
Hikmeti’l-Islâmiye and took me up the high hill known as Yûsha Tepesi, where it did
not even permit me to have the late Abdurrahman, who was in Istanbul and was the
first student and hero of the Risale-i Nur, with me to attend to my needs. Now the first
stages of a state of mind similar to that revolution of the spirit, which showed up the
nature of the New Said, have begun in me. I reckon it is a sign a Third Said will
appear, who will abandon the world altogether. That means, the Risale-i Nur and its
heroic students will perform my duties, and no need remains for me. Anyway, all the
comprehensive parts of the Risale-i Nur and all its unshakeable, sincere students give
instruction far better than me.
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Firstly: I have surmised from a number of signs that of the collections that have
been published, it is the Guide For Youth that they give most importance to. I reckon
that Hüve Nüktesi (The Air: A Window Onto

--- Sayfa 513 ---
524
Divine Unity) has broken the backs of our covert atheist enemies, and smashed the idol
of Nature, their foundation and support. For although it was to an extent possible to
hide that idol in the dense earth, it was impossible to do so in the transparent air. As a
result, because of their obdurate disbelief and apostasizing obstinacy, they are
deceiving the judiciary and inciting it against us. God willing, the Risale-i Nur will
induce the members of the judiciary to look on us favourably, and will make this attack
come to nothing too.
Secondly: Now, both the Ehl-i Sünnet magazine, and the newspaper here, and
Zübeyir’s fiery reply, and their preoccupation with the Risale-i Nur have been effective
advertisements for it. You take a look at the pieces about us that would please me, in
my place, and then inform me of them.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers, Mehmed, Mustafa, Ibrahim, and Ceylan!
Firstly: Yesterday I saw you engrossed in conversation, I was delighted and
pleased. I listened happily as though I was at your side. Then suddenly I saw that there
were people listening to you on both sides. It continued half an hour. I was worried
and said to myself: it is possible that among those listening is a spy who will make a
mountain out of a molehill and give the wrong meanings. He may be listening
carefully, but because of their lack of caution and enjoyment, the brothers who are
chatting are not looking at them or being careful. I sent this as an answer. Thanks be
to God, I knew that nothing harmful had been said, but we have to be cautious at this
sensitive time.
Secondly: I understood from a letter written by Hoja Hasan that his good opinion
of me is a hundred times greater than my due, and that he will be a publisher of the
Risale-i Nur who works on the same system as the hero of Denizli, the late Hasan
Feyzi. God willing, other Hasan Feyzi’s like him will emerge in Afyon too and it will
not lag behind Denizli, and will transform our hardships into mercy.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i
* * *

--- Sayfa 514 ---
525
My Brothers!
I have not been curious about the newspapers, but articles supporting us
appearing at this time in both Ehl-i Sünnet and Sebil-ür-Resad has confused those
jealous people who oppose us and the covert hostile atheists. The possibility that they
might try to silence those friends made me anxious.
                                                                               S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Some true solace, which reduces to nothing our distressing tribulations
The First: Our troubles being transformed into mercy.
Second: The pleasure to be found within the justice of Divine Determining, and
the relief felt in submitting to it.
Third: The joy resulting from the Divine favour particular to the Nurjus.
Fourth: The pleasure of our tribulations being transitory and passing.
Fifth: Significant rewards.
Sixth: Not interfering in God’s concerns.
Seventh: Suffering only little difficulty and slight wounds in the face of even the
severest attacks.
Eighth: These hardships being very minor in comparison with those others suffer.
Ninth: Happiness at the effects of the widespread advertising of the Risale-i Nur,
which arise from the exacting test and examination of serving the Risale-i Nur and
belief.
These nine spiritual joys are a salve and medicine so soothing and sweet they are
indescribable; they ease our terrible pains.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
My Dear, Loyal, Steadfast Brothers!
With all their stratagems, the dissemblers’ attacks these last ten months and their
getting hold of an official has not shaken even the youngest student. Their slanders are
insignificant. In the face of the

--- Sayfa 515 ---
526
hundred lies of his that we proved, he found one single error he said was contrary to
the facts, in one of our letters, that a newspaper had reported that the former governor
had been promoted. But the error was the newspaper’s. Anyway... such slanders from
such people have virtually no effect on us, and, God willing, they will cause no harm
to the Risale-i Nur circle. As I told you before, don’t give any importance to the
written calumnies of that official, don’t let them confuse your ideas. If there is any
legal point the reply to which is not found in my defence, give a brief answer. And say:
“Said says: So as not to vex the three courts which acquitted us, nor be in contempt of
them, I am not going to afford importance to that malicious indictment by replying to
it. My long defence, especially the ten points showing the ten ways it is illegal,
furnishes a complete and apt reply.”
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Firstly: It is an instance of Divine favour that I did not hear that man’s slanderous
indictment. I would otherwise have spoken vehemently. I would have said to the
Chairman of the Court: I am taking you to court, that is, you and your injustice to the
Supreme Tribunal at the Last Judgement, and I am taking your contempt of the law to
the court of this world. And the reason I said I have no lawyer was to tell them that he
is the lawyer of all of us in general matters, and only I can reply to the attacks on my
person. You may tell Ahmed Hikmet this.
Secondly: Our former defences are sufficient to answer the prosecutor’s charges.
Thirdly: Mustafa Osman and Ceylan wrote and told me what they thought of it
and that it had caused them no discomfort, and that it would have no adverse effects in
the Risale-i Nur circle either. I saw the hero Tahiri. He had the same idea. I was
curious as to what Husrev, the Feyzi’s, and Sabri thought.
Fourthly: I reckon it is because disbelief and misguidance now attack us in the
form of secret societies and political groups that Divine Determining makes them
torment us with this extreme tyranny and accusation of being a political society. That
means there is overriding need for the believers to be united. We were unaware of that
fact, so received the blow of justice from Divine Determining.
                                                                           S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 516 ---
527
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: When there is a despotic Cabinet which prevents people going on the
Hajj, pours away Zamzam water, permits us to be treated extremely unjustly, attaches
no importance to Zülfikâr and The Illuminating Lamp (Siracü’n-Nûr) being seized,
promotes the officials who torment us maliciously and illegally, and does not hear the
loud weeping through the tongue of disposition at the oppression in our house, at such
a time, the best place to be is prison. Only, if it was possible, it would best if we were
transferred to another prison.
Secondly: Just as they force the most unsuitable people to read the most
confidential treatises, so they insist and force us to be a political society. But we felt
no need at all to be a  political society or secret revolutionary group of any sort. For
among the Nurjus, through sincerity and self-sacrifice, the Islamic brotherhood of the
unified community of believers has unfolded to a high degree. With the powerful
devotion they have inherited from their millions of forefathers, the Risale-i Nur
students are bound to a truth for which their forefathers sacrificed their lives, and this
has left no need up to now for any society, official or political, secret or open, or any
revolutionary group. This means there is now a need, for Divine Determining has set
them to pester us. They tyrannize us with accusations of an imaginary political society.
And Divine Determining deals us a slap with their hands, saying: “Why haven’t you
had complete sincerity, perfect solidarity, or been a perfect ‘God’s party’?”, and it has
acted in justice.
                                                                                    S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
Firstly: I know that you are not in need of consolation. Strengthen one another’s
morale, and that will be sufficient. The lines I have hanging on the wall opposite me
are sufficient for me. It has been understood that this last attack was completely
unjustifiable and illegal intimidation, and the result of groundless suspicions and
weakness. However, the stand of the people and police was a sort of objection to that
meaningless attack.
Secondly: Is my defence adequate to reply to the new charges as well? Also, are
Zübeyir and the lawyers working? They are not anxious, are they? They should not
worry at all. In view of the matters with which

--- Sayfa 517 ---
528
they have charged us, they should charge all those who share in the brotherhood of
belief, and even all the congregations and imams, and the students of all masters and
teachers. This means that their opponents have gained considerable power so that
instead of actual incidents they are utilizing possibilities in this panicky way and
attacking us with extraordinary delusions.
Thirdly: My own view is that we should remain in prison till the spring. Anyway
everything comes to a standstill in winter. God willing, Divine favour will again come
to our aid.
                                                                                   S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
[One of Husrev’s letters]
In His Name, be He glorified!
Our Beloved Master!
While the main duty of the scholars of the experts’ committee was to defend and
protect the believers and especially those who uphold the Qur’an, with their biased
reports about us they have driven the Afyon legal authorities to investigate us in the
closest detail; have kept you, our beloved Master, under the severest repression for
eight months; been the cause of the imprisonment of us students being drawn out; and
have studied the undeniably miraculous truths of the Risale-i Nur in a spirit of
jealousy. Doubtless, your writings replying to their reports, which incited Afyon Court
against us, were the work of your compassion. Let alone defending you, our beloved
Master, who for twenty-five years has been struggling against our covert enemies with
a handful of students, and the Risale-i Nur, which comprises the Qur’an’s most
important truths, although it is your right to ask numerous questions of these scholars
who have formed a front against us in this our most perilous time, your very minor
questions will do nothing except warn them. The ‘special favour,’ which is a supreme
Divine bounty and, arising from sources of which we have much need in these
sensitive times, transforms our despair into pride, has again been manifested here in
Afyon Prison. The earth, which has not trembled for eight months, again became angry
today and twice shook as you were describing the earthquakes which occur when you
our beloved Master and the Risale-i Nur are attacked. We too witnessed it, and it
strengthened our hope. It pitied your apparent aloneness in the face of the fearsome
onslaughts of the cruel enemies thirsting to destroy you. It had physical compassion on
your powerlessness, came to your assis

--- Sayfa 518 ---
529
tance, and with the quaking earth affirmed the rightness of your cause. Giving the
good news of “Victory is ours,” which through a Divine, angelic power, issues from
your blessed pen, it made us truly grateful to our beloved Master.
                                                     The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One,
                                                            Your very faulty student,  Husrev
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
Firstly: What is necessary are caution, composure, and consultation.
Secondly: It was imparted to me that Zübeyir was given to me in place of my late
nephew Abdurrahman, and Ceylan, in place of my late nephew Fuad. So here I am
handing over my work to them.
Thirdly: I have been informed that the judges of the court have made a pretext of
the letter I wrote and was put at the head of hardworking but incautious Ahmed
Feyzi’s Mâidetü’l-Kur’an. Saying: “Said affirms the eulogies and the other things
written about him,” they have made it a reason for my conviction. I repeatedly said
that before anything else Ahmed Feyzi should explain it —that the letter was written in
order to not accept the other letters about him, and so that he should modify the other
part of it— nevertheless he wrote things unnecessarily that make them angry. If he had
a thousand faults, I would not be offended at him, but he should be wary of acting
boldly and incautiously, lest harm comes to the Risale-i Nur.
Fourthly: Brother Ahmed Feyzi, the hero of the Feyzi’s, should behave exactly
like Tahiri in Tahiri’s ward, which is his medrese, and should encourage his students in
place of the those that have been released with lessons from the Qur’an and Risale-i
Nur, and with writing out its treatises. The notebooks of the new students, which he
sent me yesterday, turned my sorry state into one of joy. “All praise be to God,” I
declared.
* * *
This time, the assault is on a very large scale. Due to their groundless suspicions
the Prime Minister and Cabinet attacked us in accordance with some plan. According
to information I have received, and numerous signs, due to the false reports and
intrigues of covert dissemblers, they have shown us to be closely connected to the
Caliphate movement and a secret community belonging to the Naqshbandi Order,
indeed to be

--- Sayfa 519 ---
530
leading it, and have caused the Government to be greatly alarmed about us.  For
evidence they point out the large collections of the Risale-i Nur being bound in
Istanbul and published throughout the Islamic world and being well-received
everywhere, and have scared the Government, and unjustifiably turned the jealous
official hojas and suspicious officials against us. They reckoned that numerous
documents and plentiful evidence would be brought to light, and that in the vein of the
Old Said, I would be unable to endure it and would create a disturbance. But endless
thanks be to Almighty God, He reduced the calamity a thousandfold. In all their
searches they found nothing to connect us to any secret community or society. We
have no connection so that they should have found it. The prosecutor was therefore
compelled to resort to lies and slander, giving things the wrong meaning, and making
allegations about things that were not offences. Since the truth is this, we and the
Risale-i Nur have been delivered from ninety-nine per cent of the calamity. In which
case, we should not complain, but offering endless thanks and beseeching Almighty
God, await the completion of this manifestation of Divine favour in patience. And with
the lessons of the Risale-i Nur, we should console those needy and eager people who
constantly enter and depart from this place of study.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal Brother!
I understood from a severe warning that the excessive, detrimental, combative and
politically-minded pieces you and Ahmed Feyzi read in court —outside the Risale-i
Nur’s way, which is not to be combative, nor to contest the worldly, nor touch on
politics, and only when absoutely essential to defend oneself briefly— has caused great
harm to the Risale-i Nur. In fact, they were the cause of our sentences and the ill-
treatment I have received. I am not offended at you and Ahmed Feyzi, but you should
have shown them to me first. Your position was given you as a material Divine decree.
You have to act like me to repair the damage. It is essential that Feyzi also gives up
the political style of defence with all his strength, and like Tahiri, occupies himself with
the Risale-i Nur and the new students.

--- Sayfa 520 ---
531
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear Brothers!
It is necessary to try to print the forty odd pages about me and the Risale-i Nur,
the list of errors and corrections and its addendum, and the reply to the Posta
newspaper, in both the old letters and the new, in Isparta and in Istanbul, and if
possible here as well. Since the court is duplicating by machine the matters they
suppose are against us, it is our legal right to duplicate the same matters together with
the ninety errors, and this we must do. Later on, my long defence and the written
objections of such friends as Ahmed Feyzi, Zübeyir, Mustafa Osman, Husrev, Sungur,
and Ceylan shall be printed also, God willing.
                                                                              S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear and Loyal Brothers!
It was imparted to me that I should write and tell you of two strange, subtle
incidents that occurred within two hours, and were apparently insignificant but in fact
important.
The First: I was reading to two people destined to be Risale-i Nur students ‘An
Important Matter which was imparted to y Heart on the Night of Power’ from A
Guide For Youth, then just as I read “it gains for the Risale-i Nur students in ten
weeks the level of study the students of the religious schools (medrese) gain in five or
ten years,” this occurred to me: just as through Divine favour the Old Said acquired in
fifteen weeks at the age of fifteen the knowledge usually acquired in the medreses with
fifteen years of study, so through dominical mercy at this time when there are no
medreses, the Risale-i Nur is sufficient for acquiring in fifteen weeks the knowledge of
the sciences of reality and belief it would otherwise take fifteen years to acquire, as
fifteen thousand people have affirmed through their own experience this fifteen years.
Secondly: That same time, my window, which is heavy, without reason fell on my
dishes and bottles and food. I supposed that both the window and all my bottles and
drinking glasses were broken and the food they contained ruined. But marvellously,
not one thing was either broken or spoilt. Only the meat I had received as a present
was spilt. But it was destined for the new students of the Risale-i Nur, maintaining my
rule of

--- Sayfa 521 ---
532
not accepting presents, and confirming with its extraordinariness the first incident.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Brothers!
In a way totally opposed to the law, our documents and additional pieces for the
appeal have not yet been sent to the Appeal Court. Our three authorized lawyers
should find some way of ensuring that they are sent as soon as possible. For their
prolonging our detention for eleven months on excuses, and not permitting me to
speak in court, and their holding me in solitary confinement for eleven months in cold,
tortuous, and distressing conditions, tells of a malicious bias unacceptable by justice. It
is therefore essential that both our lawyers and you do everything in your power to
have our trial transferred to a court in another province.
                                                                                S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
My Dear, Loyal, Sincere, Steadfast, Devoted Brothers!
Firstly: The reason I don’t keep a copy of ‘The Mystery of To you have We
granted’91 with me is that long ago there was some confusion in two premonitions I
had.
The First: I perceived through a premonition a terrible event that would occur in
this country alone, and the rise of tyrants. The mighty mystery became apparent twelve
years later as I had foretold, but in the large sphere, on the face of the earth. For sure
it apparently altered what I had predicted, but in reality it turned out to be completely
correct and the pure truth. For this reason, I do not keep that treatise with me and I do
not give it to others.
Secondly: Forty years ago I used repeatedly to say: “I see a light.” I used to give
good tidings of it. I supposed the light to be on a country-wide scale. However, it was
the Risale-i Nur; I reckoned the circle of the Risale-i Nur students to be the political
sphere of the whole country, and I was in error.

91 Qur’an, 108:1.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
533
Sir!
I thank you for having the flag of the Independence Holiday hung on my ward.
During the national struggle in Istanbul, Ankara knew that I had performed the service
of maybe a military division through publishing and distributing my work entitled The
Six Steps against the British and Greeks, for twice Mustafa Kemal notified me in
cypher wanting me to go to Ankara. He even said: “We have to have this heroic hoja
here!” That is to say, it is my right to hang this flag this holiday.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 523 ---
534
 [The defence speeches of the Risale-i Nur students during their trials in
Afyon Court, which commenced in 1948 as a conspiracy to impose, through
propaganda, the death penalty, and during which the Risale-i Nur was firstly
convicted, then all copies of it finally returned.]
We say the following in the face of those who, departing from reality and justice,
have called the Risale-i Nur students’ attachment for the Risale-i Nur and its
interpreter, which looks purely and sincerely to the hereafter, a worldly, political
society, and have tried to show this to be a criminal offence, despite three courts of
law having acquitted them in that respect:
The basis of all human society, and especially the Islamic nation, are earnest love
between relatives; concerned relations between tribes and groups; brotherhood and
moral assistance for fellow believers arising from Islamic nationhood; self-sacrificing
concern for one’s fellow-countrymen and the members of one’s nation; and
unshakeable attachment and devotion to and support for the truths of the Qur’an,
which save their eternal lives, and for those who disseminate them. It is only by
denying these bonds, which secure the life of society, and by accepting the Red Peril
—which is scattering the terrible seed of anarchy in the north, destroying nations and
their youth, and by drawing everyone’s children to itself, annihilates kinship and
nationhood, and opens the way to the total corruption of human civilization and
society— that the Risale-i Nur students can be called a political society in the sense of
its being a crime.
The Risale-i Nur students therefore do not hesitate to display their attachment to
the Qur’an’s truths and their firm relations with their brothers of the hereafter. They
accept gratefully any punishment that may be given them because of that brotherhood,
and admit the truth to your just court. They do not condescend to defend themselves
with trickery, sycophancy, and lies.
                                                                       Prisoner,  S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 524 ---
535
 [Husrev’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
In the indictment the prosecution has charged me in two respects, one general, the
other particular. The general charge is my service of the Risale-i Nur and my sharing
in the imaginary crime of my Master. The particular charge is my life of seclusion,
which is of no importance and constitutes no crime, as well as a number of
circumstances related to my personal life. In reply to the prosecution’s making me
share in my Master’s imaginary crime because of my service to the Risale-i Nur, I say
this:
On the way my Master has taken, I participate with all my heart and soul in the
imaginary crime with which he is charged, in the sacred service he performs through
the Risale-i Nur for the Islamic world and particularly for this country and nation. I
shall offer thanks to Almighty God till the end of my days for having given me success
in this service of religious belief.
Respected Judges! Certain evidence of my success in serving the Risale-i Nur is
this:
It was my writing out the copies of the Qur’an, although I had little proficiency in
Arabic calligraphy, in a wondrous and unprecedented way, perfectly, outside my will
and power. One of these you have in your possession.
The second evidence is my success in writing nearly six hundred copies of various
parts of the Risale-i Nur, which for twenty years has secured enormous benefits for
this country and nation, and for religion and good morality. In fact, in the short time of
one month I wrote out fourteen treatises, as my friends know. I find it superfluous to
defend also those points related to my part in my Master’s sacred service, which are
supposed to be offences. I affirm with all my strength my Master’s written objections
and their addendum, and I present them to your high court as my own objections.
Respected Judges! Our Master follows no worldly or political aim at all in his
blessed, sacred, and luminous works, which your court is still holding and which
consist of the truths of belief and the Qur’an. Moreover, just as I and my friends
confirm the sacred service he has performed for this country and nation, so did the
patriots in the Union and Progress government confirm it. For at that time, they gave
nineteen thousand gold liras for his university in Van, called the Medresetü’z-Zehra.
The lovers of their country admiringly confirmed his patriotic, scholarly endeavours.
Then one hundred and sixty-three deputies out of two hundred allotted

--- Sayfa 525 ---
536
one hundred and fifty thousand liras, when funds were very scarce, for that university
of his in the east.
Throughout his life, my sacred, blessed Master, whom the prosecution has
designated a criminal, has compelled even his most obdurate and jealous enemies to
submit and those who have sought his conviction in the courts, not permitting them to
combat his vehement, sharp words. I inform your high court that I am proud of the
service I have performed for the Risale-i Nur this last twenty years, working as a
scribe in his sacred service and all his learned activities, the aim of which is to secure
the foundation stones of this country’s happiness and prosperity.
                                                                        Prisoner, Husrev Altınbaşak
* * *
[Tahiri’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
As has been communicated to me by the office of the Afyon state prosecutor, I
have been sent to trial together with my Master, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, and his
other companions in connection with the matter of inciting the people to breach state
security by exploiting religious feelings.
I gave correct answers to the questions asked of me both in Isparta Magistrates’
Court, and in the office of the Afyon examining magistrate. Denizli Court, which
acquitted us, returned all our books to us, and did not convict us for reading and
writing out the treatises of my Master, Bediuzzaman, or for corresponding with our
brothers who are his students. However, six years ago, without my Master’s
permission, on my own initiative I had printed in Istanbul five hundred copies of the
Seventh Ray by Bediuzzaman in the old letters. In accordance with the decision dated
20.7.1945, Denizli Court returned these in their entirety together with their box,
handing them over to me in person. They were then distributed at cost price to Risale-
i Nur students eager for them.
In consequence of that court’s decision, which had been ratified by the Appeal
Court and had been made final, two years ago I bought a duplicating machine in
Istanbul and paper, and took them to Isparta.
Of the three collections which you have in your possession, two were written out
by my brother Husrev Altınbaşak, and one was written out by myself. First of all we
printed Zülfikâr, containing The Miracles of

--- Sayfa 526 ---
537
Muhammad (PBUH) and The Miraculousness of the Qur’an. This we in part sold, and
with the money bought the paper for The Staff of Moses Collection (Asâ-yi Mûsa). We
then printed The Staff of Moses, and sold it. Then we bought the paper for The
Illuminating Lamp Collection (Siracünnûr), and printed it. This continued for about a
year. Then, when bringing around thirty copies of these collections to Egirdir, I was
arrested on the way, and handed over to the judicial authorities in Egirdir. Not much
time had passed when on the initiative of the Isparta judicial authorities, Husrev
Altınbaşak’s house was searched and both the duplicating machine and the collections
were seized, and we were sent to court to be tried for the offences of a year
previously. Since they were religious works which were not prohibited, Husrev
Altınbaşak, myself, and one other friend were given sentences of one month for
printing books without permission. We applied to the Appeal Court, and before it had
come to a decision, I was sent to Afyon Prison.
Now, in your high court, because of this altruistic service of mine for my religion
and co-religionists, and particularly the question of the Fifth Ray, which contains
interpretations of Hadiths and was returned by the former court, the Afyon state
prosecutor wants to have me, and the Risale-i Nur’s author, and Husrev Altınbaşak,
and forty-six other student brothers punished for “breaching state security,” because
they wrote out these works and read them.
I say to you in your presence as a full citizen of this country, without deviating
from the truth, that for years I have been the student of Said Nursi, whom we hold
with the highest esteem as our Master, and who with these works has rectified our
conduct religiously and advanced us, and has rejected it when we called him
“Regenerator of Religion.” I can testify categorically and absolutely certainly that
neither he himself nor his works nor his students have in any way attempted to breach
state security. One of the matters concerning which we have been charged is the
money obtained from sale of the books, concerning which Isparta Court was fully
aware and was unable to find us guilty and sentence us. For just as we were in no need
to secure our livelihoods through sale of the books, so we used the money obtained
from their sale to buy the duplicating machine, paper, and ink. There is no possibility
of this service, which we performed purely for God’s sake with pure intention, being a
crime, and therefore request of your high court and consciences that the copies of the
Risale-i Nur be returned.
                                                                                Prisoner, Tahiri

--- Sayfa 527 ---
538
 [Zübeyir’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
I am charged with founding a secret society and breaching state security. As I
shall set out below, since you will form the certain opinion that I have committed no
such crime, I reject the charge here and now. Yes, I can say gratefully and outright
that I am a Risale-i Nur student. It would be contrary to the virtue the Risale-i Nur
has taught me to deny it, and I cannot commit such a misdemeanour. A person who
reads the Risale-i Nur would not conceal it. On the contrary, he would proclaim it
proudly and fearlessly. For it contains not a single word or sentence that demands
hesitation.
I tried to describe the Risale-i Nur’s value in forty to fifty pages. I cannot say that
I praised it. For I do not have the ability to praise any part of the Risale-i Nur, let
alone the whole collection. For it is a true commentary on the All-Wise Qur’an, which
is the sun of the universe and its intelligence, and has been illuminating and guiding
humanity for around one thousand three hundred years. If any matter related to a
secret society has been found in the works, as I stated above, I attempted to describe
the value of, then punish me for the crime of trying to disseminate harmful works.
However, the wonderful way in which the Risale-i Nur is written has been affirmed by
learned scholars; it is sufficiently powerful to reform a corrupted society; it is a guide
for the people of the twentieth century and saves them from misguidance and the vice
they are dragged down to by materialism and Naturalism, and from the dense darkness
of their ideas; and through the effulgence of the Qur’an, it has opened up for mankind
a way leading to happiness and salvation, pointing it out clearly with its light. So if the
Risale-i Nur Collection does not contain any discussions related to the crime of which
I am accused, it is my opinion that your court too will agree that to punish me would
be contrary to justice.
I was asked by the examining magistrate: “Are you a Risale-i Nur student?”
I do not consider myself worthy to be the student of a genius like Bediuzzaman
Said Nursi. But if he accepts me, I proudly confess: “Yes, I am a Risale-i Nur
student.”
Having been slandered on numerous occasions by his secret enemies, my Master
Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, the peerless author of the Risale-i Nur, has been sent to
court, and every time has been acquitted. The Risale-i Nur has been scrutinized line by
line by committees of professors and Islamic scholars and they have given reports
stating that the work is

--- Sayfa 528 ---
539
written with unsurpassed knowledge and is a true commentary on the Qur’an. Since
that is the truth, why is he sent to court? My firmly held views on this subject are as
follows:
Those who read the Risale-i Nur, especially the perceptive young, acquire a
powerful belief. They become unshakeably self-sacrificing and religious, and devoted
to their country. The immorality and vice inculcated by negative ideologies can find no
foothold where there is indestructible faith. The more those with such belief increase in
number, Freemasonry and communism cannot expand and spread. The Risale-i Nur
proves rationally, logically, and in scholarly fashion with verses from the Qur’an and
extremely powerful proofs and arguments, that materialist philosophy, on which
communism is based, has absolutely no connection with truth and reality, and that its
theories are completely unfounded. It illumines those who fall into the darkness of
those rotten ideas, and saves them. It proves God’s existence with powerful evidences
that cannot be denied or objected to, to even materialists, who believe only what their
eyes can see.
With its original and attractive style and elevated literary art, this wonderful work
quite simply makes itself read, and by high school and university students in particular.
It is because of this that the communists and Masons know that the Risale-i Nur
forms a powerful obstacle to the spread of their poisonous ideas. They have recourse
to various stratagems and calumnies in order to eliminate the Risale-i Nur, or not to
have it read, since, as a true Qur’anic commentary, it is a powerful source of belief.
Although up to now there has been no sign whatsoever of any of the lies they have
ascribed to us, they continue to attack us. It is understood from this that they want to
intimidate us, make us give up the Risale-i Nur and at the same time put before us
their own putrid publications. In this way, causing the nation and youth to lose their
faith altogether, they want to bring about a decline in moral standards, and thus to
make the country cave in on itself. It is their ambition to hand over this country and its
people to a foreign power. In the presence of the bench of judges I say this fearlessly:
They should know this and tremble; we are not to be intimidated by mere threats.
For we have seen truth and reality in the Risale-i Nur, and learnt it and believed in it.
The Turkish youth is not sleeping. This heroic Islamic Turkish nation will not bow
down under the yoke of another country. The religious, warlike Turkish nation, the
believing, brave Turkish youth, fear nothing. It is for this reason that we read the
Risale-i Nur, which raises us to the highest degrees of humanity, ensures that we

--- Sayfa 529 ---
540
advance in every field, and instilling in us young people love of religion, country, and
nation, makes us true lovers of religion who will sacrifice all our beings for them. And
we shall read this work. As I stated above, I have read very little of the Risale-i Nur,
and yet I have profited enormously. This work is of the very greatest benefit for this
country and nation and for all humanity, and if I had wealth, I would spend all of it to
publish it. For I am ready to sacrifice my whole being for my religion and the eternal
happiness and well-being of my country and nation.
Moreover, I have not believed in the Risale-i Nur naively. Thirty-three verses of
the Qur’an, and Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and ‘Abd al-Qadir Geylani
(May God be pleased with him) made predictions that the Risale-i Nur would be
written and would offer guidance to the people of this age. Furthermore, the parts of
the Risale-i Nur that I have read have made me form the opinion that this collection
consists of works that teach truth and reality and that reform humanity.
I felt a great emptiness in my spirit, and when searching for a book to read, I came
across the Risale-i Nur. Then when I read it, I could not be without it or put it down. I
felt that the Risale-i Nur was meeting the overwhelming need in my heart. I found in it
the rational proofs of belief to save me from doubts about belief and knowledge. In
this way I was saved from the distress of scepticism. I understood from its truths that
the Risale-i Nur was written for us, the people of this age.
Powerful belief is necessary so that one may acquire the elevated virtues necessary
for good conduct and manners, and courtesy. Since the truths of belief are explained
by means of extremely powerful proofs and clear examples in the Risale-i Nur, the
more I read it, the stronger my belief became. In this way I was saved from giving up
my religion, which is truth and reality and comprises the principles of the highest
civilization, and from the calamity of being swallowed by the Red Monster. Thus,
since the Risale-i Nur saves its readers from numerous calamities, material and
spiritual; makes them more knowledgeable than a university graduate; instils in them
love of Islam, country, and nation; and teaches them obedience to God, and to be
hardworking and compassionate; no one who realizes its value would give it up,
whatever the price. This sincere respect and veneration could be torn out of no one’s
heart.
The Risale-i Nur is described by the prosecution as a harmful work. I protest in
the strongest terms at this lack of conscience and lie. And it is claimed that I
encourage it. Yes, this is true. The hearts of all the enlightened who heard the other lie
were pained, indeed they wept and gnashed their teeth. The twentieth century is a time
Positivist ideas are dominant.

--- Sayfa 530 ---
541
Things for which there are no proof and evidence are not believed in, and we do not
believe in them. We want proof that the Risale-i Nur is harmful.
If another of the aims of our covert enemies who concoct these lies is to destroy
the solidarity of those who read the Risale-i Nur, which is manifested as their
embracing each other in exceptional fashion due to the bonds of Islam and for the sake
of serving the Qur’an, and expresses only respect, compassion, and affection, and has
no other goal in sight. Our enemies should not struggle against us for nothing. I am the
most backward, the most ordinary of those who read the Risale-i Nur, yet I give them
this reply:
Even if one of us is in the east, one in the west, one in the south, one in the north,
one in the hereafter, and one in this world, we are still together. If the power of all the
universe was to amass, it could not separate us from our exalted Master, Said Nursi,
or from the Risale-i Nur, or from one another.
For we serve the Qur’an and we shall serve it. Because we believe in the reality of
the hereafter, no force can root out this love and solidarity of ours. All Muslims shall
gather together in the abode of eternal happiness.
With your permission, I shall describe an important fact concerning the well-being
of our country and nation: one of the communists’ secret plans is to incite the people
against the Government.
False information was given the leaders of the Government so that Bediuzzaman
Said Nursi should be sent to prison and his works be seen as harmful. But no one
believed the negative propaganda. For years the people of this nation have believed so
firmly that he is a unique Islamic scholar this age and in every way without peer that
no propaganda can destroy their true conviction.
I offer praise and thanks to Almighty God that He has favoured me with profiting
from the works of a great Master. I am indebted with all my heart and soul to him for
being the means of my learning about belief and Islam, and benefiting immeasurably.
Since my Master has saved me from the distress I suffered for years as I wrote, and my
youth from becoming fodder for communism, and my being condemned to everlasting
solitary confinement, I am prepared to languish in this worldly prison for years for him.
If I suffer capital punishment on the way of the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic
commentary which in twenty years has taught millions of people religion, belief, Islam,
and virtue, preserving them from irreligion, I shall run to the gallows crying: “Allah!
Allah! Ya Rasulallah!” If I am

--- Sayfa 531 ---
542
executed by firing squad on the way of the Risale-i Nur, which protects our young
people from abandoning their religion and being swept away by communism to eternal
perdition, and from crimes for which they would be shot as traitors to their country,
without flinching I shall bare my chest to the bullets. And I beseech my Sustainer that
if I am cut to pieces by knives for my Master Bediuzzaman, with my blood spurting in
all directions I shall write: “The Risale-i Nur! The Risale-i Nur!”
Respected Judges of the Court!
The education the Risale-i Nur gives is truly marvellous and original; it is without
equal. The purpose of other sorts of education is to gain material benefits and to attain
various positions. People study mostly for materialist ends and to be able to become
famous, or sometimes merely because they have to study. However, those who by
reading its treatises, receive the Risale-i Nur education, which resembles an
unorganized free university, nurture no worldly aims, only to serve the Qur’an and
belief.
Nevertheless, the Risale-i Nur, which consists of serious, scholarly treatises about
the truths of belief, is read with such enthusiasm, passion, and pleasure, that it
awakens in those who read it faithfully the desire to read it over and over again. Even
though those who read and write out the Risale-i Nur may find their lives in danger at
the doors of the courtroom, they state openly that they read these wonderful works,
and that they shall read them. Even if they know that the decision will be given for
their execution, they do not hesitate to display this constancy. This characteristic of the
Risale-i Nur, one of its many wonders, makes one ask: “Did those who admit this, find
their lives by the wayside?”
This means that contained in the Risale-i Nur and Bediuzzaman is a truth so
elevated that as well as not being harmful they did not deny it.
Normally students are made to study under the constraints of discipline and
authority. However, Bediuzzaman compelled no one to study the Risale-i Nur, and
hundreds of thousands of readers study it devotedly and resolutely, the majority of
them without ever seeing him. Such a wondrous method of education was never seen
in any medrese, either recently or previously, and was never encountered in any
university.
The prosecutor said that “The respect in which Bediuzzaman is held has not been
afforded to any other Qur’anic commentator.”
That is correct. Seeing that respect and reverence are awarded in relation to
greatness and achievement, and gratitude and thanks are offered to the degree one has
profited, Bediuzzaman’s works are profited from to an enormous degree so that
respect for him and gratitude to him are unprecedented.

--- Sayfa 532 ---
543
The Masons and communists expended every effort so that Bediuzzaman, the
greatest Islamic thinker and writer of the twentieth century, would not be known by
us, and especially by the young. But the wide-awake Turkish Muslim nation and youth
recognized that hero of religion, our Master, and they benefited from him and allowed
others to do so. It is because of this that their extraordinary attachment and confidence
cannot be shaken.
Since the Qur’anic verses in the Risale-i Nur are expounded in Turkish with
supreme art and skill without anything of their virtues, which are the Qur’an’s greatest
miracle, being lost, every class of people —men, women, officials, tradesmen, scholars
and philosophers— can read and understand it. Profiting from it to the extent they can,
they become ever more attached to it. High school students, university students,
professors, lecturers, and philosophers all read it. These educated classes profit from it
to an extraordinary degree, affirming its originality and the superior art of its
composition, and feeling a strong desire to read the whole work.
When perceptive and appreciative people first come to know Bediuzzaman and
the Risale-i Nur, they are infinitely regretful they did not know of them previously, and
in order to make up for lost time, never waste their spare time, and if they have five
minutes even, pick up the Risale-i Nur, and read it day and night. This extraordinary
interest and demand has never ever been shown for the work of any psychologist,
sociologist, or philosopher. Only the educated can benefit from them. If a middle
school student or a housewife reads the work of a eminent philosopher, he or she does
not profit from it. But everyone profits from the Risale-i Nur in accordance with his
level. For this reason, the whole nation awaits your decision to acquit Bediuzzaman
and the Risale-i Nur students. If in this time of tribulation Said Nursi had not
impressed on his students the need for patience, endurance, and moderation, as when
the commander of a volunteer militia force in the First War he mustered his students to
fight, so out of the great honour in which they hold him thousands of Risale-i Nur
students would have pitched their tents on the heights around Afyon and awaited the
decision of Afyon Criminal Court to acquit him.
The work that Said Nursi and the Risale-i Nur students do cannot be considered
within the framework of the law and be proved to be a secret society. Why can it not
be proved? Is a legal expert who has risen to be chief public prosecutor incapable of
proving it according to the law? No, he is certainly not incapable. But there is no
organization that could be called a secret political society. That is why it cannot be
proved.
It is a contradiction that the statement the prosecutor first gave, which

--- Sayfa 533 ---
544
was completely accurate and in accordance with the law, said that “the Risale-i Nur
students are not a political society,” and then a bit later for some reason said that “they
are a political society.” Of course the latter is invalid. We are certain that the judges
will see this fact clearly and give the decision that “there is no secret society.”
Judges of the Court!
If when suffering sorrow and anguish a piece was broken off the heart, the news
of a youth losing his religion should make the heart break into pieces to the number of
its minute particles.
Thus, the acquittal you shall give shall be the cause of the Muslim youth and
Islamic world being effectively saved from this terrible plague. This is another of the
reasons binding me inseparably to Bediuzzaman and his works.
Your decision to acquit the Risale-i Nur and give it its freedom will save all the
Turkish youth and all Muslims from the tragedy of irreligion. For without any doubt at
all, one day the Risale-i Nur, a treasury of elevated truths, will be known throughout
the world. Then you shall be appreciated by all mankind. Your decision to acquit the
Risale-i Nur will make the present and future generations grateful to you, and the
more it is read and benefited from, the more you shall be appreicated.
Beware! Do not suppose these sincere words of mine are hypocritical. Absolutely
not! Because I am afraid of no one while Bediuzzaman is being tried, nor do I waver.
Only, with your permission, I want to say this much: if the prosecutor continues
to make such despicable charges against the Risale-i Nur, which is a superlative means
of preventing Freemasonry and communism in this blessed country, and against its
author and readers, and he does not desist from making those entirely erroneous
accusations, and carried away by his feelings, opposes them, he will be supporting
communism and Freemasonry, and will be assisting the noxious atheists to multiply,
against whom in truth these charges should be made.

--- Sayfa 534 ---
545
[Part of Zübeyir’s Supplement for the Appeal Court]
Through its proofs the Risale-i Nur repairs the belief of people which has been
destroyed by the doubts and scepticism sown by the publications of secret atheistic
organizations.
One of the least tangible reasons for the youth adhering to the Risale-i Nur as
though electrocuted, is this: for years with unparalleled devotion and self-sacrifice,
elderly and ill, at a time demanding extraordinary caution, with superhuman patience
Bediuzzaman Said Nursi has endured the various torments of his enemies, the
communists, Masons, and those hoodwinked by them. With his truth-seeing, realistic
view, he has distinguished numerous treacherous stratagems against religion, and has
written works about belief which will bring to nothing their fearsomely cunning, covert
plans.
But what a regretable, sad and sorry situation it is, that for twenty-five years they
have tried to eliminate this champion of Islam, this matchless person, in prisons and
places of detention, in absolute solitary confinement. Even if due to animosity resulting
from the unfounded suspicions given rise to by the treachery of communists, the
Risale-i Nur’s author has been punished, his works continue to be read with ever
increasing interest and enthusiasm.
The first and most powerful evidence is this: the young people who read the work
The Staff of Moses (Asâ-yi Mûsa), which has been duplicated in the new letters,
quickly learn the Qur’anic alphabet in order to be able to read the rest of the works.
This removes the obstacle of not knowing the Qur’anic script, which prevents a person
learning numerous sciences and compels him to read works written specifically to
distance him from religion and belief. Whenever the younger generation has been
decked out and fortified with the Qur’an and the sciences that irradiate from it, the
nation to which that youth belongs has begun to progress and advance. Here, the
youth have begun to fill their spirits, burning with the need for belief and Islam, with
the lights of the Risale-i Nur, a Qur’anic commentary. Thus acquiring certain, verified
belief, our young people will struggle against irreligion and communism, and will on
no account allow their country to be sold to the enemies of Islam. If the communists,
therefore, find the opportunity to destroy all paper and ink, numerous youths like
myself and older people will be ready to sacrifice themselves, and in order to publish
the Risale-i Nur, a treasury of truth, would if it was possible make their skins into
paper and blood into ink.
Yes! Yes! Yes! A thousand times!

--- Sayfa 535 ---
546
In the indictment the prosecutor says: “Said Nursi is poisoning the university
students with his works.” In reply we say: “If the Risale-i Nur is poison, we are in
need of tons of it and thousands of kilos. If he knows where it is to be found in
abundance, he should send us there speedily by aeroplane!”
When we Risale-i Nur students suffer the persecution of tyrants for the sake of
serving belief and Islam, we prefer to die in the corners of prison or on the gallows to
dying on the couch of comfort. We know it to be a supreme Divine favour to die as
martyrs in the prison into which we have been unjustly cast because of our service to
the Qur’an, rather than living in captivity in what is apparently freedom but in reality
absolute despotism.
                                                                  Prisoner,
Konyali
Zübeyir
Gündüzalp92
                                                                                        Afyon Prison.
* * *
 [Mustafa Sungur’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
The prosecution wants to have me punished for belonging to the society of Nurjus
and inciting the people against the government.
Firstly: There is no society called the Nurju Society, and I belong to no such
society. I am a member of the sacred, Divine society of Islam, which every century for
one thousand three hundred and fifty years has had three hundred million members,
was founded by Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), the Glory of the
Universe, and is vast and luminous and promises eternal happiness for all mankind. All
thanks be to God, I am determined to obey its sacred injunctions with all my strength.
As for the Risale-i Nur, my being a student of which is considered to be a crime,
it is a miracle of the Qur’an that teaches me my religious duties and those related to
belief and that Islam is the highest and most sacred religion and the sole means of
happiness for mankind. It proves with brilliant evidences that the Qur’an is a decree of
the All-Glorious One, Who is the Owner of all beings, is all-present and all-seeing
everywhere, and under Whose pre-eternal administration are all beings from minute
particles to the stars and suns; it is a miraculous work whose view encompasses pre-
eternity and post-eternity and all events; it is the pre-

92 After this defence and its addendum were sent to the Court of Appeal, the Court authorities
sent a telegraph ordering that Zübeyir should be released from prison.

--- Sayfa 536 ---
547
eternal address of an Everlasting Sun which is superior to all other books and
miraculous in forty aspects, and which by giving mankind the good news of eternal
happiness, is the object of their eternal gratitude. It proves too that God’s Messenger
(Peace and blessings be upon him) was sent by the Creator of the Universe, and that
with all his conduct and practices was the most perfect, the most loyal, the highest of
all men, whose perfections were the most elevated, and through the light of Islam that
he brought, gave the best of all news to men, and gave them the most sacred
consolation, and who has taken under his spiritual rule fourteen centuries and one fifth
of mankind, and to the book of whose good deeds pass the equivalent of all the good
deeds performed for one thousand three hundred years by his community, and that he
is the reason for the universe’s existence and is God’s Beloved. It proves also with
brilliant proofs that both the hereafter, and Paradise and Hell are certain and definite.
With its words and sentences, the Risale-i Nur testifies that it is a pre-eternal and
post-eternal light proceeding from the light of the Qur’an and the Light of Muhammad
(PBUH). In respect of its belonging to the Qur’an and being a special commentary on
it, it pertains to the heavens and the Divine Throne. Thus, with all its Words, all its
Flashes and Rays, and all its Letters, the Risale-i Nur, which is supposed to be inciting
the people against the Government, teaches the Divine truths, and principles of Islam,
and mysteries of the Qur’an. Is it a crime, then, to read the Risale-i Nur, which is thus
elevated and worthy of veneration, and teaches good morality and virtue and the truths
of belief, and to copy out its parts, which bestow eternal happiness, or to serve it so
that believers may profit from it with respect to their belief? Is that inciting the people
against the Government? And to visit the author of such a blessed and sublime work, a
monument of light who is decked out with the highest degree of belief, laudable
morals, and virtue and is at the very summit of human perfections, and to be brothers
on the way of the Qur’an and belief with the Risale-i Nur students, who with their
good works, veracity, and unshakeable belief this century, have defended the honour
of Islam and truths of the Qur’an, and upheld them, and who have no aim other than
winning God’s pleasure — is to do these things to found a political society? Which
equitable, unsullied conscience could inflict a punishment for these?
Judges of the Court! The Risale-i Nur’s veracity has been affirmed by the most
advanced scholars, and with its gaining for its readers the highest level of belief and
greatest love of Islam, there is no doubt that all its Words, and its Flashes and Rays are
luminous commentaries on the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition. They are all brilliant
suns which dispel

--- Sayfa 537 ---
548
spiritual sicknesses and darkness. As is testified to by his pure and upright life, our
Master has passed his life on the way of belief and the Qur’an, and enduring every sort
of difficulty and distress, has by disseminating the truths of the Qur’an worked to save
the sons of this blessed nation in particular from the awesome attacks of communism
and every sort of irreligion, and was charged with the sacred duty of writing the
Risale-i Nur at this time. He does not instruct us (God forbid!) in immorality and
spoliation. He teaches us the saving of belief, the highest cause and most momentous
question in the world of humanity. It is most certainly a Divine favour that for twenty-
five to thirty years he has striven with the Risale-i Nur to save the religious belief of
hundreds of thousands of believers, especially by teaching belief, the greatest
happiness in life and its most important purpose, to unfortunates like myself who knew
nothing of Islam. We say the following to those who in a way diametrically opposed to
reality, consider him to be harmful for the life of society and deny his sacred service of
belief and work for religion:
If it is a crime to adhere to God, and obeying the injunctions of religion, save
people from terrible calamities such as immorality and being without religious belief,
and to make them happy with the permanent happiness of Islam, then he may be said
to be harmful to society. It is otherwise the greatest calumny and an unforgiveable
crime. The Risale-i Nur’s aim is not this world, it is the never-ending happiness of the
hereafter and the pleasure of the Eternal Enduring One, the Compassionate One of
Beauty, one shadow of the manifestation of Whose beauty is all the beauty and good
in this world, and one flash of Whose love is Paradise together with all of its subtle
wonders. Having a thus Divine, sacred, and truly elevated aim, a thousand times over I
declare the Risale-i Nur to be free of all transitory things such as inciting the people
against the Government. And we seek refuge with God from the evil of those who
with slander of this sort try to crush us and prevent us from working for belief or from
learning about religion.
Judges of the Court! As is indicated by thirty-three verses of the Qur’an, and
pointed out by Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and Gawth al-A‘zam (May
God be pleased with him) and hundreds of investigative scholars, the Risale-i Nur is a
light of the Qur’an those who adhere to which will save their belief, God willing. It
most definitely cannot be extinguished or be lost. For example, the attacks made on it
these last twenty-five years with the intention of eliminating it, have been the cause of
its spreading and shining out in extraordinary fashion. For its Owner is the All-
Glorious Monarch in Whose power and under Whose command is everything from
pre-eternity to post-eternity. For its truths

--- Sayfa 538 ---
549
are the Qur’an’s truths, and through His protection and grace, Almighty God will
always make it shine out, God willing.
Judges of the Court! If it is a crime to read and write out the Risale-i Nur —
which teaches belief and Islam with the highest love and fervour, and recognizes no
aim or purpose other than Divine pleasure, and is certainly a supreme miracle of the
Qur’an this age and a luminous commentary on it— and to give its treatises, which
teach the truths of belief, to one’s believing brother; and if the bonds of religion and
Islamic brotherhood, which are enjoined by religion, and the sacred, Divine fraternity
of uniting on the way of the Qur’an and belief for love of God constitute a political
society, for me to belong to such a society is the greatest good fortune, and is a
happiness greater than that afforded by any favour or award. Endless thanks be to
Almighty God, Who bestowed on a wretch like myself the great favour of being a
Risale-i Nur student, which gains such happiness and good fortune for a person. My
last word is:
For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs. * God suffices
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust — He the Sustainer of
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!
                                                                                       Mustafa Sungur,
                                                                                             Teacher
* * *
 [Mustafa Sungur’s Supplement for the Court of Appeal]
1. The Criminal Court: My reading the Risale-i Nur and writing it out and giving
a part of it to a needy believing brother so that he might benefit from it was called
“inciting the people against the Government,” and deemed an offence. However, in my
written objections to this charge I said: the Risale-i Nur, which is supposed to incite
the people against the Government, is a true Qur’anic commentary. With all its parts it
teaches the truths of belief, and bestows the greatest happiness on those who read and
write it. Its aim is not anything transitory such as inciting the people against the
Government, the way of disruptive, immoral layabouts; it is Divine pleasure, the most
perfect of all happiness and good fortune. I am proud to read and write out the Risale-
i Nur, which has gained for me the highest virtue and belief, the sweetest bounty, so
that I am its luckiest student and most powerless servant. Although I said that I knew
to be its student was a supreme Divine gift, and that I constantly thank my Sustainer
who granted this vast bounty to a wretch like myself who was not worthy of it,
without basing it on any law or evidence, my adherence to belief

--- Sayfa 539 ---
550
and Islam was deemed a crime, and entirely contrary to truth and right I was punished.
2. While studying in Kastamonu Gölköy Institute, I myself witnessed the irreligion
taught us by some teachers. They said, God forbid, that the Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH) had written the Qur’an, Islam was now abrogated, civilization had advanced,
and that it was a great error and backwardness to follow the Qur’an this century. One
day even, a teacher said that because Muslims performed the obligatory prayers and
thought of the hereafter, they suffered constant distress and passed their lives
unhappily; and that in the mosques of Islam there was a deathly atmosphere, while the
Christian churches were always happy and full of life, and that with their musical
instruments and other amusements, they enjoyed life and passed their time happily.
They tried to break the bonds with Islam and belief in our hearts, and instil denial and
disbelief in their place.
Then if through reading several treatises from a peerless light of the Qur’an like
the Risale-i Nur —which pours out from the Qur’an’s effulgence, and proves with
brilliant evidences and arguments the truths of belief and Islam, and that the religion of
Islam is a never-dying inextinguishable sun and means whereby humanity may attain
happiness and well-being— a wretch in whom had been instilled the above poisonous
ideas and whose spirituality they had wanted to kill with their noxious irreligious
lessons, and had even been carried away by them and (God forbid) believing in those
ideas had begun to disseminate them — if he had come to believe in the Qur’an, would
not his offering the endless joy and happiness he felt to the compassionate, loyal, and
true hero Ustad Bediuzzaman, who had gained these for him through the blessed
Risale-i Nur he had written; would not his telling the Revered Master, who had been
charged with the burdensome duty of writing the Risale-i Nur, how it had saved him
from his former life of heedlessness and misguidance, leading him to belief and light,
and how it was a sun of guidance and means of happiness for all humanity, and a
Divine favour for all men and particularly for believers; and would not his calling “the
destruction and corruption of a covert organization of the Sufyan,” those who with
their terrible aggressive assaults on the Qur’an and Islam, as described above, were
urging the sons of this heroic Muslim nation to embrace irreligion, and trying to raze
the sacred, Divine foundations of Islam, to whom millions of people are bound and
destroy their eternal happiness and feeling compounded regret and disgust at the
lunatics who applaud them and their base, aggressive, tyrannical destruction; and
would not his saying to his former fellow students, who had fallen into doubt
concerning their faith: “Come, let’s give up following the lusts and whims of our souls;

--- Sayfa 540 ---
551
let’s bow before the truths of the Qur’an and hurry to the Risale-i Nur medrese, the
guide to happiness this century. Let’s leave those lying scoundrels whom we have been
applauding for months or years and reject the falsehoods they showed to be the truth,
and attach ourselves to Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’s teachings and take them as our
master. Let’s turn our backs on the darkness and embrace the light;” would not these
all arise from the joy he found in his belief and his love of the Qur’an and Islam, and
from his adherence to them, and his devotion to his nation, and his desiring everyone
to acquire true, verified belief and attain infinite happiness?
Is it a crime to attach oneself to God and proclaim that Islam is the loftiest
religion and the bringer of virtue and happiness? At a time when with lies and slander,
from every side there are overwhelming attacks on the Qur’an and Islam, and attempts
are being made to refute the Qur’an and Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon
him), which are extremely elevated, sacred, and precious, yet books which spread
irreligion and atheism and rebellious, transient, worthless wretches who attack Islam
are held in respect and innovations and the unlawful are applauded — at such a time is
it a crime to believe and proclaim the sacredness and loftiness of the Risale-i Nur and
that as a miracle of the Qur’an it is a Divine Light and dominical gift which explains
and proves decisively and clearly the elevatedness, veracity, and sacredness of the
Qur’an and Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him); and both God’s existence
and that the universe with all its beings and all its members and systems testifies to its
Creator’s necessary existence and unity; and because he possesses reason and can
think and is the most comprehensive mirror of the Divine Names man is a sort of
monarch over all other creatures; and that if he has a relationship with God through
worship and belief and preserves himself against misguidance and vice and grievous
sins, he becomes worthy of rising to the highest of the high, superior to all beings, and
an esteemed guest who will be forever happy in Paradise, but if he denies his Creator
through associating partners with Him and rebellion, or through heedlessness and
misguidance, he falls lower than an animal, descending to the lowest of the low,
coming to deserve everlasting Hell and unending torment and torture; and that the
Qur’an is the true Word of God, which is constant, and that its injunctions and
commands do not, and cannot, change; and that mankind’s true and permanent
happiness is possible only through following the Qur’an’s commands and adhering to
them?
The reading of novels and stories, written against Islam for five or ten minutes
illicit pleasure, and the publishing of books extremely dangerous and harmful for the
country and nation, and their being praised and

--- Sayfa 541 ---
552
recommended are not considered crimes, so can it be deemed a crime if we read and
write out the Risale-i Nur, which describes the Sun of Islam —which hundreds of
millions of people have followed and in which they have found true happiness— or
enumerated its elevated characteristics, which we lack the ability to praise? Can
anyone who has an atom of belief in his heart and desires the well-being of the country
and nation consider the above to be crimes?
Respected Judges of the Appeal Court! This case presented in your elevated
presence is directly the case of belief and the Qur’an. It is the case of the eternal
happiness and salvation of millions of people. Concerned with this case in effect are
foremost God’s Most Noble Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) and all the
prophets (Peace be upon them), and all the saints and innumerable people of reality
and believers, as well as all our forefathers who have departed for the eternal realm.
You may now win the love and good will, the prayers and intercession, of those
millions of the people of reality. The elevated reality called the Risale-i Nur is before
you. Is its aim the lowly, transient ranks and positions of this world, or to win God’s
pleasure, the greatest happiness, the purest joy, and highest good fortune? And does it
encourage people to be immoral, or does it deck them out with belief and the highest
morality and virtue?
Before you is the Risale-i Nur, which pours out from The Miraculousness of the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition and is a Divine Light. Since the greatest case facing
people, more important than anything, is to win belief in order to be able to depart
from this world for the realm of eternal happiness; and since through the effulgence of
the Qur’an, the Risale-i Nur teaches the truths of belief, and as is testified to by
hundreds of thousands of people who have read it and written it out, and as indicated
by numerous Qur’anic verses and Hadiths of the Prophet (PBUH), and Imam ‘Ali
(May God be pleased with him) and many saints like Gawth al-A‘zam (May God be
pleased with him), it has definitely won that case; certainly and without doubt, through
your elevated love of truth and justice, above every sort of transient anxiety, you will
understand and appreciate the Risale-i Nur’s veracious, Qur’anic face and its true
value, and that its students pursue no aim other than God’s pleasure.
Judges of the Appeal Court! With his high morality, virtue and compassion our
esteemed and elevated Master, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, strives to save people from
the dense darkness of false ideas and eternal solitary confinement, and enduring the
severest distress and torments has risen to the highest degree of perfection at this time
through being charged by Almighty God with the sacred duty of publishing the truths
of

--- Sayfa 542 ---
553
the Qur’an, yet entirely contrary to all truth and justice, he is cast into prison. Elderly,
ill, and with no one, practising his beliefs and worship in most elevated fashion,
possessing the most brilliant intelligence and learning, and having no aim other than
saving the belief of people, the terrible suffering of our Master, who is seventy-five
years old and truly loves humanity, in the intense cold of Afyon Prison, pierces the
heart, causing the severest anguish. Trusting in your elevated truth-loving justice and
true philanthrophy, we await the manifestation of justice’s compassion.
                                                                            Mustafa Sungur
* * *
 [Mehmed Feyzi’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
The indictment states that I am my Master, Said Nursi’s, chief scribe, and am
firmly attached both to himself and to the Risale-i Nur, and have served them, and it
deems this an offence. For my part, I accept the charge with all my strength and am
proud of it. For I have a powerful, innate yearning for knowledge. Evidence for this is
that when during the Denizli affair my house was searched, it was officially established
that found in it were more than five hundred various scholarly books, some in Arabic.
It is an unusual desire to study and extraordinary love of learning that made me collect
these five hundred books, that not one person in a thousand would have at this time,
despite my impecuniosity and young years.
Because of this natural capacity of mine, I was searching for a true master.
Endless thanks be to Almighty God that He gave me what I was searching for afar,
from close by. Yes, my Master, Said Nursi’s life testifies that his only aim in life has
been knowlege and to learn the sciences of Islam. I have understood clearly both
through my own observations, and from his published biography, and from what I
have learnt from his old students, the innate love of learning that I have is found in my
Master to an extraordinary degree, so that on his own in wondrous fashion, contrarily
to all the other medrese teachers at this time, he has persisted in medrese teaching and
endured every calamity. But then, because they did not understand my Master’s
extraordinary situation, the politicians attempted to link him with a sort of politics,
with which he has no connection, even throwing him into prison. But later Almighty
God made his passion for knowledge into a key to the Qur’an’s truths, and the Risale-
i

--- Sayfa 543 ---
554
Nur emerged, which has left all scholars and philosophers in amazement. Around that
time, as a Divine favour I found close by in Kastamonu the Master I had been
searching for all my life, whose nature was similar to mine but infinitely more elevated.
I shall offer thanks for this to the end of my days.
Just as since early days, in order to preserve the dignity of learning my Master
never accepted such things as charity and gifts, so he did not allow his students to
accept them. He would bow before no one. In fact, not condescending to crouch down
in the trenches in the front lines in the War, or even to enter them, he preserved the
dignity of learning. Similarly, heroically preserving the honour of scholarship and
teaching in the face of three awesome commanders, he was completely unmoved at
their anger and silenced them. I therefore accepted him as my true Master, since I
knew that he was someone who had sacrificed everything to preserve the high honour
of this nation and country and the Turkish learned establishment. Even, if to suppose
the impossible a Master so truly devoted to his country and nation had a hundred
faults, they should be looked on tolerantly and not objected to.
A example showing that this country’s patriots in the Second Constitutional
Period and the nationalists and patriots under the Republic appreciated in the name of
the country and nation our Master’s extraordinary service to learning was that the
Committee of Union and Progress government gave nineteen thousand gold liras for
his university in the east called the Medresetü’z-Zehra. This was to be organized along
the same lines of al-Azhar University. Its foundations were laid in Van Province, but it
remained unbuilt due to the First World War. Then the first government of the
Republic twenty-four years ago allotted one hundred and fifty thousand liras on the
agreement of one hundred and sixty-three deputies. Our Master’s nearly succeeding on
his own in founding a large university similar to al-Azhar, which was brought into
being only through the enterprise of thousands of teachers, shows that all patriots and
lovers of their country, together with the teachers of the medreses (religious schools)
should appreciate and applaud him. As for us, because we found such a Master, we
decided to endure every sort of hardship and difficulty. I have boundless respect for
him as an exceptionally learned scholar at this time, who through the effulgence of his
learning and truths of his one hundred and thirty works has caused me to advance on
the way of belief and knowledge. God willing, this respect of mine will continue for all
eternity.
There is no covert organization which exploiting religion and religious feelings
aims to breach public security, in connection with which the prosecution wants to have
me convicted. Despite months of investiga

--- Sayfa 544 ---
555
tions and searches it has not been able to verify any such society, nor do we have any
connection with such a thing. Our sole concern, within the framework of the laws of
the Republic, is for the Risale-i Nur, which has undergone the toughest examinations
and has met with due respect from the highest committees of experts and has been
acquitted by authorized courts of law. This is not treason towards the country and
nation, but scholarly striving in a way that is directly beneficial for country and nation.
Other than this we have no political aim nor any other purpose. Thus, since our
innocence and sincerity are clear in this matter, I seek the manifestation of justice from
your just court and my acquittal, as in Denizli Court.
                                                  Prisoner, Kastamonulu Mehmed Feyzi Pamukçu,
                                                                                 Afyon Prison
* * *
 [Ahmed Feyzi’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
Judges of the Court!
Is it not the duty and right of a believer to serve the Qur’an and the Prophet
(PBUH) by meeting with a scholar of religion, reading and writing out his books about
the truths of religion, and hastening to the assistance of his co-religionists? Is there any
law prohibiting us from this service of religion? Is it a crime to criticize certain aspects
of the atheistic immoral currents of our times? We are purely a body of religiously-
minded people which has no connection whatsoever with politics or government. To
think well of someone and consider him worthy is a personal opinion that may be held
by anyone. We know Bediuzzaman to be the most elevated scholar of religion of our
times. We know him to be someone who follows reality, and who expresses and
explains the truths of religion without toadying to anyone. We call him a mujahid
because of his service to religion and relying on the Qur’an’s unshakeable truths, his
undertaking the defence of our country against the currents of immorality and disbelief
which threaten it. In a country in which freedom of religion and conscience are the
rule, we cannot be held guilty of an offence because of the views we hold in the light
of our consciences. Therefore, we are not obliged to give account to anyone.
As for the matter of the persons foretold in Hadiths to come at the end of time:
we did not fabricate these. They have their origin in religion. In a

--- Sayfa 545 ---
556
number of Hadiths, God’s Messenger (Peace and blessings be upon him) said that the
life of his community would not exceed one thousand five hundred years. The major
historical events up to that time, which would have the greatest significance for the life
of his community and for the life of the world, he gave news of, calling them “the signs
of the end of the world.” He drew the attention of the Muslim Umma to their evil. He
said that those who were heedless and ignorant of these evils would meet with
everlasting misery and loss. There are innumerable religious proofs of these. We
believe in God, His Messenger, and the Qur’an. So as the result of this belief and belief
in the Messenger’s veracity, should we not strive to save ourselves from everlasting
perdition? Should we not see what is happening around us? Wondering, “Have those
perilous times come? Don’t let it be us who are the generation that falls prey to those
dangers,” should we not point out how they may be applied to existent religious
truths? If we disregard the positive evidences before us and the proven scholarly truths
which take us to the Divine existence, and supposing the irreligion of Europe to be the
greatest means of civilization and sole mark of knowledge, we abandon our religion,
who will save us from eternal perdition? Should we not think of this? Would a person
of this mind who recognizes nothing superior to the Qur’an and its truths, throw
himself into everlasting perdition out of fear of temporary punishments? Or would he
attach any worth to transient values? Would he give up his duty of serving God, and
His Messenger, and His religion? These then are the true factors tying us to
Bediuzzaman. Is there any other source of religion that can silence the pre-eternal
needs of our spirits?
The prosecutor recommends to us the thousands of Arabic books which fill the
libraries but do not interpret the spirit of today. He himself and those who think like
him may not like the compendium of knowledge, treasury of freedom, and elevated
reality called the Risale-i Nur, and they may criticize it. That is a matter for
themselves. But they may not interfere in our preferring this or that work, or our
attaching value to them. We like the Risale-i Nur. And we know it to be a true,
unhypocritical book on religion and a Qur’anic commentary. Values and value
judgements are questions of conscience. No one can interfere in them. Yes, we agree
that the Risale-i Nur’s author always teaches pure truth. The fact that he does not
accept this does not shake our opinion. Moreover, our opinion is based not on his
wonder-working in the physical realm, but on the wonders of his knowledge, the
extraordinary manifestations of which we have observed in his teachings with the
Risale-i Nur, which challenge all the world of knowledge. Can you show us a second
Bediuzzaman who although his [official] period of study was no more than three
months,

--- Sayfa 546 ---
557
spread such a brilliant light of knowledge; and with the wonders of his learning
displayed a logic so advanced in the ultimate questions of science that they left even
the loftiest thinkers in amazement; and in a language he learnt only in the second part
of his life had such a captivating style of exposition, and such a gripping ardour; who
overflows with love and passion, and is exuberant like a sea of belief, a treasury of
Divine knowledge, an ocean of wisdom?
Do you consider it excessive that we consider to be Master, the monument of
virtue and light who shows not the slightest inclination towards the pomp of fleeting,
superficial ostentation; nor stoops to even the smallest benefit or pleasure; nor attaches
any value to anyone who fawns at the feet of fleeting filth; who awaits nothing from
anyone, nor asks for it, and accepts nothing offered to him; who displaying the best
example of the purest chastity and enduring patiently, with forbearance, every sort of
deprivation, has dedicated himself to the truth and to making known the lights of the
Qur’an and knowledge of Muhammad (PBUH); and out of the abundance of his
compassion weeps at the suffering of the country and nation; and who never gives up
his work, which is for the happiness of those around him, despite all the betrayals he
has suffered; and disregarding his own old age and aloneness, strives and battles with
selfless, Divine exertion to save people from the pits of ignorance and whirlpool of
denial? In addition to the wonders of his knowledge described above, he is worthy of
being known and followed as an example of perfection and virtue because of this
matchless self-sacrifice, self-sufficiency, and masterpiece of chastity and moderation,
which he has shown at this time when moral values have been lost.
That is how we look on Bediuzzaman and his works. Is it solely because of our
attachment to him, which arises from our belief, and our belief in the severe rebukes
and reprimands of the Qur’an and Muhammad (PBUH) concerning unbelief and
morality that he has involved us in politics, which are deemed fleeting filth? Or can it
be called corruption to inform about God and His Messenger, the truth and the Qur’an
some of the sons of our compatriots who for twenty-five years have been unable to
learn the truths of religion and are heading for certain perdition, in order to save them
from everlasting extinction, and to reform their unsullied spirits and innocent
consciences?
Judges of the Court! We are in no way involved in politics. We know that for
those like us who are not versed in politics, politics is a way beset with a thousand and
one perils, dangers, and responsibilities. In any event we attach no importance to
fleeting externals. We only look to the good face of the world, which takes us to
Divine pleasure. We therefore

--- Sayfa 547 ---
558
vehemently reject the charge that we pursue politics or contest the concept of the
state. If there had been any such intention, there would have been some small
manifestation of it in twenty-five years. Yes, we have a negative front, a side which
rebukes, turned to immorality and unbelief. This arises only from belief and our
necessarily joining in the Qur’an’s severe expressions and comprehensive warnings
about these things. If these reasons and this sincere, straightforward style of exposition
do not convince you, sentence us to whatever sort of punishment you please. But do
not forget that Jesus (Peace be upon him), who today has six hundred million
followers, was sentenced to death like a common thief by the authorities of his time
only because his heart beat for mankind’s happiness and he bore the trust of delivering
the message.
Having spoken out freely, we shall be proud to face our conviction. With the cry
of For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs, we open our hands to
the Court of the Dispenser of Needs.
                                                         Prisoner, Ortaklar Bucağılı Ahmed Feyzi
Kul
                                                                                      Afyon Prison.
* * *
 [Ceylan’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
Making a mountain out of a molehill, because of my service to my Master and the
Risale-i Nur, of which I am proud, the prosecution portrays me as a prominent
diplomat or cunning plotter. In reply to his apportioning me a large share of the
imaginary crime with which the Risale-i Nur is charged, I say this: I am closely
attached to my Master, Bediuzzaman, from whom, by reading his works on religion,
belief, and morality, I have profited to such an extent that I would readily sacrifice my
life for his sake. However, my attachment is not as the prosecution said, harmful for
the country and nation, in order to incite the people against the state; it is rather an
unseverable attachment on the way of saving myself from the eternal annihilation of
the grave, from which no one can escape, and saving the belief of my brothers in
religion, which, like me, they are in need of saving in these perilous times, correcting
their conduct, and becoming useful members of the nation and country.
I am one of those close to him. From time to time for four years I have proudly
attended on him. During this time, I have witnessed nothing other than total virtue. I
have not once heard him say a single word about his

--- Sayfa 548 ---
559
being the Mahdi or the Regenerator of Religion. More than a hundred thousand copies
of the Risale-i Nur and hundreds of thousands of pure intentioned Risale-i Nur
students, who have saved their belief by reading its treatises, can testify that he is the
very epitome of humility.
My blessed Master considers himself to be a Risale-i Nur student like us. This is
what he claims. This may be seen easily in many of his letters, which you have in your
possession, and especially in the Treatise On Sincerity, which is included in The Staff
of Moses Collection (Asâ-yi Mûsa). He repeatedly says in his letters: “Enduring truths
like the sun or diamonds cannot be constructed on transient persons, and transient
persons cannot lay claim to those precious truths.” So to accuse him of boasting and
of claiming to be the Mahdi and Regenerator of Religion is not something anyone of
intelligence would do. For if you read carefully and fairly all his treatises and letters,
you will form the certain conviction that the like of this profoundly learned scholar of
the times has not been encountered for centuries. He is a saver of belief the like of
whom will not be encountered, who at a time the red sparks of communism are licking
the eaves of our houses is a patriot far more useful and productive for the country and
nation than an army. I am regretful that I was not earlier the student of such a work
and the esteemed Master who wrote it.
Respected Judges of the Court!
With the idea of performing a sacred service for the nation, so that like me the
sons of this land might profit from the Risale-i Nur, whose endless benefits I myself
had experienced, I had printed A Guide For Youth (Gençlik Rehberi) in Eskişehir. I
ask you: how contrary is it to justice that while service of the Risale-i Nur, which is a
true and irrefutable Qur’anic commentary, and thus to belief of an unfortunate like
myself should have met with praise and appreciation, and encouragement, we received
this severe treatment?
I request of your just court that you give the decision for the Risale-i Nur’s
freedom, for it is the sustenance of our spirits, means of our salvation, and key to our
eternal happiness. If the circumstances, some of which I have mentioned and
enumerated above constitute a crime in your view, I shall accept with total resignation
the harshest penalty you can inflict.
                                                                      Prisoner,
Emirdağlı
Ceylan
Çalışkan,
                                                                                   Afyon Prison

--- Sayfa 549 ---
560
 [Mustafa Osman’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
I say in reply to the matters which have been put forward as offences, that I took
part in the imaginary activities against the regime reputedly perpetrated by
Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, who is accused of founding a secret society and by
exploiting religious feelings, of being engaged in activities that might breach state
security:
1. Yes, like many Risale-i Nur students, I began to collect the treatises of the
Risale-i Nur and to read them with the intention of receiving a civilized, religious
education and learning Qur’anic conduct, which is a national characteristic and is
worthy of true Turkism and Islam, and an historical honour and virtue of ours. I
intended to become a useful member of the country and nation, and defend it against
the effects of foreign ideologies.
How could it be considered an offence at a time vice and immorality have
trampled the honour and mode of action of our forefathers, which found fame in
history, and poisoned the life of society, and have spilled into the streets to the extent
of disgusting even the immoral, alarming public opinion, so that it is gossiped about in
every home, and this grievous situation, which gives rise to criticism in the form of
news about the moral police and of various other subjects in the newspapers and
magazines, which are the tongue of public opinion, is rapidly spreading and quite
simply becoming general — to read the Risale-i Nur Collection at such a time, which
saved me as it saves all Muslims who read it; and to give it to my compatriots when
they insistently asked for it, who knew and heard that I read these works, so that it
could rectify their morals too; and so to save through the Risale-i Nur and its effective
teachings these people who had lost their moorings and were becoming harmful for the
country and nation; and to give it to them to read since it would assist them to become
useful to humanity — how could this be considered an offence? It is the luminous,
effective weapon of Bediuzzaman in his sacred, moral struggle, which is worthy of
praise and appreciation. With his effective teachings about religion he is a mujahid,
fighting against the dangerous red plague of communism which is spreading like an
epidemic even in our country and makes the whole world tremble — how could it be
considered a crime for myself to have given these treatises to people when they have
thus in twenty years transformed into useful members of the country and nation twenty
thousand people, and probably more? And how could charges be made against its
respected author in the same way? I ask your consciences.

--- Sayfa 550 ---
561
2. The Hadith which the prosecution stated was “false” and therefore unscholarly,
is said to be “sound” in the books of Hadiths. So having been accepted by the scholars
of Hadiths, and the fact that the leading Istanbul scholars both before the
Constitutional Revolution and during it accepted Bediuzzaman’s interpretations and
replies, which are now found in the Fifth Ray, to the questions they asked of him in
connection with the questions asked of them by the Japanese and the Anglican Church,
and those prominent scholars did not object to his replies establishes definitely that the
Hadith is sound.
Moreover, the truths of not a part of the Risale-i Nur, but of all of it, are so
powerful that no true Islamic scholar could object to them, so that foremost the
Directorate of Religious Affairs, and true scholars throughout the country since the
Constitutional Period, have been compelled to accept and respect them. The objections
of one or two individuals who are known as scholars but who are bereft of true
knowledge do not refute those truths and powerful proofs. They are merely ridiculous.
Is it a betrayal of the regime to write a letter of thanks to the author of the Risale-i
Nur because one is captivated by the truths of the Qur’an and belief it contains, the
spiritual and material benefits of which have become clear, and which are studied all
over the country by every class of person in order to save their eternal lives from
extinction, and from which thousands of compatriots have profited and so are eternally
indebted to their esteemed author, since he has saved their belief; is it a betrayal,
relying on the undeniable truths stated by the Hadith which is deemed to constitute an
offence, to consider certain acts and works to have appeared in this country, which are
referred to by the Hadith, and supposing it to be thus, relying on the statements of
numerous Islamic scholars, to see it as a victory of the Qur’an which will lead to the
repairing of certain errors and to be pleased at this, and to privately put this view to a
Master from whose works one has received effulgence; and to hope that the country
and nation will not fall into anarchy and thus into the embrace of the Red Peril, which
causes the whole world to tremble — is this a betrayal of the regime? Is it to malign
the reforms? And although several courts of law have acquitted that scholar, who is
utterly deserving of commendation and appreciation, and although he is very elderly, a
recluse, and has no one, to charge him with the same matters, arrest him, put him into
solitary confinement, and send him to trial, and for us too, to consider to be a crime
these scholarly views of ours and our working to save our belief, and to put these
forward as evidence of our supposed breaching of state security, is the just decision of
which conscience? I ask this of your court and leave it to your consciences.

--- Sayfa 551 ---
562
3. The charge of “Carrying Bediuzzaman’s picture as though it was something
sacred, and collecting his letters, and corresponding with him.” To carry not a simple
picture, but one decorated in gold and jewels, of the universal scholar and esteemed
author who through his works has saved my spiritual life and eternal life from
extinction, and allowed me to experience the pleasure and happiness of physical life,
and who has saved the belief of thousands like me, and to send him letters and
congratulate him, and to get to know others who love him, is my right as it is for all
members of humanity. I do not suppose this right of mine to constitute a crime, and
finally I say: as the police of two provinces and numerous towns can testify, in order to
be able to serve this country, nation, and humanity, for long years the Risale-i Nur
students have saved themselves through the Risale-i Nur from being aimless, and have
been the means of saving others. Although the patriotic service they have performed
for this country and its government has in reality been greater than a police force of
thousands, and is worthy of recognition and appreciation, it has been misinterpreted
and we have been arrested, as though deliberately on behalf of some foreign power.
All our work and businesses have gone to rack and ruin and our wretched families and
children have been left weeping and destitute. Which laws of democracy does this
conform to? Which just decisions of which just judges? I request from your respected
Court, which executes justice in the name of the just Turkish nation and its high
Assembly, that these works, the numerous benefits and advantages of which are
obvious and undeniable, are left free and that we are acquitted.
                                                              Prisoner, Safranbolulu Mustafa Osman,
                                                                               Afyon Prison
* * *
 [Hıfzı Bayram’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
I am charged with reading some of the works —which teach the truths of the
Qur’an and belief and are of great benefit for the nation and country— of the Islamic
scholar Bediuzzaman, who is accused of attempting to breach state security by
exploiting religious feelings; and with obtaining and giving —on request— to a
number of acquaintances some of his treatises, from which I had greatly benefited in
respect of belief and religion and which had led me to acquire Qur’anic manners, in the
hope that it would be for their good and they would profit from his teachings about

--- Sayfa 552 ---
563
belief, and religious and moral instruction, a national characteristic. In addition, on the
pretext of a number of acquaintances sending letters of a friendly or scholarly nature to
my address, it is alleged that I am a partner in the crime of the above-mentioned. I
object as follows to these matters with which I have been charged:
1.  I did not read the Risale-i Nur, which has previously been tried and acquitted
and returned to its author, and has been praised and recommended by the country’s
religious scholars, with any idea of causing trouble in the way insisted on by the
prosecution. I saw every part of it to be nothing but an important Qur’anic
commentary which effectively teaches Islam and gives religious instruction, the way to
make people virtuous and advance morally, and to save nations from falling into the
abyss. Since this is the case, I do not suppose that to read these with the intention of
study or maintaining my religion and belief, and to give them to others, and to obtain
them for others, constitutes a crime. For nowhere at all has any incident harmful to the
country and nation in which Risale-i Nur students have taken part been witnessed or
recorded by the police. In addition, it is totally false to say: “they study and read them
secretly” and to arouse doubts about a secret society. Because, whether scholarly or
political, the Risale-i Nur students have no connection with any society, secret or
open. In fact, several years ago the same charges were made against Bediuzzaman and
many others, and they were sent for trial in Denizli Criminal Court, and although all
the parts of the Risale-i Nur were scrutinized in the closest detail, they were all
acquitted. I do not know the extent to which the imperatives of justice demand putting
forward as evidence for a serious crime such as breaching state security and betrayal of
the regime, reading a work which itself and whose author have been acquitted, and
giving it to others to read; so I refer it to your consciences!
2. Among the charges was my being sent, while under arrest, a treatise by
someone I do not know from Bayezid. I have not seen this treatise. I am uninformed
about what it contains. If it is the Risale-i Nur, I accept it. You ask, and I shall reply.
Only, I learnt that the prosecutor mentions the Mahdi in the indictment, and my Master
is innocent of all such accusations. Just as I have never heard him mention such a
thing, so I have not seen it in any of his works. Moreover, at every opportunity he has
forbidden his students to venerate him, exalt him, or accord him any rank, and he has
rebuked those who have written him such letters. We have always known him to be an
important scholar who seeks no rank or position, and to be a precise and exacting
hoja.
                                                                               Prisoner, Hıfzı Bayram

--- Sayfa 553 ---
564
 [Emirdağlı Mustafa’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
I say briefly in reply to the prosecution’s accusing me of being a partner in my
Master Bediuzzaman’s imaginary crime:
The service I have performed for my Master and the Risale-i Nur, without having
the very slightest regret, resembles a mere droplet before an ocean of grace and
favour. Just as tiny fragments of glass are sacrificed on the way of obtaining a treasury
of precious diamonds, so I am every moment ready to sacrifice my life for the Risale-i
Nur, which is the means of saving my everlasting life. I consider it would be a terrible
betrayal of my blessed Master, the leading scholar of the age, and of his sole aim,
belief and the Qur’an, to abandon the Risale-i Nur, the innumerable benefits of which,
worldly and for the hereafter, have been established, because of temporary
imprisonment and its unimportant hardships and so that no harm should come to our
brief, tumultuous lives in this world, or to be indifferent towards the Risale-i Nur and
my Master. I do not want to deviate even an iota from what he permits and
commands.
Respected Judges of the Court!
Why does it seem excessive that despite my indigence I should be the student of a
leading religious scholar who has formed a powerful front against communism, which
aims to scatter its poisonous microbes over our beautiful land? This surely proves that
the riches of the Risale-i Nur far exceed worldly riches. Leave my Master and the
Risale-i Nur free for ever so they may save the belief of the Turkish youth like myself,
and the young people may become useful members of the country. The need of us
Turkish youth for the Risale-i Nur is thousands of times greater than the need for air
of someone held in close confinement, and the need for light of someone in pitch
blackness, and the need for food and water of someone parched with thirst and hungry
in the desert, and the need for a life-saver of someone drowning in the sea. It is
therefore not conformable with the honour of justice, because of the above facts, some
of which I have mentioned, to condemn Bediuzzaman, who has won our greatest good
opinion and regard, and to whom we are attached with unbreakable bonds, and the
many unfortunates who are his good-intentioned students, and leave us to rot in
prison.
                                                                        Prisoner, Emirdağlı Mustafa Acet,
                                                                                   Afyon Prison

--- Sayfa 554 ---
565
[Halil Çalışkan’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
Respected Judges of the Court!
In the indictment read to me by the prosecution my service of my Master is cited
as a serious crime. My Master came to our town in 1944 and resided there for four
years. For forty years he has given up all the pleasures and comforts of the world and
worked only for belief and Islam and to save the eternal happiness of Muslims,
particularly in our country, on the way of belief and the hereafter. With the Risale-i
Nur’s teachings on belief and morality, he has constructed a barrier against the noxious
ideas of communism, which are causing great harm to our religion, and particularly
among our nation, which is Muslim and Turkish. The material and spiritual harm it
causes is excessive. He prevents too similar things harmful to the nation. Does my
proud service on and off for three years of the Risale-i Nur and my Master, who is
worthy of being applauded by all the scholars in the world, constitute a crime in the
view of justice? It is also shown to be a crime that I left being a tailor to perform that
service. But if I was to sacrifice my very life for the Risale-i Nur, which is truth and
reality and a true commentary on the Qur’an, and for my Master, should it be deemed
a serious offence and myself known as a traitor to my country? I ask you.
Respected Chairman of the Court! I read some parts of the Risale-i Nur and I
wrote some out. Endless thanks be to Almighty God that due to the yearning I had
long felt for knowledge, I began to profit from these treatises. Although I was closely
concerned with them, I saw nothing in them about inciting the people against the
Government, or disturbing public order, or founding a secret society. Nor did I hear
anything from my Master about being the Mahdi or Regenerator of Religion, or
anything about such movements. The sole aim of the Risale-i Nur and our Master and
us students is to serve Islam, and particularly the Turkish nation, with respect to belief
and morality. Certainly, the Risale-i Nur and its servants should not be harassed
because of this service. Our sole aim and purpose was this and nothing else. And we
performed this duty for God’s pleasure. In any event we could not exploit such a
sacred duty for the world or any worldly benefit, and would not stoop to such a thing.
We therefore cannot endure the prosecution’s charges against the sincere Risale-i Nur
students, who have belief in their hearts, are preoccupied with the hereafter and have
no worldly ambitions whatsoever, of founding a secret political society, which never at
any time occurred to us.

--- Sayfa 555 ---
566
Respected Judges of the Court! We believe that you have understood the aims,
intentions, and nature of the Risale-i Nur students, and have formed the opinion that
we have no connection with the crimes with which we are charged by the prosecution.
We therefore request from your high court and your consciences that our books are
returned to us, free, and we are acquitted.
                                                                     Prisoner, Emirdağlı Halil Çalışkan,
                                                                                      Afyon Prison
* * *
 [Mustafa Gül’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
I am not a member of any secret society. In any event, my Master Bediuzzaman
Said Nursi never founded any such society. He always taught us about the truths of the
Qur’an and warned us severely against being concerned with politics. I am only the
student of the great Master Said Nursi. I am bound to him and to the Risale-i Nur with
all my heart and spirit. I would be happy with any punishment inflicted on me for the
sake of the Risale-i Nur and my Master. Through his works, my Master saved my
belief and life in the hereafter. His aim is to save all Muslims and all our compatriots
from unbelief and for them to win eternal happiness. It has become clear in all our
trials that we have no connection with any political ambitions. Although the reality is
this, we have again unjustly and irrelevantly been dragged to court. We have
understood from this that they want to break our solidarity. Our solidarity is not
turned to any worldly or political end or matter. We only have the very greatest
respect for our Master. Those who read the Risale-i Nur acquire an extraordinary
belief, Islam, morality, and perfection.
We are incapable of not having enormous love for our Master. I am attached with
all my being to my Master and to the Risale-i Nur students. This attachment could not
be severed or broken even if I was executed. I and all my brothers are innocent. We
request with all our strength that the Risale-i Nur is left free. I request that my
elevated Master and innocent Nurju brothers and myself are acquitted.
                                                                            Ispartalı Mustafa Gül

--- Sayfa 556 ---
567
 [Küçük Ibrahim’s Defence]
To Afyon Criminal Court
Respected Judges!
The crime with which we are charged is both irrelevant and pertains to the world,
it is political. But you, esteemed judges, understood at first sight whether or not we
were people who would be involved in politics. However, even if hundreds of
authoritative people were to ensure that this cold and alien charge was a hundred per
cent realized, and my intelligence was a hundred times greater than it is, because of the
feeling the Risale-i Nur and its esteemed author have given me, I would flee with all
my being from that temporary, fleeting political thrill and adventure, and spend it on
the way of belief in the hereafter and being saved from Hell. Both our respect for and
attachment to the Risale-i Nur’s worthy author, and reading and writing out the
Risale-i Nur, and our corresponding with the Risale-i Nur students and our relations
with them, all look directly to the hereafter, as was affirmed by Denizli Criminal Court
and the Court of Appeal. So much so that because of the ideas we have acquired from
the Risale-i Nur, we would not exchange these luminous beings for worldly and
material values. We will persist in this belief until we die.
Respected Judges of the Court!
Since we are gathered together here due to this fearsome charge, I am bound by
conscience and for the sake of the country to state an important fact: only in my own
neighbourhood, due to the reform of people’s characters brought about by the Risale-i
Nur, over a period of ten years, in full sight of everyone, foremost myself and many
others have learnt the way home. Vice and waywardness have been transformed into
happy family lives. Mothers and fathers now pray for those who were the cause of it.
You may listen to the stories of many people of this sort, in our province and around
it. Particularly in Denizli Prison, when the Risale-i Nur entered there, it had such an
overwhelmingly beneficial effect on the prisoners that it is still talked about. It was the
same when I arrived here at Afyon Prison; whoever I spoke to, they described their
former states and present states, and spoke gratefully of the Risale-i Nur students,
praying for them. These facts are well-known. I am astonished that love for the Risale-
i Nur, which has reformed me and my fellows to this great extent, both socially,
morally, and with regard to the hereafter, and especially is an important Qur’anic
commentary, and love for its esteemed author, and to write letters of consolation to
my compatriots, could have been something political. Out of this astonishment I say
that there cannot

--- Sayfa 557 ---
568
be such a crime. At the most I can say that the covert enemies of the Qur’an and thus
of the Risale-i Nur have made the judiciary and police suspicious about us for no
reason, and have thus been the cause of our packing the prisons. For sure, the elevated
judges will understand these facts, and placing their hands on their consciences will
give their just decisions, concerning which good tidings are given by God Almighty,
and they will make the Muslim Turkish nation, which throughout the country is
eagerly awaiting their decision, grateful to them.
                                                               Prisoner, Inebolulu Ibrahim Fakazlı,
                                                                                   Afyon Prison

--- Sayfa 558 ---
569
The Fifteenth Ray
The Shining Proof
This consists of two ‘Stations’
[This lesson is a treatise which is apparently unimportant, but in reality is of
the greatest importance, and is extremely powerful and comprehensive. It is a
Qur’anic fruit of Paradise and of belief which was produced from the uniting
—at the degrees of ‘knowledge of certainty’ and ‘absolute certainty’— of my
life of reflective thought and the spiritual life of the Risale-i Nur, which is
based on ascertaining reality through its evidences (tahkikî).1]
                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i
The First Station
[A concise summary of the Twentieth Letter, and Part One of the instruction
given in the third ‘School of Joseph’.2 It consists of three ‘Parts’]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
And from Him do we seek help
I am someone who has spent thirty-five years in seclusion, and particularly at
night forgets the world, and having for twenty-three years suffered the annoyance of
being under hostile surveillance, has become unsociable. Being all alone, I become fed
up if I am for even an hour with anyone

1 According to Bediuzzaman, the aim of the Risale-i Nur is to gain for its readers or students
‘true, verified belief’ (iman-i tahkikî — Arabic: tahqiqi). This has been defined as: “To acquire
certain knowledge of all the questions related to belief through close investigation, and to live that
belief... Firm, unshakeable belief.” See, Abdullah Yeğin, Yeni Lugat (3rd. ed.) Istanbul 1975, 271.
2 See, page 478, footnote 63.

--- Sayfa 559 ---
570
other than those who assist me or are desirous of the lessons of the Risale-i Nur. But
then, on the pretext of the petition I wrote to the Court of Appeal about being held for
eleven months in total solitary confinement in Afyon Prison, they forcibly transferred
me to Ward Five and forbade my brothers to come to me. I was feeling truly alarmed
that I would be unable to endure the crowded conditions when suddenly as a sign of
wrath and anger, the cold became so severe I would not have survived had I remained
in my former place. The hardship turned into mercy for me.
It occurred to me as I was reciting the tesbihat following the prayers: “In all the
wards the Risale-i Nur students are working as hard as they can at the Risale-i Nur
and its lessons both on their own account and in your place. But because this fifth
ward is somewhat isolated and is constantly being filled and emptied, the need here is
greater for the Risale-i Nur’s instruction. The youths and elderly people read the
newspapers, which write about the assaults of Russia with its awesome denial of God,
and are therefore in far greater need of its definitive, powerful instruction about belief
in God’s existence and unity.” I was thinking of writing a brief summary of the
Twentieth Letter and the sacred sentence:
There is no god but God, He is One, He has no partner; His is the
sovereignty and His is the praise; He gives life and deals death, and He is
Living and dies not; in His hand is all good; He is Powerful over all things;
and to Him shall be your return,3
which for years I have recited ten times after the morning prayer. For it points out the
affirmation of Divine unity on a vast scale, and with its eleven phrases demonstrates in
detail as clearly as the sun both eleven proofs of the Divine necessary existence and
dominical unity, and eleven good tidings. According to one narration, it bears the
Greatest Name. But then it was suddenly imparted to me that I should teach this
concise summary to Nadir Hoja and the youths here. So saying: “In the name of God,”
I began:
This sentence demonstrating Divine unity contains eleven good tidings and eleven
proofs of the truths of belief. For now, I shall point out briefly the proofs only and
refer their further explanation and the good tidings to the Twentieth Letter and other
parts of the Risale-i Nur. However, I

3 Bukhari, Adhan, 155; Tahajjud, 21; ‘Umra, 12; Jihad, 133; Bad’ al-Khalq, 11; Maghazi, 29;
Da’wat, 18, 52; Riqaq, 11; I’tisam, 3; Muslim, Dhikr. 28, 30, 74, 75, 76; Witr, 24; Jihad, 158; Adab,
101; Tirmidhi, Mawaqit, 108; Hajj, 104; Da’wat, 35, 36; Nasa’i, Sahw, 83-6; Manasik, 163, 170;
Iman, 12; Ibn Maja, Tijara 40; Manasik, 84; Adab, 58; Du’a, 10, 14, 16; Abu Da’ud, Manasik, 56;
Darimi, Salat, 88, 90; Manasik, 34; Isti’dhan, 53, 57; Muwatta, Hajj, 127, 243; Qur’an, 20, 22;
Musnad, i, 47; ii, 5; iii, 320; iv, 4; v, 191; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 538.

--- Sayfa 560 ---
571
cconsider it appropriate to write here a few points I did not tell them when I was
writing the lesson. Of the eleven phrases of the above sentence affirming Divine unity:
THE FIRST PHRASE: ‘There is no god but God’
The proof here is the treatise called The Supreme Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra), which has
been printed. It was because it is a matchless wonder that in giving news of various
parts of the Risale-i Nur, Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) said: “And by the
Supreme Sign preserve me from sudden death,” and making that Supreme Sign an
intercessor, through the treatise’s victories in the Courts of both Ankara and Denizli
and its spreading effectively and secretly, it was both the reason for the Risale-i Nur
students being acquitted, and since its secret printing had led to the students’
imprisonment for nine months, it both clearly affirmed Imam ‘Ali’s (May God be
pleased with him) wondrous prediction, and his prayer for the Risale-i Nur students.
Yes, the Seventh Ray, The Supreme Sign, points out thirty-three vast, universal,
unanimous proofs in all beings. Alluding to innumerable evidences in each universal
proof, it proves firstly that heavens indicate the Necessarily Existent One’s existence
and unity with the words of the stars; the earth with the phrases and sentences of the
animals and plants; and so on, until the universe as a whole, with the words of all its
contents and beings, and the truths of contingency and createdness and change — it
proves them as clearly as sunlight and as certainly as the day. Those who want
unshakeable belief and seek an unbreakable sword to combat irreligion and anarchy
should refer to The Supreme Sign.
THE SECOND PHRASE: ‘He is One’
A concise indication of the proof in this phrase is as follows:
In every aspect of the universe a unity, a oneness, is apparent. For example, it
displays a unity and oneness by being a well set-out city, a magnificent palace, a
meaningful, materialized book, and an embodied Qur’an every verse, and even every
letter and point of which is miraculous. Similarly, since the palace’s lamp is one and
the same, and its calendar-lamp, and fiery cook, and water-bearing sponges, and
hundreds of thousands of other things it contains are all one and the same, it proves
decisively that the owner, ruler, scribe, and author of the palace, city, book, and
mighty embodied Qur’an is existent, one, and single.

--- Sayfa 561 ---
572
THE THIRD PHRASE: ‘He has no partner’
A brief indication of the proof in this is as follows:
The source, master, and basis of The Supreme Sign is the sublime verse:
Say: if there had been [other] gods with Him —as they say— behold, they
would certainly have sought out a way to the Lord of the Throne! [to the end
of the verse],4
which is also called The Supreme Sign. That is, if God had any partners and others had
intervened in creation and interfered in His dominicality, the order of the universe
would have been spoilt.” However, the perfect order in everything, small and large,
particular and universal, from the wing of the tiniest fly and the cell of the pupil of the
eye to the numberless birds which fly through the air and the solar system, furnishes
indubitable and decisive evidence for the impossibility and non-existence of any such
partners. It also testifies self-evidently to the existence and unity of the Necessarily
Existent One.
THE FOURTH PHRASE: ‘His is the dominion’
A concise indication of the lengthy proof contained in this phrase:
We see that behind the veil One of boundless power and knowledge makes the
face of the earth into an arable field, and every spring sows in it all mixed up together
the seeds of a hundred thousand species of plants. Then in perfect order without
confusing any of their crops, He raises them and with the hand of mercy and wisdom,
out of them distributes to the two hundred thousand animal species their sustenance
and rations according to need. He performs these acts of disposal in His vast, rich
dominions, especially on the face of the earth. Those, then, who do not recognize that
All-Wise Disposer and Compassionate Owner are compelled to deny the earth
together with its produce, like the foolish Sophists.
THE FIFTH PHRASE: ‘His is the praise’
This is a very brief indication to the very extensive proof contained in this phrase:
Yes, we see with our eyes and understand clearly with our minds that this city of
the universe, quarter of the earth, and barracks of men and animals is governed,
supervised, and maintained by an All-Compassionate Provider, a Munificent Provider
of Bounties. For in order to have His bounties praised and thanked for, He makes the
earth into a merchant ship

4 Qur’an, 17:42.

--- Sayfa 562 ---
573
and railway train bringing provender, and the spring into a waggon filled with a
hundred thousand sorts of foods and packets of conserves called breasts, conveying
them to the needy living creatures whose rations have been exhausted at the end of
winter. Anyone with an iota of intelligence would agree that this was the work of an
All-Compassionate Provider. While one who does not affirm it and deviates into denial
is a foolish, harmful animal since he is then obliged to deny all the regular bounties and
specific foods on the face of the earth, which are the cause of praise and thanks.
THE SIXTH PHRASE: ‘He gives life’
An extremely brief allusion to the proof in this phrase:
Yes, it is proved in the Tenth Word and in other parts of the Risale-i Nur that
every spring on the face of the earth a glorious army is raised to life which consists of
three hundred thousand species of living beings of infinite variety. With its innumerable
members, all of whose lives and necessities are given them with perfect order and
regularity, it displays a hundred thousand samples, indeed, signs, of the supreme
resurrection of the dead. All those innumerable different creatures which are
intermingled and mixed up together are raised to life in perfect balance and order
without error, mistake, or deficiency, with none being confused, disarranged, or
forgotten. Those hundreds of thousands of animal species with their uncountable
members, which all differ as regards their forms, art, and livelihoods, are resurrected
from droplets of fluid called sperm which is all similar, from seeds resembling earth,
from tiny grains which differ little from one another, from the tiny eggs of flies which
are all similar, and the birds from the same air and from fluid and eggs which are either
the same as or only a little different from each other. The person, therefore, who does
not conclude that it is an Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, an All-Knowing,
Creative Giver of Life Who writes out on the page of the earth and the spring a
hundred thousand different books, all together, one within the other, without error,
perfectly, is surely compelled to deny both himself and all the living creatures
throughout the earth, in all the springs attached to the string of time, and on the faces
of the living earth and space, and must himself be the most foolish and wretched of
living creatures.
THE SEVENTH PHRASE: ‘And deals death’
A very brief indication of the proof contained in this phrase:
In the autumn when the three hundred thousand species of living creatures are
being discharged from their duties under the name of death, the

--- Sayfa 563 ---
574
registers and pages of the actions of each species and all their members, and the
indexes of all they have done, and the lists of all they will do the following spring, and
their seeds, which are spirits of a sort, are all entrusted in their places to the hand of
wisdom of the All-Glorious Preserver. The person, therefore, who does not recognize
that All-Wise Creator, the Ever-Living and Undying One, Who inscribes in the
miniscule seeds of the fig-tree, each of which is like an immortal spirit and bears all the
laws governing the tree’s life, the story of the tree’s life, which contains writing
enough to fill a book, thus making it like a large volume — such a person is certainly
not even an idiot and delirious animal, but more abject than the devils who stoke the
fires of Hell, and will be condemned to eternal death.
Yes, just as it is a hundredfold impossibility and futility that the above universal,
comprehensive, wise, purposive acts, which comprise numberless wonders and
miracles and point to the proofs of these Phrases, should be without the one who
performed them; so too, to attribute them to blind, impotent, unconscious, deaf,
lifeless, confused, disorderly, overwhelming causes is impossible, precluded and
unjustifiable a thousand times over. For if that was the case, every particle of earth
would have to possess an infinite power and wisdom, and a wondrous, universal
craftsmanship so that it could give form to all the plants and flowers; and as it says in
the piece about the air in A Guide For Youth, every molecule of air would have to
possess the ability to know all speech and all the words spoken on the radio and
telephone, and to teach them to the other molecules. No satan even could make
anyone accept such an extraordinary idea. The penalty for unbelief and denial, which is
thus far from reason and reality and constitutes insult and aggression against all beings,
could only be a terrible Hell, which is pure justice. We should surely declare in the face
of such disbelievers: “Long live Hell!”
THE EIGHTH PHRASE: ‘And He is living and dies not’
An extremely brief indication of the proof in this phrase is this:
For example, on the disappearance of the tiny suns reflected in the bubbles on the
surface of a choppy sea or flowing river, the bubbles that replace them display the
same tiny suns, thus pointing to the sun in the sky and testifying to it, and with their
disappearance and death they indicate the existence of a perpetual sun. Similarly, the
creatures on the surface of the constantly changing sea of the universe, and ever-
renewed, infinite space, in the arable field of minute particles, and in the river of time,
which with its flow draws all transitory beings into its embrace, continuously and
speedily flow on and depart, and their apparent causes

--- Sayfa 564 ---
575
die along with them. Every day, every year, a universe dies and a new one replaces it.
Since the crops of travelling worlds and flowing universes are continuously reaped
from the field of particles, certainly just as the bubbles and tiny suns point to a
perpetual sun with their passage, so the deaths of those numberless creatures and
endless crops, and their being discharged in perfect orderliness together with their
apparent causes, testify with the clarity and certainty of daylight, indeed, of the sun, to
the necessary existence and being and unity of an Ever-Living Undying One, an
Eternal Sun, an Enduring Creator, a Most Pure and Holy Commander. All beings
testify to these a thousand times more clearly and definitely than the existence of the
universe.
Now you have certainly understood just how deaf, foolish, and offensive is
someone who does not hear these loud voices and powerful testimonies that fill the
universe, nor heeds them.
THE NINTH PHRASE: ‘In His hand is all good’
A brief indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows:
We see that each sphere of the universe, each realm of being, each level, each
individual and member, and even each cell of each body possesses a store or depot
containing its reserve supplies of sustenance, an arable field or treasury producing and
preserving all its necessities. For at exactly the right time, in perfect order and balance,
with perfect wisdom and graciousness, all their necessities are given to those needy
beings by a hidden hand, outside their power and will.
For example, mountains contain all the minerals and chemicals necessary for man
and living beings, and the things necessary for life; on someone’s command and
through his planning, they are perfect stores and treasuries. Similarly, through the
power of an All-Wise Provider, the earth is an arable field, a harvest, a kitchen,
producing with perfect order and regularity the sustenance of all those living beings.
Even, just as human beings and all their bodily members have treasuries and stores,
and the cells of their bodies have tiny depots; so it goes on, till the world of the
hereafter, a store of which is this world; and an arable field and store of Paradise are
the world of Islam and true humanity, which produce the good, beauty, and lights of
this world; and one storehouse of Hell are the filthy matters and groups of this world,
which come from non-existence, which is evil, and yield the produce of evils, ugly
things, and disbelief, and which pollute the worlds of existence, which are good. And
the store of the stars’ heat is Hell, while the treasury of lights is a Paradise. Alluding to
all those infinite treasuries, the phrase ‘In His hand is all good,’ then, demonstrates a
most brilliant proof.

--- Sayfa 565 ---
576
Yes, this phrase, together with the phrase, ‘In His hand are the keys of all things,’
points out to anyone not totally blind an infinitely extensive, wondrous proof of Divine
dominicality and unity. For example, consider only the following out of those endless
treasuries and stores: just as with his command of “Awake!” and the key of His will,
an All-Wise Disposer Who holds the keys of seeds and grains, which are all tiny stores
containing the members and destinies of huge trees or shining flowers, opens up in
perfect balance and order the minute door of a seed; so too throwing open with the
key of the rain the treasury of the earth, without error He opens all the seeds, which
are the tiny stores and seminal fluid of plants, as well as the storehouses of droplets,
which receive the command to develop and are the origin of animals, and the seminal
fluid composed of water and air of birds and flying insects. If you want to understand
and see that He opens up with the hand of wisdom, will, mercy, and choice, all the
treasuries and depots, physical and non-physical, universal and particular, in the
universe, each with its particular key, consider your own heart, mind, body, stomach,
and garden, and the spring, which is the flower of the earth, and its flowers and fruits,
for they are all opened up by a hidden hand, with perfect order, balance, mercy, and
wisdom, with all different keys which come from the workbench of “Be! And it is.”5
That hidden hand draws out pounds of foods from a minute box weighing less than an
ounce, and sometimes hundreds of pounds, and presents them to living creatures as a
feast. Is it at all possible that blind force, deaf nature, aimless chance, or lifeless,
ignorant, impotent causes could interfere in such a boundless orderly, knowing, and
percipient act, in such totally wise, purposive art in which no chance played any part,
in such error-free perfectly balanced disposals, and in such completely just dominicality
which is free of all tryanny? Could any being who does not see and administer all
beings together at once, nor holds under his command minute particles together with
the planets and stars, intervene in this disposal and government which is in every way
wise, purposeful, miraculous, and balanced?
As the verse, Well-nigh bursting with fury6 states, Hell rages at the person who
does not recognize the All-Compassionate Disposer, the All-Wise Sustainer, in Whose
hand is all good and Who holds the keys of all things, and deviates into denial; it boils
up in fury, saying through the tongue of disposition: “He deserves my boundless
torments and is in no way worthy of compassion.”

5 Qur’an, 2:117, etc.
6 Qur’an, 67:8.

--- Sayfa 566 ---
577
THE TENTH PHRASE: ‘And He is powerful over all things’
An extremely concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows:
As soon as every conscious creature who comes into this guest-house of the
world opens his eyes, he sees that a power holds in its grasp the whole universe, and
within that power are a pre-eternal, all-embracing knowledge which never confuses
anything and a most precise wisdom and favour which never act purposelessly or
without balance. Just as, spinning a single particle from the army of particles like a
Mevlevi dervish in ecstasy, it employs it in numerous duties; so at the same time and
according to the same law, it causes the globe of the earth to travel a twenty-four
thousand-year-distance in a year, again like an ecstatic Mevlevi. At the same time and
according to same law, through which it sends to men and the animals the produce of
the seasons, it makes the sun into a shuttle or spinning-wheel, and spinning it
ecstatically so it exerts an attraction, it employs the planets, the army of the solar
system, in various duties in perfect order and balance. At the same time and according
to the same law of wisdom, that same power writes one within the other, without error
or confusion, hundreds of thousands of species, which resemble books, on the page of
the face of the earth, and displays thousands of samples of the supreme resurrection of
the dead. That same power at the same time transforms the page of the atmosphere
into a slate for writing and erasing. Employing all its particles, which are like the nibs
of pens or the points of the book, in the tasks specified for them by will and command,
it endows all of them with such ability that each receives all words and speech as
though it knows them, and broadcasts them without confusion. It employs each as a
miniscule ear and tiny tongue, proving that the element of air is a ‘throne’ of Divine
will and command.
Thus, according to this brief indication, the one who makes the universe into a
well-ordered city, a first-class apartment-building and guest-house, and a miraculous
book and Qur’an, and holds in His grasp with the balance of knowledge and
arrangements of wisdom all the levels, realms, and groups of creatures from the
universe as a whole to minute particles, and disposes of them, is Most-Merciful and
Compassionate. So the person who does not recognize that Most Merciful and
Compassionate One, Who demonstrates as clearly as the sun and daylight His wisdom
and mercy within His power, and makes known His existence and unity within His
absolute dominicality, thus wanting recognition through belief in return for His making
these known, and love through worship in return for His making Himself loved, and
thanks and praise in return for His

--- Sayfa 567 ---
578
bounties — the satans in human form who do not recognize Him, or try to love Him
through worship, in fact foster a sort of enmity towards Him through denial, and are
each minor Nimrods and Pharaohs, and are certainly deserving of infinite torment.
THE ELEVENTH PHRASE: ‘And to Him is your return’
This means to say: just as beings will depart for His presence, going to the eternal
world, the hereafter, and the everlasting realm of happiness; so it is He Who is the
place of recourse of all the creatures in the universe. All the chains of causes are based
on Him and rest on His power. They are all merely veils for the disposals of His
power. All apparent causes are only screens for preserving the dignity and majesty of
His sacred power. They have no effect whatsoever in creation. If it was not for His
will and command, nothing, not even a particle, could move or act. A very brief
indication of the proof contained in this phrase is as follows:
Firstly: We refer to the Tenth Word and its addenda, the Twenty-Ninth Word,
the Seventh Topic of The Fruits of Belief, the Third Ray, and to the treatises of the
Risale-i Nur about belief, the proof, leading to completely certain belief, that the
resurrection of the dead will occur and the hereafter and eternal life will be brought
about as indubitably and definitely as the coming spring, as this sacred phrase states.
Truly, those treatises have proved this pillar of belief in such a way with so many
evidences that they compel even the most obdurate deniers to affirm that the existence
of the hereafter is as certain as the existence of this world.
Secondly: One third of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition looks to the
resurrection of the dead and the hereafter, and it constructs all its claims on them.
Since this is so, all the miracles and evidences proving the Qur’an’s veracity also
indicate the existence of the hereafter. Similarly, all the miracles bearing witness to the
prophethood of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and all the evidences
of his prophethood, and all the proofs of his truthfulness, testify also to the
resurrection of the dead and the hereafter. For just as throughout his life, one of his
most constant calls concerned the hereafter, so all the twenty-four thousand prophets
(Peace be upon them) taught eternal life and everlasting happiness, giving the glad
tidings to mankind, and proving them with innumerable miracles and certain evidences.
Since this is so, all the miracles and evidences proving their prophethood and veracity
testified to the hereafter and eternal life, which was their constant and most important
teaching. Making an analogy with this, all the evidences proving the other pillars of
belief testify also to the resurrection of the dead and the throwing open of the realm of
bliss.

--- Sayfa 568 ---
579
Thirdly: In order to display His perfections and His power and dominicality, an
All-Glorious Maker, a Beauteous Maker, an All-Perfect Allah creates the universe
together with all its atoms, planets, parts, and levels. With perfect wisdom He
continuously makes each being work at a task, indeed, at numerous tasks, and in order
to display the eternal, endless manifestations of His Names, He sends caravan after
caravan, indeed, world after travelling renewed world, and the tribes of creatures to
the guest-house of this world and the arena of trial which is worldly life. He records
for the cinemas of the hereafter set up in the World of Similitudes, with the cameras of
the Intermediate Realm, all their images, deeds, and circumstances, and after releasing
them from their duties, sends other tribes, caravans, and flowing, travelling worlds to
the arena in order to perform those duties and be mirrors to the manifestations of His
Names. Is it therefore at all possible that there should be no realm of reward and
punishment, no resurrection of the dead and last judgement for men, who with
consciousness and intelligence respond in this fleeting world to all the aims of the
Creator, loving Him with all their capacity and making Him love them; recognizing
Him and making Him known; beseeching with endless supplications everlasting
happiness in the hereafter; and since, possessing intelligence, they suffer infinite pains,
they long for eternal life, which is pure pleasure, with all their beings, spirits, and
capacities? God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid!
Since these brief indications are proved and explained brilliantly, powerfully and in
detail in the Risale-i Nur, we refer you to that and here cut this long story short.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.7

7 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 569 ---
580
A Brief Summary of Sura al-Fatiha
[Part Two of the only lesson I gave after having been transferred temporarily
from solitary confinement in the third ‘School of Joseph’ to the company of
others.]
This is a short sample of the lessons given to the Risale-i Nur students in prison:
While reciting Sura al-Fatiha during the prayers, it commanded me to expound
one drop from its ocean and a single flash from the seven colours in the light of its sun.
For sure we had written some very sweet and agreeable points from this sacred
treasury in part of the Twenty-Ninth Letter, particularly in the journey of imagination
taken in “the Nun of na‘budu,” and the Eight Symbols (Rumuz-u Semaniye), and the
Qur’anic commentary Signs of Miraculousness (Ishârâtü’l-I’caz), and in other parts
of the Risale-i Nur, but I felt obliged to write down my reflections during the prayers,
but only the allusions to the pillars of belief and their proofs from that very sweet
Qur’anic summary, in the form of a concise extract and in the manner of Part One
above. So referring the phrase In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
to two or three treatises of the Risale-i Nur, I am starting from All praise be to God:
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. * All praise be to
God, the Sustainer of the All the Worlds. * The Merciful, the
Compassionate; * Owner of the Day of Judgement; * You alone do we
worship and from You alone do we seek help; * Guide us to the Straight
Path; * The path of those whom You have blessed, not those who have
received Your anger, nor those who have gone astray.8
FIRST PHRASE: ‘All praise be to God’
A very brief allusion to the proof of the truths of belief in this phrase.
Filling the face of the earth, indeed, the universe, are intentional bestowals and
bounties, which are the cause of praise and thanks, especially the sending of pure,
clean, nutritious milk to infants from between blood and excrement; so too are there
purposeful gifts and presents, and kindly benefactions and feasts. The price of these is
to say “In the Name of God” at the start, “All praise be to God” at the end, and in the
middle to perceive the bestowal in the bounty, and through it to recognize your

8 Qur’an, 1:1-7.

--- Sayfa 570 ---
581
Sustainer. Consider your own self, your stomach, and your senses! How many things
and bounties they need! See how many foods and delights they want for the price of
praise and thanks, then compare all living creatures with yourself. Thus, the endless
praise offered verbally and through tongues of disposition in response to these general
bestowals shows as clearly as the sun the existence and universal dominicality of One
Who is Worshipped and Praised, an All-Compassionate Bestower of Bounties.
SECOND PHRASE: ‘The Sustainer of All the Worlds’
A very short allusion to the proof contained in this phrase:
We see with our eyes that within the universe are not thousands, but millions of
worlds, small universes, mostly one within the other. Although the conditions for the
administration and running of these are all different, they are organized, maintained,
and administered so perfectly that like a single page held constantly in view the
universe is renewed and changed, and like a line, each of all those worlds is written by
a pen of power and determining. Every instant attestations, particular and universal,
are made, boundless, unending testimonies to the number of minute particles and the
beings formed of them, to the necessary existence and unity of a Sustainer of All the
Worlds who administers these millions of worlds and travelling universes with an
infinite knowledge, wisdom, and limitless all-embracing mercy within an infinite
dominicality. Not to affirm, perceive, understand or see a dominicality which raises
and administers with the same law, the same dominicality, the same wisdom, all beings
from the arable field of particles to the solar system and the Milky Way, and from the
cells of the body to the storehouse of the earth, to the universe in its entirety, certainly
makes a person deserving of endless torment, and negates his worthiness to be pitied.
THIRD PHRASE: ‘The Merciful, the Compassionate’
An extremely brief allusion to the proof in this phrase:
Yes, the existence and reality of a boundless mercy is as clearly apparent in the
universe as the light of the sun. As certainly as light testifies to the sun, so this
extensive mercy testifies to a Most Merciful and Compassionate One behind the veil of
the Unseen. An important part of mercy being sustenance, that mercy is signified by
the Name of Provider. As for sustenance, it points to an All-Compassionate Provider
so clearly that anyone with an iota of intelligence is compelled to affirm Him. For
example, He sends food to all living beings, particularly to the helpless and young,
throughout the earth and the atmosphere, in truly wondrous

--- Sayfa 571 ---
582
fashion beyond their wills and power, from seeds, droplets of fluid, and grains of earth
which all resemble each other. He makes the hen-birds search out the food and bring it
their wingless, frail chicks in the nests at the tops of trees. He subjugates the hungry
lioness to her cubs, so she does not eat the meat she finds but gives it them. He sends
the pleasant, nutritious, pure, white milk, like the water of Kawthar, from the springs
of breasts to the infants of humans and young of other animals, without it being
polluted by red blood and filthy excrement, sending also their mothers’ tenderness to
assist them. Then just as in truly wondrous fashion He causes the appropriate
sustenance to hasten to all the trees, which need a sort of food, so He bestows an
extensive table of foods on man’s senses, which require sustenance physical and non-
physical, and on his mind, heart, and spirit. It is as though the universe consists of
hundreds of thousands of laden tables of every different kind and sort, all enfolded one
within the other like the petals of the rose and shirts of the maize cob. With a
multitude of various tongues, particular and universal, to the number of tables and the
foods they bear and their bounties, these point out to everyone who is not completely
blind a Most Merciful Provider, an All-Compassionate and Munificent One.
If it is said: The calamities, ugliness, and evils in this world are contrary to that
all-embracing mercy, and spoil it.
The Answer: This question has been answered completely satisfactorily in various
parts of the Risale-i Nur such as the Treatise On Divine Determining. Referring you to
them, here we make only a brief allusion, as follows:
All the elements, all the realms of beings, and all creatures, have numerous duties,
particular and universal, and each of those duties yields numerous results and fruits.
For the most part these are beneficial, beautiful, good, and are mercy. Only a few of
them encounter those lacking ability, those who act wrongly, or those who deserve
punishment and disciplining, or those who will be the means of producing many shoots
of good. An apparent, minor evil is ugliness; it is apparently unkind. But if for that
minor evil not to occur, the element and universal being is prevented by mercy from
performing its duty, then all its other good and beautiful results would not come into
existence. Since the non-existence of a good is evil and the spoiling of beauty is ugly,
evils, ugliness, and pitilessness would occur to the number of those results. Thus,
hundreds of evil and instances of unkindness would be perpetrated just so that one evil
would not occur, which would be entirely contrary to wisdom, benefit, and the mercy
of dominicality. For example, things like snow, cold, fire, and rain have hundreds of
benefits and purposes. If through their

--- Sayfa 572 ---
583
own choice careless or imprudent people harm themselves, for instance if they put
their hands in the fire and say there is no mercy in its creation, the innumerable good,
beneficial, merciful uses of fire will give them the lie, and hit them in the mouth.
Moreover, man’s selfish desires and lowly emotions, which are blind to
consequences, cannot be the criteria, measure, or balance of the laws of mercy,
sovereignty, and dominicality which are in force in the universe. He sees things
according to the colour of his own mirror. A black-hearted, cruel person sees the
universe as weeping, ugly, dark, and tyrannical. But if he looks through the eye of
belief, he sees a macroanthropos clothed in seventy thousand beautiful garments one
over the other, sewn of instances of mercy, good, and wisdom. Like a houri of
Paradise dressed in seventy fine garments, it is always laughing, smiling with mercy.
He will observe that mankind within it is a miniature universe, and each individual man
a microcosm. He will exclaim with all his heart and spirit:
“All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds * The Merciful, the
Compassionate. * Owner of the Day of Judgement!”
FOURTH PHRASE: ‘Owner of the Day of Judgement’
A very concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase:
Firstly: All the evidences which testify to the proof of ‘And to Him is your
return,’ and to the resurrection of the dead and hereafter at the end of the Part One of
this lesson, testify to the extensive truth of belief which ‘Owner of the Day of
Judgement’ indicates.
Secondly: As is said at the end of the Tenth Word, just as the eternal
dominicality, mercy, and wisdom of the universe’s Maker, and his pre-eternal and
post-eternal beauty, glory, and perfection, and His endless other attributes and
hundreds of Names certainly require the hereafter; so does the Qur’an testify to the
abode of the hereafter with thousands of its verses and proofs, as does Muhammad
(Peace and blessings be upon him) with his hundreds of miracles and evidences, and all
the prophets (Peace be upon them) and the revealed books and scriptures, with their
innumerable evidences. The person, therefore, who does not believe in the everlasting
life of the hereafter casts himself into a sort of Hell in this world, arising from his
unbelief, and suffers constant torment. As is described in A Guide For Youth, through
their death and parting, all the past and the future and creatures and universes
continuously rain down endless pains on his spirit and heart, making him suffer the
torments of Hell before going there.

--- Sayfa 573 ---
584
Thirdly: ‘The Day of Judgement’ (Yawm al-Din) alludes to a vast and powerful
proof of the resurrection of the dead, but a situation has arisen here causing the
postponement of that proof to another time. Perhaps too, no need remains for it. For
various parts of the Risale-i Nur have proved with hundreds of powerful arguments
that the morning and spring of the resurrection of the dead and Great Gathering will
occur as certainly as day follows night and spring follows winter.
FIFTH PHRASE: ‘You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help.’
It occurred to me that before pointing out the proof contained in this phrase, I
should relate a true journey of the imagination which is described in the Twenty-Ninth
Letter. It was like this:
As is explained in the Risale-i Nur, and especially in the Qur’anic commentary,
Signs of Miraculousness (Isharat al-I‘jaz) and The Eight Symbols (Rumûz-u
Semâniye), one time when I was seeking out the Qur’an’s miracles I found four or five
miraculous predictions at the end of Sura al-Fath and an historical miracle in the verse:
This day We shall save you in your body,9 and even flashes of miraculousness in
numerous other words and sometimes miraculous points in letters. Then, when reciting
Sura al-Fatiha during the prayers, a question occurred to me in order to inform me of a
miracle in the Nun of na‘budu and nasta‘in ([You alone] do we worship [and from
You alone] do we seek help).
Why was it not “You alone do I worship and from You alone do I seek help,”
rather than the first person plural, that is, “We worship You and We seek help from
You”? Suddenly the broad arena of a journey of the imagination opened up through
the door of that “Nun” (we). I understood experientially the mighty mystery and vast
benefits of praying in congregation, and that this single letter is a miracle, and I
actually saw this. It was as follows:
At that time while performing the prayers in Bayezid Mosque in Istanbul, I said:
“You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help.” I looked and saw
that the congregation in the mosque was saying “Guide us!” the same as me; its
members were all participating in my supplication, corroborating it. Then another veil
was drawn back. I saw that all the mosques in Istanbul had as though become a huge
Bayezid Mosque. All their congregations were exclaiming: “You alone do we worship
and from You alone do we seek help” like me, setting their seals on my assertions and
entreaties, and saying “Amen!” to them. Then within

9 Qur’an, 10:92.

--- Sayfa 574 ---
585
their taking on the form of intercessors for me, a further veil was unfolded in my
imagination. I saw that the World of Islam had assumed the form of a huge mosque,
with Mecca and the Ka‘ba as the mihrab. The rows of all the Muslims performing the
prayers were in circles facing the sacred mihrab. Saying like me “You alone do we
worship and from You alone do we seek help * Guide us...” each was both
supplicating in the name of all, and testifying, and affirming it; also making all the
others intercessors for himself. Then, when thinking: “What such a vast community
claims could not be wrong and its supplications would not be rejected; it repulses
Satanic doubts,” and when affirming the vast, self-evident benefits of performing the
prayers in congregation, another veil was unfolded. I saw that the universe and all the
varieties of creatures were as though performing the prayers through the tongues of
their beings and worshipping in a way particular to each. Responding with extensive
worship to the all-embracing dominicality of the Glorious All-Worshipped One, each
group affirmed the testimonies and affirmation of Divine unity of all the others. While
observing that this was the case since they all take up positions proving the same
result, yet another veil was unfolded. I saw that just as the universe, the
macroanthropos, exclaims: “You alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek
help” with the tongue of disposition, and numerous of its parts declare it through the
tongue of capacity and innate need, and conscious beings say it verbally, all thus
displaying their worship before the Creator’s compassionate dominicality; in just the
same way, through the silent tongue of need and submission to their Creator’s
dominicality, all the particles, powers, and senses of my body, like those of all my
companions in that vast congregation, each resembling a tiny universe, declared: “You
alone do we worship and from You alone do we seek help.” In this way they showed
that they were acting in accordance with the Divine will and command and were at
every instant in need of their Creator’s grace and mercy and assistance. And just as
entering through the door of the Nun, I had observed in wonderment both the sacred
mystery of performing the prayers in congregation and the beautiful miracle of the
Nun, so I went out from it. “All praise be to God!”, I exclaimed. Thereafter I became
accustomed to reciting the verse, You alone do we worship and from You alone do we
seek help on account of those three congregations and those companions, great and
small.
Now we have completed the introduction and come to our main topic, and a brief
indication of the proof alluded to by You alone do we worship and from You alone do
we seek help:
Firstly: We see with our own eyes that in the universe and especially

--- Sayfa 575 ---
586
on the face of the earth, within an awesome, continuous, regular activity and
creativity, a compassionate, administering absolute dominicality responds with perfect
wisdom and favour to the pleas for help and entreaties made by act, tongue, and state,
replying actively to each. Sound intelligences and the eye of belief see within the
appearance of this dominicality, the response of the manifestation of an absolute
Godhead, an Object of universal worship, to the thousands of sorts of worship of all
beings, particularly living beings, and the voluntary, innate worship of all the groups of
mankind in all its varieties. All the revealed scriptures and prophets also tell of this.
Secondly: As signified by the nun of na‘budu in the introduction above, each of
the three congregations, and all of them, being engaged all together in their different,
innate, voluntary worship, is without doubt a grateful response to a ‘worshippedness,’
and a boundless, unequivocal testimony to a Most Holy Object of Worship. As
signified by the nun of nasta’in, the three congregations mentioned above, that is,
every group and every individual from the totality of the universe to the congregation
of the particles of a living body utters pleas for help and supplications both by act and
state, testifying indubitably to the One Who administers them compassionately and
hastens to assist them, and replies to and accepts their entreaties. For example, as is
said in the Twenty-Third Word, the acceptance of the three sorts of supplications of all
the creatures on the earth in a way which is truly wondrous and beyond all
expectation, testifies definitely to a Compassionate Sustainer and Answerer of Prayer.
Yes, before our eyes the supplications of grains and seeds to their Creator through the
tongue of innate capacity to become shoots and trees, are accepted. Similarly, all living
creatures seeking from someone through the tongue of innate need, their sustenance,
which their hands cannot reach, and all their vital necessities and desires, which are
beyond their power, testifies clearly to a Munificent Creator Who before our eyes
accepts all those supplications they offer through the tongue of innate need, and at
exactly the right time wisely makes strange, unconscious creatures speedily reply to
their calls for help.
Thus, as in the above two paragraphs, the acceptance of the verbal supplications
of all groups, especially the wondrous acceptance of the prophets’ (Peace be upon
them) supplications and those of the elite, attest to the proof of Divine unity which
From You alone do we seek help comprises.

--- Sayfa 576 ---
587
SIXTH PHRASE: ‘Guide us to the Straight Path’
Yes, just as the shortest way among paths leading from one place to another, and
the shortest of lines drawn from one distant point to another, are the straightest and
most direct; in exactly the same way, the straightest and most direct of spiritual paths
and interior ways are the shortest and easiest. For example, all the comparisons in the
Risale-i Nur between the ways of belief and unbelief demonstrate decisively that the
way of belief and the affirmation of Divine unity is extremely short, direct, straight,
and easy, while the ways of unbelief and denial are extremely lengthy, difficult, and
dangerous. That is to say, unbelief and the association of partners with God are not
tenable in this straight, wise universe, in which everything is driven down the easiest
and shortest path, and belief and the affirmation of Divine unity are as necessary and
essential in the universe as the sun.
Also, the most comfortable, beneficial, and the shortest and safest way in human
morality and conduct is the way of the straight path and moderation.
For example, if the power of reason deviates from the wisdom of the middle way
and the easy, beneficial straight path, it falls into either excess and a pernicious
wiliness, or deficiency and a calamitous stupidity, and is prey to all sorts of difficulties
on their lengthy paths.
And if the power of anger does not follow the path of courage, which is the
middle way, it descends into either excess and a most injurious, oppressive fury and
arrogance, or into deficiency and an abased, painful cowardice and timidity, and as the
penalty for the error of deviating from the straight path, suffers continuous torments of
the conscience.
And if the power of animal appetites strays from the safe middle way of chastity, it
falls into either excess and a calamitous, shameful debauchery and immorality, or into
deficiency and frigidity, that is, an inability to experience pleasure, and suffers the
torments of that spiritual sickness.
Thus, like these, in personal life and social life, in all their ways, the direct path is
the easiest, shortest, and most beneficial. And ways other than the straight path are full
of troubles, and are lengthy and harmful.
That is to say, just as Guide us to the straight path is a comprehensive
supplication and wide-reaching worship, so it indicates a proof of Divine unity,
instruction in wisdom, and moral training.

--- Sayfa 577 ---
588
SEVENTH PHRASE: ‘The path of those whom You have blessed’
A concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase:
Firstly: The answer to the question of who “those” are, is the verse:
Of the prophets [who teach], the sincere [lovers of the truth], the witnesses
[or martyrs] [who testify], and the righteous [who do good].10
This verse lists the four classes of mankind who have received the bounty of right-
guidance. That is, with “the prophets” it indicates Muhammad (Peace and blessings be
upon him), who is the leader of the four classes, with “the sincere [lovers of the
truth]” Abu Bakr the Veracious, and with “the witnesses [or martyrs] [who testify]”
‘Umar, Uthman, and ‘Ali (May God be pleased with them). With these prophecies,
that after the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and after Abu Bakr, both ‘Umar, and
‘Uthman, and ‘Ali would be both Caliphs and martyrs, this verse displays a flash of
miraculousness.
Secondly: The truth of Divine unity, which these most elevated, most true and
rightly-guided four classes of mankind have taught with all their strength since the time
of Adam, with innumerable proofs, miracles, wonders, evidences, and illuminations,
and whom the majority of mankind have affirmed, is most certainly as definite as the
sun. With their hundreds of thousands of miracles and proofs, these pre-eminent
members of mankind have proved their veracity and truthfulness, and their consensus
and agreement in positive matters such as Divine unity and the Creator’s necessary
existence forms such a proof it can be in no way doubted. They are the straightest and
the most veracious and verified of guides and the leaders in perfection among
mankind, and man is the most important result of the universe, vicegerent of the earth,
and of living creatures the most elevated and with the most comprehensive capacity.
Those therefore who do not recognize a truth upon which those four classes have
unanimously agreed, and deny the truths in which they believed unshakeably, with
‘absolute certainty’, ‘vision of certainty’, and ‘knowledge of certainty’, and in proof of
which they put forward the universe together with all its beings, such deniers surely
perpetrate an infinite crime and are deserving of infinite punishment.

10 Qur’an, 4:69.

--- Sayfa 578 ---
589
EIGHTH PHRASE: ‘Not those who have received Your wrath nor those who
have gone astray’
A concise indication of the proof contained in this phrase:
Based on unanimous reports, and universal, certain events and observations,
human history and the sacred revealed scriptures relate in clear, definite fashion how
on thousands of occasions succour arrived wondrously from the Unseen for the
prophets, the people of the straight path, and how what they sought was given them
exactly, and how on hundreds of occasions wrath and heavenly blows were visited on
their enemies, the deniers. This demonstrates conclusively and unmistakably that the
universe and mankind within it have a sovereign, just, generous, munificent, mighty,
subjugating Disposer and Sustainer Who in various historical incidents wondrously
bestowed victory and salvation on many of the prophets such as Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Hud, and Salih (Peace be upon them), and visited terrible heavenly calamities
on numerous oppressors and deniers like the Thamud, ‘Ad, and Pharaoh, as
punishment in this world too for rebellion against the prophets.
Since the time of Adam (Peace be upon him), two mighty conflicting currents
have come down to us. One is that of the people of prophethood, righteousness, and
belief, who, following the straight path, receive the bounty of happiness in this world
and the next. Since they act in accordance with the true beauty, order, and perfection
of the universe, they both receive the favours of the universe’s Owner, and experience
happiness in this world and the next. Being the means of mankind rising to the level of
the angels, or higher, through the truths of belief they attain to a sort of Paradise in
this world, and to bliss in the hereafter, and they cause others to win these too.
As for the second current, because it deviates from the straight path and through
excess and deficiency transforms the intelligence into an instrument of torture
amassing pains, it casts humanity down to a degree lower than the animals. Moreover,
in addition to receiving the blows of Divine wrath in return for their wrongdoing in
this world, due to their intelligences, they see the universe as a place of universal
mourning and as the slaughterhouse of living creatures toppling over in death, and as
exceedingly ugly and confused, thus causing their consciences to suffer a perpetual
Hell in this world and making themselves deserving of everlasting torment in the next.
Thus, the verse,
Not those who have received Your wrath nor those who have gone astray

--- Sayfa 579 ---
590
at the end of Sura al-Fatiha informs us of these two mighty currents. It is also the
source, basis, and master of all the comparisons in the Risale-i Nur. Since the treatises
of the Risale-i Nur expound this verse with hundreds of comparisons, we refer you to
them for further explanation, and here suffice with this brief indication.
NINTH PHRASE: ‘Amen’
An extremely brief allusion to this:
The nun in na’budu and nasta’in points out to us those three great congregations,
particularly the congregations of those who affirm Divine unity in the mosque of the
World of Islam, and especially the congregations of millions performing the prayers at
that time, and it places us among them and opens the way for us to receive a share of
their intercession; we too, then, through the word “Amen,” join in the supplications of
that congregation of believing worshippers, affirming what they say, and offering a
plea that their intercession and seeking of help will be accepted. It transforms our
insignificant worship, supplications, and entreaties into universal, extensive worship,
causing universal dominicality to respond to it. That is to say, through the mystery of
the brotherhood of belief and Islamic unity, through the bonds of unity of the
congregation of millions in the mosque of the Islamic world at the time of the prayers,
and by means of ‘spiritual radios,’ the “Amen” at the end of Sura al-Fatiha acquires
universality and may become millions of “Amens.”11
All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds.
Glory be unto to You! We have no knowledge save that which you taught us;
indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.12

11 Thus, if, according to his degree, an ordinary man receives a tiny share like a date-stone of this
sacred truth, a perfected man who has advanced spiritually may receive a share like the palm-tree.
But a person who has not advanced should not intentionally recall these meanings while reciting the
Fatiha,* lest he impairs his sense of the Divine presence. When he advances to such a station, those
meanings will anyway make themselves clear to him.
* We asked our Master what was meant by “intentionally” in the footnote above, and we are
writing here exactly the answer we received:
I consider that to dwell on the comprehensive, elevated meanings of the Fatiha and tashahhud,
not intentionally but indirectly, and not in detail, which induces a sort of heedlessness of the Divine
presence, but concisely and briefly, dispels heedlessness and imparts a brilliance to the worship and
invocations. This shows up completely the high value of the prayers, the Fatiha, and the tashahhud.
What is meant by “not dwelling intentionally” at the end of the second part, is that sometimes to
ponder over the meanings themselves in detail causes one to forget the prayers, lessening the sense of
the Divine presence. But I feel that to dwell on them indirectly and concisely yields great benefits.
Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students of the third School of Joseph,
Ceylan
12 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 580 ---
591
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
And from Him do we seek help
[Part Three of a single lesson of the third School of Joseph]
Introduction
Part Two was written at the implied command of Sura al-Fatiha in the five daily
prayers, and through the effulgence of ‘I testify that there is no god but God.’ Now I
have been obliged —for three reasons I am not at present permitted to disclose— to
write this Third Part, prompted by the tongue of ‘I testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of God,’ and through the effulgence of the sublime verses at the end of
Sura al-Fath:
It is He Who sent His Prophet with guidance and the Religion of Truth, to
proclaim it over all religion, and enough is God for a Witness. * Muhammad
is the Messenger of God; and those who are with him are strong against
unbelievers, [but] compassionate among each other,13
which contain five miraculous predictions. Referring the details, explanations, and
documented proofs to The Miracles of Muhammad in Zülfikâr, which is about the
Messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), and to the Arabic al-Hizb al-Nuri in The
Supreme Sign, here shall be written very briefly and concisely in the second and third
of three ‘Indications’, a summary of the Hizb al-Nuri and a sort of translation of the
part of the testimony of faith “Muhammad is the Messenger of God” which I
constantly use in my Arabic reflective thought together with the affirmation of Divine
unity, repeating them in the tesbihat following the prayers.
FIRST INDICATION
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), who responded with universal
worship and teaching to the manifestation of the dominicality of the universe’s Owner,
and His eternal Godhead, and His infinite bounties, is as necessary for the universe as
is the sun. For he is the supreme master of mankind and its greatest prophet, the Glory
of the World, and the one addressed by “If not for you, if not for you, I would not
have created the spheres.”14 The Muhammadan Reality was the reason for the world’s

13 Qur’an, 48:28-9.
14 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 164; ‘Ali al-Qari, Sharh al-Shifa’, i, 26.

--- Sayfa 581 ---
592
creation, and is its result and most perfect fruit. So too, truths connected with the
universe such as its true perfections and its being the enduring mirrors of an eternal
Beauteous One of Glory, and the manifestation of His Names, and the works —
charged with duties— of His wise acts, and His most meaningful missives, and its
bearing an everlasting world, and its producing the result of the hereafter and an abode
of bliss for which all conscious creatures yearn, — these are all realized through the
Muhammadan (PBUH) Reality and his messengership. Since this is so, the universe
testifies most powerfully and decisively to his messengership. Moreover, the
messengership of Muhammad (PBUH) and the Muhammadan Reality give certain
good news of eternal life, which, in order to be saved from non-existence, nothingness,
eternal extinction, and absolute annihilation, foremost the World of Islam, and all
mankind and all conscious creatures, constantly and earnestly seek, with all the powers
of their comprehensive natures, with the tongues of all their abilities, and with all their
supplications, worship, and entreaties. They thus testify to Muhammad’s
messengership and the Muhammadan Reality, endorsing that he is the pride of
mankind and the most noble of creatures. Moreover, in accordance with the rule “the
cause is like the doer,” the equivalent of all the good works performed every day by
three hundred and fifty million believers being recorded in Muhammad’s (Peace and
blessings be upon him) book of good works, and the single person of Muhammad
(PBUH) attaining to a ‘station’ manifesting the universal worship and effulgence of
hundreds of millions of righteous worshippers, and perhaps thousands of millions,
testifies in truly powerful fashion to his messengership, affirming it.
SECOND INDICATION
The following indicates more than twenty testimonies, which I always ponder over
reflectively in the course of my invocations:
Muhammad is the Messenger of God, ever faithful to his promise, through
the testimony of his sudden appearance with a perfect religion, Islam, and
Shari‘a despite being unlettered, with the firmest belief, faith, and worship,
the most elevated cause, supplications, and prayers, the most general
message, utter steadfastness, and wondrous fruitfulness, all without equal.
A translation of the above15 and a brief exposition of its meaning are the following
testimonies to the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH).

15 In the original, the above and the passages in italics at the head of the subsequent fifteen
‘Testimonies’ are in Arabic. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 582 ---
593
The First is a proof of prophethood proceeding from eleven of his attributes and
states. Yes, his appearing —despite being unlettered— suddenly and without
experience with a religion which has left in amazement the learned men and
philosophers of fourteen centuries and has won first place among the revealed religions
is an attribute without equal.
Also unequalled is the fact that Islam, which emerged from his words, actions, and
conduct, has at all times educated and trained the spirits, souls, and minds of three
hundred and fifty million people, taking them to spiritual advancement.
Moreover, he appeared with such a Shari‘a that for fourteen centuries it has ruled
with its just laws one fifth of mankind, leading it to material and spiritual progress.
So too that Being (PBUH) appeared with such a faith and creed, and such
strength of belief that all the people of reality have unanimously affirmed that, since
they receive perpetual effulgence from it, his belief was at the highest and strongest
degree. The opposition of his innumerable opponents at that time not causing him the
slightest anxiety, doubt, or scruple, shows too that the strength of his belief was
without equal or like.
He also displayed such worship of God and servitude to Him that bringing
together the beginning and end of worship, imitating no one, he saw and conformed to
the subtlest mysteries of worship, and fulfilled them even in times of greatest
disturbance. This was an incomparable attribute, as was his offering such prayers,
supplications and entreaties to his Creator that up to the present his degree has not
been reached, even with the meeting of many minds. For example, in the supplication
Jawshan al-Kabir, taking as intercessor a thousand and one Divine Names, he so
describes and acquaints his Creator that it has no like. Thus, no one has attained to his
knowledge of God.
He called people to religion with such steadfastness and announced his
prophethood with such boldness that although his people, his uncle, the great powers
of the world, and the followers of the former religions were all opposed and hostile to
him, he did not fear or hold back even a jot, but challenged them all and successfully
accomplished his task. This too was an unparalleled attribute.
Thus, these eight wondrous, matchless attributes form a truly powerful testimony
to his veracity and prophethood. They show too that there is complete certainty
concerning his utter seriousness, trustworthiness, veracity, and truthfulness. Every day
in the tashahhud with millions of tongues the World of Islam declares: “Peace be upon
you, O Prophet! And may God’s mercy and blessings be upon you.” It submits to the

--- Sayfa 583 ---
594
function with which he was charged, and affirming the good news of the eternal
happiness which he brought, it gratefully says: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet!” in the
face of the sure way leading to eternal life which mankind seeks and yearns for with an
innate, profound longing, thus meeting with him in spirit and congratulating him in the
name of three hundred million, indeed, thousands of millions.
The Second Testimony, which comprises twenty universal testimonies, as well as
many others: Through the testimony to his veracity of all truths of the pillars of belief.
That is, the truths, realities, and veracity of the six pillars of belief testify
decisively to Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity. For the collective
personality of his life as Messenger and the basis of all he claimed and the essence of
his prophethood were those six pillars. In which case, all the evidences verifying the
pillars of belief proved the truth of Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership, and his
veracity. The evidences for the hereafter of the other pillars of faith are set forth in The
Fruits of Belief (Meyve Risalesi) and the Addenda of the Tenth Word; and all the
pillars together with their proofs form a proof of his messengership.
The Third Universal Testimony, which comprises thousands of testimonies:
Through the testimony of his self (Peace and blessings be upon him), through his
thousands of miracles, perfections, and fine morality.
That is: he was a proof of himself as brilliant as the sun, through the powerful
testimony to his messengership and veracity of his thousands of miracles, attainments
and perfections, and his elevated character and fine morality. Yes, as is proved in the
wondrous treatise of The Miracles of Muhammad (PBUH) through more than three
hundred sound narrations, in accordance with the explicit verses
And the moon split,16
and
And when you threw, it was not you who threw; it was rather God that
threw,17
the moon splitting in two at the sign of a single finger of his hand; and water flowing
forth in five springs from the five fingers of the same hand, and an entire thirsty army
drinking from these and testifying to it; and his casting a handful of dust with the same
hand at an attacking enemy army, and their turning tail and fleeing when the dust
entered the eyes of all of

16 Qur’an, 54:1.
17 Qur’an, 8:17.

--- Sayfa 584 ---
595
them; and small pebbles uttering glorifications in the same hand, as though they were
human, saying: “Glory be to God!” —hundreds of incidents such as these, which are
related in ‘sound’ narrations; and some about which there are unanimous reports
described in the histories, and miracles, which according to exacting scholars
numbered around a thousand, appearing at his hand; and according to friend and foe
alike his fine attributes and good character being of the very highest degree;18 and the
unanimous agreement —at the degree of ‘absolute certainty’— of all the people of
reality, who have attained to spiritual perfection through following him and reached
‘the vision of certainty’ in the realities, that Muhammad’s (PBUH) perfections and
attainments were of the very highest level; and the spiritual achievements of the World
of Islam, which proceeds from his religion; as well as the truths of mighty Islam — all
these furnish evidence for his wondrous perfections. This surely means that this Being
(PBUH) testified in most brilliant and universal fashion to his own messengership.
The Fourth Testimony, which comprises numerous powerful testimonies:
Through the testimony of the Qur’an, with all its truths and proofs. That is, the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition testifies to his messengership and veracity with its
innumerable truths and proofs.
Yes, with all its veracious truths, the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, which as is
proved Zülfikâr is miraculous in forty respects, has illumined fourteen centuries and
governed through its unchanging laws one fifth of mankind; and from that time to this
has challenged all those who have opposed it; and not even one of the suras of which
anyone has dared to produce the like of; and as is proved in The Supreme Sign, whose
six aspects are luminous and cannot be penetrated by doubts; and whose veracity is
endorsed by six supreme ‘stations’; which is based on six unshakeable truths; and is
eagerly and respectfully recited every moment by hundreds and millions of tongues,
and is inscribed with its sacredness on the hearts of hafizes; and from whose testimony
proceeds all the testimony and belief of the World of Islam; and from whose source
flow forth all the sciences of belief and of Islam; and just as it affirms all the previous
revealed scriptures, so is it affirmed by them; — with all its truths and all its proofs of
its veracity, the Qur’an of Mighty Stature testifies to the truthfulness and
messengership of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him).

18 The hero ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him), whose courage was of the very highest order,
said: “When we were frightened when fighting in battle, we used to hide behind God’s Messenger
(PBUH).” The histories relate how even his enemies of that time corroborated that all his virtues were
superior, the same as his courage.

--- Sayfa 585 ---
596
The Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Universal Testimonies:
Through the testimony of Jawshan al-Kabir, and the sacredness of its
allusions; and the Risale-i Nur, and the power of its proofs; and the past,
and the unanimity of its signs of a forthcoming prophet; and the future, and
the confirmation of thousands of its events.
That is to say, Jawshan al-Kabir, which looks both explicitly and allusively to a
thousand and one Divine Names; is a wondrous supplication that in one respect
proceeds from the Qur’an; is superior to all the other invocations recited by those who
advance in knowledge of God; which was brought as revelation by Gabriel during a
military expedition, who said: “Cast away your armour and in its place read this
Jawshan!” — the truths it contains and its perfectly accurate descriptions of the
Sustainer testify to Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity. So too,
through proving rationally and logically as a single proof with its one hundred and
thirty parts all the truths of the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), and teaching
matters which in the view of philosophy are remote from reason in the most reasonable
and easy fashion as though they were before one’s very eyes, the Risale-i Nur —which
in one respect received effulgence from the Jawshan and was born of it— testifies in
universal fashion to Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity.
Also, the past was a universal witness to his messengership, for numerous
incidents which occurred before the commencement of his prophethood called irhasat,
and wonders which were counted as miracles of the coming prophet and are related
unanimously in the histories and books of biography, testify in authentic fashion to his
messengership. These are of many different sorts. A part of them are described in the
coming ‘Testimonies’ below, and others are related in the form of sound narrations in
Zülfikâr and in books of history.
For example, close to the time of the Prophet’s (PBUH) birth stones being rained
down from the claws of the ababil birds on the heads of Abraha’s soldiers, who had
come to destroy the Ka‘ba; and on the night of his birth the idols in the Ka‘ba all
toppling over; and the palace of Chrosroes the Persian being destroyed; and the fire-
worshipping Zoroastrians’ fire being extinguished that night, which had been burning
continuously for a thousand years; and on the certain reports of Bahira the Monk and
Halima al-Sa‘diya, clouds throwing shadows around his head; numerous events like
these gave forewarning of his prophethood before its commencement.
Also, there were very many events of differing kinds that he predicted would
occur in the future, that is, after his death. Some were prophecies

--- Sayfa 586 ---
597
about his Family and Companions, and the conquests of Islam, which are given in The
Miracles of Muhammad in Zülfikâr, together with their authentic sources. Others
were eighty accurate predictions, including ‘Uthman (May God be pleased with him)
being martyred while reading the Qur’an, Husayn (May God be pleased with him)
being martyred at Karbala, the conquests of Syria and Iran and Istanbul, and
emergence of the ‘Abbasid dynasty, and Jenghiz and Hulagu defeating and destroying
it, have all been described in detail on the basis of sound narrations and the books of
history and the Prophet’s biography. This means that numerous predictions of future
events, and the future, which proved Muhammad’s (PBUH) veracity, testify also in
powerful and universal fashion to Muhammad’s messengership and its veracity.
The Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Testimonies:
Through the testimony of Muhammad’s Family to his veracity through the
power of their certain belief at the degree of ‘absolute certainty;’ and of his
Companions, through their perfect belief at the degree of ‘the vision of
certainty;’ and of the purified scholars through the power of their
investigations at the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty;’ and of the spiritual
poles, through the conformity of their illuminations and unfoldings with his
messengership and its certainty.
That is, of the universal testimonies to Muhammad’s (PBUH) truthfulness and
veracity,
The Ninth: With their unanimous and absolutely certain belief, and their
unfoldings and illuminations, and the extraordinary guidance they gave the Umma and
their wonder-working, the great saints of Prophet’s (PBUH) Family, who in
benedictions for the Prophet are held equal to the descendants of Abraham (Peace be
upon him), who manifested the meaning of “The scholars of my community are the
equivalent of the prophets of the Children of Israel,”19 and ‘Ali, Hasan, Husayn, and
the twelve Imams of the Prophet’s Family, and the spiritual poles and leaders like
Gawth al-A‘zam, Ahmad al-Rufa’i, Ahmad al-Badawi, Ibrahim al-Dassuqi, and Abu’l-
Hasan al-Shazali all ratified through their belief and testimonies the messengership,
veracity, and truthfulness of Muhammad (PBUH).
The Tenth: The Companions of the Prophet, regarded as the most elevated and
esteemed group after the prophets, through the light of Muhammad (PBUH) came in a
short time to govern with justice from east to west despite being illiterate nomads, and
becoming advanced, educated,

19 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 64; Tecrid-i Sahih (Turk. trans.), i, 107.

--- Sayfa 587 ---
598
civilized masters, teachers, diplomats and just judges, they defeated world powers and
made that century into an age of happiness. After scrutinizing every aspect of his
conduct, through the power of the many miracles they witnessed with their own eyes,
they abandoned their former enmities and the ways of their forefathers, and many of
them such as Khalid ibn al-Walid and Ikrima Ibn Abu Jahl gave up the tribalism of
their fathers. Their embracing Islam in truly devoted and self-sacrificing manner, and
believing in Muhammad’s veracity and messengership at the degree of ‘vision of
certainty’ forms an unshakeable universal testimony.
The Eleventh: The belief in Muhammad’s messengership and veracity in
reasoned, logical manner at the degree of ‘knowledge of certainty’ of the mujtahids,
imams, and authoritative scholars, who are known as the purified ones and veracious
ones, and of the thousands of investigative scholars such as the brilliant philosophers
Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd, based on thousands of categorical arguments and definitive
proofs, each following his own way, forms a testimony so universal that only one with
the intelligence of all of them could oppose them.
One of those innumerable witnesses at the present time is the Risale-i Nur, before
which the deniers have found themselves helpless, so deceiving the police and
judiciary, have tried to silence it by means of the courts.
The Twelfth: In their spiritual progress, the profoundest people of reality and
researchers into the realities known as spiritual poles, each of whom drew into the
circle of his instruction a significant part of the Umma in the World of Islam, and
through his wondrous guidance and wonder-working caused those people to advance
spiritually, and whose progress was based on illumination and disclosing the realities in
place of proofs —they saw ‘experientially’ through their illuminations Muhammad’s
(PBUH) messengership and truthfulness and that his veracity was of the very highest
degree. Their unanimous and mutually conforming testimony to his prophethood forms
such a signature that no one who does not attain to a degree of perfections as elevated
as all of them can erase it.
The Thirteenth Testimony, which consists of four universal, most extensive and
definite proofs:
Through the testimony of the past and the agreement in the tidings of the
soothsayers, the voices from the Unseen, and the gnostics in all the periods
of the past, and the testimony of the tidings of the prophets and Divine
messengers, Peace be upon them, and the good news of the messengership of
Muhammad, Peace and blessings be upon him, in the previous holy
scriptures.

--- Sayfa 588 ---
599
A brief explanation of the above passage will be given here, for there are precise
details together with the chains of authorities in the end section of The Miracles of
Muhammad, in Zülfikâr.
It is recorded with sound narrations, and in part with unanimous reports, in the
histories and books of Hadith and the Prophet’s biography that among the most
prominent and famous of mankind in past times, foremost the prophets and the
gnostics, soothsayers, and ‘voices from the Unseen’ foretold Muhammad’s (PBUH)
messengership and coming unanimously, explicitly and repeatedly in the form of
irhasat. Since the most powerful and certain of those thousands of predictions are
described in detail in The Miracles of Muhammad, we refer you to that and here only
say by way of a brief indication: out of hundreds in the revealed scriptures of the
Torah, Gospels, and Psalms, brought by the prophets, twenty verses about the
prophethood of Muhammad (PBUH) which are close to being explicit are written in
the Nineteenth Letter (The Miracles of Muhammad). While Husayn al-Jisri found a
hundred verses about Muhammad’s prophethood, despite the numerous corruptions in
their texts made by Jews and Christians, and wrote them in his book.20
According to a sound narration concerning which were unanimous reports, the
soothsayers, and foremost Shiqq and Satih, who by means of jinns and spirit beings
gave information about the Unseen and are now called mediums, foretold explicitly the
coming of God’s Messenger (PBUH) and that he would wipe out the Persian Empire.
They stated repeatedly in a way that could not be doubted that a prophet was shortly
to appear in the Hijaz.
Similarly, Ka‘b ibn Lu’ayy, one of the Prophet’s forefathers and a gnostic, and
many other gnostics and the saints of that time such as the rulers of Yemen and
Abyssinia, Sayf ibn Dhi Yazan and Tubba, foretold clearly Muhammad’s (PBUH)
messengership, and proclaimed it in their poetry. The most important and certain of
these are included in the Nineteenth Letter. One of those kings even said: “I would
choose to be Muhammad’s (PBUH) servant in preference to ruling this kingdom.”
Another said: “If I had lived to see him, I would have been his cousin.” That is, I
would have been a devoted servant and minister of his like ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with him). The histories and books of biography have published all these prophecies,
showing that the gnostics affirmed Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership and veracity
with a powerful, universal testimony.

20 Husayn al-Jisri, al-Risalat al-Hamidiyya [Turk. trans. Manastırlı Ismail Hakkı], Istanbul 1308,
4 vols.

--- Sayfa 589 ---
600
Similarly, spirit beings called ‘hatif,’ which are heard but not seen, made
predictions about Muhammad’s messengership, the same as the gnostics and
soothsayers, foretelling his prophethood in most explicit fashion. Also, by foretelling
his prophethood, many other things affirmed his messengership and veracity, such as
animals sacrificed to idols, idols, and gravestones, testifying through the tongue of
history.
The Fourteenth Testimony: The following Arabic piece alludes to the universe’s
powerful testimony:
Through the testimony of the universe to the comprehensive messengership
of Muhammad (PBUH) through its aims and the Divine purposes in it, which
would otherwise come to nothing, for through the sending of man and
particularly of Muhammad its value and duties were established, and its
beauties and perfections became clear, and the wisdom in its truths were
realized. For his messengership revealed them and was the means of their
realization. If it had not been for his messengership, this perfect universe,
this eternal and meaningful mighty book, would have gone for nothing, its
meanings would have vanished and its perfections declined utterly, which is
impossible in numerous respects.
In The Supreme Sign, the above is interpreted as follows:
Just as the universe points to its Maker, Writer, and Inscriber, Who creates,
administers, and organizes it, and Who decorating, determining, and planning it, has
disposal over it as though it was a palace, a book, an exhibition, or place of display; so
it requires and demands an elevated herald, a truthful discoverer, an exacting master, a
faithful teacher, who will know the Divine purposes in its creation, and make them
known, and will teach the instances of dominical wisdom in its changes, and announce
the results of its dutiful motions, and proclaim its value and the perfections of the
beings within it. Since this is so and it points to his existence, surely testifying in
powerful and universal fashion to the veracity of Muhammad (Peace and blessings be
upon him), who performed these duties better than anyone, and to his being the
highest and most loyal official of its Creator, it declares: “I testify that Muhammad is
the Messenger of God.”
Yes, through the Light Muhammad (PBUH) brought the universe’s nature, value,
and perfections, and the duties, results, and value of the beings within it and the fact
that they are officials, all became known and were realized. From top to bottom it
became Divine missives full of meaning, an embodied dominical Qur’an, and a
magnificent exhibition of Divine works. If not for his Light, it becomes a mere desolate
ruin,

--- Sayfa 590 ---
601
confused, a terrible place of mourning, toppling over into the darknesses of non-
existence, nothingness, death, and obliteration. It is in consequence of this truth that
the universe’s perfections, purposeful transformations, and eternal meanings declare in
powerful fashion: “We testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of God!”
The Fifteenth Testimony: The following is an Arabic piece which comprises
numerous sacred testimonies. It indicates the sacred testimony to Muhammad’s
(PBUH) messengership given through the acts of the dominicality and deeds of
mercifulness of the Necessarily Existent One Who has disposal over the universe, and
through Whose will, command, and power occur all change and transformation,
motion and rest, from minute particles to the planets, and all the disposals of life and
death.
Through the testimony of the universe’s Owner, its Creator and Disposer, to
the messengership of Muhammad, through the deeds of His mercifulness and
acts of His dominicality; such as the mercy of revealing to him the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition; and displaying many varieties of miracles at his
hand; and assisting him and protecting him in all circumstances; and
through perpetuating his religion together with all its truths; and by raising
him to a position of high respect and honour and bestowal over all
creatures, as is to be seen and observed; and His act of dominicality of
making Muhammad’s messengership a spiritual sun in the universe, and
making his religion the index of the perfections of His servants; and making
his reality a comprehensive mirror to the manifestations of His Godhead;
and His entrusting him with duties necessary for the existence of creatures in
the universe such as mercy, wisdom, and justice, as necessary as food and
water, and air and light.
Referring details of this most extensive, certain, and sacred testimony to the
Risale-i Nur, here we shall merely take a look at a brief and concise meaning of it.
Since —in accordance with the justice and wisdom, mercy, favour, and protection
which we see in the regular, orderly disposals in the universe— it is the practice of
dominicality to always protect the good and deal blows at the bad and liars, as
demanded by ‘the acts of His mercifulness,’ this world’s Disposer and Administrator
revealed the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition to Muhammad (PBUH); and He
bestowed on him nearly a thousand miracles of very many sorts; and compassionately
preserved him in all circumstances and dangerous situations, even by means of a
pigeon and a spider; and gave him complete success in all his duties; and perpetuated
his religion together with all its truths; and caused his

--- Sayfa 591 ---
602
religion of Islam to spread over all the earth and to all mankind; and by raising him to a
position of honour above all creatures and a permanent rank of acceptance superior to
all the pre-eminent of mankind and, as is agreed by friend and foe alike, bestowed on
him the highest character and qualities, and made one fifth of mankind his community
— all of which testify most decisively to his faithfulness and messengership; so we see
from the point of view of ‘the acts of dominicality’ that this world’s Disposer and
Administrator made Muhammad’s (PBUH) messengership a sun in the universe, and
as is proved in the Risale-i Nur, caused it to dispel all kinds of darknesses and show its
luminous truths, and make happy all conscious beings, indeed the universe, with the
good news of eternal life; and He made his religion an index of perfections for all the
acceptable people of worship and a sound programme for their acts of worship; and as
is indicated by the Qur’an and Jawshan, He made Muhammad’s Reality, which is his
collective personality, a comprehensive mirror to the manifestations of His Godhead;
and as is indicated by the above-mentioned truths, and by the fact that every day for
fourteen centuries he has gained the equivalent of all the good works of all his
community, and by his works and traces in man’s social and spiritual life, He made him
the highest leader, master, and authority of mankind; and sent him to the assistance of
mankind with sacred, sublime duties, and made men as needy for his religion, his
Shari‘a, and the truths of Islam21 as they are for mercy, wisdom, justice, food, air,
water, and light; thus offering sacred testimony to Muhammad’s (PBUH)
messengership with twelve universal, decisive proofs — since this is so, is it at all
possible that the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which thus manifests these
universal, extensive testimonies of the universe’s Owner, Who is not indifferent to the
ordering of the wing of a fly even or a flower, should not be a Sun of the universe?
Each of these fifteen Testimonies comprise numerous testimonies, and through the
tongue of miracles the Second even comprises thousands, thus proving the profession
“I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of

21 In my old age and wretchedness, I perceived a millionth of the spiritual sustenance brought by
Muhammad (PBUH). If I had been able, I would have thanked him by uttering benedictions for him
with millions of tongues. It was like this:
I suffer greatly from separation and parting, but the world I love and the things in it leave me and
depart. I know that I too shall depart. And it is only by hearing from Muhammad (PBUH) the good
news of everlasting happiness and eternal life that I am saved from that severe pain and soul-searing
despair and I find complete solace. In fact, when I say: “Peace be upon you, O Prophet, and God’s
mercy and blessings!” in the tashahhud during the prayers, I am both paying allegiance to him, and
declaring my submission and obedience to his rank, and offering him congratulations on his duty, and
expressing a sort of thanks and response to the good news he brought of eternal happiness. All
Muslims offer these greetings five times every day.

--- Sayfa 592 ---
603
God” most powerfully and definitely and proclaiming its reality, value, and
importance, so that every day five times in the tashahhud the World of Islam
announces it to the universe with millions of tongues. So too, thousands of millions of
believers unhesitatingly accept and affirm that the Muhammadan (PBUH) Reality,
which is the basis of that profession, is the original seed of the universe, a reason for
its creation, and its most perfect fruit. And the universe’s Owner (May His Glory be
exalted) made that collective personality of Muhammad (PBUH) the loudest herald of
the sovereignty of His dominicality; the accurate discloser of the talisman of the
universe and riddle of creation; a shining exemplar of His favour and mercy; an
eloquent tongue of His compassion and love; the most powerful bringer of the good
tidings of everlasting life and happiness in the eternal realm; and of His messengers,
His final and greatest Prophet.
It may be seen from this what a great error, foolishness, and crime those people
commit who do not accept a truth such as this, or attach no importance to it, and what
a terrible loss they suffer.
Thus, as indicated in Part Two, Sura al-Fatiha in the ritual prayers demonstrates
with decisive proofs the affirmation of Divine unity in the profession “I testify that
there is no god but God,” which is said in the tashahhud, setting innumerable
signatures to it; so too this Third Part sets forth powerful testimonies to the reality of
messengership claimed in “I testify that Muhammad is God’s Messenger,” again stated
in the tashahhud, stamping it with innumerable confirmatory signatures.
O Most Merciful of the Merciful! In veneration of Your Most Noble
Messenger (PBUH) allow us his intercession, give us success in following his
Sunna, and make us neighbours to his Family and Companions in the Realm
of Bliss! Amen. Amen. Amen.
O God! Grant him blessings and peace, and to his Family and Companions,
to the number of the letters of the Qur’an, both those recited and those
written. Amen.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.22

22 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 593 ---
604
The Shining Proof
Second Station
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
And from Him do we seek help
 [One of the truths contained in the last verse of Sura al-Fatiha, which
indicates the comparison of the people of guidance and the straight path and
the people of misguidance and rebellion, and is the source of all the
comparisons in the Risale-i Nur, is expressed also in wondrous and
miraculous fashion by the verse of Sura al-Nur:
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His light is as
if there were a niche and within it a lamp; the lamp enclosed in glass; the
glass as it were a brilliant star; lit from a blessed tree, an olive, neither of
the east nor of the west, whose oil is well-nigh luminous, though fire scarce
touched it: Light upon Light! God guides whom He will to His Light; God
sets forth parables for men; and God knows all things.23
and a subsequent verse:
Or [the unbelievers’ state] is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep
ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by [dark]
clouds...(to the end of the verse)]24
It is proved in the First Ray that the first verse above, the Light Verse, contains
ten allusions to the Risale-i Nur; it miraculously foretells that Qur’anic commentary.
This was the main reason the name ‘Nur’ (light) was given to the Risale-i Nur. In
consequence of the description in the comparison of a journey of the imagination in a
section of the Twenty-Ninth Letter, of a miracle resembling that of the “Nun of
Na‘budu” in the word “Nur” in this extraordinary verse, the traveller in The Supreme
Sign (Âyetü’l-Kübra) questioned the whole universe and every sort of being in order
to seek, find, and learn about his Creator. He came to know Him through thirty-three
ways and cogent proofs with ‘the certainty of knowledge’ and ‘the vision of certainty.’
The untiring, insatiable traveller journeyed too with his mind, heart, and imagination
through the centuries and

23 Qur’an, 24:35.
24 Qur’an, 24:40.

--- Sayfa 594 ---
605
the levels of the heavens and earth, and seeing and inspecting the whole world as a
city, he mounted his reason sometimes on the wisdom of the Qur’an, sometimes on
philosophy, and gazing at the most distant levels through the powerful telescope of
imagination, he saw reality as it is, and in part informed us of it in The Supreme Sign.
Now, of those many worlds and levels he entered on his journey of the
imagination, which had the meaning of a comparison and was completely in
conformity with reality, we shall explain by way of example only three levels,
extremely concisely, in order to illustrate the comparison at the end of Sura al-Fatiha.
However, this will be only from the point of view of the power of reason. We refer
you to the Risale-i Nur for the other observations and comparisons.
The First Example is like this:
The traveller, who had come into the world solely to find his Creator and become
acquainted with Him, said to his reason: “We have asked everything concerning our
Creator and have received perfectly satisfying answers. In order to learn about the Sun
one has to ask the Sun itself, so now we shall make a further journey in order to find
and become acquainted with our Creator through the manifestations of His sacred
attributes of knowledge, will, and power, and through His visible works, and through
the manifestations of His Names.” So he entered the world. Then the people of
misguidance, a second current, embarked on the ship of the earth. The traveller put on
the spectacles of the science and philosophy which does not follow the wisdom of the
Qur’an, and looking in accordance with the programme of the geography that does not
read the Qur’an, saw that the earth was travelling seventy times faster than a cannon-
ball, covering a twenty-thousand-year distance in one year in an orbit in the midst of
the infinite void. It had taken upon itself myriad species of wretched, helpless living
beings. He realized that if it confused its way even for a minute, or if a stray star
collided with it, it would disintegrate, pouring all those wretched creatures into
nothingness and non-existence. Perceiving the awesome calamity of the currents of
Not those who have received Your anger, nor those who have gone astray,25
and the suffocating darkness of
Or [the unbelievers’ state] is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep
ocean,26

25 Qur’an, 1:7.
26 Qur’an, 24:40.

--- Sayfa 595 ---
606
he exclaimed: “Alas! What have we done? Why did we board this terrible ship? Is
there any way of being saved from it?” Then smashing the spectacles of blind
philosophy, he joined the current of “Those whom You have blessed.”27
Suddenly the wisdom of the Qur’an came to his assistance. Giving to his reason a
telescope which shows reality, it told him to look through it. He looked and saw the
Name of Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth28 rising like a sun in the constellation of
It is He who has made the earth subservient to you, so traverse you its tracts,
and eat of its sustenance.29
The Sustainer had made the earth an orderly, safe ship, and filled it with living beings
together with their sustenance, causing it to journey around the sun in the seas of the
universe for numerous benefits and instances of wisdom, bringing the produce of the
seasons to those who wished for sustenance. Two angels called Thawr and Hut had
been appointed captains of the ship, and they took it on its voyage through the
magnificent dominical regions for the enjoyment of the Glorious Creator’s creatures
and guests. The traveller understood that this showed the reality of “God is the Light
of the heavens and the earth,” making known his Creator through this Name. With all
his heart and spirit he exclaimed: “All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the
Worlds,” and joined the group of “Those whom You have blessed.”
The Second Sample of what the traveller saw on his journey through the worlds:
The traveller alighted from the ship of the earth and entered the world of animals
and men. He looked at that world through the spectacles of the natural science which
does not receive its spirit from religion, and saw that although those innumerable
animate creatures had endless needs and were assaulted by numberless vexatious
enemies and pitiless events, their capital was only a thousandth, or even a hundred
thousandth of what they needed. Their power too was perhaps a millionth of what was
necessary to combat those harmful things. Being connected to them through his
intelligence and out of compassion for his fellow beings, he so pitied them in their
ghastly plight, and feeling a hellish pain was so sorry and despairing, that he regretted
a thousand times over his ever having come to that wretched world. Then suddenly
Qur’anic wisdom came to his assistance, and handing him the telescope of “Those
whom You have

27 Qur’an, 1:7.
28 Qur’an, 13:16.
29 Qur’an, 67:15.

--- Sayfa 596 ---
607
blessed,” it told him to look through it. He looked and saw that through the
manifestation of “God is the Light of the heavens and the earth,” numerous Divine
Names such as Most Merciful, All-Compassionate, Provider, Bestower, Munificent,
and Preserver, each rose like the sun in the constellations of such verses as:
And there is no living thing but He has hold of its forelock.30 * The beasts do
not carry their own sustenance; God sustains them, and you.31 * And we
have ennobled the sons of Adam.32 * And the pious shall be in bliss.33
They filled the world of men and beasts with mercy and bounties, transforming it into a
temporary Paradise. He understood that they make known perfectly the generous host
of this fine, instructive guest-house, which is well worth being gazed upon, and a
thousand times he repeated: “All praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds!”
The Third Example of the hundreds of his observations during his journey:
The traveller from the world, who wanted to know his Creator through the
manifestations of His Names and attributes, turned to his mind and imagination and
said: “Come! Like the spirits and angels we shall leave our bodies behind and ascend
to the skies. We shall question the inhabitants of the heavens concerning our Creator.”
His spirit mounted his imagination, and his mind mounted his thought, and together
they rose to the heavens. They took astronomy as their guide, and looked with the
view of the philosophy which does not heed religion, and the currents of “Those who
have received Your wrath” and “Those who have gone astray.” He saw thousands of
heavenly bodies and fiery stars, a thousand times larger than the earth and travelling a
hundred times faster than a cannon-ball, speeding one within the other, unconscious,
lifeless, and aimless. If by chance one of them had confused its way for a second, it
would have collided with another unconscious globe in that boundless, empty, infinite
world, causing utter confusion and chaos, like doomsday.
Whichever direction he looked, the traveller was filled with terror and
bewilderment; he was sorry a thousand times over he had ascended to the skies. His
mind and imagination went utterly to pieces. They declared: “Our duty is to see and
point out fine truths. We resign then from observing and understanding such infernally
ugly and painful things. We do not

30 Qur’an, 11:56.
31 Qur’an, 29:60.
32 Qur’an, 17:70.
33 Qur’an, 82:13.

--- Sayfa 597 ---
608
want any such thing.” Then suddenly, through the manifestation of “God is the Light
of the heavens and the earth,” numerous Names like “Subjugator of the sun and
moon,” and “Sustainer of all the worlds,” each rose like suns in the constellations of
verses such as:
And We have adorned the lower heavens with lamps,34
and
Do they then not look at the heavens above them, how We have raised them
and adorned them,35
and,
Then he withdrew to the sky and formed it into seven heavens.36
They filled all the heavens with light and with angels, transforming it into a huge
mosque or military encampment. The traveller entered the current of “Those whom
You have blessed.” He was saved from that of “Those who have gone astray” and “Or
[the unbelievers’ state] is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep ocean.” He saw a
magnificent land, as beautiful and well-ordered as Paradise. Observing that on all sides
its inhabitants were making known the All-Glorious Creator, the value of his mind and
imagination was increased a thousandfold, and their duties advanced likewise.
Referring to the Risale-i Nur the other observations of the traveller through the
universe, which are comparable with these three examples out of hundreds, together
with knowledge of the Necessarily Existent One through the manifestations of His
Names, here we suffice with these brief indications and cut a long story short. Now,
like that traveller through the world, we shall try to know the Creator of the universe
through the works and manifestations of only three of His sacred ‘seven attributes:’
knowledge, will, and power. For details, we refer you to the Risale-i Nur.
The following piece in Arabic is the sum and substance of the Arabic Hizb al-
Nuri,37 which I constantly recite reflectively. It expounds three of the thirty-three
degrees of the phrase “God is Most Great” (Allahu Akbar). This is followed by a sort
of translation of the Arabic piece, consisting of brief indications, which opens up the
way to acquiring belief in Divine knowledge, will, and power at the degree of ‘the
vision of certainty’ through pointing out their manifestations in the universe, a subject
which greatly preoccupied the scholars of theology and of the tenets of

34 Qur’an, 67:5.
35 Qur’an, 50:6.
36 Qur’an, 2:29.
37 See page 501, footnote 78.

--- Sayfa 598 ---
609
belief. Through pointing out the manifestations of knowledge, will, and power, the
following indications thus open up the way to complete belief —at the degree of
knowledge of certainty— in the Necessarily Existent One’s existence and unity, and to
the affirmation of that belief.
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Say: “Praise be to God, Who begets no son, and has no partner in [His]
dominion; nor [needs] He any to protect Him from humiliation; Yes,
magnify Him for His greatness and glory!”38
God is greater than everything in respect of power and knowledge, for He is
knowing of all things with all-encompassing knowledge necessary to His
Essence.39 Nothing can be hidden from His knowledge because of the mystery of
its presence and witnessing and all-encompassing luminosity; existence
necessitates universality, and the light of knowledge encompasses all the world of
existence. Yes, the balanced order, and regular balances, and general,
purposeful wisdom, and all-embracing, particular favours, and the well-ordered
decrees, and fruitful determining, and specified appointed hours of death, and
the regular sustenance, and the wise skills, and the adorned solicitude, and the
utterly perfect order, harmony, arrangement, proficiency, and balance, and
absolute distinction with absolute ease all point to the all-encompassing
knowledge of the One All-Knowing of the Unseen.
Should He not know, He that created? And He is the One Who understands
the finest mysteries [and] is well-acquainted [with them].40
The comparison between man’s fine art, which points to his consciousness, and
the fine creation of man, which points to man’s Creator, is the comparison between
the tiny glimmer of a fire-fly on a dark night and the splendour of the sun at full
noon.
Offering a concise translation of the above, we shall make brief indications to
Divine knowledge, this most important truth of belief, and refer detailed discussion of
it to the Risale-i Nur.41
Yes, just as mercy shows itself as clearly as the sun through the

38 Qur’an, 17:111.
39 And God’s is the highest similitude: like all-encompassing light is necessary to the sun.
40 Qur’an, 67:14.
41 The remaining part of this treatise was written while I was suffering from a terrible illness, a
result of being poisoned, such as I had never previously experienced in my life. My faults should
therefore be looked on tolerantly. Husrev may modify, change, and correct any parts he considers
inappropriate.

--- Sayfa 599 ---
610
wonders of sustenance and proves decisively a Most Merciful and Compassionate One
behind the veil of the Unseen; so too, through the wisdom, purposes, and fruits of
order and balance in things, knowledge, which is mentioned in hundreds of Qur’anic
verses and in one respect is the chief of the sacred seven attributes, displays itself like
the light of the sun, making known with certainty the existence of One Knowledgeable
of All Things. Yes, the comparison between ordered, measured art, which points to
man’s consciousness and knowledge, and man’s fine creation, which indicates the
knowledge and wisdom of man’s Creator, resembles the comparison between the tiny
glow of the fire-fly on a dark night and the encompassing light of the sun at noon.
Now, before explaining the evidences of Divine knowledge, we shall mention briefly
the sacred conversation which took place during the Prophet’s Ascension. For
Muhammad’s (PBUH) Ascension indicates and testifies that, through its
manifestations in the universe, the sacred attribute of knowledge shows the Most Pure
and Holy One most clearly. When on that night he received the Divine address in
God’s presence, since he had been sent as an envoy on behalf of all living beings and
every sort of creature, instead of giving the greeting (al-salam) of conscious beings, he
said: “Salutations, blessings, benedictions and supplications, and good words — all are
God’s,”42 thus offering to his Creator the creatures’ gifts, showing the manner they
make known their Sustainer through the manifestations of the attribute of knowledge.
That is, with the four words “Salutations, blessings, benedictions and supplications,
and good words” he was alluding to the salutations, congratulations, worship, and
recognition of the One All-Knowing of the Unseen of the four main groups of living
beings which they offer through the manifestations of pre-eternal and post-eternal
knowledge. For this reason, the recitation of this sacred conversation of the Ascension
in its broad meaning has become an obligatory part of the tashahhud for all Muslims.
Referring detailed exposition of that sacred conversation to the Risale-i Nur, we shall
explain one meaning of it in the form of four very brief indications.
The First  is “Salutations to God” (al-tahiyyatu lillah). Briefly, its meaning is
this: for example, a master craftsman invents a wonderful machine with his profound
knowledge and miraculous intelligence, and everyone who sees it applauds and
congratulates the craftsman, and praising and saluting him, offers him gifts both
material and immaterial. The machine too, by displaying the craftsman’s wondrously
subtle art, and skill and knowledge, and working perfectly in exactly the way he
wanted,

42 For further discussion, see The Sixth Ray, in the present work. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 600 ---
611
applauds him through the tongue of its being, in effect greeting him and offering him
immaterial gifts. In exactly the same way, all the species of living beings in the
universe, together with all their individual members, are in every respect miraculous,
wonderful machines, which —like conscious beings, men, and jinn and angels, applaud
and salute their Maker verbally— through the tongues of their beings and lives
applaud and salute their craftsman, the All-Glorious Maker, Who makes Himself
known through the profound and subtle manifestations of His all-comprehending
knowledge, which sees the relationship of everything with everything else, and knows
all the things necessary for the life of each and conveys them to it at the right time.
Greeting Him, the beings declare: “Salutations to God!” They worshipfully offer the
price of their lives directly to their Creator, Who knows all creatures together with all
their states. On the night of the Ascension, in the name of all living creatures,
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him) said “Salutations to God!” instead of
the greeting of peace in the presence of the Necessarily Existent One, and offered the
salutations, gifts, and greetings of all those species of living beings.
Yes, just as with its order and balance, an ordinary regular machine undoubtedly
shows a painstaking, skilful craftsman; so each of the numberless living machines
which fill the universe displays a thousand and one miracles of knowledge. Whatever
the comparison between the light of the sun and the feeble glow of the fire-fly, that is
the comparison of the former and the brilliance with which, through the manifestations
of knowledge, the living beings testify to the necessary existence of their eternal
Maker and Craftsman, and His fitness to be worshipped.
Tbe Second Sacred Word from the Ascension is “blessings” (al-mubarakat).
Since according to Hadiths, the ritual prayers are the believer’s ascension43 and receive
the manifestation of the supreme Ascension; and since the traveller found in every
world his Creator, the One Knowing of the Unseen, through His attribute of
knowledge; accompanying the traveller, we shall enter the broad world of blessed
things and “blessings,” which make those who behold them declare: “How great are
God’s blessings!” Like the traveller, we shall behold that world of “blessed beings”
and foremost the innocent, blessed infants of beings with spirits, and the seeds of
animate creatures, which are the tiny containers of the programmes of their lives, and
through studying them shall attempt to know our Creator with ‘the knowledge of
certainty,’ through the miraculous, subtle manifestations of His sacred attribute of
knowledge.

43 Bukhari, Salat, 39; Musnad, ii, 34, 36, 67, 129. (With the meaning of “The one who performs
the prayers converses with his Sustainer.”)

--- Sayfa 601 ---
612
Yes, with our own eyes we see that through the knowledge of an All-Wise and
Knowledgeable One, all those innocent young and blessed minute treasuries and
boxes, —both altogether and singly— suddenly awaken and stir into motion, and
proceed towards the aim of their creation. They cause those who see them as they are
in reality to exclaim: “May God bless these a thousand times over! What endless
wonders God has willed!”
For example, all seeds, eggs, sperm, and grains have a precise order which springs
from knowledge; and the order is within a perfect balance, which arises from skill; and
the balance is within a constant reordering, and the reordering is within a constant
measuring and balancing; and the measuring and balancing are within a distinguishing
and nurturing, each possessing marks intentionally distinguishing it from its fellows;
and this distinguishing and nurturing are within an artful decorating and adorning; and
this adorning is within the giving of wise, appropriate, perfect forms and members; and
this giving of form is together with differences in the flesh and edible parts of those
creatures and fruits, for the purpose of generously gratifying the tastes of those
desiring sustenance; and this is within miraculous embroideries and adornments which
reflect knowledge and are all different; and this is together with pleasing smells and
delicious tastes which are all different. Thus, through the unfolding and development
of all these forms with perfect orderliness and distinction, and while being different,
without fault or error in absolute profusion, and with absolute speed and over an
infinite area, and with this wondrous situation continuing throughout the seasons; all
those blessed beings, singly and altogether, demonstrate visibly through the above
fifteen tongues the marvels of their Craftsman’s skills and His miraculous knowledge,
making known as clearly as the sun the One All-Knowing of the Unseen, their
Necessarily Existent Maker. It was because of this truly brilliant and extensive
testimony of theirs and congratulations of their Maker, that on the night of the
Ascension when speaking on behalf of all creatures, Muhammad (PBUH) used the
word “blessings” instead of the greeting of peace.
The Third Word is “benedictions” (al-salawat). This sacred word, which was
spoken during the supreme Ascension of Muhammad (PBUH), hundreds of millions of
believers offer to the Divine Court every day at least ten times in the tashahhud during
the obligatory prayers, which are the believers’ ascension. They proclaim it to the
universe. Since all the truths of the Ascension have been proved in the Thirty-First
Word in most powerful and decisive fashion, even to obdurate, atheist deniers, which
it in part addresses, for the proofs and details

--- Sayfa 602 ---
613
we refer you to that Word, and here, extremely concisely, we shall take a look at the
strange world of the various sorts of conscious beings and beings with spirits, which
illustrates the broad meaning of this Third Word of the Ascension. We shall also try to
understand by means of the manifestation of His pre-eternal knowledge, the perfect
mercy and compassion of our Creator, and the vastness of His power and all-
encompassing will, within His existence and unity.
Yes, we see in this world that even if not consciously and with their minds, by
nature all beings with spirits feel and perceive that despite their boundless impotence
and weakness, they have innumerable enemies and things detrimental to them, and
despite their infinite want and need, they have endless needs and desires. Since their
power and capital are insufficient to meet even a thousandth of these, they cry out and
weep with all their strength, and by their nature implore and entreat. Each with its own
particular voice and tongue offers supplications, entreaties, prayers of a sort, and
benedictions to One All-Knowing and All-Powerful. Then while seeking refuge His
Court, we see that suddenly an All-Wise and Powerful One Who is Absolutely
Knowing and perceives all the needs of those crying out, understands their plaints and
plight, and hears their innate petitions and supplications, comes to their assistance and
does all that they wish. He transforms their weeping into smiles and their cries into
thanks. This wise, knowing, compassionate assistance makes known in truly brilliant
fashion through the manifestations of knowledge and mercy, an Assisting Answerer of
Prayer, a Munificent and Compassionate One. During the Supreme Ascension,
Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), and during the prayers, the lesser
ascension, his community, all declare “Benedictions and supplications, and good words
—all are God’s,” which has the meaning of offering specifically to Him all the
benedictions and worship of the world of beings with spirits.
The Fourth Sacred Word is “Good words—all are God’s!” (al-tayyibat lillah).
Since many of the truths of the Risale-i Nur have been imparted to me while reciting
the tesbihat following the prayers, quite simply I have been driven involuntarily to
explain by means of brief indications the truths associated with both Sura al-Fatiha,
and the words of the tashahhud.
The sacred word “good words,” which was spoken during Muhammad’s (PBUH)
Ascension, refers to the good words and deeds and worship of those with knowledge
of God and the believers, and of men, jinn, angels, and spirit beings, who possess
universal consciousness, with which they beautify the universe. They look to the world
of beauties, and understand fully the infinite beauties of the eternal Absolutely
Beauteous

--- Sayfa 603 ---
614
One and the perpetual beauties of His Names, which adorn the universe, and they
respond to them with passion and ardour and universal worship. This word refers to
the endless good words they utter to their Creator through the fragrant odours of their
shining belief, extensive knowledge of Him, and praise and laudation. Since good
words in this meaning were spoken during the Ascension, every day without wearying
the whole Umma repeats that sacred word in the tashahhud.
Yes, the universe is the mirror of an infinite, sempiternal beauty and loveliness,
and consists of manifestations of it. All the beauties and perfections of the universe
come from that eternal beauty and become beautiful through their connection with it,
and increase in value. The universe would otherwise be a ruin, a house of sorrows, a
place of utter confusion. Their connection with that beauty is understood through the
knowledge and affirmation of men, angels, and spirit beings, who are the heralds and
announcers of the sovereignty of the Godhead. It was even imparted to me that there
is a strong possibility that in order to broadcast everywhere the beautiful, sweet praise
and laudation of those heralds and their extolling the One they worship, and to send
them up to the Sublime Throne and present those good words at the Divine Court, the
element of the air has been given a truly strange and wondrous state whereby its
particles, like soldiers under orders, are miniscule tongues and ears.
Thus, just as through their belief and their worship, men and the angels make
known the All-Glorious All-Worshipped One; so through making each of those
announcers a microcosm connected to the whole universe through the comprehensive
capacities, wondrous faculties, and subtleties of knowledge He has given them, that
All-Glorious and Wise One makes Himself known in brilliant fashion. For example, He
shows Himself as clearly as the sun by creating numerous wonderful machines in a
space the size of a walnut in man’s tiny head such as his faculties of memory,
imagination, and thought, and by making his memory into a large library.44
We shall now allude to a very brief meaning of the Arabic piece mentioned above
which points out universal proofs of all-encompassing knowledge, comprises
innumerable proofs, bringing them together and making them one extensive proof, and
demonstrates all-encompassing knowledge through fifteen evidences. We shall give a
sort of translation of the piece.

44 My severe illness does not permit me to continue; this is only a source and assistant to
Husrev’s duty of translation.

--- Sayfa 604 ---
615
The First of Fifteen Evidences: “The balanced order”
The measured regularity and balanced order observed in all creatures testify to an
all-encompassing knowledge. Yes, there being in all things —from the universe, which
resembles an orderly palace, and the solar system, and the page of the air, whose
particles display an astonishing order in the broadcasting of words and sounds, and the
face of the earth, which every spring with perfect order and regularity raises three
hundred thousand different species, to the members, cells, particles, and bodily systems
of all living beings— a balanced order and perfect regularity, which are the works of a
profound, comprehensive, unfailing knowledge, means that they testify in extremely
clear and decisive manner to an all-encompassing knowledge.
The Second Evidence: “And regular balance”
In all the creatures in the universe, particular, universal, from the planets to the
red and white corpuscles in blood, in everything, there is an exceedingly orderly
measure and appropriate balance which point self-evidently to an all-encompassing
knowledge and testify to it decisively. Yes, we see for instance that the members and
bodily systems of a fly or human being, and even the cells of the body and red and
white corpuscles in the blood, are placed with so sensitive a balance and fine a
measure, and they are so fitting and suitable for each other, and their mutual
proportion with the other members of the body is so orderly, and they are in such
harmony with them, that it is in no way possible that one lacking infinite knowledge
could have given them those situations.
Similarly, a balance so perfect and measure so regular and unfailing govern in all
living creatures and sorts of creatures from minute particles to the planets of the solar
system that they prove conclusively an all-encompassing knowledge and testify to it
with complete clarity. This means that all the evidences for knowledge are evidences
also for the existence of the All-Knowing One. Since it is impossible and precluded
that there should be an attribute without the one it qualifies, all the proofs of
knowledge form a powerful and completely certain supreme proof of the Pre-Eternal
All-Knowing One’s necessary existence.
The Third Evidence: “And the general, purposeful wisdom”
In all the creativity and activity in the universe, and in all the changes, raising to
life, employing in duties and discharging from them, all creatures and all species of
creatures have functions, uses, and purposes which are so intentional and knowing that
they leave no room for chance. We see that with respect to creation one who does not
possess all-

--- Sayfa 605 ---
616
encompassing knowledge could in no way lay claim to any of them. For example,
although it is only a piece of flesh, together with its two main functions, the tongue,
which is one of man’s hundred members —man being only one of innumerable animate
creatures— is the means to hundreds of instances of wisdom, results, fruits, and uses.
Its functions of tasting foods, recognizing all their different savours, informing the
body and the stomach, being an exacting inspector of the kitchens of Divine mercy,
and an accurate interpreter and telephone exchange for the heart, spirit, and mind in
the function of speech all point in most brilliant and decisive manner to all-
encompassing knowledge. If through its purposes and fruits a single tongue furnishes
such evidence, innumerable tongues and innumerable living beings, infinite creatures,
point to and testify to an infinite knowledge with the clarity and certainty of the
noonday sun. They proclaim that there is nothing at all outside the bounds of the
knowledge of the One All Knowing of the Unseen, or outside His wisdom and will.
The Fourth Evidence: “And all-embracing, particular favours”
The favours and instances of compassion and protection bestowed on all living
creatures in the world of conscious beings, on every species and individual, particularly
and appropriately, point self-evidently to an all-encompassing knowledge, and offer
innumerable testimonies to the necessary existence of One Gracious and All-Knowing
Who knows those who receive the favours and their needs.
NOTE: The explanation of the words of the Arabic piece, which is the
summary and essence of the Risale-i Nur, indicates the truths which the
Risale-i Nur —being distilled from the Qur’an— has taken from the flashes
of Qur’anic verses, and particularly the proofs and evidences for knowledge,
will, and power. For the Risale-i Nur expounds the scholarly proofs which
the Arabic words indicate. This means that rather than being elucidations,
explanations, and translations of those Arabic words, each of these scholarly
proofs explains an indication and fine point made by numerous Qur’anic
verses.
To return to our main question. Yes, with our own eyes we see that there is an
All-Knowing and Compassionate One Who knows us and all beings with spirits, and
knowing them, protects them, and knows all their needs and plaints, and knowing
them comes to their assistance with His favours. One out of numberless examples: the
general and particular favours bestowed on man as sustenance, medicines, and the
minerals he needs point most clearly to an all-encompassing knowledge, offering
testimonies to a Most Merciful and Compassionate One to the number of foods,
medicines, and minerals. Yes, wise and purposive works like the

--- Sayfa 606 ---
617
feeding of man, and particularly of the helpless and infants, and especially their
conveying from the kitchen of the stomach the nutrients necessary for all their
members and even their cells, and the mountains being pharmacies and stores of all the
minerals necessary for man, could only occur through an all-encompassing knowledge.
Aimless chance, blind force, deaf nature, and lifeless, unconscious causes and the
simple, overwhelming elements could in no way interfere in this feeding, administering,
preservation, and planning, which is knowing, percipient, wise, compassionate, and
gracious. Apparent causes such as those are merely employed and utilized within the
bounds of the knowledge and wisdom of One possessing absolute knowledge, and at
His command and with His permission, as a veil to the dignity of Divine power.
The Fifth and Sixth Evidences: ‘And the regular decrees and fruitful determining’
The forms and proportions of all things, particularly plants, trees, animals, and
men have been cut out with skilful art according to the principles of Divine decree and
determining, which are two sorts of pre-eternal knowledge, sewn in a way entirely
appropriate to the stature of each, and clothed on them perfectly. Each is given most
well-ordered, regular, and wise shapes. These singly and all together point to an
infinite knowledge and testify to their number to an All-Knowing Maker.
Yes, out of innumerable examples, we look at only a single tree and a human
individual, and we see that  both outwardly and inwardly the fruit-bearing tree and
multi-membered man have been delimited by unseen compasses and a subtle pen of
knowledge, and that each of their members have been given perfectly ordered fitting
forms so that they may produce the required fruits and results and perform the duties
of their natures. As for this, since it could occur only through infinite knowledge, they
testify to the number of plants and animals to the necessary existence and boundless
knowledge of a Maker and Giver of Form, an All-Knowing Determiner Who knows
the relationships of everything with everything else and keeps these in view, and
knows the definition through the compasses and pen of the decree and determining of
pre-eternal knowledge of the outsides and insides of their fellow-men and fellow-trees
and their species, and of their measured proportions and form, and they testify to the
One Who does this.

--- Sayfa 607 ---
618
The Seventh and Eighth Evidences: ‘And the specified appointed hour of death
and fixed, regular sustenance’
Superficially, the appointed hour and sustenance appear to be un-known and
unspecified, but for an important instance of wisdom under the veil of vagueness, the
appointed hour is determined and specified on the page of every living being’s destiny
in the notebook of pre-eternal Divine decree and determining; it can be neither brought
forward nor delayed. There are numerous evidences that the sustenance of every living
being is also appointed and determined and inscribed on the tablets of decree and
determining. For example, a huge tree leaving behind when it dies its seed, which is its
spirit of a sort, to continue its duties in its place, and this occurring through the wise
law of an All-Knowing Preserver; and milk, the sustenance of infants and young,
flowing forth from breasts, and its appearing from between blood and execrement, and
pouring into their mouths pure and clean without being polluted; reject decisively the
possibility of chance and shows clearly that they occur through the compassionate law
of an All-Knowing and Compassionate Provider. You can make an analogy with these
two small examples for all living creatures and beings with spirits.
This means that in reality both the appointed hour of death is specified and
determined, and each person’s sustenance has been determined and recorded in the
notebook of his destiny. But for most important instances of wisdom, both the
appointed hour and sustenance are concealed behind the veil of the Unseen, and
appear to be to be vague, unspecified, and apparently bound to coincidence. For if the
appointed hour had been specified like the setting of the sun, the first half of life would
be passed in absolute heedlessness and be lost by not working for the hereafter, and
the second half would passed in ghastly terror, as one was as though every day taking
one more step towards the gallows of death, exacerbating the calamity of death a
hundredfold. For which reason the calamities one suffers, and the resurrection of the
dead, which is the world’s appointed hour of death, have mercifully been left in
concealment in the Unseen.
As for sustenance, since after life itself it is the greatest treasury of bounties, and
the richest source of thanks and praise, and the most comprehensive mine of worship,
supplication, and entreaty, it has apparently been left vague and shown to be tied to
chance. For in this way the door of seeking sustenance through the intercession of
continuously seeking refuge at the Divine Court, and pleading and beseeching, and
praise and thanks, is not closed. For if it had been clearly specified, its nature would
have been altogether changed. The doors of thankful, grateful supplications and
entreaties, indeed of humble worship, would have been closed.

--- Sayfa 608 ---
619
The Ninth and Tenth Evidences: ‘And the regular excellence and careful
adornment’
All the beautiful creatures which display the manifestations of an eternal beauty
and loveliness especially in the spring on the face of the earth, for instance the flowers,
fruits, small birds and flies, and especially the gilded, sparkling flying insects — in their
creation, forms, and members are such a miraculous skill and precision, such a
wonderful art, mastery, and excellence, and all sorts of shapes and tiny machines which
show their craftsman’s wondrous proficiency, that they point decisively to a truly
comprehensive knowledge, and —let there be no mistake in the expression— an
extremely skilful, scientific innate knowledge, and testify that it is impossible that
aimless chance and unconscious, confused causes could interfere. While the phrase
“and careful decoration” means that those fine artefacts are adorned in a way so
agreeable, are decorated in a way so sweet, display a beauty and art so attractive, that
their maker could create these works only through an infinite knowledge. He knows
the best manner of everything, and wishes to display to conscious beings the beauty of
exquisite craftsmanship and the perfection of its beauty. For He creates and decorates
the most insignificant flower and tiniest fly with the greatest care, skill, and art, giving
them the greatest importance. This attentive adorning and beautifying self-evidently
point to a boundless and all-encompassing knowledge, and testify to the number of
those beauties to the necessary existence of an All-Knowing and Beauteous Maker .
The Eleventh Evidence, which comprises five universal evidences and proofs: ‘The
utterly perfect order, balance, and total distinction with absolute ease, and the
creation of things in unlimited abundance with absolute skill and speed with
absolute balance, to an unrestricted extent with perfect beauty and art, over
infinite distances with complete congruence, with unlimited intermingling yet
with complete distinction.’
This evidence is another and better form of the similar lines at the end of the
Arabic piece above, but because of my severe illness it explains the five or six
evidences it comprises in the form of a very brief indication only.
Firstly: Throughout the earth we see the making of wondrous living machines,
some instantaneously and some in a minute or two, in orderly and measured fashion,
each different from its fellows, with the greatest ease, arising from a thorough
knowledge and skill, all of which point to an infinite knowledge and testify that the
perfection of knowledge is proportionate to the ease resulting from the skill and
knowledge in the art.

--- Sayfa 609 ---
620
Secondly: Perfect creations of the greatest art within the greatest profusion and
multitude, point to a boundless knowledge within an infinite power, and testify to their
number to One Who is Absolutely Knowing and Powerful.
Thirdly: Creations which are of the finest balance and measure despite being made
with absolute speed, point to a boundless knowledge and testify to their number to
One Absolutely Knowing and Absolutely Powerful.
Fourthly: The making of innumerable animate beings on the broad face of the
earth with the greatest craft, adornment, and beauty of art despite their wide extent,
points to an all-encompassing knowledge which confusing nothing, sees all things
together, and for which nothing is an obstacle to anything else. It testifies too that
singly and altogether they are the artefacts of One Knowing of All Things, an
Absolutely Powerful One.
Fifthly: The coming into being of the members of a species which are far from
each other, with one in the east, one in the west, one in the north, and one in the south,
in the same way, both resembling each other and differing, could occur only through
the infinite power of One Absolutely Knowing and Absolutely Powerful Who governs
the whole universe, and through His infinite knowledge, which encompasses all beings
together with all their states, thus pointing to an all-encompassing knowledge and
testifies to One All-Knowing of the Unseen.
Sixthly: The creation of a great multitude of living machines in confusing
circumstances and dark places, for example seeds under the ground, without
confusion, despite their similarity and all being mixed up together, in miraculous
fashion without neglecting any single one of any sort, together with all their
distinguishing features, points as clearly as the sun to pre-eternal knowledge and
testifies as brilliantly as daylight to the creativity and dominicality of One Absolutely
Powerful and Absolutely Knowing. For the details we refer you to the Risale-i Nur
and here cut a long story short.
Now we begin the question of “Will,” which is in Hulâsatü’l-Hulâsa, the
summary of The Supreme Sign:45, 46
This piece consists of one long universal proof of Divine will, which comprises
many of the proofs of Will. In a short translation of it, we set

45 Since the Turkish is given for the Arabic piece here, the English translation of the Arabic is
not given. [Tr.]
46 Hulâsatü’l-Hulâsa: The ‘sum and substance’ in Arabic of The Supreme Sign, which describes
in thirty-three degrees how all the realms of creation testify to their Creator’s existence and unity. It is
included in the collection of invocations and supplications called Hizb Anwar al-Haqa’iq al-Nuriyya,
which includes Jawshan al-Kabir. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 610 ---
621
out evidence proving decisively Divine will and choice and volition. All the above
evidences for Divine knowledge are also evidences for will. For the manifestations and
works of knowledge and will are apparent together in all creatures.
The meaning of the above Arabic piece in brief:
Everything exists through His will and volition. What He wills occurs, what He
does not will does not occur. If He did not will it, nothing would occur. A proof is
this:
We see that among infinite, confused possibilities and various fruitless ways, amid
intervening and mutually opposing elements which flow like floods causing chaos, in
the midst of numerous others resembling themselves, which is the cause of disorder,
every creature with its own specific essence, particular attributes, individual character,
and distinctive form, is taken within a precise, perfect, regular order; all its members
and organs are weighed up with a sensitive, exact measure and balance and attached to
it; its mutually opposing members are created living and with extreme art from simple,
lifeless matter. For example, a human being is created with a hundred different organs
from a droplet of fluid, and a bird is made with numerous different members and
organs from a simple egg and clothed in a miraculous form, and a tree is drawn out of
a tiny seed comprising simple, lifeless carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen,
together with its branches and twigs and various members and parts, and dressed in an
orderly, fruitful form. This self-evidently, indubitably, decisively, and necessarily
proves that all those creatures together with all their parts and particles, form and
nature, are given their particular perfect states through the will, choice, volition, and
intention of One possessing Absolute Power. It proves too that everything is governed
by an all-embracing will. These single creatures pointing in this indubitable way to
Divine will shows that all creatures offer testimony to their number with a certainty as
clear as the sun at noon to Divine will encompassing all things, and that they comprise
numberless proofs of the necessary existence of an All-Powerful Possessor of Will.
All the evidences for Divine knowledge mentioned above are also evidences for
Divine will, since both function together with power. One cannot be without the other.
Just as all the correspondence and conformities between the members of species and
sorts of beings indicate that their Maker is One and the same; so their features being
distinctive and different from each other in wise and purposive fashion indicates
definitely that their Single Maker of Unity acts with will and choice. He creates
everything with will, choice, volition, and intention.

--- Sayfa 611 ---
622
This  marks the end of my explanations of the Arabic piece’s meaning, which sets
forth one universal proof of Divine will. I had intended to write many more important
points, as for the question of Divine knowledge, but my brain was exhausted due to
the illness I was suffering as a result of being poisoned, so it was postponed to another
time.
The Arabic piece about Divine power:
God is Most Great! Through His power and will, greater than all things. For He
is powerful over all things with absolute, all-encompassing power, necessary and
intrinsic to His Most Pure and Holy Essence. It is impossible that the opposite of
His power should intervene in it, for it has no degrees; equal before it are
particles and stars, particulars and universals, the part and the whole, the seed
and the tree, the world and man — through the mystery of the observable utterly
perfect order, balance, distinction, and precision, together with the ease in the
absolute abundance, speed, and intermingling; and through the mysteries of
luminosity, transparency, reciprocity, balance, order, and obedience; and
through the mysteries of the assistance of unity, facility of unity, and the
manifestation of oneness; and through the mysteries of necessity, total
detachment, and complete otherness of essence; and through the mysteries of
unrestrictedness, not being bound by space, and indivisibility; and through the
mysteries of the transformation of obstacles and obstructions into means of
facility; and through the mystery of the intuition that the particular, the part, the
seed and man are not inferior as regards art and eloquence to the star, and that
the Creator of the universal, the whole, the tree, and the world is the Creator of
the former; and through the mystery of the surroundings and wholes inevitably
being in the grasp of the Creator of the things which are surrounded and the
parts, like the miniature inscribed beings similar to them, or ‘milked,’ extracted
droplets, for they and their likes are included in the former with the balance of
His knowledge, or are ‘milked’ from them in accordance with the principles of
His wisdom; and through the mystery of a Qur’an of Dignity inscribed with
particles of ether on an atom or minutest particle not being of less eloquence or
wondrous art than a Qur’an of Grandeur written with the ink of the stars and
suns on the page of the heavens; similarly, through their relation to the power of
the universe’s Creator, the blooming rose not being of less eloquence and art
than the star Venus; nor the ant being inferior to the elephant; nor the microbe
inferior to the rhinoceros, nor is the bee inferior to the date-palm. Moreover, the
extreme ease and speed in the creation of things causes the people of
misguidance to confuse formation with self-formation,

--- Sayfa 612 ---
623
which necessitates innumerable impossibilities and is a delusion; while it proves
to the people of guidance that in relation to the power of the universe’s Creator
particles and the stars are equal, may His glory be exalted, for there is no god
but He; God is Most Great!
Before giving a translation of this Arabic piece from the point of view of the truly
vast question of Divine power, and a brief meaning of it, I shall disclose a truth which
was imparted to me. It was like this:
The existence of Divine power is more certain than the existence of the universe.
Indeed, singly and all together creatures are the embodied words of power; they
demonstrate its existence with ‘the vision of certainty.’ They testify to their number to
the Absolutely Powerful One, the One qualified by it. There is no need to prove that
power with further proofs. But because it is one of the most important bases of faith,
and the most necessary means to understanding the Qur’anic truths, and as claimed by
the verse,
Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul,47
and because not everyone has found the way to it through the use of reason, some
people have remained bewildered and uncomprehending before power and others have
denied it, and it is therefore necessary to prove an awesome truth concerning it.
As for the above-mentioned basis, foundation, means, assertion, and truth, it is the
meaning of the above verse. That is to say: “Men and jinn! The creation of all of you
and your being resurrected and raised to life at the resurrection is as easy for My
power as the creation of a single individual!” Divine power creates the spring as easily
as it creates a single flower. For that power, there is no difference between particular
and universal, small and large, many and few. It spins planets as easily as it spins
particles.
In nine ‘Steps’, the above Arabic passage expounds a most conclusive, cogent
proof of this awesome question. Very briefly, its meaning is as follows. The basis of
the steps is indicated by this:
For He is powerful over all things with absolute, all-encompassing power,
necessary and intrinsic to His Most Pure and Holy Essence; it is impossible that
the opposite of His power should intervene in it, for it has no degrees; equal
before it are particles and stars, particulars and universals, the part and the
whole, the seed and the tree, the world and man.

47 Qur’an, 31:28.

--- Sayfa 613 ---
624
That is, Divine power is such that it is powerful over all things, encompasses all
things, is essential to the Necessarily Existent One, and according to logic, is
“necessary” to Him; it is impossible that it should be separated from Him; there is no
possibility that it could be. Since the Most Pure and Holy Essence possesses such
necessary power, impotence, its opposite, could certainly in no way intervene in it.
Impotence could not impinge on the All-Powerful Essence. Since the existence of
degrees in a thing occurs through the intervention of its opposite —for example, the
degrees and levels of heat occur through the intervention of cold, and the degrees of
beauty, through the intervention of ugliness— impotence, the opposite of this essential
power, can in no way approach it; there is no possibility whatsoever that it could.
There can be no degrees in that absolute power. Since there can be no degrees in it,
stars and particles are equal to that power, and there are no differences for it between
the part and the whole, or an individual and a species. The raising to life of a seed and
a huge tree, and the universe and man, and one individual and all beings with spirits at
the resurrection of the dead is equal in relation to that power, and all are equally easy.
There is no difference between great and small, many and few. Decisive witnesses to
this truth are the perfect art, order, balance, distinction and profusion that we see in
the creation of things with absolute speed, absolute ease, and complete facility.
First Step
Through the mystery of the observable utterly perfect order, balance, distinction,
and precision, together with the ease in the absolute abundance, speed, and
intermingling.
For the meaning of this, see the above truth.
Second Step
Through the mysteries of luminosity, transparency, reciprocity, balance, order,
and obedience.
For detailed explanation of this we refer you to the end of the Tenth Word, the
Twenty-Ninth Word, and the Twentieth Letter, and here make only a brief allusion.
Just as with respect to luminosity and through dominical power, the sun’s light is
reflected as easily on the surface of the sea and in all its bubbles as is it on a single
fragment of glass; the two are equal; so it is as easy for the luminous power of the
Light of Lights to create and rotate the heavens and stars as it is to create flies and
particles and rotate them; neither presents any difficulties for it.
Also, just as through the quality of transparency and through Divine power, the
sun’s image is present with the same ease in a tiny mirror or in

--- Sayfa 614 ---
625
the pupil of the eye as, through the Divine command, its light is reflected on all shining
things and droplets, and translucent motes, and on the surface of the sea; so too, since
the inner faces of the essences of things are transparent and shining, the manifestation
and effect of absolute power creates all living beings with the ease of creating a single
individual; there is no difference between many and few, great and small.
Also, if two walnuts of equal weight were placed on a pair of scales which were
absolutely precise and large enough to weigh mountains, and a tiny seed was added to
one of the walnuts, it would raise one of the pans to the height of a mountain-top and
lower the other to the bottom of the valley with the same ease as raising one pan to the
skies and lowering the other to the valley bottom if two mountains of equal weight had
been placed in the pans and a walnut added to one. In exactly the same way, in the
terminology of the science of theology (kalam), contingency is equal in regard to
existence and non-existence. That is, if there is nothing to cause their existence, things
which are not necessary but contingent are equal in regard to existence and non-
existence; there is no difference. Few or many, big or small are the same in regard to
this contingency and equality. Thus, creatures are contingent, and since within the
sphere of contingency their existence and non-existence are equal, it is as easy for the
boundless pre-eternal power of the Necessarily Existent One to give existence to a
single contingent being as to give all contingent beings existence and clothe everything
in an appropriate being, spoiling the balance of non-existence. And when the being’s
duties are completed, He takes off its garment of external existence and sends it
apparently to non-existence, but in fact to an existence within the sphere of His
knowledge. This means that if things are ascribed to the Absolutely Powerful One, the
raising to life of the spring becomes as easy as that of a flower, and the raising to life
of all mankind at the resurrection of the dead as easy as raising to life a single soul.
Whereas if they are ascribed to causes, a flower becomes as difficult as the spring, and
a fly as difficult as all living beings.
Also, through the mystery of order, the setting in motion of a large ship or an
aeroplane through pressing a button with one’s finger is as easy as setting in motion
the mainspring of a clock by turning the key with one’s finger. So too since through
the principles of pre-eternal knowledge, and laws of eternal wisdom, and universal
manifestations of dominical will and its specified principles, all things, universal and
particular, large and small, many and few, have been given an immaterial mould,
particular measure and proportions, and sheer limits, they are entirely within the order
of Divine knowledge and laws of Divine will. Certainly, it is as easy for the Absolutely
Powerful One to rotate the solar system

--- Sayfa 615 ---
626
and cause the ship of the earth to voyage around its annual orbit through His infinite
power as it is for Him to make blood circulate in a body in orderly and wise fashion
and the red and white corpuscles circulate in the blood, and the particles circulate in
the tiny corpuscles, for without difficulty He creates a human being together with his
wondrous organs from a droplet of fluid on the pattern of the universe. This means, if
ascribed to that pre-eternal, infinite power, the creation of the universe is as easy as
the creation of a single human being. But if not ascribed to that power, it becomes as
difficult to create a single human being together with his wondrous organs, members
and senses as to create the universe.
Also, through the mystery of obedience, compliance, and conforming to
commands, with the command of “Forward march!” a commander impels a single
soldier to attack, and with the same command he drives forward to the attack a large,
disciplined army. So too, with innate desire and eagerness resembling soldiers totally
obedient to the laws of Divine will and subservient to the signs of the dominical
creational commands, creatures are a thousand times more obedient than the soldiers
of an army —within the bounds of the line of action determined by pre-eternal
knowledge and wisdom— and are completely compliant and subservient. It is
therefore as easy through the dominical command of “Come into existence out of non-
existence and get down to your business!” and in the manner determined by
knowledge and in the form specified by will, for power to clothe an individual animate
being in an existence particular to it, and take it by the hand and bring it into being as it
is to create the army of living beings of the spring and to assign them their duties. That
is to say, if everything is attributed to that power, the creation of the entire army of
minute particles and divisions of stars is as easy and free of trouble as the creation of a
single particle and single star. Whereas if attributed to causes, the creation of a particle
in the pupil of a living being’s eye or in its brain together with its ability to perform its
wondrous duties, would be as difficult and troublesome as that of the army of animals.
Third Step
Through the mysteries of the assistance of unity, facility of unity, and the
manifestation of oneness.
We shall look at the meaning of this by means of brief indications. That is, due to
the unity of sovereignty and all his subjects acting in conformity to his commands
alone, it is as easy for a ruler and commander-in-chief to govern a large country and
numerous nation as it is to govern the people of a village. For due to the unity of his
decree, the members of the nation become a means of facility just like the soldiers, and
his com

--- Sayfa 616 ---
627
mands and laws are easily executed. Whereas if it was left to various rulers, in addition
to sinking into confusion, to govern a village, or even a household, would be as
difficult as governing the country. And since the obedient nation is attached to the
single commander, like individual soldiers, through the strength of relying on the
commander’s strength, and his ammunition stores and army, each may take an enemy
king captive and perform works far exceeding his own individual strength. His
connection with the ruler obtains for him an infinite strength and power, so that he
may perform great works. But if the relation is severed, he loses that vast strength, and
with his own petty strength performs works only to the extent of the arms and
ammunition on his back. For if it was required of him to perform all the works he
carried out relying on the power of his connection with the ruler, he would have to
have in his arm the strength of the army and on his back all the ruler’s stores of arms
and ammunition.
In exactly the same way, due to the unity of His sovereignty and absolute
rulership, the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, the All-Powerful Maker,
creates the universe as easily as a city, and raises to life the spring as easily as a
garden, and raises to life all the dead at the resurrection as easily as creating the leaves,
flowers, and fruits of the garden’s trees in the spring. He easily creates a fly on the
pattern of an eagle. He easily makes man the microcosm. Whereas if ascribed to
causes, a microbe would be as difficult as a rhinoceros, and a fruit as difficult as a
mighty tree. Perhaps too, every particle which performs its wondrous tasks in the body
of a living creature would have to be given an eye that sees all things and knowledge
that knows all things so that it could carry out those subtle and perfect vital duties.
Also, ease and facility reach such a degree in unity that they become necessary.
For if the equipping of an army is from one hand, from one factory, it becomes as easy
as equipping a single soldier. Whereas if numerous different hands interfere and the
various parts of the equipment are all brought from different factories, quantitively a
single soldier’s equipment could be prepared only with a thousand difficulties; since
numerous officers interfered, it would be as difficult as a thousand soldiers. Also, if the
management and command of a thousand soldiers is given to a single officer, in one
respect it becomes as easy as a single soldier, whereas if they were assigned to ten
officers or the soldiers themselves, it would result in confusion and great difficulty.
In exactly the same way, if all things are attributed to the Single One of Unity,
they become as easy as a single thing. But if they are attributed to causes, a single
living creature becomes as difficult as the whole earth, and perhaps impossible. This
means that in unity ease and facilty are at

--- Sayfa 617 ---
628
the level of necessity. And with the interference of numerous hands, the difficulties
amount to impossibility.
As it is said in Letters (Mektûbat), if the alternations of day and night, and the
motions of the stars, and the seasons of the year, the autumn, winter, spring, and
summer, are left to a single officer and organizer, that commander-in-chief commands
the globe of the earth, which is a soldier: “Rise up, rotate, and travel!” Out of joy and
delight at receiving the command, with two motions like a Mevlevi dervish in ectasy, it
is easily the means to the daily and annual changes and the apparent, imaginary
movements of the stars, thus demonstrating the total ease and facility of unity. But if it
is left not to the single commander but to causes and the caprices of the stars, and
earth is told: “You stop in your place and don’t travel!”, every night and every year
thousands of stars and suns thousands of times larger than the earth would have to cut
distances of thousands of millions of years, so that through their travelling, the
situations of the earth and heavens such as the seasons and day and night, might come
about. But it would be so difficult as to be impossible.
The phrase And the manifestation of oneness alludes to a vast and extremely
subtle, profound, and extensive truth. Referring explanation and proof of it to the
Risale-i Nur, we shall here set out a single point by means of a comparison.
Yes, just as through its light the sun illuminates the whole earth and is an example
of unity, so through its image, reflection, seven-coloured light, and shape appearing in
all the transparent things that face it, such as mirrors, it forms an example of oneness.
If the sun possessed knowledge, power, and will, and the fragments of glass and
droplets and bubbles in which the tiny suns appeared had the capacity, through the law
of Divine will, in each and next to each a complete sun would be present together with
its image and attributes, as well as in all the other places. There being no deficiency in
its power of disposal, through the command, effect, and word of dominical power, it
would be the cause of truly extensive manifestations, thus demonstrating the
extraordinary ease and facility of oneness.
In exactly the same way, just as in respect of His unity, the All-Glorious Maker
looks through His knowledge, will, and power, which encompass all things, and is all-
present and all-seeing everywhere, so with respect to His oneness and through its
manifestation, He is present together with His Names and attributes with all things,
and particularly living things, so that easily, in an instant, He creates a fly on the
pattern of an eagle and a human being according to the system of the universe. He
creates living creatures

--- Sayfa 618 ---
629
in a way so miraculous that if all causes were to gather together, they could not make
a nightingale or a fly. And the One Who creates the nightingale, is the One Who
creates all birds; and the One Who creates a human being could only be the One Who
creates the universe.
The Fourth and Fifth Steps
Through the mysteries of necessity, total detachment, and complete otherness of
essence; and the mysteries of unrestrictedness, not being bound by space, and
indivisibility.
It being very difficult to express the reality of these two steps to everyone, their
meaning will be explained in one or two very brief points. That is, in relation to the
power of an Absolutely Powerful One Whose existence is at the degree of necessity,
the most powerful and stable of the degrees of existence, and is pre-eternal and post-
eternal, and Who is totally detached from and free of materiality, and Whose holy
nature is totally different to all other natures, — in relation to His power, the stars are
like minute particles, and the resurrection of the dead like the spring, and to raise to
life all men at the resurrection is as easy as raising to life a single soul. For as much as
a fingernail from the levels of existence that are powerful may hold a mountain from an
insubstantial level of existence, and may manipulate it. For example, a mirror and
faculty of memory from the level of powerful, external existence may hold a hundred
mountains and a thousand books from the level of existence of the World of
Similitudes and non-material existence, which are weak and insubstantial, and they
may have disposal over them. Thus, however inferior as regards power the level of
existence of the World of Similitudes is to the level of external existence, the created,
accidental existences of contingent beings are thousands of times more inferior and
weaker than a pre-eternal, everlasting, necessary existence, so that through the
manifestation of a particle He can manipulate a world from the worlds of contingent
beings. Regretably, for the time being, three important reasons do not permit me to
explain this lengthy truth and its fine points in full, so we refer it to the Risale-i Nur
and another time.
Sixth Step
Through the mystery of the transformation of obstacles and impediments into
means of facility.
Through a law of the manifestation of Divine will called in science “the knot of
life,” and of the creational command, and through the command and will being turned
towards them, the unconscious branches and hard twigs of a huge tree do not form
obstacles or impediments to the necessary

--- Sayfa 619 ---
630
substances and foods which pass to its fruits, leaves, and flowers from the “knot of
life,” which is like the tree’s mainspring and stomach; indeed, they facilitate the
process. In just the same way, since all [potential] obstacles in the creation of the
universe and creatures cease being obstacles in the face of a manifestation of will and
regard of the dominical command and become means of facility, eternal power creates
the universe and all the species of creatures on the earth as easily as creating a single
tree. Nothing at all is difficult for it. If all those acts of creation are not ascribed to that
power, then the creation and administration of the single tree would be as difficult as
the creation and administration of all trees, indeed, as the universe. For then everything
would become obstacles and obstructions, and if all causes were to gather together,
they could not send the necessary sustenance to the fruits, leaves, branches and twigs
in orderly, regular fashion from the stomach and mainspring of a tree’s “knot of life,”
which proceeds from command and will. Unless all the parts of the tree, and all its
particles even, were given an eye, all-encompassing knowledge, and wondrous power
which would see the entire tree together with its parts and particles, and know them
and assist them.
So climb these five steps and take a look; see what difficulties —indeed,
impossibilities— are present in unbelief and associating partners with God, and how
distant they are from reason and logic, and how precluded they are. Then see what
ease there is on the way of the Qur’an, indeed, that its facility is at the degree of
necessity, and how acceptable and reasonable it is, and what certain and satisfying
truth is found on its way, so certain as to be necessary. Understand this and say: “All
praise be to God for the bounty of belief!”
(The difficulties I was suffering and my indisposition caused the remaining part of
this important step to be postponed.)
Seventh Step
And through the mystery that the particular, the part, the seed and man are not
inferior as regards art and eloquence to the star, the universal, the whole, the
tree, and the world.
[NOTE: The basis, mine, and sun of the truths contained in these nine Steps
are the verses: Say, He is God, the One; * God, the Eternal and Ever-
Besought.48 They are brief indications to flashes from the manifestation of
Divine oneness and eternal besoughtedness. Making one or two points, we
shall take a very brief look at the meaning of this Seventh Step, and for the
details refer you to the Risale-i Nur.]

48 Qur’an, 112:1-2.

--- Sayfa 620 ---
631
That is, a particle which performs wonderful duties in the eye or brain is not
inferior to a star; nor is a part inferior to the whole; for instance, the brain and eye are
not inferior to the human being as a whole; nor with regard to beauty of art and the
marvels of its creation is a particular individual inferior to a universal species; nor with
his strange members and faculties is a man inferior to all the animal species; nor in
regard to fine craftsmanship and being treasury-like, and resembling an index,
programme, and memory, is a seed inferior to a mighty tree; nor in regard to his
creation, and wondrous, comprehensive organs and faculties created so as to perform
thousands of amazing duties, is a man, the microcosm, inferior to the universe. This
means that the One Who creates the particle cannot lack the power to create the star.
And the One Who creates an organ like the tongue, certainly easily creates man. And
the One Who creates a single man thus perfectly surely can create all animals, and this
He does before our eyes. And the One Who creates a seed as a list, an index, a
notebook of the laws issuing from the Divine command, and as a “knot of life,” is
certainly the Creator of all trees. And the One Who creates man as a sort of seed of
the world and as its comprehensive fruit, and makes him the mirror to all the Divine
Names, and connected to all the universe, and vicegerent of the earth, most certainly
possesses such power that He creates the universe as easily as He creates man, and
sets it in order. In which case, whoever is the Creator, Maker, and Sustainer of the
particle, part, particular individual, seed, and man must be the Creator, Maker, and
Sustainer of the stars, species, the whole, universals, trees, and the whole universe.
That it should be otherwise is impossible and precluded.
Eighth Step
Through the mystery of the surroundings and wholes inevitably being in the
grasp of the Creator of the things which are surrounded and the parts, like the
miniature inscribed beings similar to them, or ‘milked,’ extracted droplets, for
they and their likes are included in the former with the balance of His knowledge,
or are ‘milked’ from them in accordance with the principles of His wisdom.
That is, the relation to the large universals which encompass them of the
particulars which are encompassed, and of individuals, seeds, and grains which are
within universals and wholes, is as tiny miniatures, and as the identical samples of the
universal and wholes, inscribed in miniature in the very finest writing. Since this is so,
the encompassing universal must be within the grasp of the Creator of the particulars
and completely under His disposal so that through the balances of His knowledge

--- Sayfa 621 ---
632
and its fine pens He can include that huge all-encompassing book in hundreds of
miniscule sections and notebooks. The relation and comparison, then, of the
encompassed parts and particulars with their surroundings is as droplets ‘milked’ from
what encompasses them, like milk, or as if someone squeezed the surroundings and
those points dripped from them. For example, a melon seed is a droplet milked from
all its surroundings or a point in which is written the whole book, for it contains its
index, list, and programme. Since it is thus, the encompassing wholes and universals
must be within the hand of the Maker of those particulars, droplets, and points so that
He can milk the individuals, droplets, and points from them with the sensitive
principles of His wisdom. This means that the One Who creates the seed and individual
must the One Who creates the whole and the universals, and the other universals and
sorts, which encompass the latter and are bigger than them; it could not be anyone
else. In which case, the One Who creates a single soul can only be He Who creates all
mankind. And the One Who raises to life one dead person, can raise to life all jinn and
men at the resurrection of the dead, and will raise them to life. So see, what is claimed
and stated by the verse,
Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul49
is most definitely and brilliantly pure truth and reality.
Ninth Step
And through the mystery of a Qur’an of Dignity inscribed with particles of ether
on an atom or minutest particle not being of less eloquence or wondrous art than
a Qur’an of Grandeur written with the ink of the stars and suns on the page of
the heavens; similarly, through their relation to the power of the universe’s
Creator, the blooming rose not being of less eloquence and art than the star
Venus; nor the ant being inferior to the elephant, nor the microbe inferior to the
rhinoceros, nor the bee inferior to the date-palm. Moreover, the extreme ease
and speed in the creation of things causes the people of misguidance to confuse
formation with self-formation, which necessitates innumerable impossibilities
and is a delusion; while it proves to the people of guidance that in relation to the
power of the universe’s Creator particles and the stars are equal, May His glory
be exalted, for there is no god but He; God is Most Great!
[I wanted to explain the meaning of this last step at length, but regretably I
have been prevented by my extreme distress, arising from arbitrary
oppression and harassment, and my weakness and serious

49 Qur’an, 31:28.

--- Sayfa 622 ---
633
sicknesses, resulting from poisoning. I have therefore have been compelled to
suffice with a brief indication.]
That is, if a Qur’an of Mighty Stature was written on a particle which is supposed
to be indivisible and called in the science of theology (kalam) and in philosophy
“jawhar-i fard,” in particles of ether, which is matter even finer, and if another mighty
Qur’an was written in stars and suns on the pages of the heavens, then the two were
compared, the microscopic Qur’an written in particles would not be inferior in respect
of marvels and miraculous art than the vast Qur’an gilding the face of the heavens;
indeed, in some ways it would be superior.
In exactly the same way, from the point of view of the originality and eloquence in
their creation, in relation to the power of the universe’s Creator, the rose is not inferior
to the star Venus, the ant is not inferior to the elephant, and a microbe is more
wondrous as regards its creation than a rhinoceros, and with its marvellous inborn
faculties the bee is superior to the date-palm. This means that the One Who creates the
bee can create all animals. The One Who raises a single soul to life can raise to life all
men at the resurrection of the dead and gather them together in the arena of the Great
Gathering, and will gather them together. Nothing at all is difficult for Him, for before
our eyes every spring He creates a hundred thousand samples of the resurrection with
the greatest ease and speed.
Very briefly, the meaning of the final Arabic sentence is this: since the people of
misguidance do not know the unshakeable truths of the above ‘Steps,’ and since
creatures come into existence extremely easily and extremely quickly, they imagine
their formation and creation through a Maker’s infinite power to be self-formation and
that they come into existence of themselves. They have thus opened for themselves the
door of in every way impossible and precluded superstitions, which no mind, and not
even delusion, could accept. For example, in that case, every single particle of every
animate creature would have to be ascribed an infinite power, knowledge, and eye that
sees everything, and power sufficient to execute every art and skill. Thus, by not
accepting a single God, they are bound by their ways to accept gods to the number of
particles, and thus deserve to enter among the lowest of the low of Hell.
As for the people of guidance, the powerful truths and irrefutable proofs of the
above ‘Steps’ afford to their sound hearts and straight minds the firmest conviction
and most powerful belief and assent at the level of ‘the vision of certainty,’ so that they
believe without doubt or misgiving and with peace of mind that in relation to Divine
power there is no difference between stars and particles, or the smallest and the
largest, for all

--- Sayfa 623 ---
634
these wondrous things occur before our very eyes. And every marvel of art confirms
the assertion of the verse,
Your creation and your resurrection is but as a single soul,
and testifies that what it states is pure truth and reality, and through the tongues of
their beings they declare: “God is Most Great!” We too declare: “God is Most Great!”
to their number. And with all our strength and conviction we affirm the verse’s claim,
and we testify with innumerable proofs that what it states is pure truth and reality.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.50
O God! Grant blessings and peace to the one whom You sent as a Mercy to
all the worlds, and all praise be to God, the Sustainer of All the Worlds.

50 Qur’an, 2:32.

--- Sayfa 624 ---
635
[A Eulogy which answers the questions: What is the Risale-i Nur? What is
its true nature, and what is the true nature of its Interpreter?]
The high servants of religion who are described in Hadiths as coming at the start
of every century are not innovators, they are followers. That is to say, they do not
create anything new themselves, they do not bring any new ordinances; they adjust and
strengthen religion by way of following to the letter the fundamentals and ordinances
of religion and the Sunna of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH); they proclaim the true
and original meaning of religion; they remove and render null and void the baseless
matters which have been mixed up with it; they reject and destroy the attacks made on
religion; they establish the Divine commands, and proclaim and make known the
nobility and exaltedness of the Divine ordinances. Only, without spoiling the basic
position or damaging the original spirit, they carry out their duties through new
methods of persuasion appropriate to the understanding of the age, and in new ways
and with new details.
These dominical officials confirm their positions through their actions and deeds.
They carry out their duty of reflecting the firmness of their belief and their sincerity.
They display in their actions their degree of faith. They show that they follow to the
letter the practices of Muhammad (PBUH) and that truly they have been invested with
the Prophetic robe. In short: for the community of Muhammad (PBUH) they form
perfect models in respect of deeds and morality and following and adhering to the
Prophet’s Sunna; they are examples worthy of being followed. The works they write
expounding God’s Book and elucidating the injunctions of religion, and their
presenting these in accordance with the understanding of the age and its degree of
learning, are not the products of their own elevated, fertile minds; they are not the
result of their own intelligence and knowledge. They are directly the inspirations and
promptings of the Pure Essence of Messengership (PBUH), who is the source of
revelation. Jaljalutiyya, Mathnawi-i Sharif, and Futuh al-Ghayb and such works are
all of this sort. Those holy persons have a part in the ordering of those choice works,
and in their manner of exposition; that is, they are the places where their meanings are
manifested and reflected.
To come to the Risale-i Nur and its Interpreter: since in this lofty work are an
elevated effulgence and endless perfection never before encountered in any similar
work; and since it is observed that, in a way hitherto unseen in any work, it is the heir
to the effulgences of the Qur’an, which

--- Sayfa 625 ---
636
is a Divine lamp and the sun of guidance and moon of happiness; it is a fact as clear as
the sun that its basis is the pure light of the Qur’an and that it bears the effulgence of
the lights of Muhammad (PBUH) to a greater extent than the works of the saints, and
that the share in it, and concern with it, and sacred disposal over it of the Pure Essence
of Messengership (PBUH) are greater than in the works of the saints, and the
attainment and perfections of the one who is its Interpreter and place of manifestation
is elevated and matchless to the same degree.
Yes, while still in his childhood and never having studied, in the space of three
month’s study in order to be saved from externals, the Risale-i Nur’s Interpreter was
made heir to the early and later sciences, mystic knowledge, the realities of things, the
mysteries of the universe, and Divine wisdom, which had been bestowed on no one
previously. With his learning and moral fortitude, consisting of his being embodied
chastity, and his extraordinary courage and complete self-sufficiency, he was a miracle
of creation, an embodiment of Divine favour; his abilities were God-given.
As a matchless scholar, an extraordinary prodigy, challenging the whole world of
learning before reaching the age of puberty, he silenced all the scholars with whom he
debated, answered absolutely correctly and without hesitation just about all the
questions posed to him, bore the mantle of ‘master’ from the age of fourteen, and
continuously irradiated the effulgence of knowledge and light of wisdom. With the
subtlety and profundity of his exposition, the conciseness and loftiness of his
explanations, and his insight, perspicacity and light of wisdom, he astonished the
scholars and learned, deservedly earning the illustrious title of ‘Bediuzzaman’ (Wonder
of the Age). As someone who with his elevated qualities and scholarly virtues
propagated and proved most perfectly the religion of Muhammad (PBUH), he surely
received the highest favours of the Lord of the Prophets (PBUH), and was under his
lofty protection and auspices. Doubtless he was one of noble virtue who advanced at
the decree of the Most Holy Prophet (PBUH), and acted under his command, and was
the heir to his truths and reflected his lights.
As indicated by his making the lights and knowledge of Muhammad (PBUH) and
radiance of the Divine Candle (Qur’an) shine most brilliantly, and the mathematical
significances of the Qur’an and Hadith being fulfilled in him, and the mathematical
expositions of verses expressing the prophetic utterances concentrating on himself,
there is no doubt that he was a burnished mirror to the Divine Messengership in
serving the cause of belief, and the final luminous fruit of the tree of

--- Sayfa 626 ---
637
Messengership, and the final mouth of reality in respect of the legacy of the tongue of
Messengership, and a final happy bearer of ‘the Divine Candle’ in respect of serving
belief.
Signed in the name of the Risale-i Nur students who attended the single ‘lesson’
of the third School of Joseph, consisting of The Shining Proof and Zühretü’n-Nur,
Ahmed Feyzi, Ahmed Nazif, Salâhaddin, Zübeyir, Ceylan, Sungur, Tabancali
They have accorded me a share far exceeding my due. But lacking the courage to
offend these signatories, I remained silent, and accepted their eulogy in the name of the
collective personality of the Risale-i Nur students.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings, for ever and ever!
Our Most Beloved, Blessed, Highly-Valued, Kindly Master!
Our revered Master, who has completely abandoned his own will and left all
matters to dominical will, who sees the mercy and wisdom of Divine Determining in
every apparent calamity and hardship, and with perfect trust and submission awaits in
perfect patience the results of that dominical manifestation! In this terrible century
when in some places the things on which the believers rely have begun to crumble, and
with publications opposing the pillars of belief the deniers of God flaunt themselves
openly and arrogantly, and to act in opposition to the Qur’an’s commands and not
believe in spiritual forces, and to ascribe the right of creation to unconscious, blind,
deaf nature are considered marks of civilization and of being ‘cultured’ and intellectual
—at such a time, our gracious Master wrote the Risale-i Nur, a miracle of the Qur’an,
and offering its soothing cures to agitated, wretched hearts needy for the water of life
of belief, gave them the good news of eternal happiness. On its highway of reality
which proves its teachings with decisive, categorical arguments and proofs, and
through the mystery of our Illustrious Leader (PBUH), to whom refers “the cause is
like the doer,” the equivalent of all the good deeds performed by hundreds of
thousands of Risale-i Nur students who have saved their belief through the Risale-i
Nur has passed to the register of his good deeds!
Just as in Denizli Prison Almighty God bestowed The Fruits of Belief,

--- Sayfa 627 ---
638
whose remedies were sufficiently efficacious to reduce to nothing the distress of the
incarceration, and that rose’s sweet scent eliminated all the pains of its thorns,
dispelling all our temporary distress; so too here in Afyon Prison, the physical
discomforts of one day of which are equal to a month’s discomfort in Denizli Prison,
the Most Munificent and Compassionate One of Beauty has bestowed at the hand of
you our beloved Master sublime proofs affirming Divine unity and praise, and the
messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which are cures and antidotes. We most faulty
students of yours, who through the effulgences of the Risale-i Nur have learnt to read
and write, consider these three short treatises to be both conclusive proofs of the
Risale-i Nur’s veracity and a sort of summary of it, in the same way that the
programme and index of a mighty pine-tree is encapsulated in its seed.
We are incapable of describing the virtues of these three treatises, but on reading
them our spirits experience a powerful relief, our physical sufferings are transformed
into joy, and they bring us innumerable fruits from the garden of belief. With its eleven
proofs of Divine unity, the first of them dispels the darknesses of disbelief,
misguidance, and nature at this time. The second expounds with sacred proofs of belief
Sura al-Fatiha, the source, basis, and master of all the comparisons in the Risale-i Nur.
And the third explains brilliantly in a way that ensures complete certitude the part
about the messengership of Muhammad (PBUH), which was imparted to you, our
beloved Master, here in Afyon Prison.
Although we are in no way worthy of anything, we shall strive with all our power
to publish these works, which we have received. Offering endless thanks to Almighty
God, we pray to Him saying: “Most Merciful of the Merciful! May You be pleased
with our Master for ever and ever!”
                                                        The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One!
                                                          In the name of the Risale-i Nur students,
                                                               Zübeyir, Ceylan, Sungur, Ibrahim

--- Sayfa 628 ---
639
Introduction to the Turkish Translation of the Original Arabic
‘Damascus Sermon’
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise
Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings for ever and ever!
My Dear, Loyal Brothers!
[With a presentiment of the future, the Old Said perceived the truths
expressed in this Arabic sermon, which, on the insistence of the Damascus
religious authorities, he delivered forty years ago in the Umayyad Mosque to
a congregation of close on ten thousand, which included a hundred religious
scholars; he gave news of those truths with complete certainty as though they
were going to be realized shortly. However, the two World Wars and twenty-
five years of absolute despotism delayed their realization; it is now that the
signs of this, which were predicted then, are beginning to be seen in the
World of Islam. Therefore, if you consider it appropriate, you may publish
the translation of this most important and instructive piece, not as an old,
outdated sermon, but as fresh, pertinent instruction on social and Islamic
questions addressing directly, in 1371 instead of 1327, the congregation of
three hundred and seventy (now more than a million) million in the mosque
of the Islamic world, rather than in the Umayyad Mosque.]
It is fitting here to write the most important answer to a most important question.
For the Old Said spoke prophetically in that lesson of forty years ago as though he
were seeing the wondrous teachings of the Risale-i Nur and its effects. It is for this
reason that I am writing that question and answer here. It is like this:
Many have asked both me and the Risale-i Nur students: “Why is it that the
Risale-i Nur is not defeated in the face of so much opposition and so many obdurate
philosophers and people of misguidance? By preventing to an extent the dissemination
of numerous valuable, true books on belief and Islam, and by means of their worldly
pleasures and vices, they have deprived many youths and others of the truths of belief.
But their most violent attacks, vicious treatment, lies and propaganda have been
directed at the Risale-i Nur, to destroy it and to scare people away from it and make
them give it up. Despite this, the Risale-i Nur has spread in a way never seen in any
other work, six hundred thousand copies of its

--- Sayfa 629 ---
640
treatises being written out by hand with unflagging zeal and published secretly. How is
it that it causes itself to be read with such enthusiasm, both within the country and
abroad? What is the reason for it? In reply to the many questions of this sort, we say:
Being a true commentary on the All-Wise Qur’an through the mystery of its
miraculousness, the Risale-i Nur demonstrates that in misguidance is a sort of Hell in
this world, while in belief is a sort of Paradise. It points out the grievous pains in sins,
bad deeds, and forbidden pleasures, and proves that in good deeds and virtues and the
truths of the Shari‘a are to be found pleasures like the pleasures of Paradise. In this
way it saves the sensible among those who have fallen into vice and misguidance. For
at this time there are two awesome conditions:
T h e   F i r s t :  Since man’s emotions, which are blind to the consequences of
things and prefer an ounce of present pleasure to tons of future joys, have come to
prevail over mind and reason, the only way to save the dissipated from their vice is to
show them the pain present in their pleasure and to defeat their emotions. Although
they are aware of the diamond-like bounties and pleasures of the hereafter, as the
verse,
They deem lovable the life of this world51
indicates, while being believers, the people of misguidance choose worldly pleasures,
which are like pieces of glass soon to be shattered. The only way of saving them from
this love of the world and from the danger of succumbing to it is by showing them the
hellish torments and pains they suffer even in this world. This is the way the Risale-i
Nur takes. For at this time, due to the obduracy arising from absolute unbelief and the
intoxication caused by the vice and misguidance arising from science, perhaps only one
in ten or even twenty can be induced to give up his evil ways by proving the existence
of Hell and its torments, after having told him of Almighty God. Having heard this,
such people are likely to say: “God is Forgiving and Compassionate, and Hell is a long
way off,” and continue in their dissipation. Their hearts and spirits are overcome by
their emotions.
Thus, by showing through most of its comparisons the grievous and terrible
results in this world of disbelief and misguidance, the Risale-i Nur makes even the
most stubborn and arrogant people feel disgust at those inauspicious, illicit pleasures,
leading them to repent. The short comparisons in the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth
Words, and the long one in the Third Stopping-Place in the Thirty-Second Word lead
a person to feel repugnance at the vice and misguidance of the way he has taken, and

51 Qur’an, 14:3.

--- Sayfa 630 ---
641
cause him to accept what they teach. As an example, I shall recount briefly the
situations I beheld on a journey of the imagination, which were in fact reality. Those
wishing for a more detailed account may look at the end of Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybi
(The Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen Collection).
When on that journey of the imagination I looked at the animal kingdom through
the eyes of materialist philosophy and the people of misguidance and heedlessness, the
innumerable needs of animals and their terrible hunger together with their weakness
and impotence appeared to me as most piteous and grievous. I cried out. Then I saw
through the telescope of Qur’anic wisdom and belief that the Divine Name of All-
Merciful had risen in the sign of Provider like a shining sun; it gilded with the light of
its mercy that hungry, wretched animal world.
Then I saw within the animal world another grievous world which was swathed in
darkness and would make anyone feel pity and in which young were struggling in their
need and powerlessness. I was sorry I had looked through the eyes of the people of
misguidance. Suddenly, belief gave me other spectacles and I saw the Name of All-
Compassionate rise in the sign of clemency; it transformed and lit up that pitiful world
in joyous and beautiful fashion, changing my tears of complaint and sorrow into tears
of joy and thanks.
Then the world of humanity appeared to me as though on a cinema screen. I
looked through the telescope of the people of misguidance and saw that world to be so
dark and terrifying that I cried out from the depths of my heart. “Alas!” I cried. For
they had desires and hopes that stretched to eternity, thoughts and imaginings that
embraced the universe, the earnest desire for everlasting happiness and Paradise, an
innate capacity and powers on which no limit had been placed and which were free, yet
despite their innumerable needs and their weakness and impotence they were exposed
to the attacks of innumerable enemies and the blows of innumerable calamities. Under
the perpetual threat of death, they lived out their brief and tumultuous lives in
wretched circumstances. Ever looking to the grave, which for the misguided is the
door to everlasting darkness, they suffered the continuous blows of death and
separation, the most painful state for the heart and conscience. I saw that singly and in
groups they were being thrown into that black well.
On seeing the world of humanity in this darkness I was about to cry out with my
heart, spirit, and mind, and all my subtle inner faculties, indeed all the particles of my
being, when the light and power of belief proceeding from the Qur’an smashed those
spectacles of misguidance, giving me insight. I saw the Divine Name of All-Just rising
like the sun in

--- Sayfa 631 ---
642
the sign of All-Wise, the Name of All-Merciful rising in the sign of Munificent, the
Name of All-Compassionate rising in the sign of, that is, in the meaning of, All-
Forgiving, the Name of Resurrector rising in the sign of Inheritor, the Name of
Granter of Life rising in the sign of Bountiful, and the Name of Sustainer rising in the
sign of Owner. They lit up the entire world of humanity and all the worlds within it.
They dispelled those hellish states, opened up windows onto the luminous worlds of
the hereafter, and scattered lights over the world of humanity. I declared: “Praise and
thanks be to God to the number of particles in existence!” I understood with complete
certainty that in belief is a sort of paradise in this world too and in misguidance, a sort
of hell.
Then the world of the earth appeared. On that journey of the imagination, the
dark, hypothetical rules of the philosophy which does not obey religion depicted a
ghastly world. Voyaging through space on the ship of the aged earth —which travels
seventy times faster than a cannon-ball a distance of twenty-five thousand years in one
year, ever disposed to break up, its interior in a state of upheaval— the situation of
wretched human kind appeared to me in a desolate darkness. My eyes darkened. I
flung the spectacles of philosophy to the ground, smashing them. Then I looked with a
view illumined with the wisdom of the Qur’an and belief, and I saw the Names of
Creator of the Heavens and Earth, All-Powerful, All-Knowing, Sustainer, Allah,
Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth, Subjugator of the Sun and Moon had risen like
suns in the signs of mercy, grandeur, and dominicality. They lit up that dark, desolate,
and terrifying world so that the globe appeared to my eye of belief as a well-ordered,
subjugated, pleasant, and safe ship, or aeroplane, or train. It contained everyone’s
provisions, and had been decked out for trade and enjoyment and to carry beings with
spirits through the dominical realms around the sun.  I exclaimed: “All praise be to
God to the number of particles of the earth for the bounty of belief.”
This has been proved with many comparisons in the Risale-i Nur, that those who
follow vice and misguidance suffer a hellish torment in this world too, while through
the manifestations of belief, the believers and righteous may taste through the
stomachs of Islam and humanity the pleasures of Paradise. They may benefit according
to the degree of their belief. But in these stormy times, currents which numb the senses
and scatter man’s attention on peripheral matters, plunging him into them, have
deadened his senses and bewildered him. As a result of this the people of misguidance
are temporarily unable to feel their torment, while the people of guidance are
overwhelmed by heedlessness and cannot truly appreciate its pleasures.

--- Sayfa 632 ---
643
The Second Awesome Condition This Age: In former times, compared with the
present there was very little absolute disbelief, or misguidance arising from science, or
the disbelief arising from perverse obstinacy. The instruction of the Islamic scholars of
those times and their arguments were therefore sufficient, quickly dispelling any
unbelief arising from doubts. Belief in God was general, and they could persuade most
people to give up their misguidance and wrongdoing through teaching them about
God and reminding them of Hell-fire. But now there are a hundred absolute
disbelievers in one small town instead of perhaps one in a whole country. Those who
lose their way due to science and learning and obstinately oppose the truths of belief
have increased a hundredfold in relation to former times. With pride like that of the
Pharaoh and their terrible misguidance these obdurate deniers oppose the truths of
belief. A sacred truth is therefore much needed that will completely destroy the bases
of their disbelief in this world, like an atom bomb, and will halt their aggression and
bring some of them to belief.
All praise be to Almighty God that with its many comparisons, as the perfect
remedy for the wounds of this time, the Risale-i Nur —a miracle of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition proceeding from its effulgence— has routed even the worst of
those obdurate deniers with the diamond sword of the Qur’an. Its proofs and
arguments to the number of the atoms of the universe demonstrating Divine unity and
the truths of belief show that in twenty-five years it has not been defeated in the face
of the severest attacks, but has itself prevailed and been victorious. Yes, with its
comparisons of belief and unbelief, and guidance and misguidance, the Risale-i Nur
proves those truths self-evidently. If note is taken, for example of the proofs and
flashes of the Second Station of the Twenty-Second Word, the First Stopping-Place of
the Thirty-Second Word, the ‘Windows’ of the Thirty-Third Letter, and the eleven
proofs of The Staff of Moses (Asa-yi Musa), it will be understood that it is the truths
of the Qur’an manifested in the Risale-i Nur that will smash and destroy absolute
disbelief and perverse misguidance at this time.
In the same way that the parts of the Risale-i Nur which solve the greatest
mysteries of religion and the riddles of the world’s creation have been collected
together in The ‘Mysteries’ Collection (Tilsimlar Mecmuasi), the pieces which
describe the hell in this world of the people of misguidance and the paradise-like
pleasures of the people of guidance and show that belief is like a seed of Paradise
while unbelief is a seed of the Zakkum-tree of Hell, will be put together in a small
collection, God willing, and published.
                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 633 ---
644
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.
My Dear, Loyal, Unshakeable, Constant, Devoted, Faithful Brothers!
You know that the Ankara experts’ committee was unable to deny the instances
of wonder-working and predictions looking to the Risale-i Nur; its members only
wrongly supposed that I had a part in them, and objected saying: “Such things should
not have been written in the book; wonder-working should not be made public.” In
reply to this minor criticism, I said in my defence:
They are not mine and anyway I would not dare to lay claim to such wonders,
they are rather distillations and flashes of the Qur’an’s miraculousness, which taking
the form of wonders in the Risale-i Nur, which is a true commentary on it, are a sort
of Divine bestowal (in order to strengthen the morale of its students). To make public
Divine bestowal is thanks of a sort and permissible, and it is acceptable. Now, for an
important reason, I shall elucidate my answer a little. I was also asked why I make
them public and why I concentrate so much on this point, and why for the last few
months I have gone much further in the subject. Most letters are related to the
wonder-working.
T h e   A n s w e r :  Although at this time in the Risale-i Nur’s service of
religious belief hundreds of thousands of ‘repairers’ are necessary in the face of the
thousands of destructive forces; and although I have need of hundreds of scribes and
assistants; and although the people and the authorities should appreciatively and
encouragingly help us and get in touch with us rather than avoiding us and not having
contact with us; and although the believers are obliged to give preference to the
service of belief over the occupations of this worldly life and its benefits, since it looks
to eternal life; taking myself as an example, I say this:
Because of our opponents preventing me from having contact with people and
having helpers, and from everything; and their destroying the morale of my friends as
much as they possibly can, and making them look coldly on me and the Risale-i Nur;
and because of my being burdened with the duties of a thousand people despite being
an aged, ill, weak, wretched stranger with no one; and because of my being compelled
to avoid having contact with people and mixing with them due to a sort of physical
illness caused by being isolated and oppressed; and because of their scaring off the
people so effectively and destroying their morale; —because of all these and in the face
of all those obstacles, I was made to

--- Sayfa 634 ---
645
write things of that sort in order to muster spiritual forces around the Risale-i Nur,
and describe the Divine bestowals, which are a means of strengthening the morale of
the Risale-i Nur students, and to show that on its own the Risale-i Nur is as powerful
as an army (and is in no need of others). For to sell myself, God forbid, and make
myself liked, and to boast and show off would be to damage the mystery of sincerity,
which is an important principle of the Risale-i Nur. Just as, God willing, the Risale-i
Nur will both defend itself and demonstrate its true value, so will it in effect also
defend us, and be the means of having our faults pardoned.
Sending thousands of greetings to all my brothers and sisters, and particularly to
the innocent and venerable elderly, whose prayers are acceptable, and offering prayers
for all, we congratulate them on the month of Ramadan and request that they pray for
us.
                                                                                  Your ill brother,
                                                                                  S a i d  N u r s i
* * *
In His Name, be He glorified!
This powerless brother of yours says this both to that old friend who objected,
and to the attentive, and to yourselves: through the effulgence of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition, the New Said puts forward proofs of the truths of belief so
logical and correct that they compel not only the Muslim scholars, but also the most
obdurate European philosophers to submit, and this they do. As for the signs and
allusions of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, from the level of its allusive
meanings, attracting attention to the Risale-i Nur, which is one of its miracles at this
time, it is a mark of the Qur’an’s miraculousness —similar to the allusive and symbolic
prophecies of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and Gawth al-A‘zam (May
God be pleased with him) concerning the Risale-i Nur’s importance and value. To do
so is also necessitated by the miraculous eloquence of that tongue of the Unseen.
Yes, it was imparted to me in Eskişehir Prison at a terrible time when we were in
dire need of a sacred solace: “You cite the saints of olden times as testifying to the
Risale-i Nur’s acceptability, but in accordance with the inner meaning of the verse,
Nor anything fresh or dry [green or withered], but is [inscribed] in a Record
Clear,52

52 Qur’an, 6:59.

--- Sayfa 635 ---
646
it is the Qur’an that should have the word in this matter. Does it find the Risale-i Nur
acceptable? How does it look on it?” I was faced with this strange question. So I
sought help from the Qur’an, and within the space of an hour I perceived that the
Risale-i Nur was one element of the level of allusive meanings of thirty-three verses,
from the level constituted by details of their explicit meanings (and included in the
generality of the allusive meanings), and that there were powerful inferences to its
inclusion and distinction. A part of these I saw in some detail, and a part I saw in
summary form. In my view, no doubt, hesitation, suspicion, or misgiving remained.
And I wrote that firm conviction of mine with the intention of strengthening the faith
of the believers through the Risale-i Nur, and I gave it to my closest (has) brothers on
condition it was held to be confidential. In the treatise, we do not say that this is the
explicit meaning of the verse, lest the hojas say “he has been smitten by the evil-eye.”
And we do not say that this is the generality of the allusive meaning. We say that
underlying the explicit meaning are numerous layers or levels, one of which is the
allusive and symbolic meaning, and that the allusive meaning is a generality. Every
century, this has particularities. And this century the Risale-i Nur is one element in the
generality of that level of its allusive meaning. Inferences drawn by means of the
principles of jafr and numbers, practised since early times by the ‘ulama, indeed,
proofs, show that that element is intentionally held in view and will perform an
important function, and this does not harm the verse of the Qur’an or its clear
meaning, but serves its miraculousness and eloquence. One who cannot deny the
innumerable deductions made by the people of reality from Qur’anic allusions, should
not deny this, and no one can deny it.
However, if the person who out of amazement deems it unlikely that such an
important work should appear at the hand of an insignificant person like myself thinks
of the creation of a pine-tree the size of a mountain out of a seed the size of a grain of
wheat as being a sign of Divine power and grandeur, he is surely bound to say that the
appearance of this work at such a time of intense need from someone as absolutely
impotent and wanting as myself is evidence for the vast extent of Divine mercy. By the
honour of the Risale-i Nur, I assure you and those who object, that these allusions and
symbolic predictions and indications of the saints always drove me to offer thanks and
praise and to seek forgiveness for my sins. I can prove to you through the glimpses
you have had of my life, under your very eyes these twenty years, that at no time, not
even for a minute, did they inflate my ego and make my evil-commanding soul proud
and arrogant. Nevertheless, man is not free of fault or forgetfulness. I have numerous
faults of which I am not aware. Also, perhaps my own ideas

--- Sayfa 636 ---
647
crept in and there are some errors in some of the treatises. But since they do not object
to the false and corrupting interpretations of the people of misguidance, screened by
setting up man-made translations in place of the sacred letters of the Qur’an, in the
deficient letters of the new [Latin] script, and their harming the clear meanings of
verses, they surely should not object to someone wretched and persecuted expounding
a fine point of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in order to strengthen the belief of his
brothers, to the extent of discouraging him in his service of belief, as not only the
people of reality, anyone with even a grain of fairness would agree.
In addition I say this: in the face of the awesome attacks of misguidance at this
time, the powerful, true ways, paths, and tariqats with millions of devoted followers
have been apparently defeated. But a semi-literate person under constant surveillance
living opposite the police-station, who is alone and the object of a many-sided
campaign of slander in order to make everyone execrate him, cannot lay claim to the
Risale-i Nur, which is more advanced than those other ways and has resisted the
attacks more strongly, and that work cannot be the product of his skill, and he cannot
take pride in it. It has rather been bestowed directly by Divine mercy as a miracle of
the All-Wise Qur’an at this time. He laid hands on that gift of the Qur’an together with
thousands of his friends. For sure the duty of chief interpreter fell to him, but evidence
that it is not the work of his thought, knowledge, and intelligence is that in the Risale-i
Nur are parts which were written in six hours, others that were written in two hours,
others in one hour, and some in ten minutes even. I swear that even with the power of
memory of the Old Said (May God be pleased with him)53 with my own thought I
could not write in ten hours what was written in ten minutes. With my own mind and
capacity I could not write in two days the treatise that was written in an hour. And
neither myself nor the most exacting religious philosopher could research the matters
of the Thirtieth Word and write it in six days, although it was written in one day in six
hours. And so on.
That is to say, despite being bankrupt, I am the herald and servant of a
wonderfully rich jeweller’s shop. Out of His grace and munificence may Almighty God
make us and all Risale-i Nur students purely and sincerely constant in this service, and
give us success. Amen. In veneration of the Lord of Messengers.
                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i

53 Intending it to be a prayer, some of the scribes wrote the phrase (May God be pleased with
him) after this wretched Said’s name. I wanted to change it, but it occurred to me that since it is a
prayer seeking God’s pleasure, it should not be interfered with, so I did not change it.

--- Sayfa 637 ---
569
The Second Chapter
of the Twenty-Ninth Flash
(On the phrase: All praise be to God!)
 [This short treatise, called the Second Chapter, explains only nine of the
countless lights and advantages of belief in God, which make man declare:
“All praise be to God!”]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
FIRST POINT
First of all, two things will be pointed out:
1.  Philosophy is a pair of dark glasses which shows everything to be ugly and
frightful. While belief in God is a transparent, clear, luminous pair of spectacles which
shows everything to be beautiful and familiar.
2.  Man is connected with all creatures, has a sort of commerce with all things,
and by nature is compelled to meet, talk, and be neighbourly with the things that
blockade him; so too he possesses six aspects: a left, right, upper, lower, front, and
back aspect.
On wearing either of these two pairs of spectacles, man can see the creatures and
things present in the aspects mentioned above.
Right Aspect: What is meant by this aspect is the past. When it is looked at
through the spectacles of philosophy, what is seen is a vast, dark, terrifying,
overturned graveyard, where the doomsday of the land of the past has come to pass.
There can be no doubt that this sight casts man into great terror, fear, and despair.

--- Sayfa 638 ---
570
However, when this aspect is looked at through the spectacles of belief, even if
the land appears to have been turned upside down, as indeed it has, there has been no
loss of life; it is understood that its crew and inhabitants have been transferred to a
better world, one full of light. The graves and pits are seen to be underground tunnels,
dug to lead to another, light-filled world. That is to say, the joy, relief, confidence, and
peace of mind belief gives to man is a Divine bounty which makes him repeat
thousands of times over: “All praise be to God!”
Left Aspect: When the future is looked at through the spectacles of philosophy, it
appears in the form of a huge, black, terrifying grave which is going to rot us and
make us prey to snakes and scorpions which will eliminate us. But when it is looked at
through the spectacles of belief, it is seen in the form of a repast comprising every
variety of the finest and most delicious foods and drinks which Almighty God, the
Most Merciful and All-Compassionate Creator, has prepared for man. So it makes him
repeat many thousands of times: “All praise be to God!”
Upper Aspect: This is the heavens. When a person looks at this aspect through
the spectacles of philosophy, he feels an awful terror at the great speed and variety of
the motions —like horse races or military manoeuvres— of the millions of stars and
heavenly bodies in endless space. Whereas when a believer looks at them, he sees that
just as those strange and wonderful manoeuvres are being carried out under the
supervision of a commander and at his command, so the stars are adorning the world
of the heavens and are light-giving lamps for him. As a result he feels not fear and
fright at those horses racing, but familiarity and affection. It is surely little to say: “All
praise be to God!” thousands of times for the bounty of belief which thus illuminates
the world of the heavens.
Lower Aspect: This is the earth. When man looks at this world with the eye of
philosophy, he sees it as an untethered, unhaltered animal wandering aimlessly around
the sun, or like a holed and captainless boat, and he is carried away by fear and
anxiety. But when he looks with belief, he sees it in the form of a ship of the Most
Merciful One ploughing its course around the sun under the command of God
Almighty, with all its food, drink, and clothing on board, for the pleasure of mankind.
So he starts to declare with great feeling: “All praise be to God!” for this great bounty
which springs from belief.
Front Aspect: If a person who indulges in philosophy looks at this aspect, he sees
that all living creatures, whether human or animal, are disappearing group by group
and with great speed towards it. That is to say, they are going to non-being and
ceasing to exist. Since he knows that he

--- Sayfa 639 ---
571
too is a traveller on that road, he goes out of his mind with grief. But for a believer
looking with the eye of belief, men journeying to that aspect are not passing to the
world of non-existence, they are being transferred from one pasture to another like
nomads, and migrating from a transitory realm to an everlasting one, and from a farm
of service and labour to the wages office, and from a country of hardship and difficulty
to one of plenty and ease. The believer meets this aspect with pleasure and gratitude.
Difficulties which occur on the road like death and the grave are sources of
happiness by reason of their results. For the road which leads to the luminous worlds
passes through the grave, and the greatest happiness is the result of the worst, most
grievous disasters. For example, Joseph (PUH) attained the happiness of being ruler of
Egypt only by way of being thrown into the well by his brothers and cast into prison at
the slanders of Zulaikha. In the same way, a child coming into the world from his
mother’s womb only reaches the happiness of this world as a result of the excruciating,
crushing difficulties he experiences on the way.
Back Aspect: That is, since one who looks at those who have remained behind
with the view of philosophy can find no answer to the question: “Where have they
come from and where are they going, and why did they come to the land of this
world?”, he naturally remains in a torment of bewilderment and doubt. But were he to
look through the spectacles of belief, he would understand that men are observers,
sent by the Pre-Eternal Sovereign to contemplate and study the wonderful miracles of
power displayed in the exhibition of the universe, and that after receiving their marks
and ranks in conformity with the degree they have grasped the value and grandeur of
those miracles of power and the degree to which the miracles point to the grandeur of
the Pre-Eternal Sovereign, men will return to the Sovereign’s realm. So he will say:
“All praise be to God!” for the bounty of belief which has given him this bounty.
Since the praise offered in saying: “All praise be to God!” for the bounty of belief,
which thus banishes the above-mentioned layers of darkness, is also a bounty, praise
should be offered for it too. And praise should be offered a third time for this second
bounty of praise, and a fourth time for the third bounty of praise... That is to say, an
infinite chain of praise is born of a single uttering of the phrase: “All praise be to
God!”
SECOND POINT
One should say: “All praise be to God!” for the bounty of belief which illuminates
these six aspects, for just as since it disperses the darkness of the six aspects, it may be
considered a great bounty for the warding off of evil, so too since it illuminates them it
may be thought of as a

--- Sayfa 640 ---
572
second bounty, for the attraction of benefits. Therefore, since man is by nature
civilized, he is connected with all the creatures in the six aspects, and through the
bounty of belief has the possibility of benefiting from the six aspects.
Thus, according to a meaning of the verse:
Wheresoever you turn, there is the countenance of God,1
man finds enlightenment in whichever of the six aspects he is found. In fact, someone
who is a believer has a life which in effect stretches from the foundation of the world
to its end. This life of his receives assistance from the light of a life which extends from
pre-eternity to post-eternity. In the same way, thanks to the belief which illuminates
the six aspects, man’s narrow time and space are transformed into a broad and easy
world. This extensive world becomes like man’s house, and the past and the future like
present time for his spirit and heart. The distance between between them disappears.
THIRD POINT
The fact that belief affords sources of support and assistance necessitates saying:
“All praise be to God!”
Yes, because of their impotence and their multitudinous enemies, humankind are
in need of a source of support to which they can have recourse to repulse those
enemies. Likewise, because of the abundance of their needs and their extreme poverty,
they need a source of assistance from which they may seek help, so that through it
they may meet their needs.
O man! Your one and only point of support is belief in God. The only source of
assistance for your spirit and conscience is belief in the hereafter. One who does not
know of these two sources suffers constant fear in his heart and spirit, and his
conscience is perpetually tormented. While the person who seeks support from the
first point and help from the second, experiences many pleasures and delights in his
heart and spirit, so that he is both consoled, and his conscience is at ease.
FOURTH POINT
Through showing that similar pleasures exist and will be bestowed, the light of
belief removes the pain that occurs when lawful pleasures start to fade. Furthermore,
through pointing out the source of bounties, it ensures that the bounties continue and
do not diminish.

1 Qur’an, 2:115.

--- Sayfa 641 ---
573
Similarly, through showing the pleasure of renewed acqaintance, it removes the
pain of separation and parting. That is to say, while many pains occur at the thought of
the passing of a single pleasure, belief removes them by calling to mind the recurrence
of the pleasure. In any event there are further pleasures in the renewal of pleasure. If a
fruit has no tree, its pleasure is restricted to and ceases on its being eaten, and its
ceasing is the cause of sorrow. But if the fruit’s tree is known, there is no pain when
the fruit ceases to exist, for there are others to come in its place.
At the same time, renewal is in itself a pleasure. For what troubles the human
spirit most are the pains arising from separation. Whereas the light of belief removes
those pains through the hope of renewed meeting and the recurrence of similar
encounters.
FIFTH POINT
The things among these beings man imagines to be hostile and foreign, and lifeless
and lost as though orphans or dead, the light of belief shows to him as friends and
brothers, as living, and as glorifying God. That is to say, a person who looks with the
eye of heedlessness supposes the beings in the world to be harmful like enemies, and
he takes fright; he sees things as foreign. For in the view of misguidance, there are no
bonds of brotherhood between the things of the past and those of the future. There is
only an insignificant, partial connection between them. As a consequence, the
brotherhood of the people of misguidance is only for one minute within thousands of
years.
In the view of belief, all the heavenly bodies appear as living and as familiar with
one another. Belief shows each of them to be glorifying its Creator through the tongue
of its being. It is in this respect that all the heavenly bodies possess a sort of life and
spirit according to each. There is no fear and fright therefore when the heavenly bodies
are considered with this view of belief; there is familiarity and love.
The view of unbelief sees human beings, powerless as they are to secure their
desires, as ownerless and without protector; it imagines them to be grieving and
sorrowful like weeping orphans on account of their impotence. The view of belief on
the other hand, sees them as living creatures; not as orphans but officials charged with
duties; as servants glorifying and extolling God.

--- Sayfa 642 ---
574
SIXTH POINT
The light of belief depicts this world and the hereafter as two tables displaying
numerous varieties of bounties from which a believer benefits through the hand of
belief, his inner and external senses, and his subtle, spiritual faculties. In the view of
misguidance, the sphere from which a living being may benefit diminishes and is
restricted to material pleasures. While in the view of belief, it expands to a sphere
which embraces the heavens and the earth. Yes, a believer considers the sun to be a
lamp hanging in the roof of his house, and the moon to be a night-light. They thus
become bounties for him, and the sphere from which he benefits is broader than the
heavens. With the eloquent verses,
And He has made subject to you the sun and the moon,2
and,
He it is Who enables you to travel the land and the sea,3
the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition alludes to these wonderful bounties and blessings
which arise from belief.
SEVENTH POINT
It is known through belief that God’s existence is a bounty surpassing all other
bounties, a great bounty which is a source, a fountain, containing endless varieties of
bounties, innumerable sorts of blessings, and uncountable kinds of gifts. It is
consequently incumbent on man and a debt to offer praise and laudation for the
bounties of belief to the number of particles in the world. A number of these have been
shown in various parts of the Risale-i Nur; discussing belief in God, they raise the veil
from these bounties and point them out.
One of the bounties for which praise should be offered with all the praise that the
phrase “All praise be to God!” indicates with the ‘Lam of specification,’4 is the bounty
of Divine mercy.  Indeed, mercy comprises bounties to the number of living beings
which manifest Divine mercy. For man in particular is connected with all living
creatures, and in this respect is gladdened by their happiness and saddened by their
pain. Thus, a bounty found in a single individual is a bounty also for his fellows.
Another which comprises bounties to the number of children which are blessed
with their mother’s tenderness, and which deserves praise and laudation, is Divine
compassion. Yes, a person with conscience who feels

2 Qur’an, 14:33.
3 Qur’an, 10:22.
4 ‘Lam of specification’; that is, the li in al-hamdulillah. [Tr.]

--- Sayfa 643 ---
575
sorrow and pity at the weeping of a motherless, hungry child, surely feels pleasure at a
mother’s compassion for her child, surely he is pleased and happy. Thus, pleasures of
this sort are each a bounty and require praise and thanks.
Another of the bounties requiring praise and thanks to the number of all the
varieties and instances of wisdom contained in the universe is Divine wisdom. For just
as man’s self is endowed with the manifestation of Divine mercy and his heart with the
manifestation of Divine compassion, so too does his intellect take pleasure at the
subtleties of Divine wisdom. So in this respect they require endless praise and
laudation through the declaring of “All praise be to God!”
Another is the bounty of preservation, for which praise should be offered to the
number of manifestations of the Divine Name of Inheritor, and the number of
descendants who endure after the passing of their forbears, and the number of the
beings of the next world, and the number of men’s actions which are preserved so as
to be the means of their receiving their rewards in the hereafter; praise should be
offered with so great an “All praise be to God!” that it fills all space with its sound.
For the continuation of a bounty is more valuable than the bounty itself. The
perpetuation of pleasure is more pleasurable than the pleasure itself. To abide
permanently in Paradise is superior to Paradise itself; and so on. Consequently, the
bounties which Almighty God’s attribute of Preserver comprise are greater and far
superior to all the bounties existent in all the universe. Thus, this attribute requires an
“All praise be to God!” as great as the world. You can compare the rest of the Divine
Names with the four mentioned here, and since in each are endless bounties, each
requires endless praise and thanks.
Likewise, the Prophet Muhammad (Peace and blessings be upon him), who is the
means of attaining the bounty of belief and has the authority to open all the treasuries
of bounty, is also such a bounty that mankind bears for all eternity the debt of praising
and applauding him.
Likewise, the bounties of Islam and the Qur’an, which are the index and source of
all varieties of bounties, material and spiritual, require and deserve unending, infinite
praise.
EIGHTH POINT
Praise be to God, Whom, according to the Qur’an of Mighty Stature, which is its
expounder, this mighty book known as the universe praises and extols with all its
chapters and sections, all its pages and lines, all its world and letters — the Most Pure
and Holy One, Whom it praises and

--- Sayfa 644 ---
576
extols through making manifest His attributes of beauty and perfection. It is as
follows:
According to its capacity, whether great or small, each inscription in this mighty
book praises and extols its Inscriber, Who is the Single and Eternally Besought One,
through displaying His glorious attributes.
Likewise, each inscription in the book of the universe offers praise through
exhibiting the attributes of Beauty of its Scribe, Who is the Most-Merciful and
Compassionate One.
Likewise, through reflecting and mirroring the manifestations of the Most
Beautiful Names, all the inscriptions and points and embroideries in this book utter the
praises of the Most Pure and Holy One through lauding, glorifying, and exalting Him.
Likewise, each ode in this book of the universe extols and glorifies its Composer,
Who is All-Powerful and All-Knowing.
NINTH POINT
... ... ...5

5 I do not have the key to these cyphers that I might decode them. Moreover, the head of one
who is fasting can neither decypher them, nor disclose their meanings. Forgive me, I could do only
this much, and that through the moral assistance of the author, the spiritual effulgence of the Night of
Power, and being in the vicinity of Mawlana Jalaluddin.
                                                                                                  The translator,
                                                                                                Abdülmecid Nursi

--- Sayfa 645 ---
569
The Supplicant
My demolished grave in which are piled up
Seventy-nine dead Said’s2 with his sins and sorrows.
The eightieth is a gravestone to a grave;
Altogether they weep at Islam’s decline.3
Together with my gravestone and moaning grave of dead Said’s
I go forward to the field of tomorrow’s future.
I am certain that the skies of the future and Asia
Will together surrender to Islam’s clean, shining hand.
For it promises the prosperity of belief;
It affords peace and security to mankind.

FOOTNOTES
1. This line is his signature.1
2. Since the body is renewed twice every year, it means that [each year] two Said’s have died.
Also, this year Said is in his seventy-ninth year. It means one Said has died every year, so that he will
live to this date. [Bediuzzaman died in 1379 according to the Hijri calendar, and his grave was
demolished and moved in 1380. —Tr.]
3. With a premonition of the future, he perceived its present state, twenty years later.

1 This line is his signature.