--- Sayfa 1 ---
Ritual of the Shriners

This is the rituals of the Prince Hall Shriners, 1973

Opening Ceremonies

Illustrious Potentate, one rap with gavel or sceptre: We are about to
open ... Temple for business and ceremonies. Officers will take their
stations.
Officers take their stations, but do not robe. Each officer, except the
Illustrious Potentate, arises when addressed, and remains standing.
Illustrious Potentate, one rap: Noble Chief Rabban, that no interloper or
spy may intrude upon the ceremonies of our Mystic Rite, it is my
command that you summon your proper officers and receive from them
our mystic pass; disperse them with alacrity in and about the Temple to
receive the same from all within our portals, and communicate to you,
that you may give me the assurance that no ignoble here intrudes.
Chief Rabban, one rap: Nobles First and Second Ceremonial Masters,
have you the Mystic Pass?
First and Second Ceremonial Masters: Noble Chief Rabban, we have.
Chief Rabban: Approach and give it. First and Second Ceremonial
Masters approach and whisper ....
Chief Rabban: It is the command of our Illustrious Potentate that you
forthwith receive the Mystic Pass from each and everyone in or about
the body of the Temple, and return the same to me that I may give
assurance that no ignoble spy intrudes upon the ceremonies of our
Mystic Rite.
First and Second Ceremonial Masters, each on one side of the Temple
receive the Mystic Pass Each Noble arises and whispers. The pass is not
required of the Illustrious Potentate,. Chief Rabban and Assistant
Rabban, but should be required of the Outer Guard. If any be present
without the pass, the Ceremonial Master announces aloud, “an
Intruder.” The one without the pass is vouched for or expelled.
Returning, the Second Ceremonial Master communicates the pass to the

--- Sayfa 2 ---
First Ceremonial Master and the First Ceremonial Master
communicates it to the Chief Rabban.
Chief Rabban: Illustrious Potentate, our Mystic Shrine is secure and free
from jeopardy; there are none present save Nobles of our Mystic Rite.
Illustrious Potentate:  It is well. Let us be clothed.
Officers vest themselves with their robes and jewels. Each member dons
fez and white gloves. All are seated.
Illustrious Potentate, one rap: Noble Assistant Rabban, inform the
Captain of the Guard, and he his comrade, the Outer Guard that ...
Temple is about to be opened for business and ceremonies, and both take
heed to permit no interruption while we are thus engaged.
Assistant Rabban, one rap: Noble Captain of the Guard, you will inform
your comrade, the Outer Guard, that ... Temple is about to be opened for
business and ceremonies. It is the command of our Illustrious Potentate
that you both take heed and permit no interruption while we are thus
engaged.
Captain of the Guard goes to the inner door, opens it, and instructs the
Outer Guard. He then closes the door and gives **    * raps, which is
answered by the same number from the Outer Guard.
Captain of the Guard: Noble Assistant Rabban, our Outer Guard stands
instructed; we are under a double-guard; picketed by a tried and trusty
officer without; one who knows his duty; vigilantly assisted by the
Captain of the Guard within.
Assistant Rabban:  Illustrious Potentate, our sacred Temple is under a
double and trusty guard.
Illustrious Potentate: Since all present are Nobles of the Mystic Shrine
and our Temple securely guarded, let us form about the altar and unite in
singing our opening ode.
All arise and form semi-circle, opening towards the Orient.
High Priest goes to altar on east side and faces the Nobles, when the
first verse or more of the Shrine ode is sung.
“Joy is a fruit that will not grow
In nature’s barren soil;
The Saviour calls for you and me,
In His vineyard to toil.”

--- Sayfa 3 ---
The last verse to be sung only at closing of the Temple
After the ode, the High Priest offers the following prayer: ”Father and
Creator, who hast given us life and being, aid us to perform the duties
which Thy law and our vows impose upon us. Thou hast vouchsafed to
call us Thy children, and doth graciously permit us to call Thee Father.
May Thy name be our glory and our confidence, our defense and guard,
our ornament and strength, our dignity and the motive of obedience.
May it confirm and sustain us in our good rsolutions, and make us
steadfast never to desert the post of duty. Let our bodies be chaste, our
thoughts pure, our words gentle, our lives useful and innocent, to the
honor and commendation of Masonry and the Mystic Shrine. Make us
patient of the evils with which we may be afflicted, lovers of the good
which Thou commendest, haters of all vice which Thou forbiddest, and
satisfied with all Thou sendest. Let us not be tempted with want, nor
made contemptible by beggary, nor wantonly proud by riches, nor in
love with anything in this world to the disregard of duty. Look upon us
with mercy; forgive our imperfections, and accept with compassion the
little service we may be able to render to the cause of justice, truth and
common humanity. And to Thee be all glory and honor, forever. Amen.”
All: So mote it be. Amen, Amen, Amen.
Illustrious Potentate:  Noble Oriental Guide, you will now display the
Holy writings and other appropriate emblems.
Oriental Guide opens the Bible (1st chapter of Job:  Koran 38th
chapter) arranges them on the altar, Koran in front of the Bible, Bible
and Koran in arch of two crossed scimitars on the Altar.
Illustrious Potentate: Nobles, behold the Orient and attend the signs.
Signs given.
Illustrious Potentate: **    *, Chief Rabban: **     *, Assistant Rabban:
**     *.
Illustrious Potentate:  In the name of God, our Father, and by the
existence of Allah, the creed of Mohammed, and the legendary sanctity
of the Temple of Mecca, I now proclaim this Temple regularly opened
for business and ceremony, and hereby forbid any discord that might
mar our mystic rites. Noble Captain of the Guard, you will inform the
Outer Guard. Captain of the Guard informs the Outer Guard.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Captain of the Guard:  Illustrious Potentate, the Outer Guard has your
command and the Temple is secure.
One rap. All are seated.

Initiation, section 1

This 1st section is sacred:  No play should be permitted.
Temple darkened. Furniture: Altar of Obligation covered with black
cloth, the Bible, the Koran and two crossed scimitars thereon. Left of
east; Altar of Incense with burning Myrrh, right of east; Bier and Coffin,
each half way between east and Altar of Obligation; Layer of Water in
south; gong to the left of the Assistant Rabban in the south. The Black
Stone placed In the southeast corner of the Temple (the extreme left of
the Potentate). Officers in their respective stations and places; members
seated.
Illustrious Potentate: Noble First Ceremonial Master, you will retire to
the outer walls and ascertain if any Novices await our pleasure.
First Ceremonial Master comes before the Altar of Obligation, salutes
the Illustrious Potentate with the sign of salutation and retires and
secures the desired information, and returning before the Altar, salutes
and reports.
Note: The last sign given in addressing the Illustrious Potentate is the
sign of salutation.
First Ceremonial Master: Illustrious Potentate, there are without ...
candidates in waiting; Novices, who seek admission to our Mystic
Shrine.
Illustrious Potentate: Noble Recorder, have the petitions of ... been
received in open Temple, and have they paid the required eas, been
balloted for and duly elected?
Recorder: Illustrious Potentate, they have, and their characters have
been canvassed and found to come within the bounds of good report.
They have each passed the ordeal of the secret ballot of our Mystic
Shrine unsullied and vouched for by Nobles of our rite.
Illustrious Potentate: It is well. Nobles First and Second Ceremonial

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Masters, accompanied by our Noble Marshal, you will retire without the
Temple and prepare these Novices for reception in our Mystic Shrine.
hey go to Altar and salute, then retire and prepare the Novices by
removing their shoes, coats, vests, and collars and clothing them with
white dominoes and slippers; hand-cuffed or tied at the wrists. When the
candidates are ready, the Ceremonial Masters take charge of them and
give **    * knocks at the outer door. The response from within is a loud
clatter of chains being with-drawn, the removal of several large bolts,
after which the door is opened by the Oriental Guide.
Oriental Guide: What is the cause of this clamorous alarm? Who dares
intrude upon the ceremonies of our Mystic Shrine?
First Ceremonial Master: One, two or three poor sons of the desert who
are weary of the hot sands and burning sun of the plains, humbly crave
shelter under the protecting dome of the Temple.
Oriental Guide: How may we know them to be worthy and not of
treacherous or ignoble birth?
First Ceremonial Master: Their characters having been canvassed and
coming within the bounds of good report, they have passed the ordeal of
the secret ballot of our Mystic Shrine unsullied, and I espouse their
cause and sanction their reception with the secret pass.
Oriental Guide: Give me the pass.
First Ceremonial Master advances and whispers, ....
Oriental Gulde: ’Tis well; let them enter.
They enter, preceded by the Marshal, Ceremonial Masters and their
assistants, conducting the candidates, Oriental Guide leading the way.
Illustrious Potentate: **     *, all rise.
Gong sounds once, music. They march twice around counter-clockwise
with music or singing, or both; the gong sounds each time they reach the
east; when they arrive at the east after the second circuit, the Illustrious
Potentate raps *; all are seated. Candidates and escort halt.
Illustrious Potentate: What strange intruders have we here Our pleasures
were most perfect and should be sacred from this turmoil and display.
Previous to the entrance of the candidates, the Captain of the Guard has
chosen a number of Nobles and they have dressed as Arabic soldiers
with broad scimitars; they are stationed outside and drilled and ready

--- Sayfa 6 ---
for duty when wanted. The soldiers now rush in, seize the candidates
and hustle them toward the dbor, when the Oriental Guide
supplicatingly answers. Soldiers halt with candidates.
Oriental Guide: Illustrious Potentate, ‘tis I who have ushered in one, two
or three poor sons of the desert, who being weary of the hot sands and
burning sun of the plains, humbly crave that sacred boon of the weary
and thirsty traveler:  a cup of water and shelter under the protecting
dome of our goodly Temple. I do commend them to your favor, having
found them worthy and not of treacherous or ignoble purpose, each
having passed the ordeal of the secret ballot of our Mystic Shrine
unsullied and vouched for by a Noble with our secret pass.
Illustrious Potentate: Noble Guide, know you the penalty of broken faith
and do you stand forth as ransom for them all?
Oriental Guide: Illustrious Potentate, I do.
Illustrious Potentate: So be it then. Conduct them once again about our
Shrine to our Noble High Priest, that he may imprint upon the tablets of
their memories a knowledge of the duties they do here assume.
Candidates are conducted around to the High Priest and Prophet, who
is robed and wearing a mitre.
High Priest: Strangers, are your motives for coming among us
honorable, pure and free from hope of gain or pride of knowledge?
Candidates: They are.
High Priest: Have you a belief in the existence of a Deity, future
rewards and punishments?
Candidates: I have.
High Priest: Have you a desire to promote justice and suppress wrong?
Candidates: I have.
High Priest: Have you a due regard for female virtue?
Candidates: I have.
High Priest: Are you willing to jeopardize your life, if need be, to
punish the guilty and protect the innocent, and labor in the cause of
justice, truth and common humanity?
Candidates: I am.
High Priest: Have you still a desire to unite with us in the inseparable
bonds of the Mystic Shrine for the purposes to which you have assented?

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Candidates: I have.
High Priest: If you have answered in sincerity and in truth these replies,
I can assure you that no conflicting sentiment nor requirement here will
mar your principles nor your duties in the outside world, be they what
they may. Our alliance, or the rite of our Mystic Shrine, is ancient,
honorable, benevolent and secret. It is devoted to the cause of justice,
truth, and mercy. It is as ancient as the cornerstone of Mohammed’s
Temple at Mecca; as secret as the Moslem vow that bound the tribes of
Arabia to Allah or their God; as honorable as the Christian; and the
tenets to which it is dedicated when assumed cannot be eschewed or cast
aloof. We know no retrogression, justice is our escutcheon; charity
beyond reason we do not expect; virtue must be regarded for its peerless
worth and morality observed for the general good of all. We require
absolute secrecy and desire all our discipies to hold an interest in our
noble cause and a just observance of the tenets of our faith. Let the
preliminary teachings be deeply graven upon your hearts. They are
priceless when well observed and attributes that cannot be bought with
paltry, sordid gold. By the existence of Allah and the creed of
Mohammed; by the legendary sanctity of our Tabernacle at Mecca, we
greet you, and in commemoration of the Arab’s faith in purity and
innocence, we accept your answers as sincere, and you will now be
permitted to proceed in the rites and ceremonies of the Mystic Shrine.
The Oriental Guide and escort will now conduct you onward, while you
will reverently lend an attentive ear to our preparatory service.
Gong, music. Candidates proceed from station to station.
Illustrious Potentate: Who is he who hath professcd to have conversed
in person with the Supreme and maketh himself mightiest of the mighty?
Mohammed, the Prophet of the Arab’s creed.
Gong. Music.
Chief Rabban: Who but Mohammed mingled his religion with his
Houril and said: “Are not these the true sources of happiness?”
Gong. Music.
Assistant Rabban: What shall befall them who have reflected with
abhorrence that which the Prophet hath revealed? Wherefore their works
shall not avail; do they not travel through the earth and see the end of

--- Sayfa 8 ---
those who were before them?
Gong. Music.
High Priest: Why do unbelievers indulge themselves and eat beasts?
Shall not their portion be a torment? Appeal to the Prophets for the truth.
Gong. Music.
Illustrious Potentate: To whom shall be meted out the boiling waters to
drink, that they shall burst their bowels and shall be cast into molten lava
to be consumed? The infidels who wait until the last hour of justice.
Gong. Music.
Chief Rabban: Let us be of the number of those who bathe in the
fountain of incorruptible waters and rivers of milk, the taste whereof
changeth not: and rivers of wine, pleasant and purifying to those who
drink, and enter into the vineyards where fruits rare and plenty ever
abound, and no evil exists.
Gong. Music.
Assistant Rabban: He who follows the plain declaration of his dictator
will ever avoid those whose evil works have been dressed for them by
the devil and who follow up their own lusts.
Gong. Music.
High Priest: There are Moslems among us; there are others who swerve
from propriety: but who so seeketh Islam earnestly seeks true direction;
but those who swerve from truth and justice shall merit and reap
abundance of chastisement.
Illustrious Potentate: Let us purify one another. There are two highways
to good and evil; attempt not the city of destruction. Ye all be possessed
of the faculty of distinguishing and the power of choosing between
wickedness and piety. The punishment of each will be equal to the
measure of his sin.
Gong and music until the candidates arrive at the east, where they halt.
Illustrious Potentate:  Sons of the Desert, you have advanced through
the preliminary ceremonies of the Nobility of the Mystic Shrine as far as
it is possible unobligated. Before advancing further in our cause, you
will be required to assume a most powerful and binding oath,
inseparably uniting yourselves with us, and when once taken, it can
never be retracted or departed from. But I assure you, therein is not

--- Sayfa 9 ---
contained a sentiment exceptionable to all that may become an honest,
upright man, be his beliefs what they may. Are you willing to assume
such an obligation?
Candidates: I am.
Illustrious Potentate: Conduct the Sons of the Desert to our sacred and
holy Altar.
Candidates are conducted around to the west and to the Altar of
Obligation amid sound of gong, drum and music. They kneel at the Altar
with bound hands resting upon the Holy writings, heads bowed.
Illustrious Potentate strikes *** to summon all around the Altar.
Illustrious Potentate, to candidates: Repeat after me:
I, ..., of my voluntary desire, uninfluenced and of free accord, do here
assume, without reserve, the obligation of the Nobility of the Mystic
Shrine, as did the elect of the Temple at Mecca, the Moslem and the
Mohammedan. I do hereby, upon this Bible, and on the mysterious
legend of the Koran, and its dedication to the Mohammedan faith,
promise and swear and vow on the faith and honor of an upright man,
come weal or woe, adversity or success, that I will never reveal any
secret part or portion whatsoever of the ceremonies I have already
received, that are about to be communicated to me or that I may
hereafter be instructed in, to any person in the world, except it be to a
well known member of the Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine,
and I knowing to an absolute certainty that he or they be truly and
lawfully such, and of good standing with such Nobility. That I will not
be present, aid or countenance the conferring of the Order of the Mystic
Shrine upon any person who is not a Masonic Knights Templar or a
Thirty-second Degree Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite Mason, in
good standing.
I furthermore promise and vow that I will not willfully write, cut, speak,
or portray any detail that might be construed into even a clue to thc
same, except for offIcial Temple work.
Furthermore, I do here register a sacred vow, promising, should I live to
become a member, I will impartially cast a black ballot without fear or
favor against friend or foe applying for membership in the Nobility of
the Mystic Shrine, whom I believe to be disgraced, dishonored, a thief,

--- Sayfa 10 ---
perjurer, murderer, a lunatic, an idiot or a criminal. And should I,
undismayed, pass safely through the Moslem test, and be found worthy
of the confidence of my fellows, albeit, I do not actively espouse the
cause, still L do promise to be silent, even if neutral, and not oppose the
purposes of the Order.
I further promise and vow that I will obey the laws and submit to the
decrees of the Imperial Council of the Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine of North and South America and
Jurisdictions, Inc., and that I will not acknowledge. recognize nor be
present in any other body of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine claiming to be
superior in authority, nor be present in any Temple not holding
constitutional authority from the said Imperial Council of the Mystic
Shrine.
I furthermore promise and vow that to the full measure of my ability I
will never swerve from justice nor duty. That I will respect virtue;
protect the innocent; assist the distressed; promote the inculcation of
honor and integrity, and dispense reasonable charity. That I will protect
and defend the unsullied honor of any Noble of the Mystic Shrine, when
absent, if assailed. And upon this sacred book, by the sincerity of a
Moslem’s oath, I here register this irrevocable vow, in wilful violation
whereof may I incur the fearful penalty of having my eyeballs pierced to
the center with a three-edged blade, my feet flayed and I be forced to
walk the hot sands upon the sterile shores of the Red Sea until the
flaming sun shall strike me with livid plague; and may Allah, the God of
Arab, Moslem and Mohammed, and the God of our fathers, support me
to the entire fulfillment of the same. Amen, Amen, Amen.
Illustrious Potentate: In token of your sincerity, salute the sacred book,
the Bible, upon which you lean and rest. Each Candidate ktsses the
Bible.
Illustrious Potentate: Nobles, let us kneel and pray to our Heavenly
Father to assist these Poor Sons of the Desert.
All kneel on right knee. The High Priest comes to the Altar on the east
side and offers the following prayer.
High Priest: Our Father, who art in heaven, the only true God; look
kindly upon these Poor Sons of the Desert, now about to become Nobles

--- Sayfa 11 ---
of this Order, and Thy servants. Aid them to perform punctually the
vows they have assumed. Strengthen their good resolutions, and suffer
not temptation to overcome them. Make them true Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine, and teach them to exercise whatsoever powers they may possess
with gentleness and moderation and for the benefit of humanity and to
Thy glory. Aid them to be true and loyal; frank and sincere, and may this
be to them and to all Nobles here below, but preparation for final
admission into the mysteries of Thy heaven of perfect peace and
happiness. Amen.
All:  Forgive us our trespasses, O Father, as we forgive those that
trespass against us. Amen, Amen. Amen.
Illustrious Potentate:  Unbind these Sons of the Desert. They are now of
Noble birth. The rays of the hot, flaming sun upon the sterile shores of
the Red Sea are strong and more scathing than the hempen thong.
Illustrious Potentate seats the Nobles with one rap (*). Candidates arise
and their wrists are unbound.
Illustrious Potentate:  Our Noble Oriental Guide will now conduct the
Sons of the Desert to our purifying cavern in the south. It is the Fountain
of Mecca. Let them there wash their hands in innocency, cleansing
themselves of the snares of sin and vice that they may have had
surrounding them, and let them be returned to us free from the stains of
iniquity.
Candidates are conducted to the fountain with music. After washing,
they are conducted to the east.
Illustrious Potentate:  My friends, it is with pleasure that I extend to you
the greetings of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine and congratulate you
upon having thus far passed the ceremonies of our Order; bear bravely
up to the Moslem test and prove your fidelity to our cause. Although
vague may appear the prospect in our ceremony and the aspect of our
purpose, let me assure you that there is a deep and formidable meaning
in it all, and when you shall have passed unflinching and undismayed
our final test of your fidelity, nerve and courage, then will you indeed be
worthy to espouse our cause; but mark well, should you ultimately
decline to enlist actively in our cause, you are still bound by the
strongest ties to remain neutral. Remember this and continue faithful

--- Sayfa 12 ---
unto death; but ere we impart to you our formidable purpose you must
prove your fidelity and courage. We do not expect all to join actively in
our work, but those who do not unite in the task must applaud our deeds,
or by silence favor not an adverse faction to gain sway.
With this admonition, I yield up to our Noble Guide and his cohorts who
will conduct you to the ante-room and blindfold you, and one by one
you will be subjected to the Moslem test of courage. And should an
unforeseen disaster come, we are duty bound to honor and protect those
who are left near and dear to you. Ere you depart, we bid you God-speed
and adieu.
High Priest, approaching toward the east and raising both hands: And
may Allah protect and support you, that you be not cast into “al hotama”
(hell). Now let our secret vaults open to their width, that the vapors of
damp stagnation may pass away. Open the passage to the desert and
disperse our trusty Arabs in full array for the Moslem test. Awayl
Candidates conducted out under solemn music to be prepared for the
second section.

Section 2

Each candidate is in custody of an Arab soldier, and takes his turn for
initiation. They are put through blindfolded; each one should be
compelled to traverse the hot sands, devil’s pass. mock trial, hanging,
and kiss the Black Stone.
In the Preparation Room they are told by the Oriental Guide: A rough
and rugged road is before you; it is beset with an er an with difficulties.
Your life will be threatened, and you may lose it. But remember, those
who die in the faith, will be resurrected in glory; therefore summon to
your aid courage: that truly great Masonic qualification which puts on a
fearless and courageous attitude; which scorns the acts of a coward, who
but apes the conduct of a hero. Therefore suffer yourselves to be
initiated with all the forms and ceremonies of this ancient and honorable
institution. Do you all assent to this trial of fortitude; that truly
distinctive Masonic qualification?

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Candidates: I do.
Candidates are then led into the room with hands pinioned behind them
and blindfolded. They are put on the journey over the “Hot Sands,” with
an Arab soldier on each side, pricking them with his scimitar to hurry
them along, and when one falls down, a blow with the flat of a scimitar
causes him to arise. After they have gone around two or three times, two
are selected to escape enemies who they are told are approaching on a
mission of murdering all who have not passed the “Bung Hole Test.”

The Bung Hole Test
The large metal cylinder is then produced, stretched out about 30 feet.
Each candidate is asked if he was ever called a coward or turned his
back on an enemy. He is prompted to say “No, I perform all I undertake,
and never back down or out” They are then led to opposite ends of the
big cylinder, caused to enter, and are told to hurry as the enemy is
approaching. The center of the cylinder contains a strong network of
cord or wire, preventing either from passing through. They meet in the
middle and strive to pass each other while the Arabs pound on the
outside with clubs and scimitars, till they are satisfied; when they ask thc
candidates if they wish to go on or back out. They of course back down
and out; when they come out they are given a lecture on their assurance
and told to never be too sure of a thing until they have tried it. They are
one by one stretched out on the floor to rest. While in this position, a
small dog, or one who can imitate a dog, is caused to give a sharp yelp,
just after a few drops of warm water has been squirted on the
candidate’s face, and someone says, ‘Take that dog out; he has just
urinated in the face of Mr. ...’ A general laugh takes place, after which
the candidate is shown the trick.
The “Bumper” is next used. A slide, such as is used on playgrounds for
children is put up, standing about six feet high at one end, with a sharp
drop to the bottom at the other end. A ladder is placed for the candidate
to reach the board at the top of the slide. This board is hinged so as to
let the candidate slide. The candidate asceuds the ladder and is seated
on the board, his legs hang. ing over the concave side of the slide. He is
then told to take hold of a large rope, about two feet long, held up by a

--- Sayfa 14 ---
small string or thread, and is instructed under no circumstances to let go
of the rope. When he has firmly grasped the rope, the board is dropped,
and he is shot down the slide. thumping himself upon any obstructions
which may be placed to receive him.
He is then conducted to the Illustrious Potentate, whom he is
commanded to approach with humble and great reverence, stooping
very low. his head near the ground, his buttocks elevated; he then
receives the “Grand Salaam” or stroke of introduction, which is a blow
on the buttocks with a paddle so made as to explode a torpedo or blank
cartridge. He is then introduced to the Illustrious Potentate, but is told
to stand perfectly still during the ceremony. The candidate is stood on a
metallic plate, connected with a galvanic battery, which is turned on
during the introduction. He is then taken to task for not standing still as
told.
A social meeting is then in order, the candidates being personally
introduced to the officers and menibers. A selected candidate is left
talking to two of the best boxers. One of them says to the other, “I will
bet you a dollar that I can guess nearer to this brother’s age than you
can.” The other takes the bet, and the money is placed in the hands of
another Noble. The bettors, after they have made some ridiculous
guesses, ask the age of the person. When he tells his age, they quarrel
about it; each gives the other the lie. A challenge is then given and
accepted. A ring is formed, two of the candidates are chosen as Seconds,
but as soon as the gloves are produced (large boxing gloves), the
Illustrious Potentate appears, stops the fight, fines each of the fighters
one hundred dollars, and declares that the seconds (candidates) must
fight it out for their respective clients. That is, supposing A and B to be
the disputants, A’s second must fight B, and B’s second with A. The ring
is formed and the candidates meeting of course with some skilled Noble,
get some rather hard knocks, which the Nobles and other candidates
enjoy.
While the fighting is going on, some Noble makes complaint that he has
been robbed, his pocket picked. He has previously put a package, or
some valuable article in the pocket or clothes of one of the candidates. A
general search follows; the missing property is found on a candidate

--- Sayfa 15 ---
who has not been exercised much, and he is at once charged with the
theft, is pitched onto by two or three of the Nobles. Roughly hustled out
of the room for trial, stripped of his clothing, except for a pair of
drawers, he is then blindfolded, and after being led around the room, is
seated on a large sponge filled with ice water; when the news comes that
he has been forgiven on account of his good character, which has just
been received by telegraph; he is lcd out and invested with his clothes.
While the foregoing is being enacted, candidates who have escaped the
prize fight, etc., are conducted into another room, where they either find
several members disguised as women, or find them discussing an
expected visit of “Lady Nobles of the Shrine,” or they are told that such
a visit is Jo be made that evening and a committee may be appointed to
receive them in a proper manner.
Each candidate is stripped to shirt, drawers and slippers, blindfolded
and led around the room several times when he is halted.
Oriental Gulde to candidate: This is the place where our brethren stop to
sprinkle the devil’s pass with urine. You will contribute a few drops of
urine to commemorate the time and place where all who pass this way,
here renounce the wiles and evils of the world and promise to ever
worship at the Shrine of Islam. Only a few drops will do.
The candidate begins to obey instructions and the blinder is jerked from
his eyes; he then beholds before him a group disguised as women, with
bonnets and capes, peeping over a screen. He is allowed to escape from
the room while the onlookers give him the laugh.
Meanwhile, and during these scenes another drama is taking place.
Some member goes out. calls the most timid candidate aside, and he is
left alone with the member who should be his friend. The member then
hastily endeavors to encourage him, and tells him confidentially that he
wiji not be harmed; that it is all ceremony, etc., and although organized
as a Vigilance Inquisition abroad, in this country it is entirely a social
order. Then he gives him a password, sign, etc., hastily in confidence
and in full.
When fully confided, he is discovered by some officer or member who
becomes enraged at the member so disclosing, and they have some
sharp words; the discoverer declares he will report the matter to the

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Illustrious Potentate.
The member replies, “Do as you please.” (This is all on the outside.) It
is then whispered about and opinions are expressed so that the rest of
the candidates can hear it that there will be trouble about such exposure
because it is unlawful to give such information before the candidate is
through the initiation. (This candidate is then left until the last.)
Meanwhile, the friend (member) who has betrayed the signs, departs to
another room, is divested of his shirt, pants and shoes and at the proper
time bound at the wrists, and made up to give him a ghastly appearance.
iie keeps out of sight and awaits the coming ceremony, or clothes himself
with a domino and mask and waits until required.
Another member, preferably a slender, fragile. smooth-faced young
man, is selected to be robed as a woman or Arab girl, in flowing robes,
gathered tightly at the waist, bare arms and neck, female wig or striped
silk handkerchief about the head and otherwise disguised as much as
possible. He is covered with a domino and masked to enter the Temple,
and seated with a lightweight or spare member:  one not too prominent
or well-known. This member has on a domino beneath which he has his
coat, vest and white shirt; under the shirt is buckled a wide, soft-padded
belt, f astoned around under the arm-pits with two straps passing over
the back from front of shoulders, and two from the shoulder blades;
behind all four, unite in a ring or swivel at tlfe back of the neck, ready
for harmless execution by hanging at the proper time.
These disguised members, being all prepared, sit around in dominoes
and masked, in some obscure corner to await the ceremonies. Officers
and members all robed and masked.
The Layer, Altar of Incense and all the furniture are placed about the
Temple on each side. In the north a scaffold is erected of two upright
and one horizontal joists; painted black and strong enough to support a
man when suspended; a hole is in the center of the horizontal bar and a
pulley on the right corner for the rope to slide over, also a strong peg on
the center of the right perpendicular bar or post on which to fasten the
rope after elevating the man, with a clasp on the end of the noose in the
center to hook into the ring at the back of the culprit’s neck.
The gibbet should be high enough to enable the executioners to raise the

--- Sayfa 17 ---
extremeties about thrac fact from the floor and leave a space of two or
three feet above the head. A member with white robe, skull and skeleton-
faced-mask stands in front of the scaffold, robed in black, to elevate the
culprit. (Scaffold may have black curtains about it, if desired, to conceal
the executioners at the side.)
Furthermore, a headsman’s block is placed in the south covered with
black. A headsman with a curved blade battle-axe, clothed in scarlet
robe gathered about the waist, with belt and scimitar, wearing scarlet
mask, presides at the block. Beside the block lies a false head on the
floor with a black cloth covering it. The head may be made up to
resemble one of the members, if desired. A small bowl or dish should
also be In readiness on a stand for the ceremony of bleeding.
All being now in readiness, the trip over the rough, sandy desert is
begun.
The candidates are hoodwinked, and in bare feet, enter one by one, after
three loud alarms. At first they proceed onastrip of carpet, then upon a
spread of corn husks, then a strip of sheeting; or a long, narrow,
shallow pan, strewn with pebbles and sand. (Alcohol has been poured
over the sand and pebbles, and they are well heated.) Then follows a
ladder with close rounds, folded camp-stools, a roller and any rough
road which may be conveniently prepared. During this time
pandemonium reigns; drum, fife, rattle, bugle, gong and every din-
making instrument which can be procured, is in use. The candidates are
given about all they can stand, and are then conducted back to the outer
door. They are again brought in one by one, amid the din, over-
powered, thrown into a hammock or canvas, folded in and swung from
sIde to side or bounced upward, carried hastily about and finally placed
in some apartment to await the other candidates. When all have passed
this ordeal, collect them together in the anteroom, remove the relics of
the desert and at once place the Temple in order for the last ceremony
or third section.
All being in readiness, officers should he at their posts, executioners at
scaffold, skeleton masked in front of same, headsman at the block, etc. In
front of east, seven seats are prepared for seven men called the “Council
of the Inquisition”

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Before the alarm the Potentate calls the “Council” together. The
Potentate occupies the center chair, one Rabban on each side, the
remaining chairs being filled by other officers or members; the High
Priest occupies the east, wielding the sceptre; all masked except the
Potentate and the High Priest; room quite dark Ceremonial Masters are
outside with candidates clothed in white robes or dominoes, with shoes
on and not hoodwinked.

Section 3

First Ceremonial Master strikes outside, loudly upon the door with
wooden mallet.
Oriental Guide, inside, returns the alarm, opens the wicket and says:
Why this clamorous alarm?
Ceremonial Master: One, two or three candidates pursuing the secrets of
the Mystic Shrine.
Oriental Guide: Have they the Mystic pass?
Ceremonial Master: They have it not, but I have it for them.
Oriental Guide: Give me the pass.
Ceremonial Master, in a whisper:  ....
Oriental Guide: Let them enter.
Chains are drawn; gong sounds low; soft music; door is opened.
Candidates conducted to the west, seated in front of the Chief Rabban.
Illustrious Potentate:  My friends, having passed through the ordeal of
traversing the hot sands of the desert undismayed, you are now returned
for the final ceremonies. But we find ourselves compelled most
unexpectedly to hold a secret inquisition to judge and execute upon a
traitorous element within our Temple such penalty as may be decreed. I
must, however, stay those proceedings to briefly Invest you with the
knowledge of our secrets.
If it be your desire to decline an active part; you are sacredly bound to
secrecy and silence.
Our mission is to succor the distressed, relieve the oppressed, protect the
innocent and punish the guilty; to equalize station, establish harmony in

--- Sayfa 19 ---
all creeds, crush fanaticism and intolerance and perpetuate the welfare of
mankind.
Crime is running rife over the land; our laws are deemed inadequate for
the emergency, and we are exponents of a vigilance inquisition to
promptly  execute and punish the malefactor, the thief, the murderer, the
despoiler of innocence and virtue, the violator of obligation and
desecrator of the Masonic vow. Our purpose is to strike terror in the
heart of the criminal class by bringing them speedily and without mercy
to the block or to the bow-string of the Mystic Shrine.
To arrest, judge, and execute within the hour, and thus take the law
within our own grasp and summarily punish the malefactor. Blood for
blood and life for life, and as our fleet-footed justice overtakes and
punishes the evil-doer, aye, even in the heat of misdeed, it will be a
lesson to those who remain and know not the fate of the departed.
The day is not far distant when the name and the escutcheon of the
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine will strike a pallid terror to the wild
devouring element of crime, and the thankful prayers of the unprotected
will attest the justice of our cause.
I will now invest you with the salutations, signs, grip, and passwords of
our Order.
Illustrious Potentate proceeds to instruct the candidates in the signs,
grip and passwords of our Order.
Just as the Illustrious Potentate finishes these instructions to the
candidates, the Captain of the Guard discovers a member with a
disguised female in the Temple and he at once shouts: Most Noble High
Priest and Prophet, a spy, an intruder, a traitor is in the Temple.
All arise; confusion. Ceremonial Masters, Guide and Priest proceed to
where the member and female are sitting, trying to hide themselves.
Captain of the Guard:  Most Noble High Priest and Prophet, I have but
now discovered an intruder accompanied by a woman; both without the
secret pass, who have gained admission into the Temple.
The woman is pointed out and the mask snatched from her face.
High Priest and Prophet: By our faith, we are betrayed
Both are seized by the Guide and Ceremonial Masters, and they are
surrounded by the excited inquisitors, who shout: To the executioner

--- Sayfa 20 ---
with them!
Illustrious Potentate: Hold! Stand aside! Strip our mantle from that
female form; bind and hold her fast.
Domino and hood taken off and the woman stands, held fast, white-
robed and dismayed.
Illustrious Potentate, pointing to male member: Strip and hang that spy
without delay.
Officers roughly strip member to shirt and pants. He has been
previously painted pale and haggard, and is prepared for execution as
before directed.
Illustrious Potentate: Stranger, have you no defense? If not, you must
meet the death of a spy.
Culprit shakes his head. No.
Illustrious Potentate: Then let the culprit be executed.
He is hurried to the scaffold, the executioner, in skeleton mask, adjusts
the noose. A loose piece of rope being placed about his neck, to appear
real.
High Priest and Prophet, kneeling before the gallows:  Thus do we yield
up thy life for our own security, and may justice, peace and mercy abide
with thee.
Executioner places on the black cap; High Priest and Prophet arises
and holds up handkerchief; as he lets it drop and gong sounds and the
victim is suspended in the air. He struggles an instant and then hangs
silent and apparently lifeless.
Illustrious Potentate:  Thus perish our enetales. Noble Guide, seat that
miscreant woman by the block and cut a deep crescent upon her naked
breast. We cannot take her life.
Oriental Guide: Illustrious Potentate, she has already swooned.
Illustrious Potentate: The better still; she will not know her pains. Cut
the crescent on her breast and drag her from our Temple. She’ll not
forget the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine.
She is dragged in a chair to the block, a bowl brought, her breast is
bared and a knife is seen in the hands of the headsman. The bowl is held
in front and an officer stands behind holding under the arm of the
woman a rubber bulb with a stem, containing about a pint of red wine; a

--- Sayfa 21 ---
cut, a groan, and the blood (the wine) flows into the bowl. The bowl is
set on the block, a red stained towel is also thrown down; and she is
borne from the Temple, in the chair to an outer chamber.
High Priest and Prophet, taking up the bowl: Most Noble Council of the
Inquisition, now, in testimony of the justice of our cause, let us in this
maiden’s blood, seal the alliance of our bond of secrecy and silence, and
let this day’s bloody work in the deepest recesses of every Noble’s heart
be buried.
High Priest and Prophet and seven inquisitors drink.
Curtain in front of scaffold may be drawn and the executed let down for
rest. The officer who detected the member exposing the work, now
arises. The member is without and fully prepared.
High Priest and Prophet: Illustrious Potentate, I now demand censure or
punishment upon a member, Noble mentioning name, upon whose case
this inquisitor’s tribunal has deliberated; accused he is of treason in our
midst, exposing our secrete to a friend and candidate within our very
Temple.
Illustrious Potentate: Let him be brought before us.
Second culprit brought in, stripped, as described, to shirt and pants.
Illustrious Potentate: Sir, you have been openly accused of treason and
betrayal of our faith, not only here, but without our Temple’s walls. The
Vigilance linquisition has tried, judged and sentenced you; what is your
defense?
Oriental Guide: Illustrious Potentate and Inquisitors of our Council, let
me appeal to this tribunal to temper justice with mercy, and in slight
extenuation of this crime, let me offer this defense: being loose of
tongue when plied with wine and most earnestly importuned by his best
beloved friend, he, in part, did yield all us good nature, but intent on
friendship and not meaning harm, frivolously related who and what we
were and the object of our cause. And this his friend and companion,
now comes to beard us in our lair and exonerate himself by the
assumption of our vows. Therefore, I do opine, their punishment should
be equal and each to assume the wrong or let the Novice assume it all,
for ‘tis monstrous to leave his friend to perish for a crime prompted by
himself.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Illustrious Potentate to candidate: Stranger Knight thus accused, arise.
What say you to this grave charge?
Candidate answers. No matter what.
Culprit Member: By my Moslem oath, Illustrious Potentate, all that has
been said by our Noble Guide is true. That I have erred I cannot deny,
but all that I in confidence imported to him, I am informed that he
loosely brawled about, hence I must suffer for his crime.
Illustrious Potentate:  Hold, enough! Most High Priest and Prophet, to
you do I appeal for judgment. Although our Council has before decided,
still do I appeal to you.
High Priest and Propher, advancing on the floor: Illustrious Potentate
and Council of Inquisitors, our cause is sorely tried, our Temple and our
Shrine in jeopardy, the crescent turns perpendicular, point and paint, and
spills its mystic blood; the Hourii weep and justice drops her scale, for
spies have gained entrance into our sanctuary. Our safety demands
judgment on them both. Let the first in fault and his fellow go to the
block together.
The Inquisitors all arise and exclaim: To the block! To the headsman!
First and Second Ceremonial Masters seize culprit member, conduct
him to the block, then seize candidate and conduct him to the west, strip
him to his pants and shirt, same as culprit member, and bind his hands.
Illustrious Potentate: Let the traitor suffer first.
Culprit member is hurried to the block, blindfolded and is made to kneel,
head on the block. A wax or carved head lies out of sight beside the
block, covered with a black cloth.
High Priest and Prophet, holding up sceptre: And now may justice,
mercy, and peace abide with you. Strike!
The axe falls, culprit tumbles on floor; executioner stoops, lifts black
cloth from false head and covers head of culprit, seizes false head by the
hair, raises it to view and exclaim: ....
Candidate is hoodwinked and made to approach the block and lay his
head upon it.
High Priest and Prophet:  Hold! executioner, mark this stranger’s neck
with the scimitar, but do not slay him.
The headsman slaps the candidate on the neck with a damp towel and he

--- Sayfa 23 ---
is at once taken by force, thrown into the hammock or canvas, carried
and p laced in a coffin at the east end of the catafalque, while the culprit
member and the head are borne to an outer room. Officers all return.
Illustrious Potentate: Thus doth the evil doer and the malefactor meet
with “Nemesis” at the inquisition of the Mystic Shrine. It now becomes
our duty to deposit the result of our vigilance in the tomb, isolated from
the eyes of a meddling world; a fit abiding place for the remains of the
unfaithful. Most Noble Oriental Guide, lest the secret clasp of our mystic
catafalque be prematurely known to our Novices, let them be again
hoodwinked, that their hearts may be taught secrecy and their tongues
silence, ere they are entrusted with the secrets of the Mystic Shrine.
Candidates are blindfolded. The coffin is then stood on end, or placed at
an angle with head on chair, at end of table or tomb nearest the east; the
block and executioner are placed on the west side. The culprit is again
elevated by the noose, skeleton and executioner at his side, the woman
seated in the north; officers and members gathered around the table,
standing silent and still; black cloth and frame removed from banquet
table and all is in readiness ror the finale.
If it be possible to use red lights only during the entire third section, this
should be done. Lights would be changed to clear at this point.
Illustrious Potentate: Now let us rejoice that the proud idol of iniquity
has been laid in the dust, and that justice has triumphed over sin and
error. Ever thus let our light so shine before men that they behold our
good works.
Gong. Hoodwinks removed; music and general jubilee at banquet.
Candidate is provided with food, and eats and drinks from coffin, as also
the culprit upon the gallows, and the female in the north. After the feast
the meeting is closed in the usual manner.

Mystic Shrine Ceremonial

My friends or Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, the order with which you
have become united was founded by Mohammed and has as its
background the trackless desert of Arabia and the fearless, devoted, and

--- Sayfa 24 ---
barbaric Arab.
Arabic history and tradition tell us that after the fall and separation of
Adam and Eve, they were united near the place now known as “Mecca.”
Adam prayed for a Shrine where he might worship. In due time, a
Tabernacle of Clouds was given to him.
After the death of Adam, the Tabernacle was withdrawn, and his son,
Seth, erected a Temple of Stone in that place; later Ishmael, with his
father Abraham, rebuilt on this sacred spot of the Tabernacle of Clouds,
the Kaaba or the Sacred Temple of National Worship.
Each year the true followers of the faith would make a pilgrimage to
Mecca to worship at the national shrine.
Because of the presence of a lawless element in the city of Mecca, many
of these pilgrims were robbed, beaten, and even murdered. Therefore, in
the year of A.D. 647, Mohammed organized a group of fearless men as
an inquisition or vigilance committee, whose main objects were to
protect the week, dispense justice, and punish the criminals.
The order was firmly established in 1698, and since then has become
one of the most highly favored secret organizations in the world.
Because of the ruthless manner which the group used to accomplish its
aims, its leaders had to be careful in their selection of new members.
Therefore, severe tests and strong obligations wcrc required of each
candidate.
You have just passed through those tests and are now a Noble of the
Mystic Shrine.
Today the Order is often referred to as the “Play-House” of Masonry,
but I assure you that there is a serious side to all our activities.
The events or acts of our initiation, which to you may have seemed a bit
of “horseplay,” were given to either impress you with the ritual or teach
you a lesson that will prove beneficial in later life.
Let us take a moment to examine some of these events.

1. Crossing the Hot Sands.
In crossing the Sands, you represented and imitated the early Pilgrims,
who had to cross the Hot Sands of the Desert to reach Mecca.
2. The Rough Road and Sands

--- Sayfa 25 ---
The rough roads and sands also were a test of your courage and
fortitude.
You also are taught that nothing worthwhile is accomplished without
overcoming obstacles and hardships.
3. The Bung-Hole Test
Here, you learn to be cautious in promising to do things that you later
find impossible to do. You promised not to turn back, yet you no sooner
start on your journey than you have to back out.
4. The Devil’s Pass
At this point you were told to follow the example of other Nobles and
sprinkle the Devil’s Pass with a few drops of urine to commemorate the
time and place where all who pass this way renounce the wiles and evils
of the world and promise to worship at the Shrine of Islam.
Since this is a male organization, it is one way we have of making sure
we are not admitting any impersonators into our ranks. Thus, you had to
display your male organ to give a few drops.
5. Prairie Dog
After crossing the Hot Sands, in the cool of the evening, you were told
to lie down and rest. While in this position, a little “dog” came along and
urinated in your face.
This was to teach you that all Nobles are on the sante level. Some may
have pretty Fazes, long titles, and hold high positions in the Order. But,
as a Noble of the Mystic Shrine, he had the same little dog, or a similar
one, urinate in his face as he did in yours.
6. Return of Drunk for Fez
The enactment of the “Drunk” scene has no ritualistic significance but is
given to show you what could happen should you allow yourself to over-
indulge in intoxicating beverages. We do not prohibit the use of
(Camel’s Milk), but we do not tolerate misconduct while wearing the
Fez. You should conduct yourself at all times as a Noble, especially
when before the public.
7. Boxing Bout
This act was, given in connection with the losing and finding of a
Noble’s pocketbook. If you recall, our Order was organized as a
vigilance committee, whose object was to protect the weak, apprehend,

--- Sayfa 26 ---
and punish criminals. We exemplified this by searching and were
rewarded for our trouble by finding the “Thief.”
We also learn an important lesson from this act: A Noble was falsely
accused of talting the pocketbook. We implore you not to be too hasty in
making “accusations”, because they also may be false and you would be
guilty of defaming the Noble’s character.
Since a Noble had made the accusation and an argument had ensued, the
Potentate ordered the dispute settled by a “Boxing Match”, and each was
allowed to select some one to take his part.
Let this also teach you that should differences arise between you and
another Noble, try to settle them between yourselves instead of carrying
the feud to the outside.
8. The Hot Seat Ice; and Washing
Again your veracity is tested as you sing a song stating that “You Shall
Not Be Moved”, yet we find you rapidly rising and moving.
The cooling off on a cake of ice is to remind you not to forget your
obligation of the Third Degree. But, should you become weak and
indined to be a “Hot Papa,” then we recommend and guarantee the “Ice
Treatment” to cure your ailment.
The “Washing” is another instance of “Humility,” as only a Noble
would stoop to wash the “Hind Parts” of another Noble: doing
something for him that had not been done for a long time.
9. Well of Zem Zem
When Hagar and her outcast son, Ishmael, were crossing the desert and
were about to perish from thirst, an angel revealed to them a “Well” of
pure water. This today is known as the Well of Zem Zem, sacred in the
eyes of the Faithful, as they believe all who wash in this water become
cleansed of their sins.
Since we only want the pure and hardy in our Order, we send you to the
Well to be cleansed. Since the Arab travels on a Camel, we provided a
Camel for you to ride. However, because the Camel was a bit lazy, we
had to whack him a little. Now, we humbly apologize if some of those
blows meant for the Camel reached you, as we were only trying to help.
10. Eating Of The Dung
It is the custom of the tribes of Arabs that when crossing the desert, the

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Chief would go ahead and blaze the trail by dropping his dung.
The tribe following were so devoted to their Chief that they would eat
his dung.
You witnessed a Noble using the “Pot”; then you were given a similar
“Pot” and told to eat a mixture that appeared to be “Dung.” You were
also assured that the mixture contained nothing to hurt you.
This was a test of the courage and confidence you had in us as Nobles.
Should a Noble or Officer give you advice and wise counsel, listen as he
will not lead you astray, but will help you.
11. Grand Salaam
This “Test” was injected to instruct you on how to salute the Potentate.
The Salaam is the way the Arab pays homage to his Superior, or shows
respect, as we “bow” or “raise our hats.”
However, a lesson is also taught; having been told you were a Noble,
and to bow to the Potentate, you bent over and placed your “Hind Parts”
in the faces of the Nobles sitting behind you, and something happened to
you. Let this teach you that should you suddenly receive an award, or a
great sum of money, don’t let it go to your head and show your “Hind
Parts,” as something may happen to you again.
12. Mock Trial and Hanging
This event was to impress upon you the purpose of our Order: namely,
to apprehend, try, and execute all wrong doers.
When we searched and found the pocketbook, we apprehended the
culprit. The Court scene ezemplifled, the trial, and the hanging, the
execution.
The hanging also exemplified the signs used in our Salutation to the
Assistant Rabban. Pulling up the rope three times and pulling in the
slack.
13. Kissing the Black Stone
When Ishmael and his father, Abraham, built the National Shrine near
the place where the Tabernade of Clouds han heen. an angel presented
them with a dazzling White Stone, which they inserted in the wall of the
Temple, and each year the worshipers would journey to Mecca to kiss
this Stone. Today so many have kissed the Stone that it has become
black, and is known as the Kaaba Stone or Black Stone of Casper. Our

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Ritual stipulates that you, in token of your sincerity, seal your
obligations by kissing the Black Stone of Casper.
No doubt many times you have stated that you would not “Kiss”
anybody’s “Hind Parts” to gain a favor. Well, it seems that you wanted
to be a Shriner so bad that you were willing to kiss “The Black Stone of
Casper.” “Shame on you.”

Outline of Moslem Tests For Mystic Shrine
Ceremonials

Moslem Tests Required
1. Crossing the “Hot Sands” and the “Rough Road.”
2. The Devil’s Pass.
3. The Mock Trial and Hanging.
4. Kissing the Black Stone.
Tests should be selected that impress the Novice with the necessity of
having courage and humility, and with the importance of secrecy in the
apprehension, arrest, judgment, and the execution of the lawless. He
should also be admonished to remember the helpless and those in need.
Teats With Ritualistic Value
1. Hot Sands and Rough Road.
2. Devil’s Pass.
3. The Grand Salaam; changing method of approach, by instructing
Novice on way to address Altar.
4. Mock Trial and Hanging; execution of a traitor.
5. Well of Zem Zem. (and Purifying Cavern) Fountain of Mecca.
Tests for Entertainment
(Lessons derived from each)
1. Disguising member as a female.
2. The Hot Seat, Electrified Plate, Carpet, or Camel.
3. Eating of Dung or Drinking Toast to Potentate.
4. Sitting on Cake of Ice or Wet Sponge.
5. Boxing Bout.
6. Novices, place in Canvas.
7. Stolen Pocketbook; divulging secrets to a woman.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
8. Appearance of a Drunk.
Tests Used in The 1957 Imperial Council Ceremonial
1. Crossing the Hot Sands and Rough Road.
2. Bung Hole Test.
3. Devil’s Pass.
4. Prairie Dog.
5. Finding the stolen Pocketbook.
6. Ejection of the “Drunk.”
7. Boring Rout.
8. Return of Drunk.
9. Hot Seat.
10. Ice Test.
11. Washing with Sponge.
12. Washing in Well of Zem Zem.
13. Eating of Dung.
14. Grand Salaam.
15. Mock Trial and Hanging.
16. Kissing of the Black Stone.
Closing Lecture describing each Test

Shrine Lecture on Initiation

Nobles, you have just completed your rugged trek across the hot sands
of the desert in search of the great Moslem capital, Mecca, which
unfolds in the wilderness of the Arabian desert, halfway between Yemen
and Syria.
This city in which you now stand is the Holy City of Islam. This city is
so situated in the Desert of Arabia that only by constant trials and
tribulations; by passing through hazards, sand-storms, being beset by
thieves and experiencing other catastrophies and surviving; were you
able to walk therein. It is as if Nature had cooperated with the Moslem
faith to guard the secrets of this hallowed spot from the unsanctified.

The Altar

--- Sayfa 30 ---
In the heart of this city is the great Mosque, BAIT ALLAH (House of
God) (the Altar), which is situated, according to Arab tradition, in the
center of the world and immediately beneath the throne of the Almighty.
Upon the BAIT ALLAH, Altar, are a Bible and Koran.
The Koran is the unique history of our founder Mohammed. The work is
absolutely unique in its origin and in its preservation, upon the
authenticity of which no one has ever been able to cast a serious doubt.
The Koran is the actual text as dictated by Mohammed himself, day by
day and month by month, during his lifetime. It is the reflection of this
master-mind, sometimes inartistic and self-contradictory, more often
inspiring and lyrical, and always filled with great ideas which stand out
as a whole.

The Black Stone
The Black Stone is really a number of fragments, twelve, to be exact,
united by dark cement and held together by a silver band. The whole is
oval and about seven inches in diameter. What these stones or fragments
are made of no one seems ever to have definitely established. Tradition
asserts that the original stone came from Paradise and was handed by the
Angel Gabriel to Abraham and Ishmael when they were building the
Kaaba.
At the time it was snow white. Its present color is the outcome of having
been kissed by the millions who yearly make the pilgrimage to Mecca.
This, however, does not clear up the question of its composition
The obstacle to so doing is that the vast malority of the men who go to
Mecca accept the Black Stone as a holy emblem and do not worry about
its geological history. Those travelers who have examined the stone with
curiosity as well as reverence differ in their opinions.
Some say that it is a chip of rock from the Abu Kobeis hills to the east of
Mecca. Some say that it is a meteorite (a body, usually composed of
iron, which has fallen upon the earth from outer space.) Others insist that
it is of volcanic origin. None of this is of any real importance, in spite of
the controversies which the subject has given rise to on various
occasions. Whatever it is made of, the stone has been there for a long
time.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Mazimus Tyrius, writing in the second century after Christ, tells of
Arabians praying to a God which they represent as a rectangular
building in which there is a Black Stone. Some of you may ask, “Why
do we use the Black Stone, and why is it so sacred to us?” In ancient
times the sacred Stone held a place of great honor. The Black Rock of
Mecca is still an object of Mohammedan veneration.
Stones have their own characteristics. If the Stone was a big one, it
impressed people by its massiveness. Perhaps it had some peculiar
shape, looked like a man or a superman. If it was a little one, it could be
carried in the pocket or set up on the tent. Little or big, It was solid,
substantial; it did not change like a bush or a stream, and man had not
made it. It was part of the creation, as it came fresh from the hand of
God. And because this Black Stone was a present from Heaven, it has
been revered by Shrinedom to this day.
Christ said to Peter, “Upon this rock I build my church.” This allegorical
statement was similar to our symbolic Masonry of today. Christ was
impressed by the sincere, loyal and reverent way in which Peter had
followed Him, so he likened to withstand the storms of time.
We, as true Arabs, should stand firm in our convictions that coming
generations will have faith in us and build their tomorrow on our solid
foundation of fraternal stability.

Mecca
Mecca, the City of Mohammed is known as the capital of Shrinedom.
Mohammed chose this city as its capital because it was where the BENU
KINANA had formed a settlement around the Kaaba, the sanctuary of a
number of confederate tribes belonging to the district.
The feast annually observed in the days before the full moon of the
month DHUL-HIJJA at Mecca presented strong attractions for all
inhabitants in the vicinity round about.
Thus Mecca grew into a great meeting place.
The sanctuary and the Feast of Mecca caused it to grow into a great
meeting p lace. Mecca unfolds in the wilderness of the Arabian desert,
halfway between Yemen and Syria, in a land wasted by winds and
secular rains, a aavagc valley enclosed between two sharp and arid

--- Sayfa 32 ---
chains of rock mountains, making its position so secluded that not until
the pilgrims are looking down into its streets do they know that they
have arrived at the sacred city.
Long before Mohammed, Mecca was considered a sacred city because
of the holy sanctuary in its center.

Kaaba
In the middle of the court stands the Kaaba. The Kaaba is a windowless,
cube-shaped, flat-roofed building made of grey stone, forty feet high.
Enveloping it is a huge black brocade cover, like a tea cozy, on which
verses from the Koran are embroidered in gold. Every year the cover.
which is called KESOUA, is renewed. The Kaaba is the focal point of
Islam toward which Moslems all over the world turn five times a day to
pray. The Kaaba has been an object of worship since the dawn of
history; Arab legends suggest that the first Kaaba dates back to Adam.
This one was destroyed by the Deluge, and another was rebuilt by
Abraham and Ishmael. After that it fell into the hands of idolators who
built other editions, until Mohammed came and restored its ancient
dedication to one God.

Well of Zem Zem
Seven smaller buildings are disposed around the Kaaba. The most
important contains the Well of Zem Zem. This is where Hagar, when she
was expelled from the tents of Abraham through the instigation of Sarah,
decided to die. Wandering over the desert, she had reached the stony
valley of Mecca. Her provisions had given out; her gourd was empty.
Frenziedly, she ran to and fro, looking for water. Then, nearly dead from
thirst.
she flung herself on the parched ground and pushed her baby under a
thorny acacia.
“Let me not see the death of my child,” she cried, as she covered her
head with her mantle. But, before what seemed inevitable happened, an
angel appeared and showed Hagar that she was within walldng distance
of a well. Hager could no longer walk, but she crawled over to the water,
which saved her and Ishmael’s lives. This Zem Zem is the same

--- Sayfa 33 ---
identical well, so called because of the bubbling sound it made when
Hagar found it. If we are to believe the Book of Genesis, it is probably
one of the oldest existing wells of the world.
As you journeyed from the main-land to the gates of Mecca, you were
forced to cross the hot sands of the desert which was emblematical of the
rough roads of life over which everyone must trod.
Your way of life will not be smooth or clear always but rather hard,
rough and rugged. The sandstorms of confusion may at times hide your
pathway; the hot sands and scorching sun will cause you to be wearied
in well-doing.
Thus, we are taught that only those who have the indisputable and
necessary appreciation for the tenents of the Order, those persons who
can exercise the cardinal principles of Justice, Prudence, Morality and
Secrecy will be able to rest at the Temple of Mecca and drink from the
Well of Zem Zem.
One must always bear in mind that Shrinedom, in its original concept,
had as its purpose the great task of lending refinement, culture,
education, and spiritual and moral integrity to those who practiced its
principles and cherished its refined qualities; hence our whole ritualistic
system is based upon these kindly attributes together with an unflinching
faith in Allah.
Eating supposed dung is emblematical of the distasteful things in life.
There are a lot of things in life we do not like, but if we are to succeed,
we must be able to take the bitter with the sweet.
As you came down the Devil’s Pass, your mind reflected to certain
Masonic degrees in which deposits were required and differ only in what
is deposited. The memory of what you deposited is to teach you to
always renounce the wiles and evils of the world and promise to ever
worship at the Shrine of Islam, where the air is rich with the wisdom of
Allah, and refined by the deeds of venerable Patriarchs gone before.
Another important lesson was given you in the form of the cylinder into
which you were asked to enter. The lesson taught is all-important to you
as a man and a Mason, and it has its real application in life. You
attempted to go through the cylinder but were forced to back down. This
shows that “You cannot always carry out your aims and purposes in life,

--- Sayfa 34 ---
that situations, sometimes, will arise making it necessary for you to back
down; but if you are a real man, you will never back down until every
means at your disposal has been exhausted.”
Washing the buttocks represents man when he is not able to care for
himself, teaching you to always remember that you may some day
become helpless in life (old age). When you were young, you could gird
yourself and go when and where you pleased, but when Father Time
takes his toll, you are helpless and must be cared for. Always remember
the helpless and those in need.
The greatest lesson given to you today was that of the “Dog,” which
expressed humility and meekness. One may be up today with evidences
of prosperity abounding, but tomorrow the picture can be changed so
that you can be down so low in health or other misfortunes that you
cannot defend yourselves from any means of humiliation.
To this end we must respect the feelings of others and practice meekness
and humility, “For he who humbles himself shall be exalted, but he that
exalts himself shall be abased.”
Today you met a man, whom you thought to be a woman, to teach you
that you cannot always believe what you see. Deception is one of the
greatest stumbling blocks of humanity. This lesson is to inform you to
never try to be what you are not. Those of you who have lived a loose,
wild, and careless life take heed to the lesson taught you today.
You are required to give the sign of taking in the slack, because it
alludes to a part of the obligation; this is to remind you to draw in the
slack places in your lives, release the loose ends, and start anew as one
who is now a member of the Nobility in the courtyard of Allah.
And, as you go forth as Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, carrying the colors
of red, which word denotes charity to all mankind and more especially to
the household of the faithful; combined with green, which denotes
everlasting life, something that is forever growing in wisdom, strength
and beauty; be true to your trust, faithful to the cause and active In the
uplift of manldnd that Allah may delight to extend His blessings upon
you and yours forevermore.
Allah Be Praised.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Closing

Illustrious Potentate: Nobles, I am about to close this Temple. Noble
Captain of the Guard, Captain of the Guard arises and salutes when ouf
work has ceased in the Temple, what is your duty?
Captain of the Guard: To see that the Outer Guard stands instructed, and
our sacred Temple is duly guarded.
Illustrious Potentate: Attend to that p art of your duty and inform the
Outer Guard that we are about to close ... Temple, and order him to
permit no interruption while we are thus engaged.
Captain of the Guard instructs the Outer Guard, through the wicket,
then gives the usual raps, which are replied to by the Outer Guard.
Captain of the Guard: Illustrious Potentate, our sacred Temple is duly
guarded; the Outer Guard has your command.
Illustrious Potentate: By whom are we guarded, Noble Captain of the
Guard?
Captain of the Guard: By a Noble of this degree, and a trusted officer,
without, armed with a three-edged sword, the proper implement of his
office, vigilantly assisted by the Captain of the Guard within.
Illustrious Potentate: Knowing we are under double guard, we will
proceed to close. Noble Chief Rabban, what is the hour?
Chief Rabban: Illustrious Potentate, the night draws near, and it is time
to rest. Even so approaches with the same rapid step, the night of death
and the hour of judgment.
Illustrious Potentate: Noble Assistant Rabban, does any work of charity
or benevolence remain undone that is within our powers to do?
Assistant Rabban: Illustrious Potentate, none.
Illustrious Potentate:  Noble Chief Rabban, what remains to be done?
Chief Rabban: Illustrious Potentate, our duty everywhere; our duty
always; evil and wrong never.
Illustrious Potentate: Even so wrong and error reign over all the world,
and only here and there truth and the right are victors. Chief Rabban, are
you a Noble of die Mystic Shrine?
Chief Rabban: I was a Son of the Desert

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Illustrious Potentate: Then you are a Noble?
Chief Rabban: I sought protection under the dome of the Temple.
Illustrious Potentate: What induced you to become a Noble of the
Mystic Shrine?
Chief Rabban: That I might worship the true God, respect virtue, protect
the innocent, assist the distressed, and promote the inculcation of honor.
Illustrious Potentate: How gained you admission to the Temple?
Chief Rabban: I sought the commendation of a Noble, who
recommended me to the Temple. My characier having been canvassed
and coming within the bounds of good report, being worthy, and not of
treacherous or ignoble purpose, I espoused the cause of the Mystic
Shrine, and my leception was sanctioned with the secret pass.
Illustrious Potentate:  What are the cardinal principles of the Mystic
Shrine?
Chief Rabban:  Justice, prudence, fortitude, morality and secrecy. They
are priceless when well observed, and are attributes which cannot be
bought with paltry, sordid gold.
Illustrious Potentate: What binds you to ous Noble Order?
Chief Rabban: My sacred obligation.
Illustrious Potentate:  Having assumed the sacred obligations of the
Order, what did you do to make them more binding?
Chief Rabban:  I was conducted to the purifying cavern, the Fountain of
Mecca, where I washed my hands in innocency, thereby cleansing
myself of all the snares of sin and vice that may have surrounded me;
and In token of the sincerity of my Intentions I sealed the same by
kissing the Black Stone of Casper.
Illustrious Potentate: It is well. Let us unite in singing our closing ode.
***
No more hot sands for us to tread,
Our journey is ended now;
Before the grandest Potentate,
We shall forever bow.
We shall forever bow,
Before the grandest Potentate,
We shall forever bow.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
All arise and form a circle, the Illustrious Potentate and the two
Rabbans inside of the circle and in their proper relative positions, the
High Priest and Prophet at the west of the Altar, inside.
Signs are given, led by the Illustrious Potentate.
Illustrious Potentate: Noble Oriental Guide, secure the Holy Bible and
Koran.
The High Priest and Prophet then raises his band and says:
Our Father, who art in heaven, in whom we trust, and move and have
our being; Oh, Thou who willest that man should enjoy all the benefits
which Thy munificence holds out to him, deign to receive our prayers
and to shed upon the Nobles of this Order Thy precious gifts. And now
that we are about to quit this sacred retreat and mix again whiz the
world, help us to serve Thee faithfully, devoting to Thee our hearts,
obeying Thee in all things, remaining true to one another. Receive our
thanks and gratitude for Thy favors and continue Thy goodness unto us
now and forever. Amen.
All:  So mote it be. Amen. Amen. Amen. Illustrious Potentate and
Rabbans return to their stations, others remain standing about the altar.
Illustrious Potentate **     *.
Chief Rabban **     *.
Assistant Rabban **     *.
 Illustrious Potentate: Go In peace, and may God and all the angels
guard us in all the walks of life. But before we part, let us swear not to
reveal any of this day’s transactions that should not be known.
All:  I swear. At same time giving sign or secrecy.
Illustrious Potentate:  By virtue of the authority on me conferred, I now
declare this ... Temple, No. ... of the Ancient Egyptian Arabic Order
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine of North and South America and
Jurisdictions, Inc., closed.
Noble Captain of the Guard, you will inform the Outer Guard.
Captain of the Guard:  The Outer Guard stands instructed.
Illustrious Potentate gives one (*) rap.

The sercert passwords: are Mecca with the response of Nemesis

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Grips, Signs and Passwords"
The sign of salutation upon entering and retiring is given before the Altar: Bow low and extend the arms from the
shoulders directly toward the East forming the" salaam," and nearly touching the open thumbs be yond the top of the
head-the Turkish or Arabic bow of obedience.
Annual Secret Password: ..... .
Distress Word H ...... p ...... U ..... .
Grip of a Noble: Grasp right hands naturally, press ing thumb on middle of upper half of second finger.
The secret pass at the door, given through the wicket, or door to the Captain of the Guard, is lVI...... (given in a
whisper). The :Mystic password inside, on opening, or the inner secret pass, is N. . . . .. (given also in a whisper) .
\Vhen fully confided, he is discovered by some officer or member who becomes enraged at the member so
disclosing, and they have some sharp words and the dis coverer declares that he will report him to the Grand
Potentate for censure.
}\{ember replies: Do as you please. (This.is all out side). It is then whispered about so that the rest of the candidates
can hear it (if more than one), and opinions
':are expressed that there will be trouble for such expos lire before the candidate sees the end of the ceremonies, etc.,
or that it was unlawful information given before the candidate was through with the initiation

LECTURE.
To be! Given to Candida,tes.
The salutation of distinction among the faithful is: "Es Salmu Aleikum!"- Peace be with you!- to ·which is returned
the gracious wish: "Aleikum es salaam ,,_ With you be Peace!"
The Jewel of the order is a Crescent formed of any substance. The most valued materials are the claws o·f the Royal
Bengal Tiger, united at their bases in a gold setting which includes their tips, and bears on one side of the center the
head of a sphynx, and on the other a pyramid, urn and star: Y,'ith the date of the wearer's re ception into the order,
and the motto:
Arabic, "Kuwat wa Ghadab." .
 Latin, "Robur et Furor."
English, "Strength and Fury
The Crescent has been a favorite religions emblem in all ages in the Orient, and also a political ensign in some
countries, such as in modern Turkey and Persia. The ancient Greeks used the crescent as an emblem of the universal
:l\Iother of all living things, the Virgin Mother of all Souls, ,,,ho was known as Diana, Artemis, Phoebe, Cynthia,
and other names, varying with the character of her attributes in different localities. The chief seat of the Diana cult
and worship was a Ephesus. and the great temple built in her honor at that city \vas thE' pride and glory of the Greeks.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
The secrt't knowledge symbolized by the crescent has always had its devotees in every in all civilized eountrit's. and it is yet
the to all wisdom. The Greek philosopher, Plato, when asked the sonrce of his knovdedgt'. referred to P,\rthagoras. , If W('
commIt the \yritings of Pythagoras, \ye shall find that he points to the far East, \yhence he derived his instruction. In
imitation of the humility of the \yisest of mankind, we look to the East for Jight, and find plaepd there the beautiful emblem
of lw\v-horn light, the Crescent.
This is yet only a \\'lnbol, and refers to a higher and pnrer the gTt'at f01111t<li11 of light, the Sun, which is also an emhlem of
the First Canst', of and Intt'llig·enee. Thus do \ye lead the mind of the initiate. step by step. frolll the sit'rile and shifting
sands of the desert into the halls of science, the chambers of cultnre, nntil he stands in the presence of the ('mbIE'm of Light
and IlltelIigen('e. in pos",pssion of the key that \yill op('n to the diligent in(Juirt'l" t'very truth in natlll'l''s "'ide dOl\lain.
Significance of the Fez.
The lIobles \rpm' I'irh ('08t11111e of Eastern charadeI', lll;idC' of and lH'o(,;lcled yt'lvet of Oriental intensity of ('olor.
\Ylwn pilgramages to \yere interrupted by the ('n1s(Hle8. ahout A. D_ 980. the :\1 of tIl<' :\ile jonrneyt'd to Fez «H' F;'1Sl. ill
:\fornc('o. as to a holy city. Among the manufactures of the city was a head covering called tarboosh, now known as a
fez, which was dyed scarlet for students in a great· school in that city. In that way it became a mark of learning, and
gradually displaced other forms and colors of hats. It was carried in all directions by Caravans and thus became the
distinguished head-dress of Mos lems in every part of the empire.
     Q & A
The Shriners’ Recognition Test
According to a Lauterer manuscript, this is how two Shriners
recognize each other:
Q: Then I presume you are a Noble?
A: I am so accepted by all men of noble birth.
Q: Have you traveled any?
A: I have.
Q: From where to what place have you traveled?
A: Traveled east over the hot burning sands of the desert.
Q: Where were you stopped at?
A: At the devil’s pass.
Q: What were you requested to do?
A: I was requested to contribute a few drops of urine.
Q: Why were you requested to do this?
A: As a token of my renouncing the wiles and evils of the world
and granted permission to worship at the Shrine.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Q: At what Shrine did you worship?
A: At the Shrine of Islam.
Q: Did you ride?
A: Yes, I rode a camel until I paused to dismount.
Q: Then what did you do with your camel?
A: I tied him.
Q: Where did you tie him?
A: I tied him to a date tree, where all True Shriners should do
so.
BOTH: Yes, I pulled the Cord, rode the hump, I have traversed
the hot arid sands of the desert to find Peace and rest in the
quiet shade of the Oasis.