--- Sayfa 1 ---
Secret Ritual
of the
U
Thirty-third and Last Degree
SOVEREIGN GRAND INSPECTOR GENERAL
OF THE
ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED
SCOTTISH RITE OF FREEMASONRY
Anonymous

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The Secret Ritual of the 330 and Last Degree
Sovereign Grand Inspector General
of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
This book includes two versions of the ceremonial of the highest degree in
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry. The first is an American
ritual dated circa 1827 and is here published for the first time. The second is a
translation of an 1860 French ritual.
Both rituals are in manuscrirul form and
presently owned by a private collector who wishes to remain anonymous.
It is noted emphatically that neither of these rituals is used by either
legitimate Supreme Council 330 in the United States, nor by the Supreme Council
33 “for England and Wales. Whether remnants of these workings find inclusion
in the rituals of other Supreme Councils we cannot say.
America, circa 1827
The c.1827 ceremonial is written in a fine hand on a single sheet of paper
measuring 8x13 inches which has several small water stains though the text is
unaffected. Some words are hyphenated at the end of a line, though not at the
syllables.
These marks, as well as the original spelling and punctuation, have
been retained.
The inclusion of a small portion of another degree (320 ?) on the top of the
page suggests that the ceremony was the last item in a set of rituals. On the back
of the sheet appear two brief notes which are also reproduced.1
The ritual, if it can indeed be called that, appears so fragmentary that it is
difficult to ascertain whether it represents a synopsis or a complete working.
Fortunately the note on the back refering to M[oses]
Holbrook suggests the
“regularity’’ of the ceremony since he was Sovereign Grand Commander of the
Supreme Council
330,
5•~ M:.J:., from 1826~1844.2
The note also mentions
October 31, 1827, the date the Northern and Southern Jurisdictions agreed upon
territorial bounderies.
1 The French message is along the following line — “The secrecy of the mysteries being an indispensible
obligation, the Thrice PuissantGrand Master shall, before closing Lodge, recommend that to the Brethren in the
usual manner and form.”
2 In the note “S.C.” may be either “Sovereign Commander” or “South Carolina.”

--- Sayfa 3 ---
France,1860
The second ritual is an unsigned translation of a French version credited to
Jean-Baptiste Marie Ragon3 and presumably from his Tuileur G~n~ral de la
Franc-Maqonnerie, ou Manuel de l’Initi~ (Paris: Collignon, 1861).~ Ragon does
not claim authorship of the ritual and makes several critical remarks concerning
its apparent historical inaccuracies. A note indicates its date of composition as
1860.
This ritual was widely used during the mid-to-late 1800’s and was
translated into Spanish by Andres Cassard for his Manual de la Masoneria
(Barcelona: Bauza, 1860) and also finds inclusion—though in abbreviated form
—
in the irregular Cemeau rituals of the “Sovereign and Independent State of
New York” exposed in Jonathan Blanchard, Scotch Rite Masonry Illustrated [2
vols.] (Chicago: Ezra A. Cook, 1887-1888).
The manuscript book which includes this translation is signed “C.R.S.” on
the inside cover and appears to have been written either hurriedly or carelessly,
as the penmanship is occasionally poor, though always legible. The lined leather-
bound book measures approximately 7x8 inches and the ritual’s text occupies the
last ninety-six pages. The 330 ritual is written upside-down beginning on the last
page.
The first thirty-three pages are filled with the secret work of several
Masonic degrees, beginning with the Chapter and Council, which is followed by
the “Red t” and finally the 15”-32” of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite
(under the date “Septr 2, 1856”).
Towards the middle of the book are 29 pages used for seemingly non-
Masonic matters though one page includes notes made while visiting a fellow
Mason either in or from Chicago on December 22, 1862.
The rituals are especially interesting to those studying the “vengeance,~~
kadosh
and templar
aspects of Freemasonry and provide insights into the
developing themes of Masonic symbolism.
The transcriptions commence on the following page.
~J.M. Ragon (c.1781-c.1866) was denominated “the most learned Freemason of the nineteenth century.” Originally
a native of Belgium, he was initiated in 1803 at Bruges, and later moved to Pans, France where he founded the Lodge
of the Les Trinosophes.
‘~ This ritual is also described in some detail by Arthur Edward Waite, “Sovereign Grand Inspector General” inA
NewEncyclopaedia ofFreemasonry [rev. ed.] 2 vols. (London: Rider & Co., [1924]) 2:422-425.
2

--- Sayfa 4 ---
[...]the Symbolicks and Volunteers with
the three Pass
Words
pronounced
videlicet.
Phal
kal
—
Pharas kal
—
Nika Mikah
si=gnifying
separated
reunioned. & revenged, and vid Elschaddai (the almighty vide EXOD. VJ-iii)
which signifies the Delta.
Let us imitate our Grand Master Hiram Abif who
to the last placed all his hopes in the great
Architect
of
the Universe and
pronounced his dying words
—
spes Mea!
in DEO est as he passt to eternal
Bliss.
FINIS
Sovern Grand Ispectr General
The Inspectors in a Kingdom or Republick shoul=d not exceed nine in number
—
These claim Jurisdict=ion over all the Ineffable and Sublime degrees, &
form a governing body with powers to a=ppoint their own Successors and act as
Soverns of Free-Masonry
Decorations of the Apartment
—
the hangings
are purple
embroidered
with Skulls Marrow-bones & Skelletons.
The Delta
—
transparent over the
canopy (purple).
In the cent=re of room is the grand triangular Pedistal and the
skelleton ready to strike with the poinard in the right hand & in the left the
Standard of the Order.
Above
the door
—
the
motto Deus
Meumaue
Jjj~.!
In the Orient the candlestick with 5 branches
—
with
3 in the West
—
with 1 in the North (darkness) and with 2 in the South
The Grand and Supreme Council must have 1st Thrice
Puissant
Sovern
Grand
Master
who personates Frederick II
—
2d Sovern
lieu=tenant
Commander! and 5 officers of the Holy Empire.
1st
wears crimson red satin robes lined in white with crown
on
head and
sword in hand.
2 Lieutena=nt wears lesser crown (ducal).
The Ribbon
—
is black lined with gold from left to right at the bottom a
green-stemmed rose of red & white.
on the front of the ribbon the delta on
the breast (with glory)
traversed with the poinard of Nine (N.M.) and in the
centre the figure
-33-
Order —
a black double headed Eagle holding a sword with beak talons all in
gold
3

--- Sayfa 5 ---
R.~.e.PIiQ.a —
examine candt to R+ K-H & P.R.S.
— candt enters in black cape
with black hood over head & passt H.E. from W-O & to pedis=tal while 5-3-1-
2 and H.E. rise.
Candt kneels at pedistal (in black and hooded) and holding
Bible X on breast & which you belie=ve is Gods Holy word.
Do
you
R+ K-H & P.R.S accept the lawful Constitutions governing the
Order of Free-Masonry & the H.E. (I do) In the presence of adoni I obligate
myself to love my GOD relign & country & to the body of the Grand and
Supreme Council and by the poinard of N.M. Spes mea in deo est! & remove
hood impress & kiss poinard.
What do you see? Ansr. nothing.
Rise, receive sword &. signs are 1 st kneel X arms on breast. 2d unsheathe sword
kneel on left knee put hand on heart & kiss blade. Alarm 5-3-1-2 —
with sword
(H.E. take seats) when Free Masonry was burned at the stakes (manchem) of
Jacques Demolac who loved adoni
Sacred
words
—
micha macha baelim Adoni! signifying who is like unto
thee among the mighty 0! Lord!
Pass Words
—
1st Question
—
Demolay?
1st Answer
—
Hiram Abif!
—
our ancient grand master martyred
—
2d Question
—
Frederick? 2d Answer
—
Demolac
— our modern grand Master martyred. and seated in H.E. with sword
sheathed, & hears Vertot’s History of the Knights
& 5-3-1-2 H.E. rises
—
Prayer
—
0!
God our adoni!
& sacred Words.
T.P.
Sovern Grand Master
audere tacere & leave in silence
(The
following
appears
on the back side of the sheet and is written
in a hand differing from the above. —Editor)
Le Secret dans
nos Myst~res 6tant d’obligation indispensible,
le Trois-fois-
Puissant Maitre, avant de fermer chaque Loge, recommandra ce devoir aux
FF.. dans la mani~re et forme d’usage.
The line is drawn this Day
—
October 31. 1827 by Agreement with M
Holbrook. S~C
4

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Ritual of the Sovereign Grand Inspector General
33d and Last Degree
HEALTH
STABILITY
POWER
(Date Composed: 1860)
The Supreme Council is set in purple. Skeletons, skulls, cross-bones and hands
are painted above. Above the presiding officer is a transparency up6n which is
depicted a triangle with the “yod” at the center. In the center of the room is a
triangular pedestal, covered with a crimson cloth upon which is an open Bible
and a naked sword across it.
In the North is
a
human
skeleton, standing
upright, holding in the left hand the white banner of the Order and in its right,
a dagger ready to strike.
Above the
inside entrance door is a blue banner upon which is inscribed the
motto: “Deus Meumque Jus” (God and my right).
In the East is a five-branched
candlestick; in the West one of three branches, in the North one of one., and in the
South one of two; in all eleven lights.
Titles: The assembly is known as the “Supreme Council.”
The Grand Master
assumes the title “Very Puissant
Sovereign Grand Commander,” representing
Frederick the Second, King of Prussia. There is one styled “Sovereign Lieutenant
Commander.”
There is also a “Treasurer of the Holy Empire,” a “Grand
Chancellor,” an “Illustrious
Grand Secretary of the Holy Empire,” an
“Illustrious Master of Ceremonies,” and an “Illustrious Captain of the Guard,”
but he is not considered a member of the Supreme Council.
The ordinary members are called “Illustrious Sovereigns Grand Inspectors
General.”
Token—None.
Age—Accomplished Thirty.
Battery—Eleven raps (5-3-1-2).
(Note: This battery, in thousands, signifies 5312.
It is well-known that the
year 1312 was that of the suppression of the Order of the Temple, recalled
by this number, the eleven raps of which are the number
of
lights
which
illuminate the hall.)
5

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Apron—None.
Regalia:
The
Very Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander is dressed in a
robe of
crimson bordered with white:
he wears a royal crown on his head
and has a sword in his right hand.
He is seated on a throne under a crimson
canopy which
has
five
steps
approaching
it. The Puissant
Sovereign
Lieutenant Commander wears a ducal crown and bears a naked sword in hand.
He is seated in the West on a throne of three steps.
The Captain of the Guard wears old military clothing.
All members wear a large white watered
cordon, bordered with gold piping.
At the bottom of the cordon is a rosette, white, read and green, fringed with
gold.
On the front is a gold-embroidered delta, surrounded by a halo, on both
sides of the delta is a dagger, the points aimed at the center of the delta. In the
center of the delta
is
the number 33, written
in Arabic numerals.
This
cordon is worn from left to right. Further, under civilian dress is worn on the
left breast a red Teutonic cross.
Jewel:
The jewel is a black double-headed eagle, crowned,
with
wings
outspread and clutching a sword in its claws; the beaks, nails and sword are
gold. The jewel is suspended from the bottom of the cordon or on a gold chain
passed about the neck.
Banner of the Order:
It is of white silk,
3 1/2 feet long by 2 1/2 wide,
fringed with gold and silver.
In the center is a double-headed eagle with wing
outspread, gold beaks and clutching
a naked sword in its claws.
On a blue
ribbon is written “Deus Meumque Jus” (God and my Right). The staff of the
banner is eight feet long, topped by a pike.
OPENING THE WORK.
The Very Puissant Sovereign Grand commander says: Sovereign Lieutenant
Commander, How old are you?
Answer—Accomplished thirty, Very Puisant Sovereign.
Question—What is your duty?
Answer—To battle for God and my right, and inflict vengeance upon traitors.
Question—What is the hour?
6

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Answer—The watchword has been given, the guards are at their stations, and we
are in perfect security.
The Sovereign then says: Since we need not fear interruption, give notice by
the mystic numbers that the Supreme Council of the
33d degree is about to be
opened “Ad Gloriam Dei” [to the Glory of God. —Editor], that we can safely
labor in our undertakings and implore the presence of the God of Battles to assist
us in our combats, and finally obtain justice and our rights.
(He then raps with the hilt of his sword 5,3,1,2 which is repeated by the
Sovereign Lieutenant Commander and the Supreme Council is open.)
All
members kneel,
likewise the Sovereign Grand Commander and humbly
offer to God this prayer, preceded by the words: Let us pray!
“0 Thou great and Eternal God,
Father of Light, Life and Supreme Architect
of the World, whom from Thy throne of heavenly purity seest all peoples
of the
earth,
hear and
receive, the prayers
and
supplications
of Thy
unworthy servants now prostrate before Thee.
Engrave
in our hearts the
knowledge of the Eternal Word, and allow the purposes of our institution to
be governed by the principles of virtue and justice. Defend us, 0 God, from the
traps of the wicked! Protect us against the machinations of our enemies and give
us the power to conquer
those who
are arrayed against us;
for honor and
glory are ascribed to Thy holy and mighty name, now and forever.
Amen!
Amen! Amen!”
RECEPTION.
As this degree
is the most solemn and the most important it is necessary to
take the utmost precautions in the selection of persons to be admitted therein.
It is not enough to arrive at this degree to have been admitted of the degree of
Royal Secret; to
this
requirement must
be added a character and behavior
beyond reproach in addition to
a steadfast and unwavering
zeal, virtue and
well-tested determination of soul.
The aspirant submits to the Supreme Council his petition in the following form:
PETITION.
7

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Being ardently devoted to the glorious enterprise of the Knight Kadosh
and
Prince of the Royal Secret, and earnestly desiring to arrive at
the summit of
Masonic knowledge which you alone can provide, I very humbly beg permission
to offer myself as a candidate for admission into your Illustrious and Puissant
Council,
and your votes
in
my
favor will
be
the
cause
of unceasing
gratitude on my part. Signed,
The candidate is then proposed and accepted by acclamation. (He can be excluded
forever is the reasons advanced are deemed good and sufficient.)
The Illustrious Master of Ceremonies then takes the Aspirant and examines him
in all the preceding degrees, since one cannot be admitted into the Supreme
Council unless one has been regularly initiated into the ancient mysteries and
received
all
the degrees from Entered Apprentice to the 32d degree, being
Prince of the Royal Secret, for which fact a certificate must be submitted. He
must declare that the Holy Bible is the sacred eternal word of God, because
one who assumes an oath upon a book he does not recognize cannot assume a
valid obligation.
(Note: This statement, unacceptable to three-quarters ofthe world’s inhabitants,
would tend, if taken
literally,
to make the 33d degree an intolerant group
which would have no relation to the cosmopolitan institution ofMasonry, and is
yet a task for this part, invented in 1805, to see this strange requirement play
part in the ritual. —Jean-Baptiste Ragon)
No one can be admitted to this degree until he has completed his 30th year.
The candidate having complied with these formal requirements is conducted to
door of the Supreme Council where he knocks 5,3,1,2 raps.
The Lieutenant Grand
Commander
says: Very Puissant Grand Commander,
someone knocks at the door an disturbs the deliberations of the Supreme Council.
Answer—Go and see who knocks.
The officer goes to the door, knocks 5,3,1,2 raps and says: Who disturbs our
deliberations?
The Master of Ceremonies answers: A Knight Kadosh,
Prince of the Royal
Secret who is ardently devoted to the Order, his country and his God, who
beholds the sufferings of humanity in the death of his Master with an avenging
eye and who humbly solicits the favor of admittance into the Supreme Council,
that being enlightened by
Divine
Wisdom
he
may
spread the mantle of
Masonic charity over those who are in darkness.
S

--- Sayfa 10 ---
The Grand Commander closes the
door
and
relays the
response
to
the
Sovereign grand Commander, who gives the sign that he may be admitted if he
possesses the necessary qualifications.
The Illustrious Master of Ceremonies introduces the aspirant, who is dressed
in
black,
and without hat,
shoes,
sword or apron, and who has
his head
bowed, arms crossed over his breast with the
fingers extended and a ribbon
about his neck which is held in the left hand of the Master of Ceremonies and a
torch in his right.
In this condition he thrice circumambulates the Supreme Council and upon
passing the Sovereign Grand Commander he bows in humble veneration before
the sacred delta in the East.
The Sovereign Grand Commander says: Let us humbly worship with the most
profound reverence and piety the Source, that Glorious Spirit which is the Most
Merciful and
Beneficent Ruler of the Universe and all creatures it contains.
Glory to His Holy Name, now and forever.
This prayer is given after the first round.
At the second the Sovereign Grand
Commander says: How wonderful and impressive are the rays of that Glorious
Light which illuminate from on high the Eastern sky, we adore the Great and
Almighty Jehovah who is from all Eternity. Glory be to this Great and Powerful
Name forever.
After
the
third
and
last
round the Sovereign Grand Commander says:
Honorable Knight and Prince A.B., impressed with the ceremony in which you
are to be the principal actor as you take an obligation which among all others is
the most serious and important to which a man can subscribe and feeling
conscious of the the terrible penalties which the Eternal inflicts upon all who
violate the obligation you are about to assume, and as temptation frequently arise
which may test your resignation and determination,
it is necessary that we have
some proof of your courage and fortitude. It is necessary, respectable Brother,
for you to approach this urn and wash your hands in the molten lead you see
therein; that the stains of vice and immorality with which your hands have been
soiled will be purged from the heavenly record.
We have all passed through
the same trial and have escaped the threatening danger.
Place your trust in God
and resolutely determine to fulfill your obligation.
The lead, though molten,
will loose its heat when you insert your hand into it, and will recede from your
touch.
My Brethren, attend the
mystic
ceremony.
(All advance to see it
performed.) The urn should be an iron basin under which is a chafing dish
containing piece of charcoal which must not be lighted until the moment the
9

--- Sayfa 11 ---
candidate enters the Supreme Council, and placed on the bottom in a manner
that
he passes behind it as he turns.
On it is thrown incense composed of
amber, olibanum and resin, three parts of each, and two parts of storax, one
part each of labdamon and benzoin mixed in a gross powder which yields an
agreeable perfumed smoke.
The urn should be half filled with quicksilver which has the appearance of lead
but is not necessarily heated.
(Note: This trial, though more ancient than the degree, is not worthy of the
Brethren who permit it, or of the valiant Brother who willingly submits since
he has been truthfully informed on receiving the degree of Royal Secret that he
has received the completion ofMasonic Templarism. —Jean-Baptiste Ragon.)
After dipping his hand in it, the candidate is conducted to the altar, before
which he kneels and assumes his obligation which the incense burns.
All the
members also kneel and bow their heads in humble
adoration and
all have
their right hands over their hearts.
The candidate, with his right hand over his
heart, repeats the following obligation:
I,
, Knight Kadosh, and Prince of the Royal Secret, solemnly
pledge my sacred word of honor, swear sincerely and promise on
the Holy Word of the Eternal,
who is very merciful, sovereign,
powerful
and the Supreme Architect of Heaven and Earth, in the
presence of whom,
as well as
the Supreme Council of the 33d
Degree here assembled, that I will never directly or
indirectly
reveal the secrets and mysteries of the sublime degree which I am
about to receive, nor any of those which I have received, except to
an equal Sovereign Grand
Inspector General
who has likewise
lawfully received it.
I furthermore swear to strictly and scrupulously follow the statutes,
constitutions and regulations of this Degree and to fulfill the duties
of Grand
Inspector General diligently, faithfully and without
partiality,
favoritism or prejudice and that I will never receive
nor recognize any higher degree in Masonry than this; that I will
worship the Only True and Living God in the
manner and form
that I believe according to my conscience will please Him the most,
and that
I
will
govern my conduct according to His Divine
commands; that I will yield allegiance and fealty to the country in
which I reside and will be obedient to all the orders and laws of
the government; that I will to the utmost of my ability inculcate
by word and deed our
duty
to God
and neighbor;
as I am
10

--- Sayfa 12 ---
convinced that virtue alone makes us worthy
of
respect
and
religion makes us happy.
I swear and promise all this without equivocation, or mental
reservation and with no hope of being freed at some future period
thereof by any power whatsoever,
under the self-imposed penalty
of being dishonored among men and having my name branded in red
letters
in
the
Councils and
Lodges World-wide,
and I here
solemnly call upon the Great Eternal God to pour out his c.urses
upon this head (here the candidate places his right hand upon his
head) and to let me languish in misery and misfortune and finally
to subject my soul to tortures till it perish, should I ever violate my
present obligation.
May Almighty God grant me sufficient power to
abide it in every particular to the great glory of His Holy Name.
Amen!
Amen! Amen!
(He kisses the Bible three times and the
blade of the sword.)
(Note: If a Jew takes this this obligation he should remain upright wearing his
tephelin, the costume
of the religious ceremonies of the synagogue, and a
Hebrew Bible on his breast with his arms crossed upon it.)
After the obligation the Grand Commander places a sword in his right hand
saying: Honorable
Knight and
Brother,
we
place
in your
hand a deadly
weapon which we instruct you never to use against the life of a Brother except
in the following circumstances:
1.
for
your own
defense,
2. against the
common
enemy
of your country,
3. against blood stained criminals, the
murderers of our Honorable Master, Jacques de Molay.
He places on the fourth finger of his left hand a golden ring one
line wide,
within which is engraved “Deus Meumque Jus” and the name of the candidate;
he then tells him: With this
ring
I thee wed to the Order, your Country and
your God, and receive and acknowledge you a Sovereign Grand Inspector
general of the Thirty-Third and Last Degree.
May it ever recall to you
the
solemn obligations you have assumed to the Order. Swear to me never to fail to
wear it except, but when you are near your death give it to your wife, son or
eldest daughter, or dearest friend, as
a sacred keepsake under a solemn
promise not to remove it except in similar circumstances.
The candidate responds: I swear it on my honor.
The Sovereign Grand Commander then raises him and invests the cordon and
jewel of the Order to him giving him the signs and words:
11

--- Sayfa 13 ---
FIRST SIGN—Kneel, cross arms over the breast, fingers extended,
body
and head leaning towards the ground.
SECOND SIGN—Draw the sword,
fall on
your left knee and place hand
upon heart.
THIRD SIGN—Kiss the blade of the sword three times.
FIRST WORD—De Molay.
RESPONSE—Hiram Abif.
SECOND WORD—Frederick.
RESPONSE—Of Prussia.
TOKEN—None.
GRAND PASS WORD (That of Kadosh) or SACRED WORD—Micha
Micha Bealim Adonai
— Who is like Thee, among the brave, 0 Lord.
(Note: We call attention to the fact that “Begalim” or “Bealim” means “idol” or
“traitor” and that it is in the first sense that the term must be here understood.
“Gini similis tui” refers to idols —note by Brother Villaume in his “Masonic
Manual” p. 223.)
HISTORICAL DISCOURSE or LECTURE
The Very Sovereign Grand Commander in Chief, Sovereign of Sovereigns,
Prince of the
Royal Secret was our Illustrious Brother Frederick II, King of
Prussia.
He established this degree in council with the Very Illustrious Brother,
His Royal Highness,
Louis of Bourbon, Prince of the French blood and other
illustrious characters who had the degree of Knight Kadosh and Prince of the
Royal Secret.
The
Degree
of Knight Kadosh is the most awesome and important.
In this
degree you solemnly bound yourselves without restriction to destroy an order
of men for crimes committed several centuries ago, without regard for the
common principles of humanity and the laws of your country. In spite of the
great precautions taken in selecting candidates some unworthy persons may have
been received and others,
by mistaken zeal or religious enthusiasm may have
committed acts which were unallowable. In consequence, the King created and
12

--- Sayfa 14 ---
established on May 4, 5786 the 33d degree to settle the remaining obligations of
the Kadosh.
The King was aware that according to the course of human events he could not
expect to live many years
longer and conceived and executed the glorious
design
of delegating Masonic authority of the Order of Prince of the Royal
Secret in a Council of Grand Inspectors general, in order that he might be
able, after his death to regulate
agreeable to the Constitutions and Statutes
which he established, the government of Masonry in all degrees from~the 17th or
Knight of the East and West inclusive, allowing the supervision of Symbolic
Lodges and the Grand Ineffable and Sublime Lodges of Perfection or Knight
of the East or Sword, to the Grand Council of Princes of Jerusalem which he
deemed justly charged with that power.
The new Degree was denominated
“Sovereign Grand Inspector General of the Supreme Council of the 33d Degree.”
The Princes of the Royal Secret were deputies of the Grand Inspectors General.
They act by virtue of the
special powers granted them for that purpose but
their power
is
granted to
this degree.
The Council,
when formed, may
consider all circumstances involving Masonry from the 17th degree ~on up and
hear all appeals from Councils or persons above the Grand Council of the Princes
of Jerusalem
as explained in the Constitutions accompanying this
degree.
No Inspector possesses individual authority in a country where a Grand Council
of Inspectors General exists, as a majority vote of the members is required to
give legality to a decision the Grand Inspector may assume.
In consequence
of the powers with which the Inspectors of the degree
are
invested it is
necessary to limit their number.
Therefore a Council a Council consists of not more than nine members, five of
whom must profess the Christian religion. No business can be transacted unless
there
are
three
brethren present,
excepting
the
the
establishment of a
Council as provided by the Constitutions.
There can be but one Council of
this degree in each kingdom or nation of Europe and two in the United States of
America as far apart from each other as possible, on in the English Islands in
America and one in the French Islands. No Inspector may possess the manuscript
ritual
of
this
degree except those who first form the Council.
When an
Inspector goes to another country
to establish the degree the
manuscript is
given to him with the obligation never to it except to the one chosen to act as
his second in the establishment. The signs and words are given to all Inspectors.
Vengeance for the unjust cruelties, insults and injuries inflicted upon the Knights
Templar without provocation and in which the Knights of the Holy
St. John of
Jerusalem and of Malta assisted resulted in the formation of the degree of
Kadosh in a manner clearly evident in this degree.
13

--- Sayfa 15 ---
According to the tale of the Knights of Malta by Abbe Vertot,
the
Knights
Templar organized an order of Masonic Knighthood instituted under Pope
Gelasimus II about the year of Masonry 5117; they were thus called because they
lived on part of the Temple at Jerusalem,
not far from the sepulcher of
Jesus Christ.
They received and gave
charitable assistance to strangers and
Christian pilgrims.
Clothed in armor they escorted they into the
Holy
Land to see the Sacred Monuments of Christianity without fear of infidels.
(Note; The Templar historian is here inaccurate, like all connected with this
system. Pope Gelasimus II did not succeed Pascal II until 1118, he didn’t have
time or authority to create a “Masonic Knighthood.” Twice banishedfrom Rome
by the consul Franzpair he agreed with King Henry V and had Maurice Bourdin
elected in his place, under the name of Gregory VIII, Edasimus died in battle in
the Abbey of Clary on January 29, 1119. We add that in this period there was
no such thing as a “Masonic year.”
—Jean-Baptiste Ragon.)
This Order increased in numbers, power and wealth and
about the year 1200
spread over the whole of Europe.
Most of their Commanderies were situated
along the Mediterranean and their influence and possessions seemed to increase
daily.
Philippe the Fair,
King of France, grew jealous of them, which jealousy
turned to hatred because they embraced the cause of Boniface VIII in disputes
he had with the King.
Philippe never forgave the Templars for their conduct in
these matters.
On
the
13th of October 1309 he arrested all the Knights Templars in
his
Kingdom and inflicted upon them the most cruel tortures.
In 1312 the Order
was suppressed by Pope Clement V at
the demand of the king of France.
The Kings of England, Castile, Aragon and Sicily, the Counts of Provence and
all Sovereigns of Europe had the Knights arrested and seized their possessions
and placed guards in their commanderies.
On October 1, 1312 the Council of Vienna banished the Order in agreement with
the Pope and gave the greater part of their possessions to the Knights Hospitallers
of St. John of Jerusalem, Knights of Rhodes,
now called “Knights of Malta”
which were-established about 1120, when Honoris was Pope.
The Knight Kadosh were called “Knights Templar” but after the massacre by
Philippe the few who escaped changed their name and appearance, to avoid
persecution of from their enemies until their numbers increased and they could
take arms for
for
their just
and lawful rights.
They ceased wearing the
black cordon and red cross, and substituted a large blood-colored cordon,
14

--- Sayfa 16 ---
worn over the left shoulder to the right hip, to which was attached
a black
double-headed eagle with spread wings and holding a naked sword in its talons.
About
the Masonic year 5767 investigations were made in Paris to prove that
Masons with the title Knights Kadosh were Templars. If the discovery succeeded
the Order would have been destroyed. In consequence it was determined in
Grand Council by communication with Berlin and Paris that in the future they
should assume the title “Knights of the Black and White Eagle.”
In order that the Knights of Malta could keep the possessions
they
illegally
obtained they were obliged to exterminate the Order of
the
Temple, whose
knights are actually those who received the degree of Knights Kadosh, or White
and Black Eagle.
The Knights Kadosh pledged each other, and in the name
and presence of the Great and Eternal God to preserve the hatred and enmity
towards the Knights of Malta and destroy them when in their power.
Although we has assumed the duty to exterminate that Order which seeks our
destruction, it is yet necessary that the extent of our enmity toward the order be
well defined; this obligation does not require one of us, if on going to the
Mediterranean on business should meet by accident a member of this Order we
would be bound to cut his throat; that would be murder condemned by the laws
of every country, punished by death. But if a sovereign power declared war, we
are bound by the solemn obligation we has taken, and if our business permits,
we are bound to join the army of their enemies and use our talents, both in
cabinet and field to exterminate the Order, that we may again possess the rich
and strong places belonging to Templars by right.
As the different Masonic bodies are obliged to obey their superiors when they
are sufficiently numerous and powerful they will be led against the enemy by
the Sovereigns of the 33d Degree, and if victorious,
the Knights Kadosh will
declare
themselves
and
take
possession of the country of which they are
illegally deprived and remain under
the banner and protection of this rank
from which
they
will receive
systems
of government
founded
on
their
rights and of the Knights and their zeal. Their service and virtuous sufferings
during so many centuries. When we shall enter the field of our foes our forces
will be directed according to the orders given in the degree of Prince of the
Royal Secret, but as the Very Illustrious Sovereign of Sovereigns determined to
invest this degree with supreme executive power, the command of the troops
after his death
devolved
upon
us. Therefore His Majesty King Frederick
ordered that the first and second Commanders should order the troops, districts,
nations and kingdoms over which they have Masonic jurisdiction.
15

--- Sayfa 17 ---
On the arrival of the land forces at Jerusalem where appointed,
a Supreme
Council of all who have received the 33d Degree shall convene immediately,
where each Inspector General shall produce election papers to the degree and
the holder of the oldest title shall be declared and proclaimed to the
armies as
generalissimo and take the title of Very Puissant Grand Commander. All other
military ranks shall be given in succession according to the various dates
of their certificates of election. Titles of the same date shall be settled by ballot.
In the future, all ranks, honors, dignities, titles and possessions, etc., shall be
hereditary.
The government of the Order shall remain in the family of the
Sovereign Grand Commander.
On the suppression of the Knights of Malta the Sovereign Grand Commander
will immediately convene a Supreme Council of the 33d Degree in which there
shall be founded a constitution and system of government of the Order which
shall always be a military one.
The Order will then take its true title.
The uniform of the Order, in the field, is blue, lapels and hems of white, white
buttons on which is the jewel of the 33d Degree, on the small buttons only the
number 33.
As we have powerful enemies to contend with, it is fitting that to protect
ourselves against the snares of the wicked; we are always on guard and discreet.
let
us
feed our hearts the seed of virtue and
in our conduct an language
give offense to no one.
Let us respect the human race, and even our enemies.
Let us fight openly and
honorably,
and
if victorious,
let us not stain our
laurels by insulting conquered foes. Let us prove to them by magnanimous
conduct that justice does not demand the assistance of the assassins hand, but
virtue is the reward of labors. Let us conquer the villainy of their conduct by
the righteousness of our own and their injustice by our mercy.
In every country in which capricious fortunes may be thrown be
faithful and
obedient to the laws and its government. For a Knight Mason who is not faithful
to the country in which he lives would not hesitate to sacrifice the secrets of
his Order.
Venerate
the beings
that gave you birth.
Be tender to those near
your
bosom
and
an affectionate
father to your offspring: let your obligation be
crowned with peace of soul, let it be free from reproach.
Rear your son in
the Masonic Order, be true
to your friends and Brothers; patiently endure
their faults, making allowance for human frailty. Be a living example of virtue
and charity to all around you; aid the poor and afflicted, give them such
assistance as needed,
according
to your resources,
and above all
offer
16

--- Sayfa 18 ---
unceasing prayers
to
the
Great Architect as the Ever-Living God for the
signal proofs of goodness and mercy
you
have
received from
Him
and
constrain yourself with ardor to attain the heavenly eternal bliss that only he can
give. Amen! Amen! Amen!
INSTRUCTION.
Q.—Are you a Sovereign Grand Inspector General?
A.—Very Puissant Sovereign,
my virtue, courage and zeal have procured this
distinguished rank.
Q.—How can I know you to be a Sovereign Grand Inspector General?
A.—By my giving you the Pass Word.
Q.—Begin.
A.—Jacques de Molay.
Q.—Hiram Abif.
A.—Frederick of Prussia.
Q.— What
are the meanings of the skeletons skulls, bones and torches in our
Council?
A.—They serve to remind of the massacre of our ancestors by Philippe the Fair
who delivered them to the most cruel tortures.
Q.—Why do you appear in mourning armed with a sword?
A.— To mourn their loss and be ready to avenge them.
Q.—Who established this degree?
A.— Our Illustrious Brother of Brunswick, Frederick, King of Prussia.
Q.—For what purpose?
17

--- Sayfa 19 ---
A.—To regulate our hatred and our campaigns against against the
the Knights
of Malta,
to guide our zeal and our efforts in proper channels and direct our
undertakings.
Q.—What is the cause of the hatred and enmity that you have sworn against the
Knight of Malta?
A.—After
the
destruction of the majority of Knights Templar by Philippe
the
Fair,
in cooperation with Pope Clement V, their rich possessions were
assigned to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, now Knights of Malta, of Island
of Malta, which is one of our possessions, in addition to several other places
in the Mediterranean which they
have
refused
to make restitution
of that
which was wrested from us by injustice
and
cruelty. In consequence we
determined -to regain them by force, when our Order has sufficient numerical
strength
to undertake the enterprise or nobly perish in the attempt.
Q.—Is this the only reason for which the king of Prussia established this degree?
A.—There is another. The King foreseeing that his death was not too far distant
determined to establish
a
Supreme Council of Grand Inspectors General to
which he
could commit the
supreme power over the Masonic Order with
which it has been reinvested, which after his death might govern the Grand
Body, agreeable to certain statutes he established for the purpose and to lead
it to battle should it become strong enough. Each nation is independent, one over
the
other, in
civil
government
he
believed
they
should possess a high
Masonic court from which there could be no appeal.
This political set being
agreeable to each government, no jealously could exist in the Order. This Grand
Body should increase rapidly and the great aim of the Order accomplished.
Q.—What else did you see on entering the Council?
A.—I
saw in the east a five branched candlestick, in the West on of three
branches, in the North one of one branch, and in the South one of two branches.
Q.—What does it mean?
A.—In arranging this number of lights, the make up 5312,
the Masonic year in
which the order was destroyed.
The opening and closing of the Council also
refer to the circumstance, as well as the reception, by the number of raps at the
door.
Q.—What is the meaning of the cordon that you wear?
18

--- Sayfa 20 ---
A.—The white is emblematical of the purity and innocence of those who were
delivered to torture, the red of the blood of those victims of Philippe the Fair and
Clement V.
As the sun gives light and life to all regions of the earth, likewise
the sun on our breasts indicates that the sublime and Illustrious Order we possess
given light and life to the Grand Masonic Body of the Universe.
Q.—Why does the skeleton hold in its hand the banner of the Order?
A.—To indicate that all those who shall betray the Order and prove false
to
their obligation which they assumed will be punished by death. It recalls also that
they should conquer or perish nobly in the glorious undertaking.
19

--- Sayfa 21 ---
CLOSE OF COUNCIL.
The Very Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander says: Illustrious Deputy, how
old are you?
Answer—AccomplishedThirty, Very Puissant Sovereign.
Question—What is your duty?
Answer—To combat for God and my rights, and inflict punishment on traitors.
Question—What is the hour?
Answer—The radiance of the morning sun illuminate our Council.
The Sovereign Grand Commander says: Since the sun has risen to illuminate the
world, let us rise my Brothers (all rise)
and diffuse the radiance of Masonic
Light in the souls of those who are in darkness, and be examples of virtue to
the world.
Give notice that I am about to close his
Council by the Mystic
Numbers.
(TheVery Puissant Grand Commander raps 5-3-1-2 with the pommel of his
sword, which is repeated by the Very Illustrious Inspector.)
The Very Puissant Grand Commander raises his hands and says: 0 Thou Glorious
and Eternal God, Father of Light, of Life,
Very Merciful Supreme Ruler of
Heaven and Earth, lead us in the paths of Virtue and Justice! Teach us the great
fundamental principles of Thy true religion which will
make us worship Thee
and perform our duties to one another,
that
we
may
be
prepared
for
membership in the Celestial Supreme Council.
(All answer) God grant it! So mote it be!
The Very Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander says: May the Holy One of
Enoch and Israel and the Highest Almighty God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob
enrich us with His blessings now and forever!
(All answer) God grant it! So mote it be!
(The Council is Closed.)
20