--- Sayfa 1 ---
NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC’S
PRESENTATION
OF:
THE
SECRETS
OF
FREEMASONRY

Research From The Library of:
Dr. Robin Loxley, D.D.
Copyright 2006

--- Sayfa 3 ---
INTRODUCTION

It is obvious that NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC got a hold of information from other
resources and decided to do a cable presentation on May 22, 2006, which narrates
most of my website threads in short two hour special.  It was humorous to see
Masons being interviewed and trying to fool the public with flattering speech.

I watched the National Geographic special entitled: THE SECRETS OF
FREEMASONRY and I was humored to see some of what I’ve studied as coming out of
the closet.  My first response was:  Where was National Geographic during the 1980s
with this information?

Anyways, it’s nice to know that they had an excellent presentation and I was impressed
with how they went about explaining the layout of Washington D.C.  I was laughing
hysterically when a Mason was interviewed for his opinion about the PENTGRAM being
laid out in a street design but incomplete.  The Mason made a statement:  “There is a line
missing from the Pentagram so it’s not really a Pentagram.  If it was a Pentagram, then
why is there a line missing?”  He downplays the street layout of the Pentagram with its
bottom point touching the White House.

The Mason was obviously IGNORANT of one detail that I caught right away as to why
there was ONE LINE MISSING from the pentagram in the street layout.  If you didn’t
catch it, the right side of the pentagram star (Bottom right line) is missing from the street
layout, thus it would prove that the pentagram wasn’t completed.  HOWEVER, LOOK
CLOSELY AT THE LAYOUT (without pen lines being drawn) and you will notice that
there is a TRIANGLE/PYRAMID under the right wing of the right side of the pentagram.
THIS TRIANGLE COMPLETES THE DEVIL’S PENTAGRAM!  I hope you can see
what this ignorant Mason missed.  Of course Masons will deny it!  Of course they will
make fools out of people who think that Masonic Doctrine is Satanic versus Christian!
That is part of the lure, the trap, the great secret.  By the time you ascend through all 33
degrees you will be unaware that MASONIC DOCTRINE is ANTI-CHRIST in nature,
blaspheming everything about Jesus Christ and reducing the Bible to a Da Vinci Code
status.

FREEMASONRY is what I would describe as THE DA VINCI CODE:  Creating rumors,
superstitions, and blasphemous doctrines about Jesus Christ which don’t come from the
Bible.  It’s the creation of a new religion in order to destroy faith in Biblical doctrine,
such as Mormonism, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Christian Science, Scientology, and basic
Masonic doctrine does: Creating another Gospel.  The current hostility against
Republican Christians is actually hostility towards Republican Masons who claim to be
Christians, who are condemned as being part of a Skull & Bones Society plot for global
world domination.  Since THEY have all the money, the rest of the world is jealous and
contrives conspiracy theories in order to make it seem like Biblical Christianity is the true
enemy of all nations, therefore, Masonic Christians ought to be overthrown with New
Age Democracy.  But it’s a trick, because Democratic New Age beliefs are FROM

--- Sayfa 4 ---
MASONIC DOCTRINE TOO!  It’s the yin and the yang, the light and the darkness,
working together under the same sun-domed roof!

Now let’s begin with the MAP OF WASHINGTON D.C. to show that the Masonic
symbolism of the pentagram touching the White House IS COMPLETED with a
Triangle.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Freemasonry and Washington D.C.'s
Street Layout
http://freemasonrywatch.org/washington.html

The City of Washington
Come let me lead thee o'er the second Rome...
This embryo capital, where Fancy sees
Squares in morasses, obelisks in trees;
Which second-sighted seers, ev'n now, adorn,
With shrines unbuilt and heroes yet unborn...
Thomas Moore, 1804

--- Sayfa 6 ---
LOXLEY:  BUY THIS BOOK!  THIS WAS NOT WRITTEN BY A CHRISTIAN, BUT
IS A VALUABLE RESOURCE TOOL FOR LOOKING AT:
THE SECRET ARCHITECTURE OF OUR NATION’S CAPITAL

And you will find that many ARCHITECTS either knowingly or unknowingly built
American cities & buildings with similar symbolism and architecture.  As Christians, we
know that this is all ANTI-CHRIST empire symbolism replacing the cross!  As the cross
is being removed and the Ten Commandments taken down, MASONIC SYMBOLISM
HAS INFESTED EVERY COURT OF LAW with the eight-pointed star (representing
the 8 paths to the underground), the “X”, the TRIANGLE, the Pyramid, THE
CRESCENT ARCHES OF ISIS AND OSIRIS AND HORUS, (such as seen on the
CITIBANK LOGO in a red crescent dotting the I in CItIbank.

The evidence of anti-Christ symbolism is overwhelming and should not be ignored.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Washington as a Freemason

Washington's Masonic Apron

--- Sayfa 10 ---
New I.R.S. Headquarters Complex
'Contained A Strange Masonic Theme'...

        As you can see on the back of
the U.S. one dollar bill there is a
pyramid with the All-Seeing-Eye of
God, with the message,  "New Order
of The Ages" or "New World Order."

--- Sayfa 11 ---
You are about to learn that the U.S. Government is linked
to Satanism.
        The street design in Washington, D.C., has been laid out
in such a manner that certain Luciferic symbols are depicted
by the streets, cul-de-sacs and rotaries.   This design was
created in 1791, a few years after Freemasonry assumed the
leadership of the New World Order, in 1782.
        In Europe,  occult leaders were told by their Familiar
Spirits as early as the 1740's that the new American continent
was to be established as the new "Atlantis", and its destiny
was to assume the global leadership of the drive to the New
World Order.
       The United States of America was
chosen to lead the world into this
kingdom of Antichrist from the
beginning.   The capital is Washington,
D.C.
        In 1791, Pierre Charles
L'Enfante(the designer, who was a Freemason), laid out
Governmental Center of Washington, D.C.,  he planned more
than just streets, roads, and buildings.   He hid certain occultic
magical symbols in the layout of  U.S. Governmental Center.
When these symbols are united they become one large
Luciferic, or occultic, symbol.

Washington D.C. An untrained eye
might not see the Luciferic connection

--- Sayfa 12 ---
in this map.
        The upper four points of the Goathead represent the four elements of the
world, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air.   The bottom fifth point represents the spirit of
Lucifer.  All of which are represented in Washington D.C. (The United States
Capital)
        Many people have natural tendencies to want to disbelieve unpleasant or
frightening truths.
Occultists take advantage of this.   "Audacity, always Audacity", is a saying the
Masters of the Illuminati have always had.   Something shocking and so far out
and considered to be impossible,......  is Audacity.
        People naturally feel that their leaders generally have their best interest at
heart whether they be in a democracy or a government of royalty.  Leaders may
commit errors and may be incompetent.   Some people may take solace in their
belief that most leaders have their country's best interests at heart, most of the
time.
        The average citizen in any given country could not conceive that their leaders
may consistently have evil in their hearts.   And this evil would be towards the
very people they are leading.
        Since 1776, our leadership(U.S. Government) has been consistently moving
us toward the Luciferic New World Order.  This leadership has always been
working through Secret Societies, misleading us as to their true intentions.
        This is why our study today is so critical; it demonstrates, beyond a shadow
of a doubt, that our leadership has knowingly and consistently been pursuing a
hidden agenda which, when fully carried out, will mean the destruction of our
nation(the U.S.) as we know it today and the beginning of the Biblical Great
Tribulation. Our leaders are currently calling this system the New World Order.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
The U.S. Capital Building
        Once they are hidden, these occultic symbols are thought to possess great
power. The Snake Basilisk is "said to have the power to destroy all upon whom it
looks".   To a person who is not an occultist, they will have no concept of the true
hidden meaning contained within the symbol.   And that hidden purpose is to
communicate certain meanings to other occultists while hiding this meaning from
all non-occultists.
        The symbols that were interwoven into the design of Governmental Center,
communicate tremendous power to the occultist while at the same time they hide
the true meaning from non-occultist.   These symbols take on a life of their own,
in the mind of the occultist, possessing great inherent power to accomplish the
plans of the occultist.

        According to occultic/Satanic doctrine, the upper four points of the
Goathead(left) represent the four elements of the world, Fire, Water, Earth, and
Air.  The bottom fifth point represents the spirit of Lucifer.  In the above
photocopy of the Goathead Pentagram, the fifth point extends down into the

--- Sayfa 14 ---
mind of the goat, who represents Lucifer.   With all that as background, let us now
begin our study of Governmental Center, Washington, D.C.
The Satanic Symbol & the Layout of Washington D.C.
        In the street layout of Washington D.C., the fifth point is the White House, a
symbol placement which represents the intention that the spirit and the mind of
Lucifer will be permanently residing in the White House.  The map I found isn't
all that accurate as far as the streets are concerned, but it will have to do.

The White House makes up the
southern most tip of the Goathead.

Lansat satellite image of the
White House(below center) and
surrounding northern area.
    In the map above, beginning from top left to top middle:
1. Dupont Circle, Logan Circle, and Scott Circle in the middle, form the top three
points of the Devil's Goathead of Mendes, one of the most important types of the
Five-pointed Devil's Pentagram.
2. Washington Circle forms the extreme left-hand point of the Goathead.
3. Mt. Vernon Square forms the extreme right-hand point of the Goathead.
4. The White House forms the fifth and bottom point of the Goathead.
        There is a 666 evident in the most important top three circles of the
Goathead, Dupont Circle, Scott Circle, and Logan Circle.   Each of these streets
has six major streets coming into them from all angles of the circle.   This type of
encoding is so typical of the occultist.
        Everything was deliberately planned to stamp the power of Freemasonry and
the symbols of its plans for America indelibly upon Government Center in
Washington D.C.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
The combination of the the Goathead of Mendes, Devil's Pentagram, and
the practical existence of the number 666 within the three upper points of the
Pentagram, unmistakably shows that Lucifer is planned to be the ultimate master
of Governmental Center.

Dupont Circle

Scott Circle
Satellite photos came from Microsoft's Terraserver.
        Now look for a moment at the circles which comprise the points of the
Pentagram. Washington Circle, Dupont Circle, Scott Circle, and Logan Circle
comprise four of the six points of the Pentagram. The only point which is not a
circle or a form of a circle is Mt. Vernon Square. We shall return to the discussion
of the importance of the square to the occultist, but let us now concentrate upon
the circle.

Logan Circle
        It is no secret as to why the Masonic architect chose to use circles as four of
the points of the Pentagram. As Goodman states in his book, Magic Symbols,
"without doubt, the circle is the most important of all units in magic symbolism,
and in almost every case where it is used, the circle is intended to denote spirit, or
spiritual forces". Therefore, we can know with certainty that these circles of this
Pentagram were used to denote powerful spiritual forces.   And, of course, these
spiritual forces are from Lucifer.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Map of Washington D.C. with outlined Luciferic design.
        But, there is much more symbolism expressed by the circle in occultic
thought. The circle has also been used as a halo above a person's head, denoting
that "he or she is in direct communication with the spiritual world".
        The circle has also been utilized to represent the Sun, especially in spiritual
terms, denoting spiritual light. But, the circle also is utilized as a symbol of the All-
Seeing Eye. Remember the All-Seeing Eye atop the pyramid on our One-Dollar
bill? This eye is within a triangle, but the important factor to realize is that the eye
is atop a pyramid. Of course, a pyramid is nothing more than a triangle. Look
again at the triangles formed by the Goathead Pentagram.
        Four out of five triangles of the Goathead has a circle, representing the All-
Seeing Eye atop each triangle.   However, the architect had a problem with the
triangle at the far right, because he chose the square as the anchor point; the
solution is to place Thomas Circle at one of the points, thus giving that triangle an
All-Seeing Eye.  In fact, I believe this is the reason why Thomas Circle was placed
in the odd position it was; it is the only circle which was not placed as an anchor
of the Pentagram.   Even the Southern Point of the Goathead Pentagram, the one
which ends at the White House, has a circle at its top. Notice the Ellipse located
just to the south of the White House lawn.(below)
NORTH

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Lansat image of the White House
        Thus, the FreeMason architect who drew this pattern intended to show that
Governmental Center was planned to be ruled by Satan. Further, the Goathead
Pentagram was placed so the Southernmost point, the spiritual point, is precisely
centered on the White House.   Notice that I did not arbitrarily draw these lines to
center on the White House; rather, the White House is the precise point where the
two lines formed by Connecticut Avenue flowing from Dupont Circle, and by
Vermont Avenue flowing from Logan Circle, intersect. The meaning is all too
clear. Occultists planned for the White House to be controlled by Lucifer in
accordance with his occultic power and doctrine.

The Goathead.(for your reference)
        But, there is still more meaning expressed by this Goathead Pentagram.
Quickly look again at the photocopy of the Devil's Pentagram, as copied from
Goodman's Magic Symbol book. Protruding from the middle top of the
Pentagram is a lighted candle, which is producing light. This physical light
represents spiritual illumination. If this representation were made on a map, this

--- Sayfa 18 ---
illuminating candle would be thought of as being North.   North is a very
important direction, because it is the place of Governmental control. In I Ching,
for example, North is the "place one reports to the master on accomplishments".
(New Age Dictionary). This is again a fulfillment of Scripture.
Lucifer
        Remember in Isaiah 14:12-14, where God recalls Lucifer's original sin of
pride and rebellion? Lucifer had every intention of taking God's throne by force
and establishing his own reign. In verses 13 and 14, Lucifer vowed, "I will ascend
to Heaven; I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit upon the
mount of assembly in the uttermost north..." Did you see that North is apparently
the direction in which God's throne is situated, and Lucifer planned to take it
over. North is the place, occultists believe, where Governmental authority dwells.
        Now look at the Goathead Pentagram again. Scott Circle is precisely located
at the middle of the Goathead, and 16th Street proceeds directly north. As you
look directly north on 16th Street, you will immediately see the House Of The
Temple, which is the North American Headquarters of Freemasonry. Even the
number 16 is significant to the occultist; it is 4x4 (Remember that the four upper
points of the Goathead Pentagram represent the Four Elements of which the
earth is constructed). Number 16 literally means "felicity", which, according to my
Webster's Dictionary, means blissful happiness or anything which will produce
such a state. Certainly, blissful happiness is the stated goal of any Satanic system.
A corollary meaning of 16 is love.
        The number 16 also pops up in an encoded manner. Both Dupont Circle and
Logan Circle, which form the top two most important points of the Goathead
Pentagram, are located on "P" Street. "P" is the 16th letter of the English
alphabet.
        Sixteenth Street emanates north from Scott Circle, which is itself the precise
middle of the Goathead Pentagram. This street represents the candle of the
photocopy. The illuminating light of the candle is represented by the House Of
The Temple, which begins on "R" Street. The architect is literally saying that
Freemasonry is the spiritual light of this Goathead Pentagram; of course, this
Goathead Pentagram is rooted at the White House. One quick word on "R"
Street. The letter "R" is the 18th letter of the English alphabet, and 18 is critically
important to the occultist because it is 6+6+6.
        The House Of The Temple is also located 13 city blocks north of the White
House. Count them yourself, beginning with the first city block north of Lafayette
Square. Of course, the number 13 represents rebellion against God's authority,

--- Sayfa 19 ---
and is generally thought of as Satan's number. It is no accident the House Of The
Temple is located 13 blocks north of the White House.  The meaning occulticly
transmitted is that the control of the White House would be spiritual and would
emanate from the House Of The Temple. Certainly, many American Presidents
have been Freemasons.  The most famous is George Washington, but the most
influential was Franklin D. Roosevelt, who did more to advance the cause of the
New World Order than anyone else in American history.
Seventeenth President
Andrew Johnson
1865-1869

Brig General Albert Pike
(1809-1891)
Confederate
             The critical importance of this symbolism pointed out above, namely, that
the Presidency of the United States is to be controlled by Freemasonry, is
thoroughly documented by Christian author, Ralph Epperson, in his book, "The
New World Order". On page 171, Epperson quotes testimony given in March,
1867, before the House Judiciary Committee, by General Gordon Granger.
General Granger related a meeting between himself, President Andrew Johnson,
who was a Mason, and Albert Pike, the most famous of all Masons. General
Granger reported his surprise that President Johnson considered himself to be
subordinate to Albert Pike. This subordination is detailed in the oath the initiate
takes during the Third Degree, called the Master Mason's degree, inside the Blue
Lodge. This oath states, "I do promise...that I will obey all...summonses..given..to
me from the hand of a Brother Master Mason ..."  Presidents who are Masons are
obligated to take orders from their Master Masons. But why should we be

--- Sayfa 20 ---
surprised? This is the meaning of the symbolization contained by the House Of
The Temple being precisely 13 city blocks north of the White House.

The Triple Tau

The Pentagon
        Now, let us quickly examine the importance of the square to the occultist.
We need to understand this because the Eastern point of this Goathead
Pentagram is a square, not a circle. The square is comprised of two (2) vertical
lines and two (2) horizontal. According to Goodman in his book, "Magical
Symbols," the vertical line symbolizes spirit. This spiritual force may move either
from Heaven to Earth or from Earth to Heaven, or even from Heaven to Hell.
The horizontal line symbolizes matter and movement from west to east. It also
describes movement in time, as a direction in which one is traveling. This point is
very critical, because the Freemason is committed to taking America in the
direction of the New World Order.  Since the square combines the vertical and
the horizontal, it becomes a symbol of the material, physical realm which is

--- Sayfa 21 ---
enmeshed with spirit and time. The passage of time within an
occultic spiritual context is what is in view here. In this instance, the
United States of America is the physical realm which is moving in time toward the
desired direction of the New World Order.

Mason Headquarters (Mt. Vernon Square)
        This square also contains one more piece of occultic meaning. In this
Goathead Pentagram, Mt. Vernon Square is the Eastern point. In occultic
doctrine, East is the direction from which a person receives spiritual knowledge
and guidance. This belief originated in the Pagan worship of the Sun, and it is very
much alive in Freemasonry today.
        Now, let us look at the symbol contained in the lower right hand portion of
your Washington , D.C., city street map. This combination of symbols runs South
and East from the White House to the United States Capitol. These are the
symbols which clearly stamp Freemasonry upon this city, and which unmistakably
reveal that the brand of Luciferic worship which we see in the Goathead
Pentagram is the brand practiced by Freemasonry. Let us look at these
Freemasonry symbols.
       The three most sacred symbols of Freemasonry are the Compass, the Square,
and the Rule or straight-edge. Look at the United States capitol, and you will see
that it is laid out in the form of a circle. This represents the top of a professional
compass of that era, which was circular. Pennsylvania Avenue, running from the
Capitol to the White House, represents one leg of the compass. Maryland Avenue,
running from the Capitol to Thomas Jefferson Memorial(left), represents the
second leg of the compass. In this instance, you will have to lay out a ruler and
draw a solid line from the Capitol to the Jefferson Memorial to get the full effect,
because Maryland does not run straight through. It runs for a while and then
disappears only to reappear again further toward the Memorial. However, you can
easily see that the general direction runs precisely toward the Jefferson Memorial.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
This is the compass of Freemasonry.
        The Freemason's Square begins at Union Square, with Louisiana Avenue
forming one arm and Washington Avenue the other. Again, you will have to draw
a line down Louisiana Avenue and Washington to see the fully-formed square,
because Louisiana ends at Pennsylvania and Washington ends at Maryland. The
critical 900 angle of the square is pictorially missing; however, once you draw the
natural continuation of Louisiana and Washington beyond their termination
points you will see the 900 square perfectly formed.
        The Freemason's Rule, or straightedge, is clearly seen if you draw a straight
line south from the White House center to the base of the Washington Monument
and then straight East to the Capitol.
        Thus, all three of the sacred instruments of Freemasonry are depicted in the
layout of these streets. As I stated earlier, the deliberate planning of these
Governmental Buildings so that they would be laid out so as to represent these
three sacred tools of Freemasonry, coupled with the Luciferic Goathead
Pentagram, clearly tell us that the brand of Luciferic control and worship planned
for this capitol city was Freemasonry. This clearly shows that the New World
Order for which FreeMasonry has labored for so many years is Luciferic, their
vigorous protestations to the contrary notwithstanding.

        But there is more. Look again at the United States Capitol(above). At the
extreme Eastern side of the Capitol, you can see two cul-de-sacs which are
irregularly shaped.   In fact, when you draw a bold black line carefully around
these cul-de-sacs, and continue the black line around the Capitol, you get the
appearance of a fat bunny's head, with the cul-de-sacs as his ears.   This is not
accidental, either.   The head and ears of the bunny attach to the stick figures of
the legs of the compass, which are meant to be the legs of the bunny. Further, the
Mason's Square form stick-figure arms of the bunny.   This representation is
critically important, because ancient Satanists drew Satan in just this stick figure

--- Sayfa 23 ---
way, including the fat bunny head and his ears.   This is another way of
representing Satan.
       And, just as the White House forms the southern point of the Goathead
Pentagram, so the Capitol forms the head of Satan. Shockingly, the meaning is
also the same. The Southern point of the Goathead Pentagram represented the
spirit of Satan reaching into the mind of the goathead, the bunny's head represents
the same meaning. In other words, both the Executive and the Legislative
Branches of Government are to be controlled by Satan.
        In commemoration of the 190th anniversary of the birth of George
Washington, 48 American flags representing the then 48 states of the Union,
encircling the monument, were raised on February 22, 1922. The current
configuration of the more durable aluminum flagpoles date to 1959, following the
inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii into the Union as the 49th and 50th states.
        Let us now quickly look at the Washington Monument,
which lies directly West of the Capitol. In fact, the Washington
Monument lies on a straight line, precisely 900 West of the
Capitol.  The Washington Monument(left) is the most
important Presidential monument to the occultist, because it is
an obelisk set inside a circle. What, you are probably saying, is
an obelisk?    An obelisk is a tall, four-sided stone pillar
tapering toward a pyramidal top.
        The obelisk is critically important to the occultist because
they believe that the spirit of the ancient Egyptian sun god, Ra,
resided in the obelisk.
        Thus, the obelisk represents the very presence of the sun
god, whom the Bible calls Satan.
        There are four major obelisks that were erected by Freemasons in the 19th
century.
        The first obelisk was brought to France from Thebes, Egypt, and was placed
in Paris's Revolution Square the site of mass public guillotining during the Mason
lead Bloody French Revolution.
        The second obelisk was brought to England from Alexandria, Egypt, and
was placed next to the Thames river in London.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
The third obelisk was brought to America in 1881 from Alexandria, Egypt,
and was placed in Central Park in New York City.
        The fourth obelisk is the Washington Monument, built to commemorate our
First President, George Washington(who was a Free Mason). In light of the
symbols which we have just studied, which have been built into the layout of
Government Center. The Washington Monument was constructed by Masons,
according to Masonic tradition, as a symbol that this country was controlled by
Freemasonry from the very beginning.
                The Washington Monument was constructed to honor the first Masonic
President, was designed so that both the White House and the Capitol face toward
it so that the leaders of both branches have to face the spirit of Lucifer thought to
be residing in it. This is typical occultism.
        One final interesting note. We reported earlier in this article that the
Washington Monument obelisk was placed directly on a straight line, precisely 900
West of the Capitol. Thus, the inhabitants of the Capitol could face the obelisk
daily. However, note that the Washington, D.C., obelisk does not lie in a straight
line 900 South the White House. Why? Because it was lined so that it lies in a
straight line 900 from the House of Understanding, the headquarters of
FreeMasonry!! In the mind of the occultist, the true political Administrative power
resides in this Freemasonry headquarters, not in the White House. This is why
President Andrew Johnson considered himself to be the subordinate to Albert
Pike, the leader of North American FreeMasonry!
        Clearly, the power of leadership to drive this country toward the New World
Order, leading the rest of the world, lies in FreeMasonry, not in the White House
or the Congress.     These symbols, built into the physical layout of Government
Center in Washington, D.C., represent the extent of that power. Think of the
many years these symbols have remained hidden from most people's knowledge;
think of the millions of tourists which have walked on these streets during this
time, without having any idea as to the existence of these symbols, not to mention
their meaning! And, if you have ever driven a car in Washington D.C. area, you
will now understand why these streets seem to be laid out so weird!   Driving in
Washington D.C.  can be a nightmare.   Now you know why.
        I will challenge any one to try and disprove this information.  The odds
against this happening accidentally are so astronomical and ridiculous!  Do you see
irrefutable evidences of a conspiracy here?
        And, now the end is apparently in sight. The Third World War, envisioned
by Albert Pike in 1870 between Israel and her Arab neighbors, is apparently at

--- Sayfa 25 ---
hand. Out of this war is to come Antichrist. Are you spiritually ready? Is your
family? Are you adequately protecting your loved ones?
Statue of Liberty - information compiled by a list member

      The Statue of Liberty is another brotherhood symbol highlighting the lighted
torch,  Statue of Liberty is actually the Statue of Liberties - the liberties
perpetrated on the American people by the brotherhood.  It was given by French
freemasons, a mirror image stands on an island in the river seine in Paris.
        Initiates into the rites of Mithra were called lions and were marked on their
foreheads with the Egyptian cross.  The first degree initiates had a golden crown
placed on their heads, representing their spiritual self, and this crown, symbolizing
the rays of the sun, can be found on the Statue of Liberty in NY harbor.  All these
rituals went back thousands of years to Babylon and the stories of Nimrod, Queen
Semiramis, and Tammuz, their version of Jesus Mathra was said to be the son
(Sun ) of god who died to save humanity and give them eternal life.  One classic
symbol of Mithra was a lion with a snake curled around his body, while he holds
the keys to heaven.
        The individuals who are in control of this world are not who they might
seem.   They are evil spirits set out to enslave other spiritual beings,.... us.  Christ
was trying to teach us the truth about spirituality but they had Him killed for
trying.
        I do respect all those who died defending our 'freedom', but it is time to
wake up and realize who the real enemy is.

Resource: the forbiddenknowledge.com

--- Sayfa 26 ---
The Ole South...

--- Sayfa 27 ---
'Presiding in the East'
Uncle Samael...

Better Business Bureau, Notice the Torch?
        The individuals who are in control of this world are not who they might seem.
They are evil spirits set out to enslave other spiritual beings,.... us!  Christ was
trying to teach us the truth about spirituality but they had Him killed for trying.
        I do respect all those who died defending our 'freedom', but it is time to wake
up and realize who the REAL enemy is!
        The American flag is a symbol of the Brotherhood and the Brotherhood is linked
to Satanism.  The Flag has 50 pentagrams on it with thirteen stripes.  But again, as

--- Sayfa 28 ---
mentioned in an earlier page, the number 13 is not evil.  They have programmed us
to think that it is evil because they do not want us to go near the knowledge that is
behind it.
        1777: June 14 -- Continental Congress adopts the following: Resolved: that the
flag of the United States be 13 stripes, alternate red and white; that the union be
thirteen stars, white in a blue field, representing a new constellation. (stars
represent Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Georgia, Connecticut, Massachusetts,
Maryland, South Carolina, New Hampshire, Virginia, New York, North Carolina, and
Rhode Island)
Delaware: - December 07, 1787
Connecticut: - January 09, 1788
Georgia: - January 02, 1788
Maryland: - April 28, 1788
Massachusetts: - February 06, 1788
New Hampshire: - June 21, 1788
New Jersey: - December 18, 1787
New York: - July 26, 1788
North Carolina: - November 21, 1789
Pennsylvania: - December 12, 1787
South Carolina: - May 23, 1788
Rhode Island: - May 29, 1790
Virginia: - June 25, 1788
Statue of Liberty - information compiled by a list member

      The Statue of Liberty is another brotherhood symbol highlighting the lighted
torch,  Statue of Liberty is actually the Statue of Liberties - the liberties perpetrated
on the American people by the brotherhood.  It was given by French freemasons, a
mirror image stands on an island in the river seine in Paris.
        Initiates into the rites of Mithra were called lions and were marked on their
foreheads with the Egyptian cross.  The first degree initiates had a golden crown
placed on their heads, representing their spiritual self, and this crown, symbolizing
the rays of the sun, can be found on the Statue of Liberty in NY harbor.  All these
rituals went back thousands of years to Babylon and the stories of Nimrod, Queen
Semiramis, and Tammuz, their version of Jesus Mathra was said to be the son (Sun )
of god who died to save humanity and give them eternal life.  One classic symbol of

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Mithra was a lion with a snake curled around his body, while he holds the keys to
heaven.
The critical importance of this symbolism pointed out above, namely, that the
Presidency of the United States is to be controlled by Freemasonry, is thoroughly
documented by Christian author, Ralph Epperson, in his book, "The New World
Order". On page 171, Epperson quotes testimony given in March, 1867, before the
House Judiciary Committee, by General Gordon Granger. General Granger related a
meeting between himself, President Andrew Johnson, who was a Mason, and Albert
Pike, the most famous of all Masons. General Granger reported his surprise that
President Johnson considered himself to be subordinate to Albert Pike. This
subordination is detailed in the oath the initiate takes during the Third Degree, called
the Master Mason's degree, inside the Blue Lodge. This oath states, "I do
promise...that I will obey all...summonses..given..to me from the hand of a Brother
Master Mason ..."  Presidents who are Masons are obligated to take orders from their
Master Masons. But why should we be surprised? This is the meaning of the
symbolization contained by the House Of The Temple being precisely 13 city blocks
north of the White House.

The Pentagon
    Now, let us quickly examine the importance of the square to the occultist. We
need to understand this because the Eastern point of this Goathead Pentagram is a
square, not a circle. The square is comprised of two (2) vertical lines and two (2)
horizontal. According to Goodman in his book, "Magical Symbols," the vertical line
symbolizes spirit. This spiritual force may move either from Heaven to Earth or from
Earth to Heaven, or even from Heaven to Hell. The horizontal line symbolizes matter
and movement from west to east. It also describes movement in time, as a direction
in which one is traveling. This point is very critical, because the Freemason is
committed to taking America in the direction of the New World Order.  Since the
square combines the vertical and the horizontal, it becomes a symbol of the
material, physical realm which is enmeshed with spirit and time. The passage of time
within an occultic spiritual context is what is in view here. In this instance, the United
States of America is the physical realm which is moving in time toward the desired
direction of the New World Order.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Mason Headquarters (Mt. Vernon Square)
        This square also contains one more piece of occultic meaning. In this Goathead
Pentagram, Mt. Vernon Square is the Eastern point. In occultic doctrine, East is the
direction from which a person receives spiritual knowledge and guidance. This belief
originated in the Pagan worship of the Sun, and it is very much alive in
Freemasonry today.
        Now, let us look at the symbol contained in the lower right hand portion of your
Washington , D.C., city street map. This combination of symbols runs South and East
from the White House to the United States Capitol. These are the symbols which
clearly stamp Freemasonry upon this city, and which unmistakably reveal that the
brand of Luciferic worship which we see in the Goathead Pentagram is the brand
practiced by Freemasonry. Let us look at these Freemasonry symbols.
       The three most sacred symbols of Freemasonry are the Compass, the Square,
and the Rule or straight-edge. Look at the United States capitol, and you will see
that it is laid out in the form of a circle. This represents the top of a professional
compass of that era, which was circular. Pennsylvania Avenue, running from the
Capitol to the White House, represents one leg of the compass. Maryland Avenue,
running from the Capitol to Thomas Jefferson Memorial (left), represents the second
leg of the compass. In this instance, you will have to lay out a ruler and draw a solid
line from the Capitol to the Jefferson Memorial to get the full effect, because
Maryland does not run straight through. It runs for a while and then disappears only
to reappear again further toward the Memorial. However, you can easily see that the
general direction runs precisely toward the Jefferson Memorial.
This is the compass of Freemasonry.
        The Freemason's Square begins at Union Square, with Louisiana Avenue
forming one arm and Washington Avenue the other. Again, you will have to draw a
line down Louisiana Avenue and Washington to see the fully-formed square, because
Louisiana ends at Pennsylvania and Washington ends at Maryland. The critical 900
angle of the square is pictorially missing; however, once you draw the natural
continuation of Louisiana and Washington beyond their termination points you will
see the 900 square perfectly formed.
        The Freemason's Rule, or straightedge, is clearly seen if you draw a straight
line south from the White House center to the base of the Washington Monument
and then straight East to the Capitol.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Thus, all three of the sacred instruments of Freemasonry are depicted in the
layout of these streets. As I stated earlier, the deliberate planning of these
Governmental Buildings so that they would be laid out so as to represent these three
sacred tools of Freemasonry, coupled with the Luciferic Goathead Pentagram, clearly
tell us that the brand of Luciferic control and worship planned for this capitol city was
Freemasonry. This clearly shows that the New World Order for which FreeMasonry
has labored for so many years is Luciferic, their vigorous protestations to the
contrary notwithstanding.

        But there is more. Look again at the United States Capitol (above). At the
extreme Eastern side of the Capitol, you can see two cul-de-sacs which are
irregularly shaped.   In fact, when you draw a bold black line carefully around these
cul-de-sacs, and continue the black line around the Capitol, you get the appearance
of a horned owl, with the cul-de-sacs as its ears.   This is not accidental, either.  This
is another way of representing Satan.   Freemasonry designed the layout of
Washington D.C. they placed the owl there and on the American One Dollar Bill.
      The Southern point of the Goathead Pentagram represented the spirit of Satan
reaching into the mind of the goathead, the owl represents the same meaning.   In
other words, both the Executive and the Legislative Branches of Government are to
be controlled by Satan (II Corinthians 4).
        In commemoration of the 190th anniversary of the birth of George Washington,
48 American flags representing the then 48 states of the Union, encircling the
monument, were raised on February 22, 1922. The current configuration of the more
durable aluminum flagpoles date to 1959, following the inclusion of Alaska and
Hawaii into the Union as the 49th and 50th states.
        Let us now quickly look at the Washington Monument,
which lies directly West of the Capitol. In fact, the Washington
Monument lies on a straight line, precisely 900 West of the
Capitol.  The Washington Monument(left) is the most important
Presidential monument to the occultist, because it is an obelisk
set inside a circle. What, you are probably saying, is an
obelisk?    An obelisk is a tall, four-sided stone pillar tapering
toward a pyramidal top.
        The obelisk is critically important to the occultist because
they believe that the spirit of the ancient Egyptian sun god, Ra,
resided in the obelisk.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Thus, the obelisk represents the very presence of the sun god, whom the Bible
calls Satan!!
        There are only three major obelisks in the world today, and two of them are in
the United States. According to Epperson in his book, "The New World Order", the
first major obelisk was constructed in St. Peter's square in Rome, and is so placed
that every Pope who addresses any crowd in the square, must face the obelisk. A
New Age author, Peter Tomkins, reports the same facts in his book, "The Magic Of
Obelisks", Harper and Row, New York, 1982, ISBN 0-06-014899-3.
        There is an obelisk in St. Peter's Bascilica as well.  You'll be shocked to know
that the Church of God promotes Celibacy while displaying a sex act right outside of
St Peter's Bascilica.
        The second obelisk was brought to America in 1881 from Alexandria, Egypt,
and was placed in Central Park in New York City.
        The third obelisk is the Washington Monument, built to commemorate our First
President, George Washington (who was a Freemason). In light of the symbols which
we have just studied, which have been built into the layout of Government Center, I
believe the Washington Monument was constructed by Masons, according to Masonic
tradition, as a symbol that this country was controlled by Freemasonry from the very
beginning. And the Washington Monument has Freemasonry stamped all over it:
         * It is built from 36,000 separate blocks of granite. The number 36 is derived
from multiplying 3x12 and is an important number.
         * Its capstone weighs exactly 3,300 pounds.
         * The monument contains 188 specially donated Memorial stones, most of
them donated by individuals, societies, cities, and nations throughout the world. But,
Masonic lodges throughout the world contributed 35 of these Memorial stones. These
35 blocks were intermingled with the other Memorial stones, but the last several of
them were placed at the 330 foot level.
         * The total cost of the Washington Monument was reported to be $1,300,000,
showing again a most important Masonic number, 13.
         * The Monument has 8 windows, and together they total 39 square feet in
size. The number 39 is very sacred because it is formed by multiplying 3x13 AND 39
divided by two is 19.5 which is another significant masonic number. And, also
remember the importance of the Number 8 in Occultic Numerology, for it carries the
meaning of "New Beginnings". Combined with the meaning of Number 13, as
"Extreme Rebellion", you get the total message that this "New Beginning" {New
World Order} is to be carried out in "Extreme Rebellion."   I believe this to also be
connected to the UPC/EAN 13 BarCode specification(Mark of the Beast).
        There are several other, more complicated Masonic numbers concealed within
the construction of the Washington Monument, but you get the point:
        This monument, constructed to honor the first Masonic President, was designed
so that both the White House and the Capitol face toward it so that the leaders of

--- Sayfa 33 ---
both branches have to face the spirit of Lucifer thought to be residing in it. This is
typical occultism.
        One final interesting note. We reported earlier in this article that the
Washington Monument obelisk was placed directly on a straight line, precisely 900
West of the Capitol. Thus, the inhabitants of the Capitol could face the obelisk daily.
However, note that the Washington, D.C., obelisk does not lie in a straight line 900
South the White House. Why? Because it was lined so that it lies in a straight line
900 from the House of Understanding, the headquarters of FreeMasonry!! In the
mind of the occultist, the true political Administrative power resides in this
Freemasonry headquarters, not in the White House. This is why President Andrew
Johnson considered himself to be the subordinate to Albert Pike, the leader of North
American FreeMasonry!
        Clearly, the power of leadership to drive this country toward the New World
Order, leading the rest of the world, lies in FreeMasonry, not in the White House or
the Congress.     These symbols, built into the physical layout of Government Center
in Washington, D.C., represent the extent of that power. Think of the many years
these symbols have remained hidden from most people's knowledge; think of the
millions of tourists which have walked on these streets during this time, without
having any idea as to the existence of these symbols, not to mention their meaning!
And, if you have ever driven a car in Washington D.C. area, you will now understand
why these streets seem to be laid out so weird!   Driving in Washington D.C.  can be
a nightmare.   Now you know why.
        I will challenge any one to try and disprove this information.  The odds against
this happening accidentally are so astronomical and ridiculous!  Do you see
irrefutable evidences of a conspiracy here?
        And, now the end is apparently in sight. The Third World War, envisioned by
Albert Pike in 1870 between Israel and her Arab neighbors, is apparently at hand.
Out of this war is to come Antichrist. Are you spiritually ready? Is your family? Are
you adequately protecting your loved ones?
        From the rest of my website, you should make the connection that the
Churches and Governments are all controlled by this Brotherhood as well.
http://www.theforbiddenknowledge.com/chapter3/

--- Sayfa 34 ---
http://www.cuttingedge.org/news/n1040.html

THE CUTTING EDGE
We will demonstrate that the street design in Government Center in Washington, D.C.,
has been cunningly laid out in such a manner that certain Luciferic symbols are depicted
by the streets, cul-de-sacs and rotaries. This design was created by an Masonic architect
in 1791, just a few years after Freemasonry assumed the leadership of the New World
Order, in 1782. Remember, occult leaders in Europe were told by their Familiar Spirits as
early as the 1740's that the new American continent was to be established as the new
"Atlantis", and its destiny was to assume the global leadership of the drive to the New
World Order. From the beginning, the United States of America was chosen to lead the
world into this kingdom of Antichrist, and Washington, D.C. was to be its capital.
You will need to have your maps of Washington, D.C., opened in front of you as we
proceed. As we proceed through this discussion we will answer the great question of
"Why" these streets have thus been laid out.
Before we begin our discussion of this Washington, D.C. map, let us lay some important
groundwork which will enable us to better understand the occultic meaning behind what
we are about to show you. This information was given Cutting Edge Ministries by a born-
again Christian who was once a medium level Satanist, Doc Marquee. At the time of his
conversion, Doc was in charge of several Satanic covens West and North of Boston. Doc
was a Third Level Witch and a Master Witch. Shortly before Doc was born-again, he was
invited to become an Illuminist, which is a secret society totally committed to the New
World Order. Thus, Doc was in a most powerful position: he was both a Satanist Master
Witch and an Illuminist.
Doc underwent special training in the Illuminist secret society. As part of his training, he
was shown the occultic nature of the street design of the Washington, D.C.,
Governmental Center. This information was provided to show Doc several factors:
•  1. This design demonstrates the long-term plan which American Illuminists
have had upon America. As we shall see in a few moments, this occultic street
design was created in 1791 by an architect who was a Freemason.
•  2. This design shows that the Plan for a New World Order is deliberately
conceived and considered to be inevitable. Remember our earlier discussion about
the importance and perceived power of symbols? The occultist firmly believes
that a symbol or a set of symbols possesses inherent power once they are created.
Therefore, occultic doctrine teaches that these Satanic symbols would act as a
powerful electric-type grid once they were set in place. This power grid would
constantly pulsate with Luciferic power 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
constantly moving America toward the coveted Luciferic goal of the New World
Order.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
•  3. This design demonstrates the hidden, secret power wielded by the Illuminists
in the United States. Luciferic Illuminists have their hands on the most powerful
levers of political, economic, and military power in this country, and they wield
this power without any public understanding of what is really going on.
Thus, Doc and other Illuminists were shown this street design with the express purpose of
demonstrating that they were on the winning side in this drive to the New World Order.
Now, let us examine the street layout of Washington, D.C., starting with a little bit of
history.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
When the architect, Pierre Charles L'Enfante, who was a Freemason, laid out
Governmental Center of Washington, D.C., in 1791, he planned more than just streets,
roads, and buildings. He planned to use the layout of Governmental Center to hide certain
occultic magical symbols, which, when they were instituted, became one large Luciferic,
or occultic, symbol. An occultic magical symbol is defined as "...an image which hides an
inner meaning. This meaning is usually cunningly hidden behind a form..." (Frederick
Goodman, Magic Symbols, Brian Trodd Publishing House, Ltd., London, 1989, page 6).
This definition from this Luciferic book is so important, we need to repeat it. An occultic

--- Sayfa 37 ---
magical symbol is defined as "...an image which hides an inner meaning. This meaning is
usually cunningly hidden behind a form..." As we study this occultic street design of
Washington, D.C., Governmental Center, you will be seriously tempted to disregard this
information. Please do not, because these symbols are "cunningly hidden" behind a form.
Further, occultists always depend upon the natural human tendency to want to disbelieve
unpleasant or frightening truth. The Masters of the Illuminati always had a saying,
"Audacity, always Audacity". Of course, Audacity means something so shocking and so
far out, it is to be considered impossible. People naturally feel, both in a democracy and a
government of royalty, that their leaders generally have their best interests at heart. Some
leaders may be incompetent and some others may commit errors, but at least, people take
solace in their belief that most leaders most of the time, have their country's best interests
at heart. The average citizen of any country simply cannot conceive that their leaders may
consistently have evil in their hearts toward the very people they are leading. But, as we
have consistently shown, this is precisely the case. Our leadership has been consistently
moving us toward the Luciferic New World Order since 1776, always working through
Secret Societies, and always misleading the people as to their true intentions.
This is why our study today is so critical; it demonstrates, beyond a shadow of a doubt,
that our leadership has knowingly and consistently been pursuing a hidden agenda which,
when fully carried out, will mean the destruction of our nation as we know it today and
the beginning of the Biblical Great Tribulation. Our leaders are currently calling this
system the New World Order!
Now back to the symbols embedded within the streets of Washington, D.C.: These
occultic symbols, once they are hidden, are thought to possess great power. For example,
the Snake Basilisk is "said to have the power to destroy all upon whom it looks" (Ibid,
page 7). However, the person who is not an occultist will have no concept of the true
hidden meaning contained within the symbol. Therefore, symbols also serve another
purpose: to communicate certain meanings to other occultists while hiding this meaning
from all non-occultists.
Therefore, the symbols which have been interwoven into the design of Governmental
Center, communicate tremendous power to the occultist while hiding the meaning from
anyone who is not an occultist. And, these symbols take on a life of their own, in the
mind of the occultist, possessing great inherent power to accomplish the plans of the
occultist.
With this as background, let us now begin our study of Governmental Center,
Washington, D.C.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Beginning from top left to top middle:
•  1. Dupont Circle, Logan Circle, and Scott Circle in the middle, form
the top three points of the Devil's Goathead of Mendes, one of the most
important types of the Five-pointed Devil's Pentagram.
•  2. Washington Circle forms the extreme left-hand point of the
Goathead.
•  3. Mt. Vernon Square forms the extreme right-hand point of the
Goathead.
•  4. The White House forms the fifth and bottom point of the
Goathead.
In occultic/Satanic doctrine, the upper four points of the Goathead
represent the four elements of the world, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air.
The bottom fifth point represents the spirit of Lucifer. In the photocopy
of the Goathead Pentagram, the fifth point extends down into the mind
of the goat, who represents Lucifer. Thus, in this street layout, the fifth
point is the White House, a symbol placement which represents the
intention that the spirit and the mind of Lucifer will be permanently
residing in the White House.
There is a 666 evident in the most important top three circles of the Goathead, Dupont
Circle, Scott Circle, and Logan Circle. Each of these streets has six major streets coming
into them from all angles of the circle. This type of encoding is so typical of the occultist.
Do not be deceived into thinking that this is accidental; everything I am showing you
here today was deliberately planned to stamp the power of Freemasonry and the symbols
of its plans for America indelibly upon Governmental Center. The combination of the
Devil's Pentagram, the Goathead of Mendes, and the practical existence of the number
666 within the three upper points of the Pentagram, unmistakably shows that Lucifer is
planned to be the ultimate master of Governmental Center.
Now look for a moment at the circles which comprise the points of the Pentagram.
Washington Circle, Dupont Circle, Scott Circle, and Logan Circle comprise four of the
six points of the Pentagram. The only point which is not a circle or a form of a circle is
Mt. Vernon Square. We shall return to the discussion of the importance of the square to
the occultist, but let us now concentrate upon the circle.
It is no secret as to why the Masonic architect chose to use circles as four of the points of
the Pentagram. As Goodman states in his book, Magic Symbols, "without doubt, the
circle is the most important of all units in magic symbolism, and in almost every case
where it is used, the circle is intended to denote spirit, or spiritual forces". Therefore, we
can know with certainty that these circles of this Pentagram were used to denote powerful
spiritual forces. And, of course, these spiritual forces are from Lucifer.
But, there is much more symbolism expressed by the circle in occultic thought. The circle
has also been used as a halo above a person's head, denoting that "he or she is in direct
communication with the spiritual world". (Ibid, page 29). The circle has also been
utilized to represent the Sun, especially in spiritual terms, denoting spiritual light. But,

--- Sayfa 39 ---
the circle also is utilized as a symbol of the All-Seeing Eye. Remember
the All-Seeing Eye atop the pyramid on our One-Dollar bill? This eye
is within a triangle, but the important factor to realize is that the eye is
atop a pyramid. Of course, a pyramid is nothing more than a triangle.
Look again at the triangles formed by the Goathead Pentagram. Four
out of five triangles of the Goathead has a circle, representing the All-
Seeing Eye atop each triangle. However, the architect had a problem
with the triangle at the far right, because he chose the square as the
anchor point; the solution is to place Thomas Circle at one of the
points, thus giving that triangle an All-Seeing Eye. In fact, I believe
this is the reason why Thomas Circle was placed in the odd position it
was; it is the only circle which was not placed as an anchor of the
Pentagram. Even the Southern Point of the Goathead Pentagram, the
one which ends at the White House, has a circle at its top. Notice the
Ellipse located just to the south of the White House lawn.
Thus, the Freemason architect who drew this pattern intended to show
that Governmental Center was planned to be ruled by Satan. Further, the Goathead
Pentagram was placed so the Southernmost point, the spiritual point, is precisely centered
on the White House. Notice that I did not arbitrarily draw these lines to center on the
White House; rather, the White House is the precise point where the two lines formed by
Connecticut Avenue flowing from Dupont Circle, and by Vermont Avenue flowing from
Logan Circle, intersect. The meaning is all too clear. Occultists planned for the White
House to be controlled by Lucifer in accordance with his occultic power and doctrine.
But, there is still more meaning expressed by this Goathead Pentagram. Quickly look
again at the photocopy of the Devil's Pentagram, as copied from Goodman's Magic
Symbol book. Protruding from the middle top of the Pentagram is a lighted candle, which
is producing light. This physical light represents spiritual illumination. If this
representation were made on a map, this illuminating candle would be thought of as
being North. North is a very important direction, because it is the place of Governmental
control. In I Ching, for example, North is the "place one reports to the master on
accomplishments". (New Age Dictionary). This is again a fulfillment of Scripture.
Remember in Isaiah 14:12-14, where God recalls Lucifer's original sin of pride and
rebellion? Lucifer had every intention of taking God's throne by force and establishing
his own reign. In verses 13 and 14, Lucifer vowed, "I will ascend to Heaven; I will exalt
my throne above the stars of God; I will sit upon the mount of assembly in the uttermost
north..." Did you see that North is apparently the direction in which God's throne is
situated, and Lucifer planned to take it over. North is the place, occultists believe, where
Governmental authority dwells.
Now look at the Goathead Pentagram again. Scott Circle is precisely located at the
middle of the Goathead, and 16th Street proceeds directly north. As you look directly
north on 16th Street, you will immediately see the House Of The Temple, which is the
North American Headquarters of Freemasonry. Even the number 16 is significant to the
occultist; it is 4x4 (Remember that the four upper points of the Goathead Pentagram

--- Sayfa 40 ---
represent the Four Elements of which the earth is constructed). Number 16 literally
means "felicity", which, according to my Webster's Dictionary, means blissful happiness
or anything which will produce such a state. Certainly, blissful happiness is the stated
goal of any Satanic system. A corollary meaning of 16 is love.
The number 16 also pops up in an encoded manner. Both Dupont Circle and Logan
Circle, which form the top two most important points of the Goathead Pentagram, are
located on "P" Street. "P" is the 16th letter of the English alphabet.
Sixteenth Street emanates north from Scott Circle, which is itself the precise middle of
the Goathead Pentagram. This street represents the candle of the photocopy. The
illuminating light of the candle is represented by the House Of The Temple, which begins
on "R" Street. The architect is literally saying that Freemasonry is the spiritual light of
this Goathead Pentagram; of course, this Goathead Pentagram is rooted at the White
House. One quick word on "R" Street. The letter "R" is the 18th letter of the English
alphabet, and 18 is critically important to the occultist because it is 6+6+6.
The House Of The Temple is also located 13 city blocks north of the White House. Count
them yourself, beginning with the first city block north of Lafayette Square. Of course,
the number 13 represents rebellion against God's authority, and is generally thought of as
Satan's number. It is no accident the House Of The Temple is located 13 blocks north of
the White House. The meaning occulticly transmitted is that the control of the White
House would be spiritual and would emanate from the House Of The Temple. Certainly,
many American Presidents have been Freemasons. The most famous is George
Washington, but the most influential was Franklin D. Roosevelt, who did more to
advance the cause of the New World Order than anyone else in American history.
The critical importance of this symbolism pointed out above, namely, that the Presidency
of the United States is to be controlled by Freemasonry, is thoroughly documented by
Christian author, Ralph Epperson, in his book, "The New World Order". On page 171,
Epperson quotes testimony given in March, 1867, before the House Judiciary Committee,
by General Gordon Granger. General Granger related a meeting between himself,
President Andrew Johnson, who was a Mason, and Albert Pike, the most famous of all
Masons. General Granger reported his surprise that President Johnson considered himself
to be subordinate to Albert Pike. This subordination is detailed in the oath the initiate
takes during the Third Degree, called the Master Mason's degree, inside the Blue Lodge.
This oath states, "I do promise...that I will obey all...summonses..given..to me from the
hand of a Brother Master Mason ..." Presidents who are Masons are obligated to take
orders from their Master Masons. But why should we be surprised? This is the meaning
of the symbolization contained by the House Of The Temple being precisely 13 city
blocks north of the White House.
Now, let us quickly examine the importance of the square to the occultist. We need to
understand this because the Eastern point of this Goathead Pentagram is a square, not a
circle. The square is comprised of two (2) vertical lines and two (2) horizontal. According
to Goodman in his book, "Magical Symbols", the vertical line symbolizes spirit. This

--- Sayfa 41 ---
spiritual force may move either from Heaven to Earth or from Earth to Heaven, or even
from Heaven to Hell. The horizontal line symbolizes matter and movement from west to
east. It also describes movement in time, as a direction in which one is traveling. This
point is very critical, because the Freemason is committed to taking America in the
direction of the New World Order. Since the square combines the vertical and the
horizontal, it becomes a symbol of the material, physical realm which is enmeshed with
spirit and time. The passage of time within an occultic spiritual context is what is in view
here. In this instance, the United States of America is the physical realm which is moving
in time toward the desired direction of the New World Order.
This square also contains one more piece of occultic meaning. In this Goathead
Pentagram, Mt. Vernon Square is the Eastern point. In occultic doctrine, East is the
direction from which a person receives spiritual knowledge and guidance. This belief
originated in the Pagan worship of the Sun, and it is very much alive in Freemasonry
today.
Now, let us look at the symbol contained in the lower right hand portion of your
Washington , D.C., city street map. This combination of symbols runs South and East
from the White House to the United States Capitol. These are the symbols which clearly
stamp Freemasonry upon this city, and which unmistakably reveal that the brand of
Luciferic worship which we see in the Goathead Pentagram is the brand practiced by
Freemasonry. Let us look at these Freemasonry symbols.
The three most sacred symbols of Freemasonry are the Compass, the Square, and the
Rule or straight-edge. Look at the United States capitol, and you will see that it is laid out
in the form of a circle. This represents the top of a professional compass of that era,
which was circular. Pennsylvania Avenue, running from the Capitol to the White House,
represents one leg of the compass. Maryland Avenue, running from the Capitol to
Thomas Jefferson Memorial, represents the second leg of the compass. In this instance,
you will have to lay out a ruler and draw a solid line from the Capitol to the Jefferson
Memorial to get the full effect, because Maryland does not run straight through. It runs
for a while and then disappears only to reappear again further toward the Memorial.
However, you can easily see that the general direction runs precisely toward the Jefferson
Memorial. This is the compass of Freemasonry.
The Freemason's Square begins at Union Square, with Louisiana Avenue forming one
arm and Washington Avenue the other. Again, you will have to draw a line down
Louisiana Avenue and Washington to see the fully-formed square, because Louisiana
ends at Pennsylvania and Washington ends at Maryland. The critical 900 angle of the
square is pictorially missing; however, once you draw the natural continuation of
Louisiana and Washington beyond their termination points you will see the 900 square
perfectly formed.
The Freemason's Rule, or straightedge, is clearly seen if you draw a straight line south
from the White House center to the base of the Washington Monument and then straight
East to the Capitol.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Thus, all three of the sacred instruments of Freemasonry are depicted in the layout of
these streets. As I stated earlier, the deliberate planning of these Governmental Buildings
so that they would be laid out so as to represent these three sacred tools of Freemasonry,
coupled with the Luciferic Goathead Pentagram, clearly tell us that the brand of Luciferic
control and worship planned for this capitol city was Freemasonry. This clearly shows
that the New World Order for which Freemasonry has labored for so many years is
Luciferic, their vigorous protestations to the contrary notwithstanding.
But there is more. Look again at the United States Capitol. At the extreme Eastern side of
the Capitol, you can see two cul-de-sacs which are irregularly shaped. In fact, when you
draw a bold black line carefully around these cul-de-sacs, and continue the black line
around the Capitol, you get the appearance of a fat bunny's head, with the cul-de-sacs as
his ears. This is not accidental, either. The head and ears of the bunny attach to the stick
figures of the legs of the compass, which are meant to be the legs of the bunny. Further,
the Mason's Square form stick-figure arms of the bunny. This representation is critically
important, because ancient Satanists drew Satan in just this stick figure way, including
the fat bunny head and his ears. This is another way of representing Satan.
And, just as the White House forms the southern point of the Goathead Pentagram, so the
Capitol forms the head of Satan. Shockingly, the meaning is also the same. The Southern
point of the Goathead Pentagram represented the spirit of Satan reaching into the mind of
the goathead, the bunny's head represents the same meaning. In other words, both the
Executive and the Legislative Branches of Government are to be controlled by Satan.
Let us now quickly look at the Washington Monument, which lies directly West of the
Capitol. In fact, the Washington Monument lies on a straight line, precisely 900 West of
the Capitol. The Washington Monument is the most important Presidential monument to
the occultist, because it is an obelisk set inside a circle. What, you are probably saying, is
an obelisk? An obelisk is a tall, four-sided stone pillar tapering toward a pyramidal top.
The obelisk is critically important to the occultist because they believe that the spirit of
the ancient Egyptian sun god, Ra, resided in the obelisk. Thus, the obelisk represents the
very presence of the sun god, whom the Bible calls Satan!!
There are only three major obelisks in the world today, and two of them are in the United
States. According to Epperson in his book, "The New World Order", the first major
obelisk was constructed in St. Peter's square in Rome, and is so placed that every Pope
who addresses any crowd in the square, must face the obelisk. A New Age author, Peter
Tomkins, reports the same facts in his book, "The Magic Of Obelisks", Harper and Row,
New York, 1982, ISBN 0-06-014899-3.
For full details of this obelisk in St. Peter's Bascilica, please read NEWS1034, "POPE
JOHN PAUL II EMBRACES EVOLUTION!!"
The second obelisk was brought to America in 1881 from Alexandria, Egypt, and was
placed in Central Park in New York City.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
The third obelisk is the Washington Monument, built to commemorate our First
President, George Washington. In light of the symbols which we have just studied, which
have been built into the layout of Government Center, I believe the Washington
Monument was constructed by Masons, according to Masonic tradition, as a symbol that
this country was controlled by Freemasonry from the very beginning. And the
Washington Monument has Freemasonry stamped all over it:
* It is built from 36,000 separate blocks of granite. The number 36 is derived
from multiplying 3x12 and is an important number.
* Its capstone weighs exactly 3,300 pounds.
* The monument contains 188 specially donated Memorial stones, most of them
donated by individuals, societies, cities, and nations throughout the world. But,
Masonic lodges throughout the world contributed 35 of these Memorial stones.
These 35 blocks were intermingled with the other Memorial stones, but the last
several of them were placed at the 330 foot level.
* The total cost of the Washington Monument was reported to be $1,300,000,
showing again a most important Masonic number, 13.
* The Monument has 8 windows, and together they total 39 square feet in size.
The number 39 is very sacred because it is formed by multiplying 3x13. And, also
remember the importance of the Number 8 in Occultic Numerology, for it carries
the meaning of "New Beginnings". Combined with the meaning of Number 13, as
"Extreme Rebellion", you get the total message that this "New Beginning" {New
World Order} is to be carried out in "Extreme Rebellion".
There are several other, more complicated Masonic numbers concealed within the
construction of the Washington Monument, but you get the point: This monument,
constructed to honor the first Masonic President, was designed so that both the White
House and the Capitol face toward it so that the leaders of both branches have to face the
spirit of Lucifer thought to be residing in it. This is typical occultism.
One final interesting note. We reported earlier in this article that the Washington
Monument obelisk was placed directly on a straight line, precisely 900 West of the
Capitol. Thus, the inhabitants of the Capitol could face the obelisk daily. However, note
that the Washington, D.C., obelisk does not lie in a straight line 900 South the White
House. Why? Because it was lined so that it lies in a straight line 900 from the House of
Understanding, the headquarters of Freemasonry!! In the mind of the occultist, the true
political Administrative power resides in this Freemasonry headquarters, not in the White
House. This is why President Andrew Johnson considered himself to be the subordinate
to Albert Pike, the leader of North American Freemasonry!
Clearly, the power of leadership to drive this country toward the New World Order,
leading the rest of the world, lies in Freemasonry, not in the White House or the

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Congress. These symbols, built into the physical layout of Government Center in
Washinton, D.C., represent the extent of that power. Think of the many years these
symbols have remained hidden from most people's knowledge; think of the millions of
tourists which have walked on these streets during this time, without having any idea as
to the existence of these symbols, not to mention their meaning! And, if you have ever
driven a car in this area, you will now understand why these streets seem to be laid out so
wierd! Driving here can be a nightmare. Now you know why.
I dare anyone to email me to tell me that this perfect layout of occult symbols is
accidental or without significance. The odds against this happening accidentally are so
astronomical as to be absurd. Do you see irrefutable evidences of a conspiracy here?
And, now the end is apparently in sight. The Third World War, envisioned by Albert Pike
in 1870 between Israel and her Arab neighbors, is apparently at hand. Out of this war is
to come Antichrist. Are you spiritually ready? Is your family? Are you adequately
protecting your loved ones? This is the reason for this ministry, to enable you to first
understand the peril facing you, and then help you develop strategies to warn and protect
your loved ones. Once you have been thoroughly trained, you can also use your
knowledge as a means to open the door of discussion with an unsaved person. I have
been able to use it many times, and have seen people come to Jesus Christ as a result.
These perilous times are also a time when we can reach many souls for Jesus Christ,
making an eternal difference.
We hope you have been blessed by this ministry, which seeks to educate and warn
people, so that they can see the coming New World Order -- Kingdom of Antichrist -- in
their daily news.
Have you accepted Jesus Christ as your savior? Do you know that you have eternal life?
You can accept Christ and be born again right now, right where you are! If you want to
know that you have eternal life and be forgiven of all your sins please read this. Finally,
we would love to hear from you. You can write us at:
God bless you.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
The George Washington Trowel
The cornerstone of the Capitol Building of the United Stated
of America was laid with Masonic Honors on September 18,
1793. As the site was located within the Masonic
jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Maryland, the ceremony
was conducted under the auspices of that Grand Lodge with
Rt. Wor. Joseph Clark as Grand Master pro tem. Wor.
Brother and President George Washington presided over the
ceremony, in which he was assisted by Rt. Wor. Brother
Clark of Maryland, Wor. Brother Elisha C. Dick, Master of his home lodge, Alexandria
Lodge No. 22 of Virginia, as well as Wor. Brother Valentine Reintzel, Master of Lodge
No. 9 of Maryland (now Potomac Lodge No. 5 of the District of Columbia).
Both the silver Trowel and marble Gavel used by George Washington in laying the
cornerstone were crafted especially for the occasion by Brother John Duffey, a
silversmith of Alexandria who was a member of Fredericksburg Lodge No. 4. The trowel
has a silver blade, silver shank, ivory handle and a silver cap on the end of the handle. In
addition to the Trowel and Gavel, Brother Duffey crafted Masonic working tools of
walnut for use in the ceremony. At the conclusion of the ceremony, President
Washington presented the Gavel to the Master of Lodge No. 9 and the Trowel to the
Master of Alexandria Lodge No. 22.
The inscription on the trowel was engraved on the underside of the blade sometime after
1805 and reads as follows:
"This Trowell, the property of Alexandria-Washington Lodge No. 22 A.F.& A.M. was
used by General George Washington September 18, 1793 to lay the corner stone of the
Capitol of the United States of America at Washington, D.C."
After the Capitol Cornerstone ceremony, we find no mention of the Trowel's use until
1816, when it helped lay the cornerstone of Mechanics' Hall on Alfred Street in
Alexandria. Subsequently, the Trowel was used by Alexandria-Washington Lodge for
special cornerstone ceremonies, and demand became heavier during the first half of the
twentieth century.
Alexandria-Washington Lodge looks on the Washington Trowel as one of its most prized
possessions. Today, it is on public display in a special case in the Alexandria-Washington
Replica Lodge Room in the George Washington Masonic National Memorial.
In addition to the above, cornerstone layings in which Alexandria-Washington Lodge
participated and the Washington Trowel was used have included:
Saint Paul's Church, Alexandria (1817)
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, (1847)
Washington National Monument (1848)

--- Sayfa 46 ---
George Washington Equestrian Statue, Richmond (1850)
Fireman's Monument at Ivy Hill Cemetery, Alexandria (1856)
Alexandria Hospital (Old, downtown Alexandria--not Seminary Road)
George Washington Park, Alexandria (1909)
Alexandria High School (1915)
Detroit Masonic Temple
House of the Temple, Scottish Rite, Washington
Masonic Temple, Grand Lodge of D.C., Washington
(Now the Museum of Women in the Arts)
Scottish Rite Temple, Kansas City, Mo.
High School, Salina, Kansas
U.S. Supreme Court, Washington
National Cathedral, Washington
Library of Congress, Washington
Alexandria Post Office and Custom House
George Washington Masonic National Memorial (1923)
U.S. Dept. of Commerce, by President Hoover
National Education Building, Washington (1930)
U.S. Post Office Building, Washington, by President Hoover (1932)
Department of Labor Building, by Grand Lodge of D.C. (1932)
Department of Interior Building by Presidnet Roosevelt (not Masonic)(1936)
Emmanuel Episcopal Church, Braddock Heights, Alexandria, Va.
George Washington High School, Alexandria
Thomas Jefferson Memorial, Washington (1939)
Fredericksburg Lodge # 4, Addition (1951)
Mary Washington College Fine Arts Building, Fredericksburg, (1951)
State Department Building, Washington (1957)
Mount Vernon Methodist Church (1958)
U.S. Capitol East Extension (1959)
Scottish Rite Temple, Alexandria (1959)
Elmer Timberman Lodge #54, Annandale, Virginia (1960)
James Monroe Memorial Law Library, Fredericksburg, Va. (1961)
Since the Replica Trowel was made, the Washington Trowel has been used only once in a
cornerstone ceremony. This was for the 200th anniversary re-enactment of cornerstone
laying of U.S. Capitol, in Washington, D.C. on September 18, 1993. Sponsored by the
Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia, this event was attended by Masons from all
over the United States.
As can be noted from the preceding list, the Washington Trowel was in demand for
cornerstones of many important buildings. It was observed that the surface had become

--- Sayfa 47 ---
scratched from mortar, and in the 1960's, the Lodge, concerned about this wear and tear
decided to have a Replica Trowel crafted.
Bro. George E. Olifer, an accomplished artist in precious metals and later Worsipful
Master of the Lodge, was commissioned by the Lodge to replicate the Trowel as closely
as possible. In each and every aspect except one, Wor. Olifer's handiwork is totally
indistinguishable from the original. He marked the Replica with his own very small
jewelers mark so that the replica can be identified, provided one knows where to look.
His mark is in the same location on the Replica as John Duffy placed his mark on the
original Trowel in 1793.
Since the late 1960's the Replica Trowel has been used whenever the Lodge is requested
to lay a cornerstone or to provide the Trowel for display at a special event. The 200th
anniversary re-enactment of the U.S. Capitol Cornerstone ceremony in September of
1993 was the one exception to this rule.
Some cornerstone events within the more recent past, in which the Replica Trowel has
participated include:
Cornerstone of New Health Care Facility, Masonic Home at Bonnie Blink, Cockeysville, Md.,
Grand Lodge of Maryland (1981)
Re-enactment of Cornerstone Laying of Almas Shrine Temple Washington, D.C., Grand Lodge of
D.C. (1986)
200th Anniversary Re-enactment of First Cornerstone of Federal District, Jones Point, Alexandria,
Virginia, Alexandria-Washington Lodge No. 22 (1991)
200th Anniversary Re-enactment of Cornerstone Laying of White House, Washington, D.C.,
Grand Lodge of D.C. (1992)
Cornerstone for Reconstruction of Washington Grist Mill Perryopolis, Pa., Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, (1992)
Cornerstone of American Red Cross Chapter Building Alexandria, Virginia, Alexandria-
Washington Lodge No. 22 (1995)
Cornerstone of Rural Electric Co-Op Association Building, Arlington, Virginia, Alexandria-
Washington Lodge No. 22 (1995)
Re-enactment of Cornerstone Laying of Alexandria Academy, Alexandria, Virginia, Alexandria-
Washington Lodge No. 22 (1995)
Cornerstone of Charles A Brigham, Jr. Masonic Temple, Madisonville- Madiera Lodge No. 419,
Symmes Township, Ohio, Grand Lodge of Ohio, (1996)
Prepared April 3, 1998 by Wor. Bro. Frank Rosser Dunaway, Jr., PM, Alexandria -Washington Lodge
#22.
The Trowel is the property of Alexandria Washington Lodge #22 and is currently on display in the Replica
Lodge Room of the Memorial.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Master Therion aka A. Crowley
and THE LODGE WARS

Trump XXI
Success The
World

--- Sayfa 50 ---
http://www.thediviningnation.com/lab.htm

Questions I receive about occult groups and full spectrum in-fighting are
repeatedly asked by those with a genuine interest in this topic. Lodge Wars
are probably the most frequent with regard to the secret societies
abounding throughout Europe during the Twentieth Century, although the
influences spilled out into America and other countries, during War Time
especially. Stone circles and monuments from the misty past are within
The Mountain Lake Wave, rather obscure at the pace of the mainstream, yet
pure. The wave arouses interest in metaphysics, nature, and survival of the
Ancient Knowledge through the ages. Click the house symbol for a photo
of an ancient stone circle in the backyard of an Inverness home.  The
Transparency Wave touches on The Mountain Lake Wave on the side of the
firm while the Akasha-Black Waves touch the other, near the
transcendental frequency.
Trans. DonnaKova Dauser

--- Sayfa 51 ---
And what is it to work with love?
 It is to weave the cloth with threads drawn from your heart, even as if your
beloved were to wear that cloth.
It is to build a house with affection, even as if your beloved were to dwell in
that house.
It is to sow seeds with tenderness and reap the harvest with joy, even as if
your beloved were to eat the fruit.
It is to charge all things you fashion with a breath of your own spirit,
And to know that all the blessed dead are standing about you and
watching.
Often have I heard you say, as if speaking in sleep, “He who works in
marble, and finds the shape of his own soul in the stone, is nobler than he
who ploughs the soil.
And he who seizes the rainbow to lay it on a cloth in the likeness of man, is
more than he who makes the sandals for our feet.”
But I say, not in sleep but in the over wakefulness of noontide, that the
wind speaks not more sweetly to the giant oaks than to the least of all the
blades of grass;
And he alone is great who turns the voice of the wind into a song made
sweeter; by his own loving.
  -Kahlil Gibran, THE PROPHET

--- Sayfa 52 ---
http://www.thediviningnation.com/transparent.htm

The Confessions of Aleister Crowley abound with
critique of the lodge mentality during the earlier
twentieth century. [scroll to excerpts] Although I am not
a member of The Hermetic Order of The Golden Dawn or
other groups cited by Crowley in this notation, I am
honestly concerned about his observations, primarily
because most oversights mentioned have failed to
correct themselves and remain intact today. I leave the
links hot should you wish to read further into Crowley's
journal. Hopefully, this page does not offend anyone
from any sincere group serious about the integrity of
their work. If there are objections to this post, email them to me. It should
be noted Europeans view the metaphysical from a perspective with
experiential references. Several castles, as example of this, are known to
be haunted. Many homepages are dedicated to haunt
sites throughout cyberspace, providing vivid
illustrations of ancient stone monuments to our
ancestors and divine alike. Those who live in the
vicinity of a castle with ghosts, like Crowley, are
naturally curious about many of the goings on. One
of them, Aldourie Castle, [Inverness & Nairn] near
Boleskine, according to tradition and rumor, is
haunted by a Gray Lady. There are several resident
ghosts and paranormal events reported regularly at
Glamis Castle.
The Expedition to Chogo Ri in 1902 is the external
version of the alchemical journey mapped by
Abramelin. Manly P. Hall refers to ancient memories of the great, high
power at the top of the world, "... the axle mountain of the world, sacred
among many races and symbolic of the human head, which rises out of the
four elements of the body. This sacred mountain, upon whose summit
stood the temple of the gods, gave rise to the stories of Olympus, Meru,
and Asgard."  Visit the National Geographic website for visual splendor,
including new Saqqara tomb discovery about Egypt's great transition and
Aten @ http://www.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0311   Right, Karnac,  by
David Roberts

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Expedition to Chogo Ri 1902      Climber: "K2 (8,611 m), in the northern part
of Karakoram, is the cherished dream of every climber."
Crowley's Beachy Head Prediction
THE INDEPENDENT ON SUNDAY
April 8, 2001

Featured Picture of the Week: How are the mighty fallen:  the 200ft Devil's
Chimney broke away from Beach Head on England's south coast last week
sending clouds of chalk dust into the sky. The 19th-century climber and
occultist Aleister Crowley warned that evil would descend on the people of
nearby Eastbourne if the tower collapsed.
                                                                                                          - Alan Jones

Beachy Head Lighthouse reports - On January 12, 1999, a huge part of the 200
m high chalk cliffs immediate behind the lighthouse fell into the sea.
Thousands of tons of chalk rubble, loosened by a winter of wet weather
and storms, collapsed to form a new spit of land reaching almost up to the
base of the tower.... The cliff fall came as a great shock to the inhabitants of
the privately-owned Belle Toute lighthouse that stands just feet away from
the edge of the cliffs...

--- Sayfa 54 ---
Position 50° 44' 0 N 00° 14'.50 E
White Cliffs of Beachy Head [similar to photo depicted in the Sunday paper]
Beachy Head Lighthouse
Map of South Coast
The Phial of Galadriel:  A magical phial containing the light of Earendil, the
Evening Star. This was a gift to Frodo:
"And you, Ring-bearer," she said, turning to Frodo. "I come to you last who
are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this." She held up a
small crystal phial. It glittered as she moved it and rays of white light
sprang from her hand. "In this phial," she said, "is caught the light of
Earendil's star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still brighter
when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places, when all
other lights go out."
The Lord of the Rings, page 397
The Elven gift was instrumental when Frodo and Sam escaped from Shelob
in the pass of  Cirith Ungol. Visit Galadriel's Glade and Lothlórien for
background.

CONFESSIONS excerpt
72
I think it proper to devote an entire chapter to the subject of my relations with
freemasonry. I have mentioned that I had obtained the 33° in Mexico City. It did not
add much of importance to my knowledge of the mysteries; but I had heard that
freemasonry was a universal brotherhood and expected to be welcomed all over the
world by all brethren.
I was brought up with a considerable shock within the next few months, when,
chancing to discuss the subject with some broken-down gambler or sporting-house
tout --- I forget exactly --- I found that he would not "recognize" me! There was
some trivial difference in one of the grips or some other totally meaningless
formality. A measureless contempt for the whole mummery curled my lip. I squared
the matter (as already related) by having myself initiated in Lodge Number 343
"Anglo-Saxon" in Paris. What that led to I have recounted elsewhere and now
quote:
I happened to know that the chaplain of the British Embassy in Z--- was Past Grand
Organist of a certain English province. He proposed me, found a seconder, and I
was duly initiated, passed and raised. I was warmly welcomed by numerous English
and American visitors to our Lodge; for Z--- is a very great city.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
I returned to England sometime later, after "passing the chair" in my Lodge, and
wishing to join the Royal Arch, called on its venerable Secretary.
I presented my credentials. "O Thou Great Architect of the Universe," the old man
sobbed out in rage, "why dost Thou not wither this impudent impostor with Thy
fire from heaven? Sir, begone! You are not a Mason at all! As all the world knows,
the people in Z--- are atheists and live with other men's wives."
I thought this a little hard on my Reverend Father in God, my proposer; and I noted
that, of course, every single English or American visitor to our Lodge in Z--- stood
in peril of instant and irrevocable expulsion on detection. So I said nothing, but
walked to another room in Freemasons' Hall over his head, and took my seat as a
Past Master in one of the oldest and most eminent Lodges in London!
Kindly note, furthermore, that when each of those wicked visitors returned to their
Lodges after their crime, they automatically excommunicated the
{695}

whole thereof; and as visiting is very common, it may well be doubted whether, on
their own showing, there is a single "just, lawful and regular mason" left on the
earth!
By the end of 1910, thanks to my relations with the Grand Hierophant 97° of the
Rite of Memphis (a post held after his death by Dr. Gerard Encausee, Theodor
Reuss, and myself), I was now a sort of universal inspector-general of the various
rites, charged with the secret mission of reporting on the possibility of
reconstructing the entire edifice, which was universally recognized by all its more
intelligent members as being threatened with the gravest danger.
I must briefly explain the circumstances.
(a) There is a great multiplicity of rites.
(b) There is a great multiplicity of jurisdictions.
(c) Even where rite and jurisdiction are identical, there are certain national
jealousies and other causes of divergence.
(d) The Progress of feminism has threatened the Craft. (The meaning of the 3°
having been totally lost, orthodox freemasons are unable to explain why women
cannot become Master Masons. They cannot. I, the fiercest of feminists, say so.) Co-
Masonry, under Mrs. Besant, whose hysterical vanity compels her to claim any
high-sounding title that she happens to hear, Le Droit Humain in France, and

--- Sayfa 56 ---
similar movements almost everywhere, were bringing masonry into contempt by
their sheer silliness. They were so obviously exactly as good as real freemasons.
(e) The history of freemasonry has become more obscure as the light of research has
fallen on the subject. The meaning of masonry has either been completely forgotten
or has never existed at all, except insofar as any particular rite might be a cloak for
political or even worse intrigue.
(f) It has become impossible for people living in modern conditions to devote
adequate time even to learning the merest formalities.
(g) The complete lack of understanding which is now practically universal has made
men inquire why in God's name they should cherish such pretentious pedantries?
A few anecdotes will illustrate the situation for the average non- mason.
1. A certain rite in England derives its authority from a document which is as
notoriously a forgery as Pigott ever penned. The heads of this gang wished to break,
in the most shameless and rascally manner, an agreement made some years
previously with John Yarker. Yarker pointed out that their only real authority was
derived from their agreement with him, since he, working under a genuine charter,
had "heled" their breach with antiquity by recognizing them. They replied that they
relied on the forged document. He said that he would cut away the ground from
under their feet by publishing the proofs that their charter was worthless. Then they
said that they
{696}
knew as well as he did that the document was forged; but they didn't care, because
they had induced the Prince of Wales to join them!
2. Several of the main rites of English masonry are not recognized by each other,
and some of these are not even tolerated (that is, if a member of A joins B, or even
discusses freemasonry with a member of B, he becomes liable to immediate
expulsion); yet a certain royal duke was actually the head of two incompatible rites.
3. There is no uniformity with regard to toleration. Thus A and B sometimes
recognize each other, but, while A recognizes C, B does not, so that a member of B
and a member of C might find themselves meeting in a Lodge of A, and thereby
automatically excommunicate each other.
4. English Craft masons do not permit religious political or commercial motives to
enter into freemasonry, yet they are in official relationship with certain masonic
bodies whose sole raison d'être is anti- clericalism, political intrigue or mutual trade
benefit.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
5. The Scottish Rite, the degrees of Knight Templar, Knight of Malta and others in
England are definitely Christian, e.g. the point of one degree is the identification of
prophet, priest and king, three in one, the Trinity of the Royal Arch, with Christ;
and in the Rose Croix degree, Christ is recognized as the "corner stone" of earlier
symbolism. But in America, the Christian elements have been removed so that
wealthy Jews may reach the summit of masonry.
6. I once attended a Lodge whose Master was one of the two local bankers. He used
his influence to get business for his bank. The other banker promptly obtained a
charter from some "clandestine" body and started an opposition. In this district, the
clandestine Lodges greatly outnumbered the orthodox.
7. I have visited Craft Lodges and Royal Arch Chapters in Fraternal Accord in
England, where the "raising" and "exaltation" were carried out in shirt sleeves,
while cigars were smoked and the legs conveniently disposed on other chairs, and
only employed to kick the candidate as he went round.
8. At one ceremony in America, the officers being 33° masons, recognized by the
orthodox Scottish Rite in England, there were two candidates, both Jews. They were
hoodwinked and introduced into opposite ends of a tube through which they were
instructed to make their way. In the middle of the tube was a live sow.
9. In Detroit, a member of the 32° was threatened by certain 33°s with expulsion
unless he complied with their views as to his domestic life. The matter was one with
which they had no right to meddle on any conceivable theory of human relations.
10. In some parts of America, financial and social pressure is put upon
{697}

people to compel them to take the 32°! It is common to boycott men in trade or
business for refusing to give unfair advantages to their fellow masons.
11. A 33° mason, of many years' standing, holding high office in the Supreme Grand
Council, who had joined in order to obtain the traditional secret knowledge, told me
that he had never learnt anything from any of the degrees. The only peculiarity in
this case is that he should have expected anything of the sort --- or wanted it!
12. With hardly an exception, the "secrets" of freemasonry are strictly arbitrary.
Let me explain what I mean. If I am given the combination of a safe, I expect to be
able to open it by the use of the word. If I can do so, it proves that that is the correct
word. The secrets of freemasonry disclose no mysteries; they do not do what they
profess to do; they are meaningless conventions.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
13. With the rarest exceptions, freemasons make no attempt to keep their
obligations so far as the moral principles inculcated are concerned. For instance, the
Master Mason is sworn to respect the chastity of the wife, sister and daughter of his
Brother. Those who do so probably respect the chastity of any woman irrespective
of her male connections.
14. Freemasons, generally, but especially in England and America, resent any
attempt to take masonry seriously. I may quote an essay by a Past Grand Master. It
appeared in the English Review for August 1922. It sets forth the initiated view. The
question is: Why does a man become a mason?
We ought to cross off the pettier human motives first, love of vanity, of mystery, of
display, of make-believe; but the average man in England becomes a mason for as
serious a reason as he becomes a Church member or a theosophist; and the average
man is usually most abominably disillusioned.
He may join the Craft with some idea of fellowship, because it is a tradition in his
family to do so, or because he hopes to find in the Secret of the Mysteries something
which he does not find in any of the exoteric forms of religion.
How is it that the same Order satisfies --- more or less --- aspirations so diverse?
We are brought at last face to face with the fundamental problem of the masonic
historian --- the origin of the whole business.
Without any hesitation at all, one may confess that on this critical question nothing
is certainly known. It is true, indeed, that the Craft Lodges in England were
originally Hanoverian clubs, as the Scottish Lodges were Jacobite clubs, and the
Egyptian Lodges of Cagliostro revolutionary clubs.
{698}
But that no more explains the origin of freemasonry than the fact "many Spaniards
are Roman Catholics" explains why the priest says and does certain things rather
than others in the Mass.
Now here is the tremendous question: we can admit all Mr Yarker's contentions,
and more, as to the connection of masonic and quasimasonic rites with the old
customs of initiating people into the trade guilds; but why should such a matter be
hedged about with so severe a wardenship, and why should the Central Sacrament
partake of so awful and so unearthly a character?
As freemasonry has been "exposed" every few minutes for the last century or so,
and as any layman can walk into a masonic shop and buy the complete Rituals for a
few pence, the only omissions being of no importance to our present point, it would

--- Sayfa 59 ---
be imbecile to pretend that the nature of the ceremonies of Craft masonry is in any
sense a "mystery".
There is, therefore, no reason for refraining from the plain statement that, to
anyone who understands the rudiments of symbolism, the Master's degree is
identical with the Mass. This is in fact the real reason for papal anathema; for
freemasonry asserts that every man is himself the living, slain and re-arisen Christ
in his own person.
It is true that not one mason in ten thousand in England is aware of this fact; but he
has only to remember his "raising" to realize the fundamental truth of the
statement.
Well may Catholic and freemason alike stand appalled at the stupendous blasphemy
which is implied, as they ignorantly think, not knowing themselves of the stuff and
substance of the Supreme Self, each for himself alike no less than Very God of Very
God!
But suppose that the sublimity of this conception is accepted, the identity admitted;
what sudden overwhelming billow from the past blasts their beatitude? What but
the words with which Freud concludes Totem and Taboo: In the beginning was the
deed!
For the "sacrifice of the Innocent" celebrated alike in the Lodge and in cathedral is
this identical murder of the Master of the Fellow- Craftsmen, that is of the Father
by his sons, when the ape system of the "Fatherhorde" was replaced by the tribal
system which developed into the "military clan"!
These statements are undeniable, yet it may be doubted whether there are five
hundred freemasons of all the rites put together who would assent to them, or even
refrain from objecting to them as bitterly as the average man in Victorian times
disliked being told of his kinship with the other primates, and as his children and
grandchildren are annoyed when science demonstrates
{699}

that their religions are survivals of savage superstitions and their dreams
determined by bestial instincts.
15. The W.M. of an exclusive English Lodge told me that he had learnt his part by
saying it over to his wife in bed, justifying himself for this apparent breach of his
obligation by remarking, with a laugh, that the secrets were lost and that therefore
he could not betray them however much he wanted to.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
Faced with these, and similar difficulties, I gladly accepted the task laid upon me by
the most intelligent freemasons of the world, united as they were by their sincerity,
understanding and good will, though divided by sectarian squabbles about
jurisdiction.
My first object was to answer the question, "What is freemasonry?" I collated the
rituals and their secrets, much as I had done the religions of the world, with their
magical and mystical bases. As in that case, I decided to neglect what it too often
actually was. It would be absurd to judge Protestantism by the political acts of
Henry VIII. In the same way, I could not judge masonry by the fact that it had
denounced the Concordat. I proposed to define freemasonry as a system of
communicating truth --- religious, philosophical, magical and mystical; and
indicating the proper means of developing human faculty by means of a peculiar
language whose alphabet is the symbolism of ritual. Universal brotherhood and the
greater moral principles, independent of personal, racial, climatic and other
prejudices, naturally formed a background which would assure individual security
and social stability for each and all.
The question then arose, "What truths should be communicated and by what means
promulgated? My first object was to eliminate from the hundreds of rituals at my
disposal all exoteric elements. Many degrees contain statements (usually inaccurate)
of matters well known to modern schoolboys, though they may have been important
when the rituals were written. I may mention one degree in which the candidate is
portentiously informed that there are other religions in the world besides
Christianity and that there is some truth in all of them. Their tenets are explained in
many cases with egregious error. The description of Buddha as a god is typical. I
saw no point in overloading the system with superfluous information.
Another essential point was to reduce the unwieldly mass of material to a compact
and coherent system. I thought that everything worth preserving could and should
be presented in not more than a dozen ceremonies, and that it should be brought
well within the capacity of any officer to learn by heart his part during the leisure
time at his disposal, in a month at most.
The eighteenth-century Rosicrucians, so-called in Austria, had already endeavoured
to unite various branches of Continental freemasonry and its superstructures; in the
nineteenth century, principally owing to the energy
{700}

and ability of a wealthy iron master named Karl Kellner, a reconstruction and
consolidation of traditional truth had been attempted. A body was formed under the
name O.T.O. (Ordo Templi Orientis) which purported to achieve this result. It
purported to communicate the secrets, not only of freemasonry (with the Rites of 3°,

--- Sayfa 61 ---
7°, 33°, 90°, 97°, etc.,) but of the Gnostic Catholic Church, the Martinists, the Sat
Bhai, the Rosicrucians, the Knights of the Holy Ghost and so on, in nine degrees,
with a tenth of an honorary character to distinguish the "Supreme and Holy King"
of the Order in each country where it was established. Chief of these kings is the
O.H.O. (Outer Head of the Order, or Frater Superior), who is an absolute autocrat.
This position was at this time occupied by Theodor Reuss, the Supreme and Holy
King of Germany, who resigned the office in 1922 in my favour.
The O.H.O. put the rituals of this Order at my disposal. I found them of the utmost
value as to the central secret, but otherwise very inferior. They were dramatically
worthless, but the prose was unequal, they lacked philosophical unity, their
information was incomplete and unsystematic. Their general idea was, however, of
the right kind; and I was able to take them as a model.
The main objects of the instruction were two. It was firstly necessary to explain the
universe and the relations of human life therewith. Secondly, to instruct every man
how best to adapt his life to the cosmos and to develop his faculties to the utmost
advantage. I accordingly constructed a series or rituals, Minerval, Man, Magician,
Master-Magician, Perfect Magician and Perfect Initiate, which should illustrate the
course of human life in its largest philosophical aspect. I begin by showing the object
of the pure soul, "One, individual and eternal", in determining to formulate itself
consciously, or, as I may say, to understand itself.
It chooses to enter into relations with the solar system. It incarnates. I explain the
significance of birth and the conditions established by the process. I next show how
it may best carry out its object in the eucharist of life. It partakes, so to speak, of its
own godhead in every action, but especially through the typical sacrament of
marriage, understood as the voluntary union of itself with each element of its
environment. I then proceed to the climax of its career in death and show how this
sacrament both consecrates (or, rather, sets its seal upon) the previous procedure
and gives a meaning thereto, just as the auditing of the account enables the
merchant to see his year's transactions in perspective.
In the next ceremony I show how the individual, released by death from the
obsession of personality, resumes relations with the truth of the universe. Reality
bursts upon him in a blaze of adorable light; he is able to appreciate its splendour as
he could not previously do, since his incarnation has enabled him to establish
particular relations between the elements of eternity.
{701}

Finally, the cycle is closed by the reabsorption of all individuality into infinity. It
ends in absolute annihilation which, as has been shown elsewhere in this book, may
in reality be regarded either as an exact equivalent for all other terms soever, or (by

--- Sayfa 62 ---
postulating the category of time) as forming the starting point for new adventure of
the same kind.
It will be clear from the above that the philosophical perfection of this system of
initiation leaves nothing to be desired. We may write Q.E.D. The practical problem
remains. We have already decided to incarnate, and our birth certificates are with
our bankers. We do not have to worry about these matters, and we cannot alter
them if we would; death, and what follows death, are equally certain, and equally
able to take care of themselves. Our sole preoccupation is how best to make use of
our lives.
Now the O.T.O. is in possession of one supreme secret. The whole of its system at the
time when I became an initiate of the Sanctuary of the Gnosis (IX°) was directed
towards communicating to its members, by progressively plain hints, this all-
important instruction. I personally believe that if this secret, which is a scientific
secret, were perfectly understood, as it is not even my me after more than twelve
years' almost constant study and experiment, there would be nothing which the
human imagination can conceive that could not be realized in practice.
By this I mean such things as this: that if it were desired to have an element of
atomic weight six times that of uranium that element could be produced. If it were
desired to devise an instrument by which the furthest stars or the electrons could be
brought within the range of every one of our senses, that instrument could be
invented. Or that, if we wished to develop senses through which we could appreciate
all those qualities of matter which at present we observe indirectly by means of
apparatus, the necessary nervous structure would appear. It make these remarks
with absolute confidence, for even the insignificant approaches that I have been able
to make towards the sanctuaries of this secret have shown me that the relations
between phenomena are infinitely more complex than the wildest philosophers have
ever imagined, and that the old proverb "Where there's a will there's a way" needs
no caveat.
I cannot forebear to quote from Professor A. S. Eddington, Plumian Professor of
Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy at Cambridge:
Here is a paradox beyond even the imagination of Dean Swift. Gulliver regarded the
Lilliputians as a race of dwarfs; and the Lilliputians regarded Gulliver as a giant.
That is natural. If the Lilliputians had appeared dwarfs to Gulliver, and Gulliver
had appeared a dwarf to the Lilliputians --- but no! that is too absurd for fiction,
and is an idea only to be found in the sober pages of science.
{702}

--- Sayfa 63 ---
The injunctions of the sages, from Pythagoras, Zoroaster and Lao Tzu, to the
Cabbalistic Jew who wrote the Ritual of the Royal Arch, and the sentimental snob
who composed those of the Craft degrees, are either directed to indicating the best
conditions for applying this secret, or are mere waste of words. Realizing this, it was
comparatively simple for me to edit masonic ethics and esotericism. I had simply to
refer everything to this single sublime standard. I therefore answered the question
"How should a young man mend his way?" in a series of rituals in which the
candidate is instructed in the value of discretion, loyalty, independence,
truthfulness, courage, self-control, indifference to circumstance, impartiality,
skepticism, and other virtues, and at the same time assisted him to discover for
himself the nature of this secret, the proper object of its employment and the best
means for insuring success in its use. The first of these degrees is the V°, in which
the secret is presented in a pageant; while he is also instructed in the essential
elements of the history of the world, considered from the standpoint of his present
state of evolution and in his proper relation to society in general with reference to
the same.
The degree of Knight Hermetic Philosopher follows, in which his intellectual and
moral attitude is further defined. In the VI°, his position having been thus made
precise, he is shown how to consecrate himself to the particular Great Work which
he came to earth in order to perform. In the VII°, which is tripartite, he is first
taught the principle of equilibrium as extended to all possible moral ideas; secondly,
to all possible intellectual ideas; and lastly, he is shown how, basing all his actions on
this impregnable rock of justice, he may so direct his life as to undertake his Great
Work with the fullest responsibility and in absolute freedom from all possibility of
interferences.
In the VIII°, the secret is once more manifested to him, more clearly than before;
and he is instructed in how to train himself to use it by certain preliminary practices
involving acquaintance with some of those subtler energies which have hitherto, for
the most part, eluded the observation and control of profane science.
In the IX°, which is never conferred upon anyone who has not already divined from
previous indications the nature of the secret, it is explained to him fully. The
conclusions of previous experiments are placed at his service. The idea is that each
new initiate should continue the work of his predecessor, so that eventually the
inexhaustible resources of the secret may be within the reach of the youngest
initiate; for at present, we are compelled to admit that the superstitious reverence
which has encompassed it in past ages, and the complexity of the conditions which
modify its use, place us in much the same position as the electricians of a generation
ago in respect of their science. We are assured of the immensity of the force at our
disposal;
{703}

--- Sayfa 64 ---
we perceive the extent of the empire which it offers us, but we do not thoroughly
understand even our successes and are uncertain how to proceed in order to
generate the energy most efficiently or to apply it most accurately to our purposes.
The X°, as in the old system, is merely honorary, but recent researches into the
mysteries of the IX° have compelled me to add an XI°, to illustrate a scientific idea
which has been evolved by the results of recent experiments.
In the reconstituted O.T.O. there are therefore six degrees in which is conveyed a
comprehensive conception of the cosmos and our relation therewith, and a similar
number to deal with our duty to ourselves and our fellows, the development of our
own faculties of every order, and the general advancement and advantage of
mankind.
Wherever freemasonry and allied systems contribute to these themes, their
information has been incorporated in such a way as not to infringe the privileges,
puerile as they often seem, which have been associated hitherto with initiation.
Where they merely perpetuate trivialities, superstitions and prejudices, they have
been neglected.
I claim for my system that it satisfies all possible requirements of true freemasonry.
It offers a rational basis for universal brotherhood and for universal religion. It puts
forward a scientific statement which is a summary of all that is at present known
about the universe by means of a simple, yet sublime symbolism, artistically
arranged. It also enables each man to discover for himself his personal destiny,
indicates the moral and intellectual qualities which he requires in order to fulfill it
freely, and finally puts in his hands an unimaginably powerful weapon which he
may use to develop in himself every faculty which he may need in his work.
My original draft of these rituals has required modification in numerous details as
research made clearer, deeper and wider the truth which they comprehended; and
also, as experience showed, the possibilities of misunderstanding on the one hand,
and of improved presentation on the other. Great practical progress was made until
the work was suspended by the outbreak of the war in 1914.
One of my original difficulties was to restore the existing rituals to their perfection.
There were innumerable corruptions due to ignorance of Hebrew and the like on
the part of the unworthy successors of the founders. To take a gross example.
The word Jeheshua, spelt in Hebrew in the 18° of the Scottish Rite, was habitually
spelt with a Resh instead of a Vau. So brutal a blunder is conclusive proof that the
modern Sovereign Princes of Rose Croix attach no meaning whatever to the name of
Jesus --- which they profess to adore more intelligently than the mob because it
represents the descent of the Holy Spirit into the midst of that tremendous name of
God which only occurs in

--- Sayfa 65 ---
{704}

their ritual because of its power to annihilate the universe if pronounced correctly1.
The intelligence of the average mason may be gauged by the following quotation
from the R.A.M. degree. The twentieth century! --- and such stuff is solemnly
offered as instruction to grown men!
Some have doubted whether the Ark was capable of containing two of every sort of
creature, with provisions necessary for their support for a whole year; for so long
and more did Noah stop in that Ark. But on a careful inquiry it has been found that
only about one hundred different sorts of beasts, and not two hundred birds, are
known, the greater part of them are of no bulk, and many exceedingly small, and it
has been said all the creatures in the Ark would not take up the room of five
hundred horses. After four thousand years human ingenuity cannot now contrive
any proportions better adapted than that of the Ark for the purpose it was intended
for. A Dutch merchant, two hundred years ago, built a ship answering in its
respective dimensions to those of the Ark; its length being one hundred and twenty
feet, breadth twenty feet, depth twelve feet; while building, this vessel was laughed
at, but afterwards it was found that it held one third more and sailed better than
any other merchant vessel of the time.
Thus we have a collateral proof no way inconsiderable that the Spirit of God, from
whom commeth all understanding, directed Noah in that manner.
Again, the central secret of a Master Mason is in a Word which is lost. This fact has
induced various and ingenious persons to invent ceremonies in which it is found (in
some more or less remarkable manner) amid the acclamations of the assembled
populace, and proclaimed in pomp to the admiring multitude. The only drawback is
that these Words do not work. It apparently never occurred to these ingenuous
artisans to test it. It is useless to label a brick "This is the keystone of the Royal
Arch", unless the arch stands when it is put in place.
Much of freemasonry is connected with the Hebrew Cabbala. My knowledge of this
science enabled me to analyze the Secret Words of the various degrees. I soon found
myself able to correct many of the corruptions which had crept in, and there was no
doubt that my conclusions were not mere conjectures, since they made coherent
good sense out of disconnected nonsense. (I am naturally unable to publish any of
these discoveries; but
{705}

--- Sayfa 66 ---
1. The ignorance of masons is quite boundless. In the Red Cross of Rome and
Constantine Degree, for example, we read, "Lord God of Sabbath". No one
knows the difference between HB:Taw HB:Bet HB:Shin and HB:Taw
HB:Aleph HB:Bet HB:Tzaddi !
I am always ready to communicate them to inquiring Brothers. When I have done
so, my arguments have been found cogent and convincing.)
I supposed myself to have reached the summit of success when I restored the Secret
Word of the Royal Arch. In this case, tradition had preserved the Word almost
intact. It required only a trifling change to reveal it in all its radiant royalty. And yet
my success only left me with a sense of deeper annoyance at my complete failure to
deal with the abject anti-climax of the III° with its lamentable excuses for having
made a fool of the candidate, its pretentious promises and its pitiful performance.
As I lay one night sleepless, in meditation, bitter and eager, upon this mystery I was
suddenly stabbed to the soul by a suggestion so simple, yet so stupendous, that I was
struck into shuddering silence for I know not how long before I could bring myself
to switch on the electric light and snatch my notebook. At the first trial the solution
sprang like sunlight in my spirit. I remained all that night in an ecstasy of awe and
adoration. I had discovered the lost Word!
The obvious line of criticism is this: How can you be sure that the Word which you
have discovered is really the lost Word after all?
This may be made clear by an illustration. On the apron of the 18° I find HB:Heh
HB:Resh HB:Shin HB:Heh HB:Yod in Hebrew characters. I find that this word
means nothing; the context suggests that it may be an error for HB:Heh HB:Vau
HB:Shin HB:Heh HB:Yod, Yeheshuah or Jesus; but how do I know that this word
and not another has power to make man triumphant over matter, to harmonize and
sanctify the blind forces of the universe? Thus: I know that HB:Heh HB:Vau
HB:Heh HB:Yod represents the four elements; that 4 is a number symbolizing
limitation. It is the square of 2, the only number which cannot be formed
harmoniously into a "Magic Square". (Two represents the Dyad, the original
Error.) I know also that the letter Shin represents a triune essence, the fire of the
Spirit, and in particular Ruach Elohim, the Spirit of the Gods, because these two
words have the numerical value of 300, which is also that of Shin itself.
I thus interpret the word Yeheshuah as the descent of the Holy Spirit into the
balanced forces of matter, and the name Yeheshuah is therefore that of a man made
divine by the descent of the Holy Spirit into his heart, exactly as the name George
means a farmer. This exegetical method is not a modern invention. When Jehovah
selected a family to be the father of Israel, he changed the name HB:Mem-final
HB:Resh HB:Bet HB:Aleph (243 = Abram) Father of Elevation into HB:Mem-final
HB:Heh HB:Resh HB:Bet HB:Aleph (248 = Abraham) Father of a multitude; and
by way of compensation changed HB:Yod HB:Resh HB:Shin (510=Sari) Nobility to

--- Sayfa 67 ---
HB:Heh HB:Resh HB:Shin (505=Sarah), Princess. There are several other similar
stories in the Bible. A change of name is considered to indicate a change of nature.
Further, each name is not arbitrary; it is a definite description of the nature of the
object to which it is attached. By a similar process, I am certain of my results in the
matter of the Lost Word, for the Found Word
{706}

fulfils the conditions of the situation; and furthermore, throws light on the obscure
symbolism of the entire ritual.
I am thus in a position to do for the contending sects of freemasonry what the
Alexandrians did for those of paganism. Unfortunately, the men who asked me to
undertake this task are either dead or too old to take active measures and so far
there is no one to replace them. Worse, the general coarsening of manners which
always follows a great war has embittered the rival jurisdictions and deprived
freemasonry altogether of those elements of high-minded enthusiasms with regard
to the great problems of society which still stirred even its most degenerate sections
half a century ago, when Hargrave Jennings, Godfrey Higgins, Gerald Massey,
Kenneth MacKenzie, John Yarker, Theodor Reuss, Wynn Westcott and others were
still seeking truth in its traditions and endeavouring to erect a temple of Concord in
which men of all creeds and races might worship in amity.
<snip>

Sacred Mysteries
Among
The Mayas And The Quiches,
11,500 Years Ago
Their Relation To The Sacred Mysteries
of Egypt, Greece, Chaldea and India
by,
Augustus Le Plongeon
regarding excavations
     In the ceilings of the rooms situated at the north and south extremities
of the building are carved in peculiar and regular order, in deep intaglio,
semi-spheres, ten centimeters in diameter, intended to represent the stars

--- Sayfa 68 ---
that at night so beautify the firmament. Inside of the triangle formed at each
end of said rooms by the converging lines of the arch are also several of
these semispheres - those in the north room form a triangle, while those in
the south room, five in number, figure a trapezium with one of these half
spheres in the middle.
     The middle chamber is now devoid of decorations of any sort. Its length,
seven meters, is to-day the only vestige which remains to indicate that in it,
in former times, were practiced rites and ceremonies pertaining to the third
degree of initiation. This chamber could be reached by walking on the
narrow terrace round the building; but I feel certain that those whose
privilege it was to assemble within its walls, got to it from the west side.
There was a stairway nine metres wide, beautifully ornamented, leading
from the court yard adjoining the priests' palace, to the entrance of the
sanctuary. Thence another small stairway 2m. 40c. wide, situated on the
north side of the sanctuary, led to the upper terrace, to the roof of that
monument, and to the middle chamber. The access to the north and south
rooms was by a grand stairway of ninety-six steps, each 20 cm. high, that
led to the upper terrace surrounding the whole edifice. This stairway,
situated on the east side of the mound, is fourteen metres [45 feet 6 inches]
wide, and, like that on the east side, so steep as to require no little practice
and care to ascend and descend its narrow steps with comparative safety
and ease...
     The ornaments that cover these walls are remarkable in more than one
sense. They are not only inscriptions in the Maya language, written in
characters identical with, and having the same meaning and value as those
carved on the temples of Egypt; but among them are symbols known to
have belonged to the ancient sacred mysteries of the Egyptians, and to
modern Free Masonry. In August 1880, among the debris, at the foot of the
mound just described, I found pieces of what once had been the statue of a
priest. The part of the statue, from the waist to the knee, particularly
attracted my attention. Over his dress the personage wore an apron with an
extended hand....   A symbol that will easily be recognized by members of
the masonic fraternity.
     We must not forget that Plato informs us that the priests of Egypt
assured Solon, when he visited them 600 years before the Christian era,
that all communications between their people and the inhabitants of the
"Lands of the West" had been interrupted for 9,000 years, in consequence
of the great cataclysms, during which, in one night, the large island of
Atlantis disappeared, submerged under the waves of the ocean. Are we not
then right if we surmise that the monuments of Mayax existed 11,500 years
ago, and that mysteries, similar to those of Egypt, were celebrated in them?
To support that belief we have the symbols already mentioned as existing
in the chambers, the construction of the chambers themselves, the

--- Sayfa 69 ---
sculptures carved on the cornice that surrounds the sanctuary,
representing cross bones and skeletons, with arms and hands uplifted,
tokens that many of the Masons again cannot fail to recognize; besides
other emblems..... which exist on the walls of the residence of the priests,
an edifice adjoining that temple. This may be considered the oldest known
edifice in the world consecrated to secret rites and ceremonies; and its
builders the founders of the sacred mysteries, that were transported from
Mayax to India, Chaldea, Egypt, Etruria, by colonists or missionaries....

--- Sayfa 70 ---
http://www.masonicinfo.com/books/secretarchitecture.htm

The Secret Architecture of Our Nation’s Capital
The Masons and the Building of Washington, D.C.
David Ovason
“Masons designed Washington, DC!”  Websites trumpet this ‘news’ in
huge red letters on black and a forbidding background. Postings to
Internet newsgroups point fingers accusingly and demand ‘an answer’
– or for Masons to prove that they didn’t.
It’s no secret and Masons are proud to trumpet, often in a greatly
exaggerated way, that members of the Fraternity were active during
the War for Independence in the United States. It’s also well known
that some of the brightest and most remembered men of that age
were involved in the initial establishment of the government. (The oft-
repeated claim that all of Washington’s Generals or that most of the
signers of the Declaration of Independence are exaggerations that
simply won’t die!) During and following the American Revolution, a
large percentage of the population were Masons but to writers today,
the reasons for this seem somehow unimaginable. (Those with an
interest in this 'phenomena' are referred to Stephen Bullock's
"Revolutionary Brotherhood".)
In 1999, “The Secret Architecture of Our Nation’s Capital” was first
published – oddly, considering the title, in Great Britain. Written by
David Ovason, an astrologer whose other works included two books
about Nostradamus (one of which trumpets his discovery of a secret
language which had eluded all other researchers and the other,
published AFTER the horrific events of September 11th, 2001 in New
York claims to have now found a quatrain which foretold the event!).
It’s also important, we feel, to remind readers that an astronomer is
one who is trained in science to understand the heavens; an astrologer
is one who, perhaps even self-taught, determines what a person’s life
will be by the position of the constellations at the time of their birth –
a fortune teller. None of Mr. Ovason's books reveal his education.
Perhaps there's a reason?
When 'our little friends’ on the Internet became aware of this book’s
title, they immediately began to shout that this was the final proof of
all of Masonic conspiracy. Ignoring both the book's actual contents as
well as the author's credentials (or lack thereof) they immediately
began to create all sorts of fanciful theories. They trumpeted the
‘approval’ of Freemasonry as evidenced by the preface written by C.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Fred Kleinknecht, 33°, the Sovereign Grand Commander of the
Southern (US) Scottish Rite Jurisdiction. If the ‘heir’ to Albert Pike
would write an introduction to this book, this “proved” that
Freemasons designed Washington, D.C.
Well, not quite! However before we proceed, it’s important to
understand the significance of this claim that Masons designed
Washington. On its face, it actually seems quite complimentary to the
Fraternity and to many it would be met with a response of “So what?”
Well, here's what: for those with over-developed imaginations, it’s a
fearsome threat. To them, this ‘fact’ proves beyond any doubt their
fears of a horrid Masonic conspiracy which – depending on the
individual – may take a variety of forms. Some – ignoring the three
hundred year experience of Freemasonry encouraging freedom –
argue that it is now clear Freemasonry is hell-bent on world conquest:
that the ‘signs’ implanted in the Washington street layout along with
that eye in the pyramid on the back of the dollar bill are the final
proof. (Good thing they figured it out in 2000 after a couple of
hundred years, isn’t it?)
Others, taking their imaginations even further, note that the layout is
proof that aliens from outer space influenced Masons who designed it.
Laugh if you will but for some, this is desperately real and they’re
convinced beyond any explanation. Those who’ve read this site for
some time will recall our reporting that the huge Square and Compass
placed in front of the George Washington National Masonic Memorial
was opined by some as being the marker for the landing of the
spacecraft at midnight on 1/1/2000 with the increase in postal rates to
33cents just preceding that as a forewarning. (Our friend and Brother
Harry Lyons was there on Shooter's Hill in Virginia at the Memorial at
midnight that night: alas, no spaceship - or at least that's what he's
saying publicly!)
And for the religious zealots, this ‘design’ in the street plan is a signal
for all that the Masons are establishing a secret religion which will
pave the way for the coming of the anti-Christ. Again, we’re a bit
confused since the design has been there for a couple of hundred
years and no one has seen the anti-Christ or any Masonic religion
appear yet - but why let facts get into the way of a good yarn, eh?
The Masonic connection is further emphasized by the introduction (a
foreword, actually) written by C. Fred Klienknecht – and anti-Masons
have made much of it. After reading their breathless claims for more
than two years while awaiting US publication, it came as quite a shock
to see what was actually written. The Sovereign Grand Commander
writes that he sees a similarity ONLY between a ceiling design
recommended by Pike for a lodge (containing the constellations and
planets) and the other constellation designs Ovason has found

--- Sayfa 72 ---
scattered in various statuary throughout Washington DC.
‘endorsement’ of this work, it's pretty weak. Here's the Grand
Commander's last sentence of his foreword: “His thesis may be
controversial, but it is well thought out and presented.”  If that’s what
anti-Masons believe is unqualified support, it may be because they've
unfamiliar with what a true endorsement looks like. Guess in the
workplace, they've never had the cause to get one....
And it was also to our surprise that Mr. Ovason seems quite
uninterested in any of the theories as to why Masons would have gone
to such great lengths to ‘embed’ a message into the design of the
capital city. His imagination about what Masons ostensibly know,
however, seems boundless and aids in his fantasy at every turn. He
writes in his Acknowledgement, “My thanks go to all those Masons and
Masonic Lodges of present time who have helped me with questions
which must surely have amused those privy to the deeper secrets.”
And so, on this presumption, the book moves forward.
It was on Page 9 when the first of many, many unsubstantiated claims
came leaping forth. In glancing through the book prior to reading, we'd
noted nearly 70 pages of tightly-spaced footnotes. Surely these would
at least allow us to follow through on the author's claims, right?  But
yet, he begins a discussion about the land on which Washington DC
now stands and notes wishfully that the ownership by John Pope would
be pleasant historically (in some sort of cosmically-ordained way,
apparently) if that individual was related to John Pope who had settled
in Massachusetts in 1630. He notes that John (from Dorchester) was ‘a
distant forbear’ of the architect John Russell Pope. Footnote for his
source? Not a chance!
It's a popular technique in 'popular' literature surrounding
Freemasonry today. Similar to the very popular Hiram Key, Mr.
Ovason makes a fanciful assumption and then later uses this to
buttress yet another of his own theories.
In truth, anyone looking at the early layout of Washington, DC can,
with a bit of imagination, see the design of a square and compass.
That these are the implements used by Freemasonry to remind
members to circumscribe their desires and keep their passions within
due bounds with all mankind is undeniable. Just as undeniable,
however, is that operative architects have used such implements for
thousands of years and some of them surely must have been inspired
by their grace and practical applications of their tools - even if they'd
never joined the fraternity of Freemasons. But wait: that's not what
Ovason is writing about: it's VIRGO!!!!! Yes, the thrust of this book is
about the number of things that someone can play 'connect the dots'
with and come up with a rough approximation of what the
constellation Virgo looks like.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
Here's an example: “The cornerstone for the Washington Monument
was laid at the northeast corner of the foundation in the early
afternoon of July 4, 1848.  As I have indicated, probably one reason
why the Masons chose to lay the stone in the afternoon was because
they wished to allow the all-important Virgo to become operative in
the chart.  Shortly before lunchtime on that day, the Moon went into
Virgo." Probably? Why? Footnote? Naw....
Virgo, it seems, is everywhere. "In fact, there was another Virgoan
influence in this chart which might be missed by someone not familiar
with the workings of astrology.  The all-important Dragon’s Head in the
1848 chart is in 25 degrees of Virgo."
And yet, while Mr. Ovason wants to tie the Masons to the Virgo
designs, he seems remarkably uninformed about who is a Mason and
who isn't. He writes about Pierre L'Enfant, the original designer of
Washington, “Later, he undertook special duties for Washington in
France, where (almost certainly being a Mason) he organized a branch
of the Society of Cincinnati, for which he designed its emblem.”  Aha!
A footnote: surely this will provide enlightenment to support his
parenthetical assertion. What do we find? A footnote stating:  “It is
very likely that L’Enfant was a Mason.”  <SIGH>  In addition, he glibly
identifies Vinnie Ream (a sculptress and close friend of Albert Pike)
and Madame Blavatsky as Masons. So much for scrupulous research....
Talking about the George Washington Monument, Mr. Ovason writes
“In spite of such delays and setbacks, a considerable change of vision
was required to move from so thoroughly a neoclassical design as a
horse-rider, to an obelisk which was essentially Egyptian in spirit.
Historical documents indicate that this change was directed by Masons.
Furthermore, not only was the form of the monument different from
that anticipated by L’Enfant, it was not even sited in the position he
had visualized.” Alas, yet again not a single footnoted anything to
explain how Ovason has come to the conclusion it was directed by
Masons (of the 'Freemason' variety)!
There are constant references to various parties being “keen
astronomers” but Mr. Ovason apparently doesn't understand or
appreciate the essential part astronomy played in military (and most
especially naval) science of the day. The 'important people' of those
times were, for the most part, military men: whether their service
involved moving troops across land or handling ships across water,
there was an ongoing reliance upon celestial navigation and it thus
stands to reason that the level of understanding of astronomy in those
days would be far, far greater than it is today. The author is
apparently oblivious to the fact that even today, naval officers learn
celestial navigation but that two hundred years ago, long before
printing was readily available and maps were even marginally reliable,

--- Sayfa 74 ---
anyone who was responsible for military troops, surveying, foresting,
exploring or a whole host of other occupations (including farming)
would certainly be a 'keen astronomer'. There was no 'radar weather'
to give wrong predictions so even those tending animals in the most
remote regions would need, of necessity, be 'keen astronomers'.
We found it particularly interesting that Ovason's work makes much of
the year 1881 (Trithemian doctrine of planetary angels) and claims
(without substantiation) that occultists were alert to the critical
importance of that year of change. However, because Pike was not
particularly interested in that year, Mr. Ovason dismisses this lack of
interest by saying that “...his attention must have been on other
things.” Convenient, isn't it?
He makes broad statements unsupported by fact. Here's but one
example: “By contrast, the astrological conditions pertaining to the
ritual of the cornerstone were rarely made public. This was nothing to
do with “Masonic secrecy” – it was merely a continuation of an ancient
tradition.” One supposes that it's awfully difficult to make things public
when they were likely never thought of - but that's much too mundane
obviously.
Three hundred and fifty plus pages later and but three pages from the
end of the book, we find this revealing commentary:
"It is not possible to work as a historian in the United States today without observing
the understandable doubts which some Christian religious groups have concerning
esotericism. If, as a Christian myself, I may venture an opinion in this context, it is
that the Bible appears to have been written in such a way as to accommodate the
understanding of a vast range of different beliefs, most of which find a meeting point
in the seminal Mystery of the Christian religion, which is the Resurrection.  Among
this range of beliefs is one that might be typified as Christian esotericism, which
approaches Christian texts and traditions in the light of hermetic thought. Generally
speaking, an informed and well-intended analysis of esoteric Christianity is unlikely
to unearth beliefs which conflict in any significant way with the traditions pertaining
to the hallowed Mysteries of Christianity, or with the great cosmic and moral truths
we find in the Bible.  Beyond offering keys to such Mysteries, Christianity is a moral
force, which should be capable of harboring a wide variety of opinions, and which
should not harbor hatreds – especially hatreds directed at communalities of beliefs,
in which differences are often peripheral or minor.
I introduce this thought because, given certain reactions to my previous works, I
suspect that misunderstandings may arise about what I have and have not claimed
in this present book.  I have been surprised by the number of people who have taken
it upon themselves to criticize some of my earlier writings without having done me
the courtesy of reading what I have written. The general tenor of such criticism
seems to arise from the misconception that any hermetic idea must be in some way
diabolic, or linked with black magic. This is completely untrue.
In view of such misunderstandings, I would like to make it quite clear that I am not
for one moment suggesting that it was “the Masons who built Washington,
D.C.,” or that Mason’s Lodges ever had a coordinated, formulated plan to
influence the growth of the city in any way. <Emphasis added> As a careful
reading of this text will have indicated, I am claiming merely that Washington, D.C.,
was designed and built on Christian hermetic principles derived from, or linked with,

--- Sayfa 75 ---
ancient cosmological ideas.  In exploring this truth, I observe that some of the
people involved in the building of the city, besides being architects, planners and
artists, happened also to be Masons. I am reasonably sure that in just about every
case these individuals were also committed Christians. It would be patently absurd
(if only because it is so obvious) for me to labor the point that Washington, D.C.,
was built by Christians.”
So what's all the fuss about? Who knows.... It's certainly clear from
reading this work that this book is FAR from the proof of any nefarious
deeds or plans by Masons or Masonry. That will not, of course, stop
anti-Masons from making their ridiculous claims.
After having read both this work as well as Mr. Ovason's The Secrets
of Nostradamus. we can only suggest that having found that
remarkable prediction of the terrorist attacks on New York after they
happened, this is not an author we'll follow further - and not a book
we'd recommend.
EXCERPT:
Page 199:

The rich external sculptural program above the three upper frontal doorways to the
Library of Congress also contains the image of a zodiac. Anyone who enters by the
central portal passes beneath the spandrel bas-relief of a zodiac, held in the hand of a
woman who personifies Astronomy (figure 19). Immediately on passing through the deep
arch into the center of the atrium, or Great Hall, one fines oneself standing upon a marble
floor into which are laid the 12 images of a huge brass zodiac. The arrangement of the 12
figures is in the form of a square, but at the center is a huge sunburst, around which is a
compass. This central design combines solar time with the directions of space, suggesting
that the interior of the library is dedicated to the same theme found on the exterior.

As the engraving from a Masonic textbook shown on p. 200 indicates, the sunburst at the
center of a zodiac is no new thing – it was used symbolically in medieval art, even at a
time when it was not recognized that the Sun was at the center of the solar system. This
may be traced back not to astronomical ideas, as one might imagine, but to Christian
theological notions. From relatively early times, theologians seized on the cosmic idea
that Christ was a solar being, with his 12 disciples in radiant attendance around Him. (48)
In this notion, the central Sun has a much deeper symbolic meaning than any
astronomical pagan imagery can convey and almost certainly explains why so many late-
19th-century zodiacs contain solar-radiant centers. The importance of this idea in the
period the library was being built may be seen in a zodiac used in a book dealing with
arcane astrology. This contained a solarized image called by the Masonic author Parsons
“the esoteric zodiac” (next page).

At first glance, the Great Hall zodiac seems to be very simple. Brass inlay silhouettes of
the 12 signs, each lightly modeled and marked with intaglio to suggest form, are set into a
dark-red French marble, circled by a lighter marble. The zodiacal 12 are arranged on the
floor of the Great Hall in a square (alternating with rosettes) at the center of which is a
radiant sunburst, marked with the for cardinal points of the compass, intimating that

--- Sayfa 76 ---
orientation may be an important factor in the zodiac. The distribution of the zodiacal 12,
and the rosettes, is interesting, for while the order follows the traditional sequence in a
widdershins, directions the purpose of the orientation is not at first apparent. Indeed, only
one practiced in the secrets arts of the Masons will recognize that its square form links
this zodiac with Earth. Given such a linkage, is the compass it contains designed to
indicate a hidden direction in space?

Noted Astrologer David Ovason published a book in 1999 entitled The Secret
Architecture of our Nation's Capitol:  The Masons and the Building of Washington,
D.C., in which he uncovered the historic fact that the Masonic Fraternity dedicated the
young United States of America to the stars generally, and to the Dog Star Sirius .  Listen
to the stated goal of this book:
"Today, there are more than twenty complete zodiacs in Washington, D.C., each one
pointing to an extraordinary mystery.  David Ovason, who has studied these astrological
devices for ten years, now reveals why they have been placed in such abundance in the
center of our nation's capitol and explains their interconnections.  His richly illustrated
text tells the story of how Washington, from its foundation in 1791, was linked with the
Zodiac, with the meaning of certain stars, and with a hidden cosmological symbolism that
he uncovers here for the first time."  [Jacket flyleaf]
Immediately, we are told that the capitol city of the United States of America was
founded according to the Biblically forbidden practice of Astrology from the beginning
of its serious construction.  Further, as we get into this material, you will discover that
Washington, D.C. and its key government buildings, were specifically oriented and
dedicated to the Dog Star Sirius, which we will later study, is the occult designation of
Satan .
This book absolutely proves the Satanic nature of Freemasonry in its Invisible Fraternity,
the vehement protestations to the contrary from Masons today.  Surely, you say, this book
was written by an Anti-Mason.  Wrong!  The author, David Ovason, is a noted
Astrologer, and his work is highly acclaimed by none other than C. Fred Kleinknecht, 33
Degree, Sovereign Grand Commander, The Supreme Council, 33 Degree (Mother
Council of the World), Southern Jurisdiction, U.S.A., Washington, D.C. [Page viii].
Listen to Kleinknecht glowingly praise this book's findings in the Foreword.  "In this
fascinating and well-researched book, David Ovason presents the remarkable thesis that
Washington, D.C., is a city of the stars.  He demonstrates that there are over 30 zodiacs in
the city, and that the majority of them are oriented in a meaningful way.  Even more
astonishing is it to learn that these zodiacs were designed to point to the actual heavens --
thus marrying the Capital City with the stars ... the assignment, position, and meaning of
Washington, D.C.'s zodiacs bespeak a relationship between heaven and earth."

--- Sayfa 77 ---
"What does this mean to us?  The star Spica happens to be the one that David Ovason has
shown to be symbolically linked with both Washington, D.C., and the United States as a
whole ... this star may be the origin of the five-pointed star that adorns the American
flag.  He also suggest that Spica may have been the origin of the Blazing (or Flaming)
Star of Freemasonry." [Pages vii-viii]
Later, on pages 4-5, Ovason tells us that this star, Spica, is really Sirius, "represented in
hieroglyphics that resembled an obelisk and a five-pointed star"; further, Ovason says
that the stars for our American flag seems to have been taken from this Sirius
hieroglyph.  If America and its capitol, were dedicated to the Dog Star Sirius, this is a
very weighty matter, indeed, for as we showed in NEWS1430, and later here, this Sirius
is Satan .
SPECIFIC EVENTS IN AMERICAN HISTORY DECIDED BY ASTROLOGY
"Had you stood on this water-edge of Foggy Bottom on April 3, 1791 ... you would have
witnessed remarkable event -- one which seems to have been involved in the magic of the
building of Washington, D.C.  On the morning of that day ... there would be an eclipse,
when the Sun ... would be blacked out by the body of the Moon .. The eclipse of 1791
was in Aries -- a certain portent that the destiny of Washington, D.C., would be filled
with pioneering endeavor and excessive (not to say belligerent) enthusiasms ... the augury
of that morning ... was remarkable. The Sun and Moon were not the only pair in Aries at
that time:  no fewer than five of the known planets were in that zodiacal Ram -- the sign
which favors brave undertakings.  Such cosmic curiosities are a sign that the city had
begun in a kind of dream -- as in a vision." [Page 6-7]
Indeed, America seems to have been started by occult Freemasons who were following
the dream of Sir Francis Bacon, espoused from 1590-1626, that North America should be
established as a New Atlantis.  Listen to New World Order author, Elizabeth van Buren,
writing in her book, The Secret of the Illuminati :
"Sir Francis Bacon had formed with the aid of his secret society ... the plans for the
colonization of the Western Hemisphere ... There is a secret and immutable destiny
planned for mankind, one not recognized by or dreamt of by the mass of humanity.  The
northern continent of America had been decreed to be the land of a democratic
commonwealth of states thousands of years before Columbus ever sailed to its shores.
There can be no doubt that the Enlightened Ones had a hand in the formation of the new
nation. Thomas Paine, George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, John
Adams, and countless others who were involved in signing the Declaration of
Independence were all Freemasons or members of some other sect.  The designs for both
the Great Seal of the United States and earlier, the flag of the colony, indicate that they
were inspired by those with esoteric knowledge." [Pages 142-144]
Now we know that Satan had plans for the United States to be founded according to his
occult lore, as the New Atlantis.  Atlantis was the mythical city in which all of its
inhabitants were expert practitioners of the occult doctrines, so adept that their Third Eye

--- Sayfa 78 ---
actually became physically apparent.  The United States was planned to be the New
Atlantis that would lead the rest of the world into the occult heaven known as the New
World Order, in which their Christ would rule triumphantly for 1,000 years!
Sir Francis Bacon, beginning in the early 1590's, began the detailed plans by which North
America would be colonized.  He was the supreme adept in the Rosicrucian Society, and
established the super secret Knights of the Helmet [Ibid., p. 123-129], a society
established along the lines of Rosicrucianism.  And, finally, Bacon was responsible for
the modern birth of Freemasonry, as detailed by Masonic author, George V. Tudhope, in
his book, Bacon Masonry , ISBN 1-56459-108-5, reprinted by Kessinger's Publishing.
Thus, we can see that the occult activities of our original occult Forefathers mentioned
above was merely the outworking of an occult plan originally conceived "thousands of
years before Columbus ever sailed"!  Our Masonic forefathers were merely following the
details of the occult plan as envisioned specifically by Sir Francis Bacon in the 1590's,
operating according to the vision provided him by his Guiding Spirit.
Christian author -- and former Black Magick Freemason -- William Schnoebelen, states
that "... others saw America as the 'New Atlantis', a place where occultism could prosper
uninhibited by Christianity.  Long before 1776, a colony of Rosicrucians was established
in Ephrata, PA!  Colonial America was full of occult groups, and both Witchcraft and
Freemasonry came over on the boats quite early!" [William Schnoebelen, Masonry:
Beyond The Light , Page 258]
In the New Atlantis, each citizen was so advanced in the occult that a Third Eye
physically opened up between their forehead.  Shockingly, this Third Eye features
prominently in this book by Ovason.  Listen:
"Other historians will tell you that the beginnings of this second Rome [Washington,
D.C.] may be traced back to a much earlier dream, in the imaginative 'second-sight'
faculty of a man who lived on this land ... in 1663, Francis Pope." [Page 8]  "Second-
sight" is an occult term for a person who can clairvoyantly see through a Third Eye, not
physically apparent yet, but operating nevertheless.  [William Schnoebelen,
Masonry:  Beyond The Light , p. 178]  Thus, Ovason is saying that our original
American Forefather Masons were so advanced they were seeing clairvoyantly!
This understanding speaks volumes as to the original Satanic designs Masonry had for
this country.  Let us now examine how Freemasons built key buildings in Washington,
D.C. according to the doctrines of Satanism.  You are beginning to get an understanding
of America you never had before, and you can now see why the street layouts were so
designed that they were shaped in the form of Satanic symbols [Read NEWS1040,
"Masonic Symbols of Power In Their Seat of Power, Washington, D.C., and NEWS1399,
"Former Satanist Informs Us That Government Mall In Washington, D.C. Was Originally
Conceived As A Sephirotic Tree of Life".]

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Before we actually begin our study, let us allow Ovason the final word on the
significance of Astrology and other occult symbols in the building of Washington, D.C.:
"... the mythology of the stellar lights plays an essential part in the foundation and history
of the federal city ... Is there some secret behind the efforts of the builders of this city to
ensure that so many stars should fall to Earth? Why should astronomers and astrologers
make so much effort to weave their magic art in this city?  Furthermore, what is it about
Washington, D.C., that, in 200 years of colorful history, has made it the focus of zodiac
builders ... Is the city ... secretly being prepared for some future time when the stars will
be seen as the living mysteries they really are?" [Pages 10-11]
The time when the "stars will be seen as the living mysteries they really are" will be
when Antichrist rules and the Satanic Mysteries are brought back "into public
expression" [Master D.K., The Externalisation of the Hierarchy , p. 570, speaking
through Alice Bailey].  In other words, when Antichrist rules, he will reestablish the
Satanic Mysteries as public worship.  Then, the real significance of the Astrology built
into Washington, D.C., will be known to all.
Now, let us examine the extent to which Washington, D.C., was originally built
according to Luciferian Astrology.
THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
Historians recognize that the beginning of the new independent Republic occurred on
July 4, 1776, when the Declaration of Independence was publicly issued.  We already
know that the timing of this declaration was carefully calculated according to Satanic
doctrine.  July 4 is exactly the 66th day following the beginning of the Satanic High Holy
period called Beltane, which begins on April 30.  In this calculation, April 30 is counted
as 'Day 1'.
The number '66' is the occult number for the Perfect Government of the Perfect Man,
who is represented by the number '666'.  Therefore, by waiting for the 66th day following
Beltane to establish the United States of America, our Masonic forefathers were telling
fellow Adepts throughout the world and through time, that America was going to be the
New Atlantis, the forerunner of the perfect global government of Antichrist.
Further, July 4 is exactly 13 days after Summer Solstice on June 21.  In this calculation,
June 22 is counted as 'Day 1'.  The number 13 is the number of Satan's rebellion, and
figures prominently in Luciferian lore.
But, now, David Ovason tells us something new about the Declaration of Independence.
"These [Astrological] computations clearly show that on the day the Declaration of
Independence was agreed in Philadelphia, the Sun was on Sirius ." [Page 138]
Thus, our occult Masonic Founding Fathers calculated even the day when they should
agree on the wording of the Declaration of Independence.  This day was one in which the

--- Sayfa 80 ---
Sun was on Sirius .  This careful attention to the timing of the events which succeeded in
founding this nation were predetermined according to Astrological phenomenon!
Ovason then clearly states, "The Mason who first signed the Declaration of Independence
would have been aware of the particular significance of July 4 as a cosmic event." [Page
139]
As William Schnoebelen so boldly stated, "Colonial America was full of occult groups,
and both Witchcraft and Freemasonry came over on the boats quite early!" From the very
beginning of this Republic, the battle in the supernatural sphere was raging for the soul of
this nation, just as God revealed is occurring for every major nation in every era in Daniel
10:20.
WHAT -- WHO -- IS SIRIUS THE DOG STAR BY WHICH AMERICA WAS
ORIENTED?
Since we have already learned that Washington, D.C., specifically, and America
generally, were originally laid out according to the Dog Star Sirius, we need to examine
the Egyptian Satanic Mythology about Sirius.  Once we have examined Egyptian belief
of this star, you will gain a far better understanding of the deep spiritual trouble America
is in with God.  There has always been an America you never knew existed, but God
knows, and that is the key to this discussion, at this End of the Age.
In Satanic legend, Sirius is one of the most important stars in the galaxy; but, more to the
point, Sirius is Satan!  Let us listen to what Freemason leader and author, Albert Pike, has
to say about Sirius, who came out of the Egyptian Mysteries.
"Isis was aided in her search [for the slain body of Osiris] by Anubis, in the shape of a
dog.  He was Sirius, or the Dog-Star, the friend and counselor of Osiris, and the inventor
of language, grammar, astronomy, surveying, arithmetic, music, and medical science; the
first maker of laws; and who taught the worship of the Gods, and the building of
Temples."  [Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma, p. 376, Teachings of the 24th Degree,
Prince of the Tabernacle]
Thus, we can see the critically key role that Sirius plays in the world of the Egyptian
Mysteries.  He was a counselor of the Messiah figure, Osiris, who died for the good of
mankind, and whose body was "nailed up in the ark" [Ibid., p. 377].  Sirius taught the
beneficial sciences, made the original laws, taught the worship of the pantheon of pagan
gods, and taught how to build the pagan Temples.
Later, Pike tell us that Sirius was the "largest and brightest Star in the Heavens ..."  [Ibid.,
p. 454, Teachings of the 25th Degree, Knight of the Brazen Serpent].  Since Sirius is
the most important star during the days of June and July, he is the star at the precise time
the Summer is the hottest; therefore, we get our saying "Dog Days of Summer" from
Sirius.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
However, when we dig into Luciferian lore just a little deeper, we realize that Sirius is
just another name for Hell and for Satan !  Listen to occult writer M. Temple Richmond,
writing in his book, Sirius, p. 29:
"The Euphrateans, Persians, Phoenicians, and the peoples of Vedic India called Sirius,
The Leader, while the Romans knew Sirius as Janitor Lethacus, or Keeper of Hell, both
of which titles are perhaps reminiscent of Anubis, the Egyptian god who led the deceased
through the underworld.  The Egyptians themselves reverenced Sirius under several other
names as well, including Sothis, Sothi, Sept, Sepet, Sopdet, Sot, and Sed."
Thus, this occult writer, Richmond, boldly states that Sirius is the Keeper of Hell!  In
the Bible, we call this person, Satan .  Richmond further ties together Sirius with Anubis
the dog.
The Egyptians also called him Set, or Seth.  New Age author and founder of the
Luciferian secret society called House of Theosophy, Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, writes
of the god, Set.  "... Hermes, the god of wisdom, called also Thoth, Tat, Seth, Set, and
Sat-an, and that he was, furthermore, when viewed under his bad aspect, Typhon, the
Egyptian Satan, who was also Set." [Isis Unveiled, Vol. I, Science, New York, Trow's
Printing and Bookbinding Company, 1877, p. 554, xxxiii.; Emphasis was in original]
Christian author, Bill Schnoebelen , former practicing Satanist, says that the Egyptian
worship of Set was truly abominable.  He says, "in ancient Egypt, Set was worshipped
with obscene, homosexual rituals". These rituals performed for Set/Sirius were so
horrible and debased that "later rulers of Egypt defaced their temples and obelisks and
tried to drive them from the land." [Schnoebelen, Twice The Child of Hell , p. 9]
Further, we discover that Sirius married his sister, Nephthys, according to the New
Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology, Prometheus Press, 1972, p. 21.  Thus, Sirius
committed the sin of Incest.
Christian author, Texe Marrs, says "Throughout the centuries Sirius has been recognized
by most occultists and esoteric teachers as the location were Lucifer and his hierarchy
dwell.  In Christian terminology, Sirius is simply a secretive codeword for 'hell'. {Marrs,
Book of New Age Cults and Religions, 1990, p. 299]
Occult author, Veronica Ions, boldly states that Anubis [Sirius as the Dog] was a god of
divination and magic [Egyptian Mythology , England: The Hamlyn Publishing Group,
Ltd., 1965, p. 83]; and Albert Pike notes that the "Egyptian Anubis is the god guarding
the gates of death". [Pike, Morals and Dogma, p. 430]
Set/Sirius is portrayed by Black Magick Satanists as the "Devil of Darkness" and the
Lord of the Underworld", according to New Age author, M. Esther Harding, in her book,
Woman's Mysteries: Ancient and Modern , New York, G.P. Putnam's Sons for the C.G.
Jung Foundation For Analytical Psychology, 1971 Edition, p. 48, and 168 respectively].

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Further, Harding reveals that this "Underworld' over which Set/Sirius is charge is not
Hades, but Tartarus, for "Tartarus is the hell of the damned and it was of this world that
Set was the Lord".  Schnoebelen then adds the caveat that Set's symbol is the Inverted
Pentagram!  Thus, the filthy Satanic Pentagram represents Sirius/Set , by whatever name
the occultist uses.
Finally, Masonic author, Albert Pike, reveals in his book, Morals and Dogma, that the
Pentagram Masons call the Blazing Star of their Lodges represents Sirius, the Dog Star!
Pike even blasphemously refers to Sirius as the "Guardian and Guide of our Souls ...
which to the Ancients was the Sun." [Page 15-16]  This is Sun Worship at its very worst!
Now, you can see why Masonic architects planned the original street layout in
Government Center to include the Goatshead of Mendes pentagram, the inverted
pentagram mentioned above.  As we report in NEWS1040, this pentagram engulfs the
White House!
KEY BUILDINGS BUILT AND DEDICATED ACCORDING TO SATANIC
DOCTRINE
1.  House of the Temple, or the Supreme Council -- "... architect John Russell Pope ...
built the most esoteric structure in Washington, D.C., once known to Masons as the
House of the Temple, or the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction."  [Page 9]  This
building is the one located precisely 13 blocks north of the White House, and is directly
lined up with that infamous obelisk, also known as the Washington Monument.  It is here
that C. Fred Kleinknecht, 33 Degree Supreme Commander, The Supreme Council 33
Degree (Mother Council of the World), Southern Jurisdiction, makes his office.  This
Masonic Temple is viewed by occultists as the true spiritual heart of Washington, D.C.
2.  Washington, D.C. street layout is laid out according to the plans of Babylon !  "...
the positions of the Capitol and the White House became the focal points for the city ...
the avenue joining the first two important sites (later called Pennsylvania Avenue)
determined the approximate angle of the radiants from the Capitol. These radiants were
imposed upon a grid of streets oriented on a north-south line, in a fashion which some
historians trace back to ancient Roman foundations, and others to plans of Babylon."
[Ovason, Page 41]
America is truly the Neo-Babylon of the world.  In Revelation 2:13, Jesus revealed that
Satan has a city in which he makes his seat!  "I know thy works and where thou dwellest,
even where Satan's seat is."  At the time Jesus revealed the events of Revelation to John,
Satan's seat was in the city of Pergamos.  Since 1776, when Luciferian Masons
established America as the New Atlantis, Satan's seat has been Washington, D.C.!  You
will better understand the information which is to follow if you keep this thought in
mind.
America truly can be the Economic Babylon of Revelation 18! [Read CE1038 for full
details]

--- Sayfa 83 ---
3.  Even the location of Government Center was made according to occult
thinking!  George Washington issued a proclamation dated March 30, 1791,
which set aside the specific location -- seen in this map -- on which
Government Center was to be built.  This location was chosen because the
layout of the land and the river created what esotericists call the "Pythagorean Y ".  As
David Ovason explains, "The Pythagorean Y is a vestigial drawing [a faint tracing] of a
path through life, in which one is perpetually presented with a choice of symbolic
directions ... Should one do good or bad?  Should one be selfish, or generous?  The
Pythagorean Y represented all the dualities which the growing soul must bear with each
passing moment of time." [Ovason, Page 47]
Thus, this very location for this occult capitol city dedicated to the Egyptian Star Sirius
was determined by occult thinking.  This geographical location was selected because the
Potomac River and its Eastern Branch, naturally formed a "Pythagorean Y"!
The next event is also very revealing.  The ceremony to dedicate this particular area
occurred on April 15, 1791, at precisely 3:30p.m.  "... Ellicott -- now revealed in the ritual
as a Masonic brother of George Washington -- symbolically confirmed the precise
location ... This done, Elisha Cullen Dick, the Master of Alexandria Lodge No. 22 ...
placed the marker.  Once the location was completed, a deposit of corn, wine, and oil was
made upon it, according to Masonic practice."
The mere fact that Freemasonry carries out a Corn, Wine And Oil ceremony shouts for all
to hear that this organization is as pagan and Satanic as any which has ever existed from
the Egyptian and Babylonian Satanic Mysteries.  You see, this ceremony is a part of Sun
Worship, a practice absolutely forbidden by Scripture!
Masonic author George H. Steinmetz, in his book Freemasonry:  Its Hidden Meaning ,
states:  "The ancients who worshipped the Sun as a god, or as a symbol of God,
considered all things yellow, golden color, of the sun, as pertaining to it; hence, gold,
brass, and corn or grain, because of their color, were deemed sacred ..."
Likewise, the ancient pagans associate wine with God, who was considered "at once the
Wine of life and the Wine bearer". [Francis Grant, Oriental Philosophy , p. 133-134].
Finally, we learn the Astrological reason for beginning the ceremony at precisely
3:30p.m.  "At exactly 3:30p.m., Jupiter, the most beneficial planet in the skies, began to
rise over the horizon.  It was in 23 degrees of Virgo ... he seized on the moment when the
zodiacal Virgo was exerting an especially strong and beneficial influence.  By this means,
the zodiacal power of Virgo, which was called in later Masonic circles 'the beautiful
Virgin' was able to stamp her benign influence on the building of the federal city.  Was
this one of the contributing reasons why many astrologers have insisted that Washington,
D.C. is ruled by zodiacal Virgo ...  It is quite clear that the ceremonial placing of the
stone related to more than merely the founding of the federal district:  it was somehow
linked to the future destiny of America itself." [Ovason, Page 49]

--- Sayfa 84 ---
4.  The occult role of Pennsylvania Avenue -- "In L'Enfant's faded map, and its later
amendments, Pennsylvania Avenue was accorded the most important role, as mediator
between Capitol and presidential home." [Ovason, P. 60] Pennsylvania Avenue
represents one leg of the Masonic Compass running from the White House to the Capitol
[Read NEWS1040 for full details and a map].
5.  The White House (President's House) -- "... the President's House was the first public
building to be erected in Washington, D.C.  A letter submitted 'by a gentleman' to a
Charleston newspaper offers the only surviving eyewitness version of the Masonic
cornerstone laying, which was held on Saturday, October 13, 1792, when the Georgetown
Lodge No. 9 of Maryland gathered for the ceremony."  [Ovason, P. 62]
Not only was the White House dedicated by Masons to the pagan gods, but the architect
was a Mason, a person named James Hoban, whom Ovason calls a "speculative Mason".
[Ovason, P. 63]
The cornerstone was laid carefully according to Astrology.  "In the arch of skies on the
day the foundation stone for the White House was laid, there was a most interesting
conjunction. Shortly before noon, the Moon had entered the same degree as the Dragon's
Head (a node of the Moon).  Both planet and node were in 23 degrees of Virgo."
[Ovason, Page 64-65]
With the White House having been dedicated to the pagan gods, you can see why the
Goatshead of Mendes Pentagram -- the most evil of all symbols -- engulfs the Executive
Mansion. [Read NEWS1040 for full details and a map].  Is it any wonder that so many of
our Presidents have been Masonic or members of other occult groups?
6.  Streets laid out according to occult plan .  "Time and time again, as we study the
Masonic involvement in the building of this city, through almost two centuries, we shall
see emphasis placed on this sign Virgo.  Time and time again, we shall see that a
knowledge of the stars played an important part in every stage of the creative phases in
the construction of the city.  Indeed, as the story of Washington, D.C., unfolds, we will be
forced to the conclusion that the 13 approximately straight lines of avenues which
L'Enfant planned for the city were symbolic of the stripes of the national flag, laid out to
receive the impress of the stars." [Ovason, P. 66]
Amazing! Now you know THE reason why the streets of Government Center in
Washington, D.C., are laid out in obvious Luciferian symbols, like the Goatshead of
Mendes [Inverted] Pentagram, the Masonic Compass, Square, Rule, and generally in such
straight lines, 13 such streets to be exact.  These streets were "laid out to receive the
impress of the stars" to satisfy Astrology, forbidden in Scripture.
Further, we have already learned that the city street plan originated in Rome and Ancient
Babylon!

--- Sayfa 85 ---
With this concept in mind, let us review an occult poem created to commemorate the
building of Washington, D.C.  Keep in mind that Washington, D.C., was originally called
Rome, that "second-sight" refers to a Satanist who has achieved the mystic Third Eye
clairvoyant capabilities, and that the obelisk is nothing more than the penis of Baal whom
Satanists worship.  Consider this occult poet waxing great on the wonderful significance
of building this second Rome, Washington, D.C.:
"In fancy now, beneath the twilight gloom,
Come, let me lead thee o'er this second Rome!
Where tribunes rule, where dusky Davi bow,
And what was Goose-Creek once is Tiber now!
This embryo capital, where Fancy see
Squares in morasses, obelisks in trees;
Which second-sighted seers ev'n now, adorn,
With shrines unbuilt and heroes yet unborn."
["Thomas Moore, "To Thomas Hume, from the City of Washington" (1804), printed in
the 1853 edition of The Poetical Works of Thomas Moore, Vol. II, p. 296, reprinted by
Ovason, p. 395, Footnote 22]
Can you feel God's judgment coming upon this pagan land?  Since America is clearly
Babylon, I can hear the Savior's voice, saying, "And after these things I saw another
angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his
glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, 'Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen , and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her,
and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies'."
[Revelation 18:1-3]
Since this nation was established as a New Atlantis, a New Babylon, and since
Washington, D.C. was originally established according to many of the same precepts as
the original physical Babylon, this Scripture seems to apply very strongly to this country.
We have become the key nation in the world at this time, and all the nations have
committed spiritual and commercial fornication with America, and the merchants of the
earth have grown rich through trading with us.  As we clearly demonstrate in Seminar
One, this Economic Babylon is the United States.  God's judgment draws ever nearer.
http://www.cuttingedge.org/news/n1487.cfm

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Other Notes:
Today, there are more than twenty complete zodiacs in Washington, D.C., each one
pointing to an extraordinary mystery. David Ovason, who has studied these astrological
devices for ten years, now reveals why they have been placed in such abundance in the
center of our nation's capital and explains their interconnections. His richly illustrated
text tells the story of how Washington, from its foundation in 1791, was linked with the
zodiac, with the meaning of certain stars, and with a hidden cosmological symbolism that
he uncovers here for the first time.
Fascinating and thoroughly researched, The Secret Architecture of Our Nation 's Capital
is an engrossing book that raises provocative questions and otters complex insights into
the meanings behind the mysterious symbols in Washington.
http://www.bestprices.com/cgi-bin/vlink/0060953683BT.html
 Other books by David Ovason:
--The Secret Architecture of Our Nation's Capital (Paperback)
--The Secret Symbols of the Dollar Bill (1st Ed.) (Hardcover)
--Nostradamus (Paperback)
--The Secrets of Nostradamus (Paperback)
--Los Secretos De Nostradamus (Paperback)
--The Secret Symbols Of The Dollar Bill (Paperback)
--Los Secretos De Nostradamus (Paperback)
--Two Children (Hardcover)
--The History of the Horoscope (Hardcover)

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Aphelion  in 1881 &
Freemasonry
http://www.darkstar1.co.uk/ds20.html
I have been investigating the symbols used by secret societies and mystery cults
to try and establish the existence of a hidden seam of golden knowledge about
the Dark Star.  My premise is that these symbols are very ancient, and have
survived the ravages of persecutions down the years, as monotheism and
dogmatic religious authorities have attempted to stamp out the old teachings.
We now live in more enlightened times (one would hope), and the secret esoteric
symbols have been gradually emerging from their shells.  However, the
guardians of these teachings have really no better idea of what they mean than
any of the rest of us.  The esotericists have interpreted these symbols, it is true,
but these interpretations are more a reflection of their modern spiritual values
than those of the ancients themselves.  Many might disagree with this view, but I
start with this as my initial premise.
In DarkStar19 I began an examination of Alchemy and
showed how a standard astrological interpretation of this
esoteric school of thought leaves a lot to be desired.  I
will soon release alchemical images that show clearly the
role of Nibiru as the Messianic Star, or the Dark Sun.  On
this page I will show more of the alchemical images (1),
but with the onus upon Freemasonry, another secret society that appears to hold
promise for this research.  This 16th Century image, for instance, seems to show
a red fiery globe, among a field of 7 stars (its moons?), between the Sun and
Luna (2).  Clutching this globe, the alchemist appears to be moving onto solid
ground, perhaps even moving between planets...
Note how the coronal discharge of the red orb is swept back from the Sun, as
one would expect when the brown dwarf's coronal discharge interacts with the
Solar Wind.  This is the origin of the appearance of the Winged Disc during
Nibiru's perihelion passage.
The Blazing Star
The Freemasons have a tremendous interest in a 'Blazing Star' that is said to
represent Sothis, or Sirius.  They have this Star motif placed in prominent places
in their Temples, or Lodges.  Many of their rituals are derived from Isian rites,
and ancient Egyptian symbols feature strongly in the Craft, even though many of

--- Sayfa 88 ---
their degrees are actually Mosaic, or sometimes Christian, in character.  There is
emphasis placed upon the appearance of a bright light in the darkness, derived
from the 'Black Rite', described by Isis in 'The Virgin of the World'.  This celestial
entity known as the 'Night' "weaves her web with rapid light though it be less than
Sun's" (3).
Combine this with the Freemason's worship of the Divine
Being as represented by a 'bright, shining light in the
East' that breaks through the darkness of the Lodge, and
one can begin to piece together a common strand.
Although connected with Sirius, this light is an altogether
different entity.
The alchemical image shown here contains Masonic
symbols (4).  The five visible planets and the Sun and
Luna make up the standard set of planetary symbols, but
the rebus is stood upon the alchemical dragon, Azoth,
who breathes fire.  He, in turn, lies upon a Winged Disc
that is evidently neither the Sun nor Mercury.
Geometrical workings are at play within the disc, in keeping with the other
Masonic symbols, and the numbers 4 and 3 appear to hint at that magic number
7 again...

The Equilateral Triangle
The equilateral triangle is an important symbol for
Freemasons also.  Matthew Scanlan has described the
Triangular Lodge of Rushton in Northamptonshire and
links much of the symbolism used within its architecture
to alchemy (5).  (I am particularly impressed by a motif of
the 'seven eyes of God within a hexagon (sic)' on the
building).  The Equilateral Triangle is one of the oldest of
the sacred symbols, according to James Churchward,
and represents the Trinity or the Triune Godhead:
"Whenever or wherever this symbol is found, in any form of record or inscription,
it is either in reference to, or represents, the ancient Trinity and Heaven...The
Truine Godhead of the Egyptians consisted of "Shu, Set and Horus" (6).

This image shows a line of Luna, Mercury and Sol.  Above them
is the equilateral triangle of the Masons containining an Eagle
(7).  We are also treated to a red burning orb and seven

--- Sayfa 89 ---
raindrops (Water and Fire, or seven moons and the brown dwarf Nibiru?).
So the Freemasons have inherited a very ancient series of symbols, and
Alchemy demonstrates that this Masonic equilateral triangle has some sort of
celestial significance.  It is often shown with an enclosed eye, the 'all-seeing eye
of Osiris' according to Churchward, who notes that this combined symbol was
often seen "in ancient Catholic churches, over the main altar" (6).  Americans will
be very well acquainted with this symbol, as it is part of the Masonic imagery
shown on their One Dollar bills.

1881 and the Esoteric
Author
This section of the Dark Star Theory was recently
removed because I received a couple of strongly
worded e-mails from the author David Ovason (8).
He was upset that I had included references to
material in his books, and threatened me with legal
action!  He accused me of breaching copyright law.
I was quite shocked by this because to all intents
and purposes I was presenting short quotations from
his books (9, 10), referencing them appropriately
and using them as source material only.  That's
standard academic practice, and certainly comes
under the auspices of 'fair use' in British and
American copyright law.  Nevertheless he would not
enter into correspondence about this with me.
Now it is absolutely within David Ovason's rights to
express his anger with me for including references
to his material in these pages.  It's a free country, as
they say.  In truth, I don't agree with many of the conclusions in his books, but I
have made reference to many interesting facts that one cannot readily find
elsewhere about the esoteric studies of Europe and the United States.  I have
picked up that material from him in the same way that he has, no doubt,  picked
up that material from older books, fellow esotericists and researchers etc.  That's
how knowledge passes along.
But it should be pointed out that I have taken that source material and reached a
set of conclusions that Mr Ovason likely as not disagrees with.  Perhaps that is
why he has objected to my even MENTIONING HIS NAME within these pages!!
Which is ridiculous.  Perhaps he is concerned that his good name as an author

--- Sayfa 90 ---
will be sullied with talk of ancient astronauts and missing planets and the like.
Well, if so, that's just tough. It is simply naive to expect the world to bang along to
your drum when you publish your own work.  It will simply become part of the
academic milieu, accessible to later researchers who may not agree with your
conclusions.
And how ironic that an author who is sensationally providing us with the esoteric
secrets of other thinkers and artists should get so upset about seeing those
secrets passing along further down the literary chain.  As if that wasn't an entirely
predictable outcome for popularising previously hidden, esoteric material!
Anyhow, I am now able to publish new photos of the Garfield monument with its
Zodiac depicting two Suns (11). In brief, here are the conclusions that I have
drawn from material contained in David Ovason's books, along with material from
other sources, like Zolar (12), and even information readily available over the
Internet:
There is an esoteric tradition describing a 'Dark Satellite' (Zolar)
That Dark Satellite allegedly reached it darkest point in 1881AD, an important
esoteric date (Ovason)
President Garfield was assassinated that year, (Known Fact) and his memorial in
Washington D.C. contains a Zodiacal plaque that has astrological significance (Known
Fact).

--- Sayfa 91 ---
The astrological sphere of the Sun has two objects 'orbiting' it; in the Zodiacal
houses of Gemini and Sagittarius (Ovason)
The enigmatic plaque implies the actual existence of a physical, but hidden
second Sun (My conclusion)
Taken together there is an esoteric tradition, probably deeply embodied within
Freemasonry, of a second Sun reaching aphelion in 1881AD (My conclusion)
That second Sun is the Dark Star, a small brown dwarf that presumably achieved
aphelion around that year and is now slowly swinging back towards us. (My
conclusion)

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Its perihelion is close to Gemini, whilst its aphelion 1881 is associated with
Sagittarius (My conclusion)
A year has passed since Ovason's outburst, and I am happy to report that neither
of us has seen the inside of a courtroom in that time.  I am grateful to my friend
Andy Goldie for taking these photographs of the Garfield monument in
Washington D.C., and allowing me to publish them.  I think it is important to
share this important find with my readers. Yes, it was David Ovason who wrote
about this in his book first of all.  But his discovery about this Zodiac has
implications about the knowledge of the Dark Star amongst Freemasons, and it is
vital for me to promulgate that insight in my own writing. So I acknowledge his
prior work, as I have always done, but I will not be brow-beaten into silence about
my own controversial insights on this matter.  In fact, here are the details of his
book, which is still an excellent read:

More Masonic Symbols
Investigating Freemasonry is a difficult enterprise for a non-Mason such as
myself.  On the one hand, Freemasons are anxious to give the impression that
the Craft and other orders/degrees are becoming more open to scrutiny, in order
to gain the confidence of a suspicious public, but on the other hand...Well, it goes
without saying that an organisation that has cherished its secrecy for so long will
be slow to truly open up.  It would be unwise to say too much about what I think
Freemasonry is all about.  I'm likely to be incorrect, not being an Initiate of the
Craft.  But I can provide tangible evidence that indicates that many of the
symbols I have alluded to are contained within Masonic lore.  Here are some
further examples:
This image shows the interior of
the Lodge De Goed Hoop Temple
(Lodge of Good Hope) in Cape
Town, South Africa (14).  Note the
five-pointed 'blazing star' which is
flush with a red aura.  Of more
interest however is the Moon icon,
which is replete with seven small
stars.

Again, I think the red crescent of Nibiru's coronal discharge at perihelion has
become integrated with the crescent moon down the centuries, leading to the
seven stars being depicted with the Moon, not the 'Blazing Star'.  It's difficult to

--- Sayfa 93 ---
imagine why the seven stars would be so often associated with the Moon
otherwise.  I suspect the 'Blazing Star' is the conjunction of Nibiru with Sirius at
perihelion (See DarkStar21).
We first considered the
Crescent and Seven Stars
icon with the 'Talisman of
Orpheus'.  It is not an
uncommon symbol, it
seems, but its importance
has not been recognised
previously.  On this
gravestone the same
symbolism is deployed in an
evidently Masonic context.
This is the Brierly Tomb at
Mellor, Greater Manchester,
England (15).
The Angel and the Mason are both pointing in the direction of this curious motif
(circled), which is found close to Aries on this occasion.  The Mason appears to
be stood upon a five-pointed star (Sirius), and a ladder extends towards the
Crescent and 7 Stars (a Stairway to Heaven?).
In his article, the Rev Parker amusingly notes how Masonic imagery found on the
architecture of churches is often put down to a tribute following the accidental
death of a Mason falling from the roof.  'Mason's set square' at Gloucester
Cathedral is given as an example...an incongruity I can investigate in my own
town!

--- Sayfa 94 ---
The masonic button on the left is the earliest known, dating to 1763 from the
Regularity Lodge No 91 (United Grand Lodge, London) (15).  On the right is a
Masonic medal showing the radiant triangle at the top.  It is surrounded by a
semi-circle of discs, numbering seven.  The medal was awarded for charitable
work, but the imagery employed also hints at Jesus/Mary or Horus/Isis.
This Scottish Lodge (St Bryde No 579) boasts a
Blazing Star that appears very much like a
classic Winged Disc (16).  One of the things that
I find very interesting is the presence of the two
pillars.  These no doubt symbolise the two pillars
upon which Knowledge was written prior to the
Flood: one could withstand the destruction of the
Deluge, the other was capable of surviving a
fiery cataclysm (one wonders whether the
excitation of Nibiru as it approaches the Sun is
reciprocated; that the super-charged Sun might
cause massive global over-heating during some
perihelion passages).

We have seen the two pillars deployed in alchemical images also, and it is
possible that their presence may indicate an archeo-astronomical significance.
In other words, the appearance of the Winged Disc is meant to be seen between
two marker pillars, or obelixes.  Speculative Freemasons certainly show much
interest in related Egyptian relics.

The 1st American Flag

--- Sayfa 95 ---
Martin Cosnette dug up this little gem for me.  Apparently, according to David
Icke's website, this was the very first American flag (17).  The original Stars and
Stripes in the form of a comet and accompanying set of seven stars! It contains
all of the relevant symbols associated with Nibiru, the Dark Star.  There is the
massive comet containing the Eye (of The Watchers, or Nephilim?) and the
seven accompanying stars, or moons.  Quite remarkable. So were the founders
of the USA knowingly presenting the image of the hidden Dark Sun as their own?
This is a black and white image, and one presumes that the colour of the field on
the left is blue, and that on the right is red.  As we have seen above, the creation
of the United States of America involved a significant number of Freemasons,
George Washington most prominent among them.  The flag shown here could
have easily been derived from symbolism deployed on the Lafayette Apron,
which was presented to Washington himself.  Freemasons themselves have put
forward explanations for the symbols, but add that no interpretation can be
considered absolute.  The following is derived from work by Frank W. Bobb,
Grand Lodge librarian and curator at the Grand Lodge Museum in Philadelphia,
where the 'Washington Apron' is kept.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Prominent among the symbols is the All-Seeing Eye, a symbol of 'watchfulness
and of the Supreme Being' (number 4).  It is a third astronomical symbol,
independent of the lesser sources of light provided by the Sun and Moon. This
'God' of the freemasons is emblazoned with fiery radiance, within which can be
found the Seven Stars (number 40).  These are said to represent the seven
Liberal Arts and sciences of the Freemasons.  In this sense, then, the All-Seeing
Eye is the fount of Masonic knowledge and learning.
But this interpretation provided by Frank Bobb may be just conjecture. For me,
personally, the overall imagery is absolutely identical to that of Nibiru and its
moons, and found as it is with the Sun (number 39) and Moon (number 7), and
the Arch of Heaven (number 6), an alternative meaning can be presented.  Did
the Freemasons know about Nibiru through esoteric and hidden knowledge
passed to them from older, persecuted Orders or heretical sects?
Was this hidden knowledge so central to their secret system of beliefs that it was
used by Washington and his colleagues to create the flag of the United States of
America?  It's an amazing thought.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
Written by Andy Lloyd, author of
'The Dark Star'
Published by Timeless Voyager
Press 2005
© 17th December 2003, and
updated 10th April 2005

References
1.   Alchemy' http://www.levity.com/alchemy/home.html This
website showcases alchemical images speculatively coloured by levity.com's Webmaster.
2.   Woodcut from Petrarch Das Glüchbuch, Augsburg, 1539
3.   R. Temple  "The Sirius Mystery"  p115 Century 1998
4.   Sixth woodcut from the series in Basil Valentine's Azoth.
5.   M. Scanlan  "Mystery Set in Stone"  pp22-4 Freemasonry Today Summer 2001
http://www.freemasonrytoday.com
6.   J. Churchward  "The Lost Continent of Mu" pp272-3 Futura
7.   18th century engraving based on work of Basil Valentine.
8. Correspondence with David Ovason, May 2004
9.  D. Ovason  "The Secret Zodiacs of Washington D.C."  pp36-41, 96, 115-6, 122-3 Arrow 2000
10. D. Ovason "The Zelator: The Secret Journals of Mark Hedsel" Arrow 1999
11. D. Ovason "The Nostradamus Code"  Arrow 1997

12. Photographs © Andy Goldie 2005, and reproduced with his kind permission
13.  Zolar "The Encyclopaedia of Ancient & Forbidden Knowledge" Ch 7, 1970, Abacus
14. V. Zaayman "Lodge De Goede Hoop" p36 The Ashlar Sept 1997
15. Rev A. Parker "Some Masonic Gravestones in Liverpool and Manchester" pp226-8 & p40
Freemasonry Today Summer 2000

--- Sayfa 98 ---
16. J. Jack "Lodge St. Bryde No. 579" p22-6 The Ashlar Sept 1999
17.  German-speaking readers may be interested in this link (thanks to Ernst W. Winters):
http://www.nostradamus-dimde.de/g_usa_1.htm
18. C.Knight & R. Lomas 'Uriel's Machine' Arrow 1999

Hello Andy,
Greg Jenner writes:

"You can also see this flag in the book: 'The Gods of Eden' by: William Bramley. He says it was
only a 'runner-up' to the first official American flag. Still very interesting though.

"Thought you might be interested in this prologue (pg. XIII) from the book 'Uriel's Machine' by:
Christopher Knight & Robert Lomas, © 1999.

"According to the two Authors Freemason rituals of the ancient Scottish rite devoted entire
Degrees to 'Enoch' himself who was told by an angel, called Uriel, to preserve the secrets of
civilization because a global disaster was imminent. Masonic documents dating from the early
17thcentury, known as the 'old charges' tell how everything dear to mankind existed before the
disastrous Flood and had to be reconstructed by the survivors.

"On page 55 in the book the Authors go on to say that, according to the 'Book of Enoch', he had a
vision of seven stars that appeared as "Seven burning mountains" descending upon the Earth
and the 'Tollmanns' interpreted this later as seven Cometary fragments that hit the Earth causing
the Great Flood in Noah's time! Regardless if the "Seven Burning Mountains" impacted the Earth
or not, it is clear to me that the seven stars were associated somehow with a celestial event in
which Enoch was 'allowed' to view.

"Therefore it is my conclusion, like you, that the Freemasons are privy to certain hidden
knowledge regarding this celestial event (Nibiru) and the seven stars or "Burning Mountains" on
the early American Flag is a great example of this. And as you well know these seven stars show
up throughout Masonic symbology."

(From Greg Jenner, Abbotsford, BC, Canada)

"Uriel's Machine"(18) is a fascinating book, and the excerpts pointed out by Greg Jenner do make
for very interesting reading. They provide a direct link between a description of the Dark Star and
its satellites at perihelion, and myth connected with catastrophic Earth changes.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
THE MASONIC NEW WORLD ORDER

MASONIC FOUNDATIONS OF THE UNITED
STATES
Christians have been led to believe that the government of the United States of
America is based on the basic principles of Christian morality, which have their
origin in the Scriptures. Notable for propagating this misinformation are D.
James Kennedy, author of a book promoting astrology, and Peter Marshall, Jr.
(son of the late U.S. Senate Chaplain) who wrote The Light and The Glory.
Interestingly, both ministers are members of the Council for National Policy, a
secret organization founded by the Council on Foreign Relations which includes
among its 400+ members numerous Christian ministry leaders, various members
of Scottish Rite Freemasonry of high degree, including Jesse Helms and Jack
Kemp, Senator Trent Lott, Rep. Dick Armey, and other globalists involved in
media, oil, real estate and financial industries.
THE FOUNDING FATHERS
Historical evidence militates against the view that those who formulated the
fundamental documents of American government were Christians. To the
contrary, not a few who wrote and signed the Declaration of Independence,
Articles of Confederation and the Constitution were Deists, Theists and
Freemasons. Webster's Dictionary defines "theism" and "deism":
Theism - "belief in the existence of a god or gods; specif: belief in the existence of
one God viewed as the creative source of man and the world who transcends yet
is immanent in the world."
Deism - "a movement or system of thought advocating natural religions based
on human reason rather than revelation, emphasizing morality, and in the 18th
century denying the interference of the Creator with the laws of the universe."
One recent historical account of Freemasonry, THE TEMPLE & THE LODGE,
boast instead of the profound influence of Freemasonry on the founding
documents, (while carefully trying to avoid creating the impression of a Masonic
conspiracy):

--- Sayfa 100 ---
"Of the fifty-six signatories of the Declaration of Independence, only nine can
definitely be identified as Freemasons, while ten others may possibly have been.
Of the general officers in the Continental Army, there were so far as
documentation can establish, thirty-three Freemasons out of seventy-four.
Granted the known Freemasons were, as a rule, more prominent, more
instrumental in shaping the course of events than their unaffiliated colleagues...
"On 11 June, (the Continental) Congress appointed a committee to draft a
declaration of independence. Of the five men on this committee, two - Franklin
and...Robert Livingston - were Freemasons, and one, Robert Sherman, is
believed, though not confirmed, to have been. The other two, Thomas Jefferson
and John Adams - were not, despite subsequent claims to the contrary. The text
of the declaration was composed by Jefferson. It was submitted to Congress and
accepted on 4 July 1776. The nine signatories who can now be established as
proven Freemasons, and the ten who were possibly so, included such influential
figures as Washington, Franklin and, of course, the president of the Congress,
John Hancock. The army, moreover, remained almost entirely in Freemasonic
hands...As we shall see, it is in the Constitution that the influence of Freemasonry
is most discernible...
"At last, on 25 May 1787, the Constitutional Convention opened in Philadelphia
and commenced its efforts to devise the machinery of government for the new
nation. The first voice to make itself heard in any significantly influential way
was a characteristically Freemasonic one, that of Edmund Randolph..
Randolph...a member of a Williamsburg lodge, had become Washington's aide-
de-camp. Subsequently he was to become Attorney-General, then governor of
Virginia and Grand Master of Virginia's Grand Lodge. During Washington's
presidency, he was to serve as the first Attorney-General of the United States,
then the first Secretary of State.
"...There were ultimately five dominant and guiding spirits behind the
Constitution - Washington, Franklin, Randolph, Jefferson and John Adams. Of
these, the first three were active Freemasons, but men who took their
Freemasonry extremely seriously - men who subscribed fervently to its ideals,
whose entire orientation had been shaped and conditioned by it. And Adam's
position, though he himself is not known to have been a Freemason was virtually
identical to theirs. When he became president, moreover, he appointed a
prominent Freemason, John Marshall, as first Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court." (1)
The Biblical Discernment Ministries web site also provides information on the
Masonic founding fathers of America.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
From American Masonic History - What Are America's True Roots?
"Some of the greatest names of the American Revolution were Masons: Ethan
Alien, Edmund Burke, John Claypoole, William Daws, Benjamin Franklin, John
Hancock, John Paul Jones, Robert Livingston, Paul Revere, Colonel Benjamin
Tupper, and George Washington. Of the 56 signers of The Declaration of
lndependence, eight were known Masons and seven others exhibited strong
evidence of Masonic membership. Of the forty signers of the Constitution, nine
were known Masons, 13 exhibited evidence of Masonic membership, and six
more later became Masons.
"There were many other Masonic influences in early American history: (1)
Lafayette, the French liaison to the Colonies, without whose aid the war could
not have been won, was a Freemason; (2) the majority of the commanders of the
Continental Army were Freemasons and members of "Army Lodges"; (3) most of
George Washington's generals were Freemasons; the Boston Tea Party was
planned at the Green Dragon Tavern, also known as the "Freemasons' Arms" and
"the Headquarters of the Revolution"; (4) George Washington was sworn in as
the first President of the United States by Robert Livingston, Grand Master of
New York's Masonic lodge, and the Bible on which he took his oath was from his
own Masonic lodge; and (5) the Cornerstone of the Capital Building was laid by
the Grand Lodge of Maryland." (2)
The following profiles demonstrate the extent to which certain of the prominent
and influential founding fathers were committed either to Freemasonry, deism or
theism:
The History of Freemasonry  53min 21sec
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
You will note in this profile that Anderson's Constitutions, which was the
handbook for English Freemasonry, enunciated the Masonic mandate for the
True Noahide as expressed by Prince of Masonry, Albert Mackey:
"On 8 December 1730, Benjamin Franklin printed in his newspaper, The
Pennsylvania Gazette, the first documented notice about Freemasonry in North
America. Franklin's article, which consisted of a general account of Freemasonry,
was prefaced by the statement that 'there are several Lodges of FREE MASONS
erected in this Province'... Franklin himself became a Freemason in February
1731, and Provincial Grand Master of Pennsylvania in 1734. That same year, he
ushered into print the first Freemasonic book to be published in America, and
edition of Anderson's Constitutions...the Bible for English Freemasonry. It

--- Sayfa 102 ---
enunciates what were to become some of the now familiar and basic tenets of the
Grand Lodge... (In) The first article... Anderson writes, 'tis now thought more
expedient only to oblige (Masons) to that Religion to which all men agree..." (3)
"...(A) revision of the Old Charges...contained this passage: 'A Mason is obliged
by his tenure to obey the Moral Law.' In the edition of 1738, Dr. Anderson has,
without authority, completed the sentence by adding the words, 'As a true
Noachida. ...the only religious laws which a Freemason is required to obey are
those which are contained in the code that has been attributed to Noah. This
sentiment is still further expressed toward the close of the 'Old Charges' where it
is said that the Mason is obliged only 'to that religion in which all men agree,'
excluding therefore atheism and requiring the observance of such simple laws of
morality as are enjoined in the precepts of Noah." (4)
THOMAS PAINE
Thomas Paine, a theist, published his pamphlet "Common Sense" in January of
1776, which turned the tide of public opinion in favor of declaring independence.
Paine's arguments against all forms of monarchy dissolved any lingering
attachment to Great Britain. On July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress adopted
the Declaration of Independence declaring the colonies free and independent
states. Although Paine quoted Scripture to denounce the concept of monarchy,
his later work, Age of Reason, is a treatise on the implausibility of the Bible and
the irrationality of Christianity. Paine believed in one God, but rejected all
religions, saying:
"My own mind is my own church." He also maintained an interested in
Freemasonry. His pamphlet, Origin Of Free-Masonry, proposed that Masonry's
embodiment of the sun worship of ancient Druidism was a legitimate alternative
to Christianity. He notes that Freemasonry's god, "...Osiris and Isis, theologically
represented the Supreme Being and universal Nature..." (5)

THOMAS JEFFERSON
Thomas Jefferson, a Deist, wrote the Declaration of Independence, which opens
with a statement of rights deriving, not from the God of Holy Scripture, but
Nature's God and the Natural Law.
"When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the

--- Sayfa 103 ---
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation."
In The Jefferson Bible: The Life and Morals of Jesus, Jefferson describes his views of
Jesus Christ, the Christian religion, and his own religious beliefs. In a Syllabus
which he appended to his Bible, he compared the teachings of Jesus to those of
the earlier Greek and Roman philosophers, and to the religion of the Jews of
Jesus' time. The following excerpt is from a letter discussing the Syllabus. Of
significance is his statement, "...(Jesus) preaches the efficacy of repentance
towards forgiveness of sin; I require counterpoise of good works to redeem it..."
"But while this syllabus is meant to place the character of Jesus in its true and
high light, as no impostor Himself, but a great Reformer of the Hebrew code of
religion, it is not to be understood that I am with Him in all His doctrines. I am a
Materialist; he takes the side of Spiritualism; he preaches the efficacy of
repentance towards forgiveness of sin; I require counterpoise of good works to
redeem it, etc., etc. It is the innocence of His character, the purity and sublimity
of His moral precepts, the eloquence of His inculcations, the beauty of the
apologues in which He conveys them, that I so much admire; sometimes, indeed,
needing indulgence to eastern hyperbolism. My eulogies, too, may be founded
on a postulate which all may not be ready to grant. Among the sayings and
discourses imputed to Him by His biographers, I find many passages of fine
imagination, correct morality, and of the most lovely benevolence; and others,
again, of so much ignorance, so much absurdity, so much untruth, charlatanism
and imposture, as to pronounce it impossible that such contradictions should
have proceeded from the same Being. I separate, therefore, the gold from the
dross; restore to Him the former, and leave the latter to the stupidity of some,
and roguery of others of His disciples. Of this band of dupes and impostors, Paul
was the great Coryphaeus, and first corruptor of the doctrines of Jesus. These
palpable interpolations and falsifications of His doctrines, led me to try to sift
them apart. I found the work obvious and easy, and that His past composed the
most beautiful morsel of morality which has been given to us by man. The
syllabus is therefore of His doctrines, not all of mine. I read them as I do those of
other ancient and modern moralists, with a mixture of approbation and
dissent..." (6)
GEORGE WASHINGTON
Washington: An Abridgement, by Richard Harwell, records the first president's
initiation and loyalty to the Masonic Lodge.
On September 1, 1752, a new lodge of Masons held its first meeting in
Fredericksburg and soon attracted members. Under Daniel Campbell as Master,

--- Sayfa 104 ---
a class of five was initiated on November 4. George, one of this group, paid his
initiation fee of  23 pounds. as an Entered Apprentice. (7)
[Washington's journey to Fredericksburg- 1781]
The journey had shown that the President was as popular in the Southern States
as he was in Federalist New England. On the tour he received at least twenty-
three addresses. Particularly noticeable were the addresses from Lodges of Free
Masons. This probably had no other significance other than it disclosed the
strength of the Masons in the South and their pride in Washington as a brother.
His answers, in turn, were in good Masonic terms, with no casualness in his
references to his membership in the Order. (8)
In 1791, Washington chose Washington , D.C. in 1791 and commissioned Pierre
Charles L'Enfant, a French engineer, to create a plan for the physical layout of the
city, with the Capitol as the center of the city.
[He] took the road for the relatively brief ride to the Federal City. It was
September 18 [1794], the date for laying the cornerstone of the Capitol. The
President found the splendor of music and drums, of flying colors, of many
Masons in their symbolic regalia, of happy spectators generally.  It was a
memorable affair for the Masonic Order, magnified by Washington's
participation as a member. (9)
Portions of the Temple and The Lodge also confirm that Masonic ceremonies were
conducted for Washington's inauguration and the laying of the cornerstone of
the Capitol building:
"On 4 February 1789, Washington was elected first president of the United States
and John Adams his vice-president. The inauguration was on 30 April. The oath
was administered by Robert Livingston, Grand Master of New York's Grand
Lodge...The marshal of the day was another Freemason, General Jacob Morton.
Yet another Freemason, General Morgan Lewis, was Washington's escort...
Washington himself at the time was Master of Alexandria Lodge No. 22,
Virginia... On 14 December, Alexander Hamilton submitted proposals for
establishing a National Bank. Jefferson opposed them but Washington signed
them through. On the American dollar bill was printed the 'Great Seal' of the
United States. It is unmistakably Freemasonic - an all seeing eye in a triangle
above a thirteen-stepped, four-sided pyramid, beneath which a scroll proclaims
the advent of a 'new secular order,' one of Freemasonry's long-standing dreams.
"On 18 September 1793, the cornerstone of the Capitol was officially laid. Grand
Lodge of Maryland presided over the ceremony and Washington was asked to
serve as Master... Subsequently, the Capitol and the White House were each to
become focal points of an elaborate geometry governing the layout of the

--- Sayfa 105 ---
nation's capital city. This geometry, originally devised by an architect named
Pierre l'Enfant, was subsequently modified by Washington and Jefferson so as to
produce specifically octagonal patterns incorporation the particular cross used as
a device by Masonic Templars." (10)
Richard Harwell noted the Masonic funeral of George Washington in 1799:
When word came that the Freemasons and the military would attend the funeral
in a body, Lear began to arrange for the hospitality that would be expected. (11)
Washington's high esteem for the Masonic Order is expressed on the Masonic
National Memorial erected in his honor.
"Carved on the outside of the George Washington Masonic National Memorial in
Alexandria, Virginia, are words from an address by General Geroge Washington
when he visited King David Lodge in Newport, Rhode Island, as follows:
"'Being persuaded that a just application of the principles on which the Masonic
Fraternity is founded must be promotive of private virtue and public prosperity,
I shall always be happy to advance the interest of the Society and to be
considered by them as a Brother.'" (12)
See also: George Washington's Correspondence

THE MASONIC ARCHITECTURE OF WASHINGTON, D.C.

THE U.S. CAPITOL BUILDING
The Architect of the Capitol Home Page also documents that "The cornerstone [of
the Capitol] was laid by President Washington in the building's southeast corner
on September 18, 1793, with Masonic ceremonies." (13) And in a more recent
Masonic ceremony in Washington, D.C., 33rd degree Freemason Senator Strom
Thurmond (R-SC) and fellow Masons honor the laying of the cornerstone 200
years ago.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
MASONIC LAYOUT OF D.C.
The following extended excerpt explains the Freemasonic symbolism in the city
of Washington D.C. (The author's dominionist position that we must "reclaim
America" for Christ is not endorsed by Watch Unto Prayer, for reasons that will
become evident as this series continues.)
Freemasonry - Is it Satan's Door to America?
"A curious piece of the Masonic puzzle is the actual street layout for our Capital
city, Washington, D.C.. You see, the city was laid out in the form of the central
Masonic Symbols, the Square, the Compass, the Rule and the Pentagram.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
"Take any good street map of downtown Washington, D.C. and find the Capitol
Building. Facing the Capitol from the Mall and using the Capitol building as the
head or top of the Compass, the left leg is represented by Pennsylvania Ave. and
the right leg, Maryland Ave. The Square is found in the usual Masonic position
with the intersection of Canal St. and Louisiana Ave. The left leg of the Compass
stands on the White House and the right leg stands on the Jefferson Memorial.
The circle drive and short streets behind the building form the head and ears of
what Satanists call the Goat Of Mendes or Goat's head!
"Sitting on top of the White House is an inverted 5 pointed star, or Pentagram. It
faces North, with the point down in true occult fashion. It sits within the
intersections of Connecticut and Vermont Avenues north to Dupont and Logan
Circles, with Rhode Island and Massachusetts going to Washington Circle to the
West and Mt. Vernon Square on the East.
"The Pentagram or five-pointed star is, of course, both a Masonic symbol and the
ancient symbol of witchcraft. With its point facing down (or south, when placed
on the ground) it is especially associated with Satanism. Satanists can be found
wearing the inverted pentagram frequently; and it appears on the cover of many
black magic books, including THE SATANIC BIBLE. In this form, it is also the
emblem of the Eastern Star, the women's Masonic organization.
"The center of the pentagram is 16th St. where, thirteen blocks due north of the
very center of the White House, the Masonic House of The Temple sits at the top
of this occult iceberg.
"The Washington Monument stands in perfect line to the intersecting point of the
form of the Masonic square, stretching from the House of the Temple to the
Capitol building. Within the hypotenuse of that right triangle sits many of the
headquarters buildings for the most powerful departments of government, such
as the Justice Dept., U.S. Senate and the Internal Revenue Service.
"It would be great to know that your national Capital is bathed in continual
prayer and to believe that its buildings and monuments have been dedicated in
prayer, but do you realize that every key Federal building from the White House
to the Capitol Building has had a cornerstone laid in a Masonic ritual and had
specific Masonic paraphernalia placed in each one. Again, wonderful if we are
talking about our one true God in all this, but such is not the case.
"The cornerstones of all these buildings have been laid in Masonic ritual,
dedicated to the demonic god of Masonry, JaoBulOn. That is the secret name of
the Masonic god, the "Lost Word" learned in the ritual of the Royal Arch degree.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
"JAO" is the Greek for Jehovah, "BUL" is a rendering of the name, BAAL, and
"ON" is the Babylonian name of OSIRIS.
"Freemasonry boasts 16 Presidents, including Ronald Reagan, 41 Federal Judges,
60 Congressmen, 14 members of the Judiciary Committee and 18 Senators. One
can only guess at the numbers involved within the many governmental
departments. There is no doubt that Masonic conspirators plotted against this
nation from its very inception to the present hour...." (14)
The Great Inverted Pentagram of Washington DC
"I'll spare you assorted conjecture on why the designers of this city decided to
place Masonic symbolism all across the landscape on a scale that can be seen
from space. Just take a look." (15)
Masonic Symbols of Power in Their Seat of Power - Washington, D.C.
Cutting Edge makes an important observation which explains the obsessive
preoccupation with occult symbolism among practitioners of witchcraft.
"Occultists the world over believe that, once a symbol is created, it acquires
power of its own, and more power is generated when such symbol(s) are created
without the profane [uninitiated] knowing about it. And, the greatest power of
all is created in the symbol(s) if the uninitiated NEVER discover that the symbol
exists. In this article, we shall demonstrate positive proofs of conspiracy to
achieve the ends of Freemasonry, i.e., achieving the New World Order. And,
these proofs exist right under your eyes, in Washington, D.C., the Capital
district...
"Remember, occult leaders in Europe were told by their Familiar Spirits as early
as the 1740's that the new American continent was to be established as the new
"Atlantis", and its destiny was to assume the global leadership of the drive to the
New World Order. From the beginning, the United States of America was chosen
to lead the world into this kingdom of Antichrist, and Washington, D.C. was to
be its capital." (16)
Government Center was Created in 1792 as a Capitol Dedicated to Masonry
"As you can see, our Founding Fathers who were Freemasons, intended from the
beginning, that Washington, D.C., Government Center, was to be established as a
Freemason Capitol. They intended that Freemasons would determine the
political and spiritual direction of the infant United States of America. This
direction was to be toward their New World Order. We are now very, very close
to this goal today. Thus, our seeds of destruction were sown by our Founding
Fathers without anyone else knowing about it! This fulfills the stated objective of
Albert Pike in his book, "Morals and Dogma", hiding the truth from the "Profane"

--- Sayfa 109 ---
while revealing it to the "Elect". The arrogance of this statement is beyond my
comprehension!!
"As we revealed in FREE01, the true center of spiritual and political power
resides only in the Freemason Temple of Understanding, located 13 blocks north
of the White House, and directly in line with the massive obelisk known as the
Washington Monument. Occultists believe that the spirit of the Sun God "Ra"
indwells the obelisk, and that the "Elect" must bow down before it twice to three
times daily. Thus, the Washington Monument, the obelisk, is in direct line with
the Congress to its East, and with the Freemason Temple directly North. The
White House is not in direct line with the obelisk, which is very revealing as to
the planned center of power.
"Freemasons intended that the center of power would be the Temple of
Understanding, not the White House!! Thus, they located the Temple due North
of the obelisk! We hope you understand now that the spirit of Freemasonry has
been guiding our nation's direction ever since 1776, and that this guidance was
solidified in 1792 by incorporating Freemasonry symbols into the very street
structure of Government Center. The importance of our discovery of these maps
is that we found them on a Freemason Web Site,
http://www.eskimo.com/~daylight/. The fact that we found these maps on a
Freemason site PROVES beyond a shadow of a doubt that the intent of L'Enfante
and our Founding Fathers, from the beginning of our country, was to
deliberately design Government Center according to Freemasonry principles."
(17)

THE WASHINGTON MONUMENT
Masonic Stones of the Washington Monument

--- Sayfa 110 ---
"On the 4th of July, 1848, under a
clear sky in the presence of the
President of the United States and
virtually every notable of the
government including former first
lady Dolley Madison, the cornerstone
was set with masonic ceremonies by
the Grand Lodge of Masons of the
District of Columbia. One of the
principle addresses of the occasion
was given by Benjamin B. French,
Grand Master, who wore the
masonic apron that Washington
wore at the laying of the cornerstone
of the U.S. Capitol. In his address
French referred to the masonic
master's chair used by Washington as
Worshipful Master of Washington-
Alexandria Lodge, and the gavel
used by the first President to set the
cornerstone of the Capitol, in the
custody of Potomac Lodge #5 of
Georgetown, D.C. Both of these were
on display for the occasion along
with other Washington masonic
relics." (18)
See also: More Masonic Stones of the
Washington Monument

THE GREAT SEAL
On the U.S. dollar bill is displayed the Great Seal of the United States, which
contains important symbols of Freemasonry: the All-Seeing Eye of Horus, the
Pyramid, the Six-Pointed Star, the Phoenix/Eagle the motto, Novus Ordo
Seclorum. Altogether, the Masonic symbolism on the dollar bill reveals the
true national origin and destiny of the United States: The founding of a
government in conformity to the Plan of the Great Architect of the Universe
and the eventual establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth. This utopian
plan originated in England, where British Freemasons dedicated themselves
to lay the foundation for the New World Order on the American continent.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
See The Masonic Seal Of America for an internet exclusive
with most images being new to the net.  This presentation by
Endtime Deception ministry shows the true occult meaning
when the seals are merged seals together, proving once and
for all Freemasonry's design on our $1 bill and the power and
control of Freemasonry over the USA and the World.
The Lost Tribes of Israel
Manley P. Hall wrote in The Secret Teachings of All Ages:
"The Great Seal is the signature of this exalted body [a secret body existing in
Europe] - unseen and for the most part unknown - and the unfinished pyramid
upon its reverse side is a trestle board setting forth the task to the
accomplishment of which the United States Government was dedicated from the
day of its inception." (19)
American Freemasonry issued from English Freemasonry, where it originated in
the late 16th or early 17th centuries. The English transported Freemasonry
wherever they settled in the British Empire. Underlying the British colonial
initiatives was the concept of British-Israelism (Anglo-Israelism). The British-
Israel belief presumes that, after the Assyrian Captivity (II Kings 18), the ten
northern tribes of Israel migrated to the British Isles. According to this false
doctrine, the Anglo-Saxon nations are the chosen people of God for the
fulfillment of God's promise to establish a Kingdom of God, i.e. a theocracy,
upon earth.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
British Israelism is also termed Christian Identity and numerous ministries
which profess to be Christian promote such error, which effectively negates
God's promises of restoration to national Israel. The Straight Talk web site, which
"shuns traditional Christian practices and doctrine (but) is... founded on the
teachings of Paul, along with those of Dr. Gene Scott," even pretends to identify
the tribes which migrated to each Anglo-Saxon nation.
With Masonic references to the "Great Architect of the Universe" and the "Laws
of Nature," Straight Talk explains the hidden meaning of the Obverse and
Reverse sides of the Great Seal of the U.S.
"E. Raymond Capt, in his booklet, 'Our Great Seal says: The Great Seal given to
our country, after years of laborious heraldic and symbolic study, reveals our
true national origin and destiny. The Obverse face is Israel in the Old Testament;
The Reverse face is our race under the New Covenant. Each face is a masterly
harmony of all that is potent in symbolism and prophecy. It was originated and
adopted by men who recognized the overshadowing presence of the Great
Architect of the Universe and submission to His will as revealed in the Scriptures
and the Laws of Nature. They planned a government in conformity to His great
Plan. They recognized that America's greatest task was to go toward the goal of
the Plan -- the eventual establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth."
Apparently, there was much controversy surrounding the engraving of the
Reverse side of the Great Seal, which was cut a century and a half after the
Obverse.
"Although Congress had appropriated the funds (1884) for the 'obverse and
reverse of the seal of the United States,' the Reverse Seal was not cut. Five times
the 'acts of Congress' relating to the Reverse Seal were ignored; 1782, 1789, 1833,
1884, and 1902. It took 153 years for the complete process!"
For some reason it became needful to camouflage the symbol of the phoenix
which was originally imprinted on the Reverse side of the Great Seal. In 1902,
agreement was reached within the Masonic orders and the phoenix emerged as
the eagle, a less obvious occult symbol. Hans Biederman's Dictionary of
Symbolism explains the occult symbolism of the eagle/phoenix:
"In ancient Syria, the eagle was associated with the sun-god. It was said to be
capable of rejuvenation, like the phoenix." The occult meaning of the phoenix
forecasts the revival of the mystery religions - out of the pyres of persecution
during the Inquisition to at length usher in the Novus Ordo Seclorum. The
Philosophical Society documents the transformation of the phoenix to eagle in
the Reverse side of the Seal, although not the reason for the delay.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
Phoenix Or Eagle?
"On the left is the bird’s head from the first Great Seal of the United States (1782)
and on the right the Great Seal of 1902. When the first Great Seal was actually
cut, the bird represented upon it was very different from the eagle which now
appears: the neck was much longer and the tuft of feathers at the upper back part
of the head was quite noticeable; the beak bore little resemblance to that of the
eagle; and the entire bird was much thinner and its wings shorter. It requires
very little imagination to trace in this first so-called eagle the mythological
phoenix of antiquity. What is more, there is every reason why a phoenix bird
should be used to represent a new country rising out of an old, while as
Benjamin Franklin caustically noted, the eagle was not even a bird of good moral
character!"
The 13 Tribes
In British-Israel/Masonic theory, the number 13 has great significance. For this
reason, the designs of many symbols in the Great Seal were composed of 13
units, as described by Manley P. Hall:
Obverse & Reverse
"The significance of the mystical number 13, which frequently appears upon the
Great Seal of the United States, is not limited to the number of the original
colonies. The sacred emblem of the ancient initiates, here composed of 13 stars,
also appears above the head of the 'eagle.' The motto, E Pluribus Unum, contains
13 letters, as does also the inscription, Annuit Coeptis. The 'eagle' clutches in its
right talon a branch bearing 13 leaves and 13 berries and in its left a sheaf of 13
arrows. The face of the pyramid, exclusive of the panel containing the date,
consists of 72 stones arranged in 13 rows. MPH" (Hunt’s History of the United
States)
The Christian/British/Israel web site, Straight Talk, explains that the number 13
refers to Jacob's (Israel's) blessing upon his sons in Genesis 49. The 12 Tribes of
Israel became 13 when Joseph's inheritance was divided between his two sons,
Ephraim and Manasseh: "It must be remembered the Manasseh is the thirteenth
tribe. Ephraim moved into Joseph's place and Manasseh was added to the
twelve."
"It will be found that the Great Seal of the United States contains ten features of
thirteen. And given that some sixteen drafts, over a time period of 159 years
through which the seal was constructed, it makes coincidence impossible as an
explanation for those 13's. I know that the easy answer to the fact of all these
thirteens is that there were thirteen original colonies, but this surface explanation
doesn't fit all the evidence. When the facts of the United States and the Great Seal

--- Sayfa 114 ---
are viewed in the context of the whole Lost Tribes teaching, it obviously fits like
it belonged. The 'coincidence' of there being thirteen colonies doesn't add a whit
to the total picture unless it is taken to be part of the [Lost Tribes] material.
Finally in 1935 the final die was cut for the seal that we see on the one dollar bill
today.
"The obverse, or front, side of the Seal as proposed by Thomas Jefferson was to
show the Israelites being led by the Pillar of Cloud and of Fire. Benjamin
Franklin suggested the event of Pharaoh's drowning in the Red Sea. The Harp of
David was included in three early designs, while the number of olives and leaves
did not settle to thirteen each until late in the nineteenth century."
13 Courses of the Pyramid
Paul Foster Case, author of The Great Seal of the United States, wrote:
"Since the date, 1776, is placed on the bottom course of the pyramid, and since
the number 13 has been so important in the symbolism of the seal, it is not
unreasonable to suppose that the 13 courses of the pyramid may represent 13
time periods of 13 years each."
The following chronology shows that, from 1776 onward, significant events
pertaining to the plan for a New World Order did occur every 13 years
culminating in the founding of the United Nations in 1945, exactly 169 years (13
periods of 13 years each) after the year 1776.
•
1776 - Thomas Paine published Common Sense; Declaration of
Independence; American Revolution.
•
1789 - French Revolution; Adoption of U.S. Constitution & Great
Seal
•
1802 - Washington, D.C. incorporated.
•
 1815 - Congress of Vienna ends Napoleanic era; Convention of
Commerce & Navigation established trade with England; Battle of
New Orleans.
•
1828 - Belgium's Independence in Netherlands (location of The
Hague - future International Court of Justice established by the
U.N. Charter).
•
1843 - Charles Dickens published A Christmas Carol; first
commercial Christmas card published. See: Cosmic Christmas:
Birth of the Sun God
•
1853-6 - Crimean War - Russia against France, Britain, Turkey, and
Sardinia over control of Jerusalem's Holy Places.
•
1867 - Britain/North American Act united Canada; Alaska sold to
U.S.; Society of Rosicrucians formed in England.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
•
1880 - Presidential Seal and Coat of Arms; Egyptian obelisk
transferred to New York; Beginning of conquest of Africa by
European powers.
•
1893 - Parliament of World Religions founded.
•
1906 - Bank panic provided excuse to establish Federal Reserve;
National Education Association (NEA) incorporated.
•
1919 - Treaty of Versailles ended WWI; Paris Peace Conference set
up plans for CFR; German Workers Party (Nazi's) founded;
Progressive Education Association founded by John Dewey.
•
1932 - Zionist 18th Congress established in Jewish Agency for
Palestine.
•
1945 - UNITED NATIONS CHARTER; Yalta Conference; Atomic
bomb dropped; Discovery of Nag Hammadi Library.
In 1954, U.S. Sen. William Jenner spoke of a well-orchestrated, carefully timed
conspiracy to undermine the American government. Although the Senator
alluded to communism and socialism, these red herrings have for decades served
as calculated diversions from a larger conspiracy: the Illuminati and its Secret
Brotherhood of New World Order planners. Senator Jenner may or may not have
suspected this when he spoke of an "established timetable" with "precisely
measured parts":
"We have a well organized political action group in this country, determined to
destroy our Constitution and establish a one party state... (It has a) foothold
within our Government, and its own propaganda apparatus...One may call this
group by many names. Some people call it socialism, some communism, some
collectivism. I prefer to call it 'democratic centralism.' ... The important point to
remember is not its ideology but its organization. It is a dynamic, aggressive, elite
corps, forcing its way through every opening, to make a breach for a collectivist
one-party state. It operates secretly, silently, continuously to conform our
Government without our suspecting the change is under way... This secret
revolutionary corps understands well the power to influence the people...by an
elegant form of brainwashing... We see this, for example, in the innocent use of
words like 'democracy' in place of 'representative government'.... It conducts
tactical retreats but only the more surely to advance its own secret goal...I know
of the Alger Hisses who planned it that way... Dr. Wirt, of my State, told us in
1934 that the plans were all drawn, The timetable established... the revolutionary
cabal and its allies... designated the overall strategy. They broke the whole up into
precisely measured parts and carefully timed moves, which appear to be wholly
unrelated... They will use every ally, to prevent the American people from
guessing how far the transformation had gone..." (20)

--- Sayfa 116 ---
TITLE: FREEMASONRY -- TWO ORGANIZATIONS, ONE VISIBLE, THE
OTHER INVISIBLE
Subtitle: This is a short article we hope every Mason will
read before he begins to read any of our other articles.
There is a Masonic organization out there most of you
know nothing of, even if you are a 33rd Degree Mason.
We have constantly received emails from Freemasons who
are absolutely anguished over our articles depicting
Masonry as being Satanic. They honestly proclaim to us that
this is NOT the situation in their Lodge; further, they say,
they are 32nd or 33rd Degree, and would certainly know
what Freemasonry is and what it is not; and, they boldly
proclaim: Masonry is NOT Satanic.
We are both right: You are right when you claim that
Freemasonry is certainly not Satanic as you have practiced it
in your Lodge. And we are right when we say that
Freemasonry is Satanic to the core, and is striving mightily
to produce the New Age Christ [Antichrist].
How, you ask, can we both be right? Simply put,
Freemasonry is an organization within an organization.
One organization is deliberately lied to and mislead with
false interpretations, while the inner organization knows the
spiritual Truth of Freemasonry, and embraces it with heart,
soul, and mind.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ORGANIZATION OF
FREEMASONRY
 Let us hear Masonic author Manly P. Hall describe this
two-dimensional organization of Freemasonry. Masonry is
comprised of two distinctly different organizations, one
visible and one invisible. Hall describes this two-level
organization: [Hall was honored by The Scottish Rite
Journal, who called him 'The Illustrious Manly P. Hall' in
Sept, 1990, and further called him 'Masonry's Greatest
Philosopher', saying "The world is a far better place because
of Manly Palmer Hall, and we are better persons for having
known him and his work"]. This is what Manly P. Hall said:
" Freemasonry is a fraternity within a fraternity -- an outer
Good Resources on
Freemasonry

--- Sayfa 117 ---
organization concealing an inner brotherhood of the elect ... it is necessary to
establish the existence of these two separate and yet interdependent orders, the
one visible and the other invisible. The visible society is a splendid camaraderie
of 'free and accepted' men enjoined to devote themselves to ethical, educational,
fraternal, patriotic, and humanitarian concerns. The invisible society is a secret
and most August [defined as 'of majestic dignity, grandeur'] fraternity whose
members are dedicated to the service of a mysterious arcannum arcandrum
[defined as 'a secret, a mystery']." [Hall, Lectures on Ancient Philosophy, p. 433]
Many well-meaning men are members of this visible society with no knowledge
whatsoever of the inner invisible society. In fact, Albert Pike had some things to
say about the brethren in the visible society: "Masonry, like all the Religions, all
the Mysteries, Hermeticism, and Alchemy, conceals its secrets from all except the
Adepts and Sages, or the Elect, and uses false explanations and
misinterpretations of its symbols to mislead those who deserve only to be
mislead; to conceal the Truth, which it calls light, and draw them away from it."
[Morals and Dogma, p. 104-5, 3rd Degree]
Did you hear these key words from Pike? Masonry is a religion after all, after the
order of the Satanic Mysteries, the equally Satanic Hermetic Philosophy, and
Alchemy! Masonry conceals its secrets from the brethren in the outer visible
society, no matter their rank; only the Elect in the inner invisible society ever
know the truth. The poor brethren in the visible society are spoon-fed "false
explanations and misinterpretations" of its symbols" -- for what reason? -- those
poor guys in the visible society "deserve only to be mislead".
If a man were known to revere Jesus Christ in the beginning of his membership
within Masonry, he would be immediately shunted into the visible society, and
would never, ever learn the truth. You would never be considered an Adept, or a
Sage, or one of the Elect, for those terms are reserved for the members of the
invisible society. You would be one of those who were deliberately lied to about
the doctrines of Masonry, and given deliberate misinterpretations of its symbols,
so that you would merely THINK you knew the Truth.
Pike then completes his instructions to intentionally mislead those members of
the visible society, by saying: "So Masonry jealously conceals its secrets and
intentionally leads conceited interpreters astray." [Ibid., p. 105]
Members of the visible society are referred to as the 'masses', and you do
comprise 95% of all Masons. Listen to what Pike says about telling the truth of
the organization to the 'masses': "A Spirit", he said, "that loves wisdom and
contemplates the Truth close at hand, is forced to disguise it, to induce the
multitudes [that is you] to accept it ... Fictions are necessary to the people, and

--- Sayfa 118 ---
the Truth becomes deadly to those who are not strong enough to contemplate it
in all its brilliance." [Morals and Dogma, p. 103, 3rd Degree; Emphasis added]
If a person is not capable of accepting the Truth that inner-core, invisible
Freemasonry really worships and serves Satan, then such Truth would become
"deadly" to you. Therefore, "fictions are necessary" so visible Masons would not
be so devastated that they would leave Freemasonry and expose its inner secrets.
A very recent book also speaks of these two organizations.  David Ovason, a
noted astrologer, has written a book publised in 1999, entitled, The Secret
Architecture of our Nation's Capital:  The Masons and the Building of
Washington, D.C.  This book is not an anti-Mason book; in fact, a glowing
forward to this book is written by none other than C. Fred Kleinknecht, 33
Degree, Sovereign Grand Commander, The Supreme Council, 33 Degree (Mother
Council of the World), Southern Jurisdiction, U.S.A., Washington, D.C.  In other
words, the conclusions of this book are highly thought of by one of the most
important current Masons in the world today!  Listen to what this book says
about the two organizations of Freemasonry,
After speaking of the "cosmic astral journey in Masonic terms", Ovason speaks of
the meaning of the more common symbols of Masonry.  "... Bromwell injected a
profound level of esotericism into the bland-seeming symbols used within the
Lodges.  These proliferate on the so-called tracing boards and carpets ... used by
Master Masons to demonstrate Masonic symbols to the neophytes.  When not
used as an instrument of education, the tracing boards and carpets remain as
symbols of the Lodge -- of the inner and outer way of the Craft." [Page 99]  So,
David Ovason admits that Masonry has both an "inner" [Invisible] and an "outer"
[Visible] society.  And, Albert Pike has boldly stated that the "neophytes" are
deliberately taught untruths about the meaning of the symbols!
New Age author, Bill Cooper has this to say about these two fraternities, one
within the other.  "Most members of the Freemasons are not aware that the
Illuminati practices what is known as 'secrets within secrets' or organizations
within organizations."  [Behold A Pale Horse, p. 79]
The final example of this "fraternity within a fraternity", the Invisible residing
within the Visible, comes from the oldest New World Order planning document
known to be in existence.  This document is one of the best examples of
Automatic Writing, and it details many of the changes societies throughout the
world must make in order to achieve the Kingdom of The Christ.  This document
is known as the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, and is being followed
carefully today.  Listen as the supernatural author speaks of the two organization

--- Sayfa 119 ---
within Freemasonry.  The author is speaking of the guise by which the Illuminati
will ultimately seize dictatorial control.
"7. For what purpose then have we invented this whole policy and insinuated it
into the minds of the gentiles without giving them any chance to examine its
underlying meaning? For what, indeed, if not in order to obtain in a roundabout
way what is for our scattered tribe unattainable by the direct road? It is this
which has served as the basis for our organisation of SECRET MASONRY
WHICH IS NOT KNOWN TO, AND AIMS WHICH ARE NOT EVEN SO MUCH
AS SUSPECTED BY, THESE GENTILE CATTLE, ATTRACTED BY US INTO
THE SHOW ARMY OF MASONIC LODGES IN ORDER TO THROW DUST IN
THE EYES OF THEIR FELLOWS." [Protocol #11 - The Totalitarian State,
Paragraph 7; Emphasis was in the original]
Notice that this supernatural author described the Freemasons of the Outer,
Visible Fraternity as "Gentile Cattle" which had been deliberately drawn into the
Fraternity for "show" so as to "throw dust in the eyes of their fellows".  It turns
out that the Masons of the Invisible Fraternity think quite lowly of the Masons of
the Visible Fraternity!
But, why should we be surprised, for Albert Pike called the Visible brethren who
are just trying to learn what the symbols of the Lodge mean, "conceited
interpretors". [Morals and Dogma, p. 105]
By the way, for those of you who have tried to convince me that Albert Pike is
discredited today, listen to what David Ovason in his book on the secret Masonic
architecture of Washington, D.C., says about Pike:
1.  "Albert Pike -- probably the most learned esotericist in the United States ..." [P.
31]
2. "... Albert Pike was a fine scholar in some areas ..." [P. 92]
3.  "The learned Albert Pike ..." [P. 366]
4.  "... Pike died in his rooms at the temple on April 2, 1891.  Seven years later,
Congress approved the raising of the Albert Pike memorial ... The statuary is
imposing.  A larger-than-life, full-length satute of Pike stands on a high pedestal,
attended by a lamenting woman said to represent the spirit of Masonry." [P. 321]
Remember, this book was glowingly recommended by the current top leader of
Freemasonry, C. Fred Kleinknecht, 33 Degree, as noted above!  Obviously, if Mr.
Kleinknecht thinks this highly of Albert Pike, then all those people who have

--- Sayfa 120 ---
tried to convince me otherwise need to take this matter up with Mr. Kleinknecht!
The fact is, Pike IS Freemasonry today.
There IS one short paragraph that properly and concisely defines the heart and
soul of the Invisible Fraternity of Freemasonry. Let us return to Manly P. Hall for
this quote:
"When a Mason learns the key to the warrior on the block is the proper
application of the dynamo of living power, he has learned the mystery of his
Craft. The seething energies of Lucifer are in his hands and before he may step
onward and upward, he must prove his ability to properly apply energy." [The
Lost Keys To Freemasonry, Manly P. Hall, published by the Macoy Publishing
and Masonic Supply Company, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, 1976, p. 48; Emphasis
added]
The Scottish Rite Journal praised Manly P. Hall in 1990 as "Masonry's Greatest
Philosopher". One 32nd Degree Mason wrote back to me, stating that he had
never, ever heard of Manly P. Hall; yet you can see his book was published by
the Macoy Publishing and Masonic Supply Company. The only reason this high-
ranking Mason had never heard of Manly P. Hall is that Hall was a leader of the
Invisible Fraternity, while this Mason was participating in the Visible Fraternity!
Another 33rd Degree Freemason, Foster Bailey, sponsored his wife, Alice A.
Bailey, into Co-Masonry, where she became a key leader.  Alice was also the top
leader of the House of Theosophy from the 1920's to the early 1950's; she was a
prolific writer, admittedly a channeler for a spirit by the name of Master D.K.
She had significant revelations to add to this subject of Inner, Invisible
Freemasonry.
"There is no dissociation between the One Universal Church, the sacred inner
Lodge of all true Masons, and the inner-most circles of the esoteric societies.
[Bailey, Externalisation of the Hierarchy, p. 513]
Bailey is saying here that, once you get into the Inner, Invisible part of
Freemasonry, there is no distinction possible between this heart of Masonry, the
true Universal Church [which we know to be the church of Antichrist], and of
the similar inner-most circles of the other secret societies throughout the world.
But, then, Bailey makes an even stronger statement revealing the Inner, Invisible
Masonic fraternity.  "The Masonic Movement ... is the custodian of the law; it is
the home of the Mysteries, and the seat of initiation.  It holds in it symbolism the
ritual of Deity, and the way of salvation is pictorially preserved in its work.  The
methods of Deity are demonstrated in its Temples, and under the All-seeing Eye

--- Sayfa 121 ---
the work can go forward.  It is a far more occult organisation than can be
realised, and it is intended to be the training school for the coming advanced
occultists." [Bailey, Externalisation of the Hierarchy, p. 511]
Since the meaning of the word, "occult", is "hidden", or "invisible", we know that
Bailey is here speaking of the Inner, Invisible part of Freemasonry.  And, not only
is does this Invisible Fraternity exist, it is intended to be the training ground for
the coming advanced occultists!!
THIS is the Invisible Freemasonry, about which you have been kept in ignorance
all along! To verify this fact even further, we encourage you to go to the
publishing and distribution house of Invisible Freemasonry, Kessinger's
Freemasonry and Occult Publishing; Kessinger's publishes all the old, formerly
very secret Masonic books of the Invisible Society. The address is
http://www.kessingerpub.com/ and we encourage you to peruse the subjects
they have listed at the very bottom of their Home Page, noting the extremely
Satanic, anti-Christian subjects of which the Invisible Fraternity is comprised! We
have noted a few of these subjects below as Kessinger's has listed them:
Alchemy; Ancient Religions; Astral Body [Satanic practice]; Astrology
[Forbidden in Bible]; Auto-Suggestion; Babylonian; Blavatsky, H.P. [one of the
most Satanic Black Magick practitioners of all time! Her teachings were studied
by Adolf Hitler and provided basis for the Jewish Holocaust]; Buddhism; Card
Reading; Chaldean [Babylon and Chaldean Mysteries were brought into total
annihilation by God for their severe Satanism, and is the same Babylon
condemned in the Book of Revelation]; Christian Mysticism [This is the
"Christianity" of Masonry, where every single doctrine is reinterpreted];
Christian Science [Fully anti-Christian but compatible with Masonry];
Clairvoyance [Satanic to the core and forbidden in the Bible]; Color and Sound
[Critically important to Satanism]; Cosmic Consciousness [SATANIC]; Crystal
Gazing [Forbidden in Bible]; Divination [Forbidden in Bible]; Druidism and
Celts [Elevated human sacrifice to highest levels]; Eastern Doctrines; Esoteric
Christianity [Redefining Christian doctrines]; Evolution [And you just thought
Masonry was compatible with true Christianity]; Fortune Telling [Forbidden in
Bible]; Geomancy and Gematria [Satanic]; Gnosticism [Fought against in the
Epistles of Paul in the Bible]; Hermetic; Holy Grail [Satanic allegory to produce
Antichrist]; Hypnotism; Islam; Karma [Satanic doctrine teaching Reincarnation];
Love and Sex Consciousness [Completely Satanic]; Magic [Forbidden in Bible];
Nature Worship [Sun Worship primary worship of Invisible Freemasonry];
Palmistry [Satanic Divination]; Phallicism [Worship of Male erect Sex Organ!];
Qabalah [Satanic Reinterpretation of Hebrew Old Testament]; Reincarnation;
Rosicrucian [Satanic to the core]; Serpent Worship [Not only is Masonry a
religion, it worships the Serpent, actually Satan himself]; Telepathy [Satanic

--- Sayfa 122 ---
communication without audible language]; Tarot [Divination forbidden in Bible];
Transcendental Physics; Zoroastrianism [Satanic cult destroyed by God in Old
Testament].
THIS is the heart and soul of the Invisible, Inner Fraternity. The absolute
darkest part of this heart is Phallicism, worshipping the erect Male Sex Organ.
The obelisk is the major symbol for this worship, which is why you see obelisks
everywhere associated with Freemasonry! It is time to stop being deceived, don't
you think?!
Listen to Albert Pike speak of the obelisk: "Hence the significancy of the phallus,
or of its inoffensive substitute, the obelisk, rising as an emblem of the
resurrection by the tomb of buried Deity[Morals and Dogma, p. 393] Now, you
know why you see so many obelisks atop the graves of Freemasons, for it is "an
emblem of the resurrection of buried Deity"; the Invisible Mason believes he is
becoming a god throughout his life, so the obelisk at his grave is simply the
visible manifestation of that belief.
The obelisk was originally created by the Egyptian Mysteries of the Pharaohs,
and is spoken of in the Bible. Listen:King Jehu said to the guards and to the
officers, 'Go in and slay them; let none escape'. And they smote them with the
sword; and the guards before the king threw their bodies out, and went into the
inner dwelling of the house of Baal. They brought out the obelisks of the house of
Baal and burned them." [2 Kings 10:26, Amplified Bible]
God Almighty ordered the Satanic obelisks burned, but only after He ordered
King Jehu to slaughter the worshippers of the obelisk, also known as Baal
worshippers. Thus, the Invisible Freemasonry is devoted to the obelisk worship
so forbidden by God as to be worthy of the Death Penalty. Keep this in mind the
next time you contemplate the Washington Monument!
Finally, Serpent Worship takes us directly into Hell itself, for Satan stands
directly behind this form of worship. This is the Invisible Fraternity of
Freemasonry, and I bet you never knew it existed, did you?

THE MASONIC NEW WORLD ORDER
PART II

THE GEORGE WASHINGTON

--- Sayfa 123 ---
MASONIC NATIONAL MEMORIAL

A guided tour of the George Washington Masonic National Memorial will
quickly dispel any illusions one may have concerning the true faith of the Father
of Our Country. The following report will provide information on:
o George Washington, who is widely acclaimed to be a
Christian by evangelical leaders such as:
David Barton, Peter Marshall and D. James Kennedy
o The present day Knights Templar, showing the infiltration of
Masonry into the Christian churches
o The leading role of Freemasonry in the American Revolution
The George Washington Masonic National Memorial, which is just off the
Capitol Beltway, adjacent to Old Town Alexandria, VA and six miles from
Washington, D.C, sits atop Shooter's Hill, a lofty peak about 3 miles west of the
western shore of the Potomac River. Because of its vantage point, Shooter's Hill
was the site of a Revolutionary War fort, although the only remains of the fort
are some irregularities in the soil line that can be viewed from the monument's
observation deck.
The Masons purchased the 36 acre site and laid the cornerstone in 1923. Assisting
in the ceremonies were President Calvin Coolidge, Chief Justice William H. Taft
and the Grand Masters of all the Grand Jurisdictions in the nation. The edifice,
which has a broad rectangular base and soaring steeple, was completed and
officially dedicated in 1932. President Herbert Hoover assisted in the dedication
ceremonies.
The entrance to the Memorial displays two large plaques with George
Washington's words of approbation and devotion to the Masonic Order, a
portion of which states:
"Being persuaded that a just application of the principles on which the Masonic
Fraternity is founded must be promotive of private virtue and public prosperity,
I shall always be happy to advance the interest of the Society and to be
considered by them as a Brother."
The Memorial Hall contains a 17 ft. high bronze statue of Washington wearing
his Masonic apron as the Charter Worshipful Master of Alexandria Lodge No. 22
- to which office he had been elected in 1788 and held at the time of his election
to the Presidency of the United States in January, 1789. The statue was presented
to the Memorial by the Order of DeMolay for Boys in 1950 and unveiled by
President. Harry S. Truman, Past Grand Master of Missouri.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
N.B.  The Order of DeMolay is named after the martyred 14th century Order of
the Temple Grand Master, Jacques DeMolay. The DeMolay Order for Boys is also
highly recommended by the Rev. Billy Graham whose status as a 33rd degree
Mason is documented at the Endtime Deception web site.
A book sold at the Masonic Memorial, The Age of Washington, describes
President Washington's participation in laying the cornerstone of the U.S. Capitol
with full Masonic rites:
"On September 18, 1793, President Washington officiated at the laying of the
cornerstone for the United States Capitol building. It was a major event in the
creation and development of the federal city, a project very dear to the heart of
George Washington. It was also what the Masonic Fraternity refers to as one of
the most memorable days in the life of George Washington, in the life of
Freemasonry, and in the life of the United States.
"Washington, dressed in Masonic regalia, lead a procession of officers and
brethren of the Masonic Fraternity from Maryland and Virginia to the site in the
District of Columbia. Upon arrival, the music stopped playing, the drums
stopped beating, the flags were anchored, and the artillery fired a volley. A large
silver plate was handed to President Washington. Using a small trowel with
silver blade and ivory handle, Washington deposited the plate and laid it on the
corner-stone. A prayer followed. Then there were heard Masonic chanting
honors and then a 15-volley from the artillery. According to a newspaper's
eyewitness account, when the proceedings ended 'The whole company retired to
an extensive booth, where an ox of 500 pounds weight was barbecued . . . Before
dark the whole company departed with joyful hopes of the production of their
labor.'
"The apron and sash worn by George Washington together with the trowel he
used are today preserved in the Alexandria- Washington Masonic Lodge. George
Washington, a member of the Masons since 1752, the Master Mason, the Past
Master, the President of the United States had personally participated in the
laying of the U.S. Capitol's cornerstone. He did so 'as a Freemason and
President,' wrote Allen E. Roberts in G. Washington: Master Mason." (38)
In conjunction with emphasis on the Masonic influence on the founding of the
U.S. Government, the religious tolerance aspect Freemasonry was advanced to
promote the fraternal order. George Washington, in the ecumenical spirit of the
Masons, sent a message in 1798 "'To the Clergy of Different Denominations
Residing in and Near the City of Philadelphia.' In that message he wrote:
'Believing as I do that Religion and Morality are the essential pillars of civil
society, I view with unspeakable pleasure, that harmony and brotherly love

--- Sayfa 125 ---
which characterizes the Clergy of different denominations, as well in this, as in
other parts of the United States.' He added that he hoped 'your labours for the
good of Mankind will be crowned with success...'" (39)

MASONIC EXHIBITS

The Memorial's various exhibitions on the Shriners, Royal Arch Masonry, the
Knights Templar Chapel, a replica of King Solomon's Throne Room (based on
legend of Hiram Abiff) and the Tall Cedars Room (a reconstruction of Solomon's
Temple) attempt to present Masonry as a faith that is based on Scripture. The
propaganda made available to the public, however, is far from an accurate
portrayal of true Freemasonry, which is based on Kabbalism assimilated by the
Knights Templar who occupied the Holy Land during the Crusades. The
Masonic emphasis on Old Testament types and figures is, in fact, derived from
Kabbalah, which symbolism is designed to lead men into the ancient mysteries.
The Royal Arch Room features Egyptian and Hebraic paintings, a reproduction
of the Ark of the Covenant and a large mural of the ruins of King Solomon's
Temple. A new addition to the Memorial, the Tall Cedars Room, is a
reconstruction of Solomon's Temple with statues of King Solomon, the High
Priest, Prince Azariah, the Master Overseer, the Grand Master of Workers and
others. These figures and are supposedly found in I Kings 4 and 5, which
chapters describe the building of Solomon's Temple.
The Cedars of Lebanon were the materials used in the Temple by Hiram of Tyre,
whom Masons teach is Hiram Abiff, the "First Grand Master" who is
impersonated by every man initiated as a Master Mason. According to Masonic
legend, Hiram Abiff was the only one on earth who knew the secrets of a Master
Mason, including the Grand Masonic Word, the name of God (the 'Ineffable
Name' of God identified in Kabbalah as YHVH).
A detailed brochure for the Tall Cedars Room states:
"The floor of the Tall Cedars Room...has as its center the Star of David [an occult
symbol] ...Soon to be added will be replicas of other artifacts from King
Solomon's Temple including the Altar for Incense Burning, the Seven Branched
Menorah, the Altar of Burnt Offerings, and the Table of Shew-Bread."
The Watch Unto Prayer report, A Sacred Assembly of Men, explains the
Kabbalistic interpretations of Solomon's Temple, the furniture of the Holy of
Holies, and the Masonic legend of Hiram Abiff.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
THE KNIGHTS TEMPLAR
The Order of Knights Templar is described as the only Order of Masonry strictly
for Christians.  The Knights Templar Chapel exhibits an original suit of armor
worn by a Knight Templar of the 12th century and a sword, a Bible and stained
glass representations of Knights and Christian themes.
To give an idea of the international scope and organization of Knights Templar
membership - that is, Masons Who are Affiliated with Christianity - a brochure on
the Knights Templar reads:
Knights Templar
An ancient order serving mankind in the 20th century
Pride in our past - Faith in our future
Integrity, Obedience, Courage
"The Knights Templar is a Christian-oriented fraternal organization that was
founded in the 11 century. Originally, the Knights Templar were laymen who
protected and defended Christians travelling to Jerusalem. These men took vows
of poverty, chastity and obedience, and were renowned for their fierceness and
courage in battle.
"Today, the Knights Templar display their courage and goodwill in other ways.
They organize fund-raising activities such as breakfasts, dinners, dances, and flea
markets. They support Masonic-related youth groups and they raise millions of
dollars for medical research and educational assistance.
"Currently, Templar membership consists of people from all walks of life,
including doctors, lawyers, clergy, businessmen and entertainment personalities,
all of whom profess a belief in the Christian Religion."
Masonic Connection
"All Knights Templar are members of the world's oldest fraternal organization
known as 'The Ancient Free and Accepted Masons' or more commonly known as
'masons.' However, not all masons are Templars. Templary is but a part of the
Masonic structure known as the 'York Rite of Freemasonry.'"
Three Levels of the Knights Templar
"The Knights Templar operate on a local, state and national level. But their
religious activities extend across national borders as well. Nationally, there is the
Grand Encampment of Knights Templar. This unit defines the rituals and laws

--- Sayfa 127 ---
governing state and local level organizations. The state level is called A Grand
Commandery of Knights Templar. This organization represents members of a
state or an area of equivalent size. Finally, the local level unit is called a
Commandery of Knights Templar. There are almost 1,600 Commanderies in
communities across the United States, Germany, Italy and Mexico, with over
260,000 members.
"To petition a Commandery of Knights Templar for membership, you must first
be a member of a Masonic Lodge and other prerequisite bodies, and must profess
a belief in the Christian Religion. Commanderies organize many social activities,
including Ladies Auxiliaries, Drill Competitions, Public Divine Services, Family
Picnics, Organized Trips, Dinner Parties and Entertainments, Christmas
Observances, Easter Sunrise Services, and Memorial Services."
The Knights Templar Holy Land Pilgrimage
"In addition to many religious observances throughout the year, The Grand
Encampment of Knights Templar sponsors an annual 'Holy Land Pilgrimage.'
The purpose of the pilgrimage is to send a Christian minister to The Holy Land.
Masonic membership is not required and the Minister can be male or female."
Support for Young men and Young Ladies
"The Knights Templar also provide financial support, advisors and scholarships
to Masonic-related Youth Organizations such as Order of Rainbow, Job's
Daughters, and Order of DeMolay."
Patriotic Knights
"The Knights Templar are a uniformed Masonic unit that participates in parades
or other public events. They take great pride in their patriotism and respect for
the American Flag, which they are often called upon to carry as Parade Color
Guard."
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
Also available in the Memorial is a book titled Freemasonry in American History.
The opening chapters make clear that, early on, the Grand Lodges of England
and Scotland were planting Provincial lodges and appointing Grand Masters in
the colonies to further their scheme of fashioning a new form of government.
According to author Allen E. Roberts, the Freemasons considered the
Protestantism of Great Britain to be oppressive and looked to the New World as
an opportunity to establish a government based on the Natural Law, which
maintains that human reason, not supernatural revelation, must be man's guide.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
In actuality, British and Scottish Freemasons were frustrated after many failed
attempts to restore the Masonically-supportive Stuart dynasty to the throne of
England and, as loyal Jacobites, they sought to establish a Masonically-controlled
government in the New World. There is evidence that both the American and
French Revolutions were planned and perpetrated by Freemasons to overthrow
government by monarchies which were unsympathetic to Freemasonry. In 1673
and 1678, the English Parliament had passed the Test Acts, which prevented
anyone but Anglicans from holding public office. The Protestant Hanoverian
dynasty became firmly entrenched in Great Britain following the deposition in
1688 of King James II who had converted to Catholicism.
According chapters 14 and 15 of Freemasonry in American History, the leaders of
the American Revolution were, in the main, Freemasons: Paul Revere was Junior
Warden of the 15th St. Andrew's Lodge; Peyton Randolph, a Freemason from
Virginia, was President of the First Continental Congress; famous delegates to
the Second Continental Congress included Masons John Hancock and Benjamin
Franklin; George Washington was elected by the Second Continental Congress to
be Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Forces; under Washington was an
army led largely by Masonic commanders, including Brigadier Gen. Richard
Montgomery, Col. Benedict Arnold, John Sullivan, Col. John Glover, Nathanael
Greene; foreign officers who arrived in 1777 to aid the cause of the Continental
army were Freemasons Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, Peter Stephen Du
Ponceau, Thaddeus Kosciusko and the Marquis de Lafayette.
The Constitutional Committee consisted of Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin
(past Grand Master of Pennsylvania), John Adams, Roger Sherman, and Robert
Livingston (who would become Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of New York).
The Fourth Reich of the Rich, by Des Griffin, states about Thomas Jefferson:
"The Columbian Lodge of the Order of the Illluminati was established in New
York City in 1785: Members included Gov. DeWitt Clinton and later Clinton
Roosevelt, Charles Dana and Horace Greeley. The following year a Lodge was
established in Virginia with which was identified Thomas Jefferson." (40)
Freemasonry in American History confirms that, as 3rd U.S. President from 1805-
9, Thomas Jefferson's Vice President was George Clinton, Worshipful Master of
Warren Lodge No. 17 in New York City in 1800, and also the uncle of DeWitt
Clinton who would serve as Grand Master of Masons in New York from 1806 to
1819. (41)
Many other Famous Freemasons were leaders of the American Revolution and
Presidents of the United States.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
It seems that many colonists initially opposed the Declaration of Independence
and Revolutionary War, but were gradually persuaded to join the Masonic cause.
A volume cited by Allen, George Washington, Master Mason states:
"George Washington expected to 'fall' during the war. And well he might have
such expectations. Some historians claim a third of the colonists were Tories; it
would appear this was an underestimation. At any rate, it was evident that not
even half were wholeheartedly in favor of a revolution. There was certainly no
unity." (42)
American history ought to be reevaluated by Christians in the light of Scripture
and the evidence of Masonic control of government -- a fact which has been long
suppressed.  Scripture -- which enjoins obedience to the governing authorities --
would seem also to preclude organizing a rebellion against said authorities,
which are ordained of God (Rom. 13:1; I Pet. 2:13,14,17; Tit. 3:1).
Evangelical leaders, such as David Barton and Council for National Policy
members, Peter Marshall and D. James Kennedy, who describe the leaders of the
American Revolution as Christians, are in effect promoting the belief that God
approves of political revolution. Patrick Poole, who is affiliated with the Free
Congress Foundation's Coalition for Constitutional Liberties, even advises
Christians as to the evil nature of government:
"Our country was founded upon the presupposition that government is a
dangerous servant and a fearful master." (43)
However, the teaching of Scripture is this: "For there is no power but of God: the
powers that be are ordained of God." (Rom. 13:1b)
The Lord Jesus Christ exhorts believers to examine the fruit that is brought forth
by religious leaders. Are present day evangelical leaders leading people into the
Kingdom of God through the preaching the Gospel or are they fomenting
rebellion against secular authority in order to establish a theocracy? The popular
theme of "reclaiming America's Christian heritage" may well be the patriotic ploy
that draws Christians into the final stages of Ordo ab Chao, the revolution that is
required to establish a Masonic New World Order.
GEORGE WASHINGTON'S {Masonic} CORRESPONDENCE
  (1) Michael Biagent and Richard Leigh, The Temple & The Lodge, NY: Arcade
Pub., 1989, pp. 239, 240, 256, 260.
(2) American Masonic History - What Are America's True Roots?*
http://www.rapidnet.com/~jbeard/bdm/Psychology/mashist.htm
See also: America's "Christian" Roots?

--- Sayfa 130 ---
http://www.rapidnet.com/~jbeard/bdm/Letter/v4n1-1.htm
(3) The Temple And The Lodge, pp. 202, 179.
(4) The History Of Freemasonry, Albert Mackey, pp. 408-11.
(5) Thomas Paine, Origin Of Free-Masonry, Writings Of Thomas Paine, G.P.
Putnam's Sons,1896. http://www.mediapro.net/cdadesign/paine/origins.html
(6) Thomas Jefferson letter to William Short,
http://www.angelfire.com/co/JeffersonBible/jeffbsyl.html
(7) Washington: An Abridgement by Richard Harwell  (Abridgement of the
Seven Volume George Washington By Douglas Southhall Freeman [Written with
research associates Mary Wells Ashworth and John A. Carroll]1948 Charles
Scribner's Sons, New York, 1968, p. 32.
(8) Ibid., p. 597.
(9) Ibid., p. 638.
(10) The Temple & The Lodge, pp. 261-2.
(11) Washington: An Abridgement, p. 783
(12) Notes from the Trestleboard, February 1996
http://sykuta.business.pitt.edu/masonic/Trestleboards/trestle_feb96.html#mis
c2
(13) Architect of the Capitol Home Page
http://www.aoc.gov/history/cap_hist.htm#plan
(14) "Freemasonry - Is it Satan's Door to America?," Ed Decker,
http://www.saintsalive.com/freemasonry/fmsatansdoor.htm
(15) The Great Inverted Pentagram of Washington DC
http://www.clark.net/pub/klaatu/pentagram.html
(16) Cutting Edge Ministries http://www.cuttingedge.org/news/n1040.html
See also: Cutting Edge Freemasonry Corner -
http://www.cuttingedge.org/fmcorner.html
(17) Cutting Edge Ministries http://www.cuttingedge.org/news/n1081.cfm
(18) Masonic Stones of the Washington Monument
http://www.nps.gov/wamo/Monument_Stones_Description.htm
(19) Manley P. Hall, The Secret Teaching of the Ages, p. xci.
(20) James R. Patrick, America 2000/Goals 2000 Research Manual, p. 35.
(21) The Temple & The Lodge, pp. 81, 79.
(22) Prince Michael Stewart of Albany, The Forgotten Monarchy of Scotland,
Element Books, 1998, p. 125.
(23) The Temple & The Lodge, p. 92.
(24) The Temple & The Lodge, p. 55.
(25) The Forgotten Monarchy of Scotland, p. 125.
(26) The Temple & The Lodge, p. 94.
(27) The Temple & The Lodge, p. 109.
(28) Bloodline of the Holy Grail, p. 324.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
(29) Frances Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, Routledge, 1972, p. 308.
(30) Robert Sargent, English Bible: Manuscript Evidence, p. 208.
(31)The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, pp. 123-4.
(32) William T. Still, New World Order: Ancient Plan Of Secret
Societies, Huntington House, 1990, p. 50.
(33) Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th edition, 1911, pp. 913-14.
(34) King James I, Daemonologie, Godolphin House, 1597, 1996, back cover.
(35) The Temple & The Lodge, pp. 144-45.
(36) Bloodline of the Holy Grail, p. 322.
(37) Rosemary Ellen Guiley, Harper's Encyclopedia of Mystical & Paranormal
Experience, , 1991, p. 216.
(38) George W. Nordham, The Age of Washington, Chicago: Adams Press, 1989,
pp. 142-43.
(39) The Age of Washington, p. 206.
(40) Des Griffin, Fourth Reich of the Rich, Emissary Pub., 1976, p. 55.
(41) Allen E. Roberts, Freemasonry in American History, McCoy Publishing, 1985,
p. 181.
(42) Freemasonry in American History, p. 139.
(43) Patrick S. Poole, "The End of Privacy," Covenant Syndicate, Aug.10, 1998

--- Sayfa 132 ---
A Masonic Temple

FREEMASONS THE TRUTH

SECRETS OF A SECRET SOCIETY
Freemasonry, although it's leaders strenuously deny it, is a secret society.
In England and Wales it has more than 600,000 initiates; a further
100,000 in Scotland and between 50,000 and 70,000 in Ireland. All the
members of this Brotherhood are male, and all except those who are
second, third, or fourth, generation Freemasons - who may join at eighteen
- are over the age of twenty-one. Freemasonry's critics have described it as
a business cult, a satanic religion, and a political conspiracy. Defenders of
Freemasonry tell us it is nothing more than a benevolent and charitable
fraternal brotherhood.

The headquarters of the Brotherhood in England and Wales is in London,
at the corner of Great Queen Street and Wild Street. This is the seat of the
`United Grand Lodge of England', the governing body of the 8,000-plus
Lodges in England and Wales. These Lodges, of which there are another
1,200-odd under the jurisdiction of the `Grand Lodge of Scotland' and
about 750 under the `Grand Lodge of Ireland', carry out their secret
business and ritual in Masonic Temples. Temples might be purpose built,
or might be rooms in hotels or private buildings temporarily converted for
Masonic use. Many town halls up and down the country, for example, have

--- Sayfa 133 ---
private function rooms used for Masonic rituals, as does New Scotland
Yard - headquarters of the Metropolitan Police and home to the "Animal
Rights National Index" (ARNI) and Special Branch.
Debate about Freemasonry in the Police began in 1877 with the
sensational discovery that virtually every member of the Detective
Department at Scotland Yard, up to and including the second-incommand,
was in the pay of a gang of vicious swindlers. The corruption
had started in 1872 when, at a Lodge meeting in Islington, John
Meiklejohn - a Freemason - was introduced to a criminal called William
Kurr (Kurr had then been a Freemason for some years). One night the two
Masonic brothers exchanged intimacies. Kurr was operating a bogus
`betting agency' swindle and was sorely in need of an accomplice within
the force to warn him as and when the Detective Department had
sufficient information against him to move in. Meiklejohn agreed to accept
100.00 pounds, nearly half his annual salary, to supply information. In forces all
over England, Freemasonry is strongest in the Criminal Investigation
Department (CID). This had been particularly noticeable at Scotland Yard,
and the situation remains the same today. Between 1969 and the setting up
of the famous Operation Countryman in 1978 there were three big
investigations into corruption in the Metropolitan Police. These were:
(1) An enquiry into allegations of corruption and extortion by Police,
first published in The Times. This resulted in the arrest, trial
and imprisonment of two London detectives in 1972.
(2) An enquiry by Lancashire Police into members of the
Metropolitan Police Drug Squad. This led to the trial of six
detectives, and the imprisonment in 1973 of three of them.
(3) An enquiry into allegations of corruption among CID officers
responsible for coping with vice and pornography in London's
West End. Over twenty detectives were sacked from the force
during the three-year investigation in the early 1970's, which led
eventually to the notorious Porn Squad trials. There were
corrupt Masonic Policemen involved in all these cases.
According to anti-Masonic books to be re-published, and some modern
works, Freemasonry was formed and continues to work to "dupe the
simple for the benefit of the crafty" (p.33, Proceedings of the US Anti-
Masonic Convention, 1830). The Freemasonic value system and
organisational structure can be used to conceal both immoral and illegal
acts but, its members derive benefit from the Brotherhood only so long as
the status quo is maintained. Inside the Brotherhood: Further secrets of
the Freemasons, by Martin Short, carries on Stephen Knight's research
into modern English Freemasonry and gives additional information on
American Freemasonry. "Relying on first-hand evidence wherever possible,
the book examines the extent to which Masonic oaths of mutual aid and
secrecy have contaminated the fraternity, aroused mounting hostility from
churches, politicians and public, and provoked charges of corruption in
key areas of the law, local government, education, the medical profession,

--- Sayfa 134 ---
business, the armed forces, the Civil Service, and the secret services."
Acacia.
I
 Freemasons Hall
INITIATION
Initiation into the various secret societies - the Freemasons being one of, if
not the, most familiar, and the one referred to throughout this article - is
relatively easy these days. Potential initiates are hand-picked and invited
to join, tempted with the promise that, once accepted into the
organisation, many personal advantages would be on offer: improved
career prospects with promotion easier to achieve, more prosperous
lifestyles, and obstacles to success would be made to disappear. In other
words this mutually beneficial "old boy network" would take care of its
own.
The vast majority of members are on the first three rungs of the 33 level
hierarchy and have no idea of the hidden agenda. Once initiated into the
lowest level - the first of the 33 degrees - vows are taken to pledge
allegiance to the society above all else. Most initiates are willing to do this
as the temptation of power, wealth, and knowledge is hard to refuse. It is
hinted that there are penalties to pay for betraying their society and
revealing its secrets, but at this level the organisation is viewed by its
members as little more than a secretive social club with a morality based
on chivalry. What appear to be certain esoteric secrets, are revealed to
them upon initiation as a `taster' of what is to come as long as they remain
faithful. Money is then paid by the initiate in order to progress to the
second degree through a ceremony involving the revelation of yet further
secret knowledge with the promise of more to come at each stage. Initiation
into higher degrees requires increasingly larger sums of money and still
the clues keep coming. Promises of wonderful arcane knowledge are
continual yet the actual knowledge revealed remains encoded and only
serves to whet the appetite. No one is ever given the full scenario, only
pieces of what appears to be a picture of the most awesome significance.
As more and more is revealed and the higher up the ladder the initiate is
allowed, the greater are the perks provided and doorways opened in terms
of career and social status. Moreover, the warnings against transgression
of the secret society's rules become blatant and more sinister at each
step.It is impossible to achieve high levels of initiation within Freemasonry
unless one is hand-picked by those of the higher degrees. In order to
qualify, one must meet their criteria of wealth, status, social class, and
character type. By the time the twentieth degree is reached a minimum of
professional level income is required to fund progression through the
system. The result of this financially dependent progression is that the top
level members of the Brotherhood elite are among the richest, and most

--- Sayfa 135 ---
powerfully influential in the world. They are also responsible, directly and
indirectly, for most of the money/power based crime such as the illegal
drugs industry, political assassinations, Satanism, and mind control,
which goes on every day all around the world.
Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution, by Stephen Knight, produced
evidence the Ripper murders were a Masonic cover-up involving the
highest levels of British government and the monarchy. An important
investigative effort suggesting the levels of influence at which the senior
members of the freemasonic brotherhood operate and their indifference to
the bounds of law. Acacia

BARRISTERS AND JUDGES
To understand why Freemasonry is so powerful in the law, it is helpful to
be familiar with the distinct roles of the two branches of the legal
profession. The barrister is the only member of the profession who has the
right of audience in any court in the country. Whereas solicitors may be
heard only in Magistrates Courts, County Courts, and in certain
circumstances Crown Courts, a barrister can present and argue a client's
case in all these as well as in the High Court, the Court of Appeal, and the
House of Lords. But unlike the solicitor, the barrister cannot deal with the
client direct. Contact between client and barrister is always supposed to be
through the solicitor, although this does not always work out in practice.
The etiquette of the profession demands that the solicitor, not the client,
instructs the barrister. Thus the barrister is dependent on the solicitor for
his living. In England, the rank of barrister-at-law is conferred exclusively
by four unincorporated bodies in London, known collectively as the
Honourable Societies of the Inns of Court. The four Inns, established
between 1310 and 1357, are Lincoln's Inn, Grays Inn, the Middle Temple
and the Inner Temple.
Prior to the establishment of the latter two Inns, "The Temple", which lies
between Fleet Street and the River Thames, was the headquarters of the
`Knights Templar' - a Christian/military order who gained staggering
riches and a wealth of esoteric knowledge between the eleventh and
thirteenth centuries, but were declared heretics by King Philip IV of France
and wiped out during the early fourteenth century. The Knights Templars
went on to become the Freemasons, (whose symbol is a red cross or rose

--- Sayfa 136 ---
on a white background, representing blood and semen in Satanic ritual)
and the modern day `Order of the Knights Templar' within British
Freemasonry claims direct decent from the medieval order. Each Inn is
owned by its Honourable Society, has its own library, dining-hall, and
chapel, and is governed by its own senior members - barristers and judges
- who are known as Benchers. The Benchers decide which students will be
called to the Bar (made barristers that is) and which will not. Their
decision is final. As with so much else in British Law, ancient customs
attend the passage of students to their final examinations and admission.
Candidates must of course pass examinations, which are set by the
Council for Legal Education, (see MASONS IN MEDICINE, EDUCATION
AND PUBLIC SERVICES), but in addition they must `keep twelve terms'. In
everyday language this means that on a set number of occasions in each
legal term (Hilary, Easter, Trinity and Michelmas) for three years,
candidates must dine at their Inn. If they do so without fail, pass their
exams and pay their fees they will then be called, and the degree, or rank,
of barrister-at-law will be bestowed upon them. Solicitors, especially those
outside London, have a particular incentive for becoming Freemasons. By
the rules of their profession they are forbidden to advertise. They are
therefore reliant on passing trade, which is often sparse, and
recommendation, which is hard to get. Solicitors join Freemasonry purely
to get on close terms with the businessmen and worthies of their
community, and to gain personal contact with Police, JPs, magistrate's
clerks and any local or visiting members of the judiciary - men they could
rely upon either to put business their way or whose good offices they
would be professionally valuable.
From the beginning the men of law were linked with Freemasonry. The
term `Masonic firm' is used more often in the law than in any other
profession. This is because there is a greater preponderance of companies
which are exclusively run by members of the Brotherhood in this area of
society than elsewhere. It refers to those firms of solicitors whose senior
partners are, without exception and as part of a deliberate policy,
Freemasons. In such firms, and this is equally true in London as in the
Provinces, most of the junior partners will also be `on the square'.
Some Masonic firms will not allow the possibility of a non-Masonic
partner. In these cases only existing brethren will be taken on. In some
larger Masonic firms there will be one, perhaps two, of the junior partners
who are not Masons. These non-Masons generally never even suspect the
secret allegiance of their fellow partners. At a certain stage in their career
they might receive an approach from one of the Brothers within the firm -
not a blunt invitation to join, but a subtle implantation of an idea, a
curtain twitched gently aside. Usually if this is passed over nothing further
will occur. If it is recognised and rebuffed, the non-Mason will probably be
actively looking for a partnership elsewhere shortly afterwards, as work
becomes unaccountably more demanding and as he finds he no longer
seems to measure up to the standard expected of him.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
In summary, according to Freemasonry's critics, Freemasonry is a
brotherhood or more aptly a cult which mandates secrecy and obedience
within its ranks, affords protection and advancement of the interests of its
members, punishes its enemies and turns a blind eye to criminal
behaviour committed by its members against non members. Freemasonry
provides a value system and an organisational structure which works to
put brother Freemasons in positions of power in all organisations and can
be used by its members for the most immoral and illegal purposes. Its
foundation appears to rest upon the willingness of its members to selfishly
exchange their ethics for personal advantage. Its strength appears to lie in
a pervasive presence, unseen by those outside the brotherhood, working in
concert to protect and expand their wealth and power. Acacia.

LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Almost every local authority in the country has it's own Freemasonic
Lodge, the temple often situated actually within the Town or County Hall.
These local government Lodges are known variously as (a) `Borough
Lodge', (b) `County Lodge', (c) `Town Hall Lodge', or (d) `Council Lodge',
depending where they are. In London alone there are no fewer than
twenty-four Lodges which from their names in the Masonic Year Book can
be identified as being based on local authorities. There are at least as
many again in Greater London whose identity is cloaked under a classical
or other obscuring title like `Harmony'. In addition to these there are the
Lodges based upon the City of London Corporation, and Lodge No. 2603
for officers and members of what was formerly known as the Greater
London Council (GLC), originally consecrated as the London County
Council Lodge in 1896.In the provinces, most County Councils and

--- Sayfa 138 ---
District councils and many Parish Councils have their own Lodge. One
thing is clear, the vast majority of councillors and officials join these
Lodges, rather than a Lodge based on geographical area or an institution
or profession, because they believe it increases their influence over local
affairs. It could be said that - in local as well as national Government, and
even though we are told we live in a `democracy' - whatever debate occurs
in public is a facade that covers the disturbing truth that everything has
been decided in advance.
Freemasons are sworn to show favouritism in advancing the interests of
brother Freemasons. The royal arch mason swears, "I will promote a
companion royal arch mason's political preferment, in preference to
another of equal qualifications" (pg.9, The Address of the US Anti-Masonic
Convention, 1830.) Acacia.
MASONS IN MEDICINE, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC SERVICES
Masonry in the medical profession is prevalent, especially among general
practitioners and the more senior hospital doctors. Hospital Lodges prove
useful meeting places for medical staff and administrators. Most main
hospitals, including all the London teaching hospitals, have their own
Lodges. According to Sir Edward Tuckwell, former Sergeant-Surgeon to the
Queen, and Lord Porritt, Chairman of the African Medical and Research
Foundations - both Freemasons and both consultants to the Royal
Masonic Hospital - the Lodges of the teaching hospitals draw their
members from hospital staff and GP's connected with the hospital in
question. Tuckwell and Porritt are members of the Lodges attached to the
teaching hospitals where they trained and later worked - Porritt at St
Mary's Paddington (St Mary's Lodge No 63), which has about forty active
members out of about a total 300, half of them general practitioners; and
Tuckwell at St Bartholomew's (Rahere Lodge No 2546), with about thirty
active brethren. Other London hospital Lodges include King's College (No
2973); London Hospital, Whitechapel (No 2845); St Thomas's (No 142) and
Moorfields (No 4949).
Many of the most senior members of the profession are Freemasons,
especially those actively involved with the Royal College of Physicians and
the Royal College of Surgeons, which has benefited from a massive
A 600,000 pounds trust fund set up by the Brotherhood for medical research.
The royal arch mason swears, "I will aid and assist a companion royal arch
mason, when engaged in any difficulty, and espouse his cause, so far as to
extricate him from the same, if in my power, whether he be right or
wrong...A companion royal arch mason's secrets, given me in charge as
such, and I knowing him to be such, shall remain as secure and inviolable,
in my breast as in his own, murder and treason not excepted, ". (pg.9, The
Address of the US Anti-Masonic Convention, 1830). Acacia.
Freemasonry plays a significant but possibly a declining role in the field of
education.
It is common for junior and secondary school headmasters and college
lecturers to be ‘Brothers’. There are as many as 170 Old Boys Lodges in

--- Sayfa 139 ---
England and Wales, most of which have current teaching staff among their
members.
The ambulance and fire services are strongly represented in Masonry, and
there is a higher proportion of Prison Officers than Police Officers in the
Brotherhood. Unlike the Police though, their is little fraternisation between
the higher and lower ranks in the Prison Service. The senior officers of
Prisons have their lodges, the `screws' theirs, and rare the twain shall
meet.
One premier London Lodge has, in a matter of years, completely changed
its character due to an influx of prison officers from Wormwood Scrubs
Prison. Lodge La Tolerance No 538, consecrated in 1847, until recently
considered something of an elite Lodge, was in need of new members. One
of the brethren knew a senior officer at the Scrubs who was interested in
joining the Brotherhood, and it was agreed that he should be considered.
The prison officer was interviewed and accepted into the Lodge. Such was
the interest among the new initiate’s colleagues that one by one the
number of prison officers in Lodge La Tolerance increased. As more and
more joined, so more and more older members left because they were
unhappy with the changing character of the Lodge. Lodge No 538 is now
dominated by prison officers from the Scrubs, where it is strongest in D
Wing, the lifers' section. Claims throughout the service of Masonic
favouritism are more common than in the police. Specific allegations
investigated produce a picture of undeniable Masonic influence over
appointments, contracts, and promotions, in many areas.
One thing should be clear by now; the Brotherhood owns the law, they
own the military, they own the oil companies, pharmaceutical companies,
and just about everything which provides fuel for the status quo. It sets
the standards for education, it sets the curriculum, it plants seeds via the
media and education systems of what will later become, through tender
nurturing power hungry, dissatisfied, spiritually unaware slaves to their
system. If it was not so sinister it would be purely perfect in its all
encompassing design.
Masons might protest and point out the significant charitable acts done by
the brotherhood. Millions for charity! But are millions significant compared
to the sums that might be realised by the level of influence suggested. The
Cali drug cartel in Columbia gave millions for charity as they pocketed
billions. Like the Cali cartel, it might pay to invest a little for public
relations purposes. Acacia.
MASONIC INFLUENCES ON THE ABUSE OF ANIMALS
Ancient institutions survive and hold sway in the City of London more
than anywhere else in Britain. Although the City is one of the most
important financial and business centres in the World, medieval custom
and tradition are apparent everywhere. Once a year the Worshipful
Company of Butchers presents the Lord Mayor with a boar's head on a
silver platter, exactly as it did in the fourteenth century. At 10:30 each
morning `fine wise men' set the world price of bullion in the opulent Gold

--- Sayfa 140 ---
Room of N.M. Rothchild and Sons, (the Rothchilds have been Freemasons
for generations), but before these gentlemen are out of bed, the
"gentlemen" from the Fishmongers Guild, their boots silvered with fish
scales, are exercising their immemorial functions down by the river at
Billingsgate, London's fish market. On the other side of the City, pre-dawn
buyers eye hook-hung carcasses at Smithfields, the worlds largest
dressed-meat market. It is the continuing belief in the importance of
ancient tradition which is partly responsible for the undying strength of
Freemasonry.
Fox hunting - which is touted as being `traditional' but is actually not old
enough to qualify as tradition - is merely one area of animal abuse where
an example of basic Freemason connections can be seen. In the summer of
1995, the Hunt Saboteurs Association put a request in their quarterly
magazine, "HOWL", which read:
WANTED: FREEMASONS
If anyone has information on freemasons, i.e. details on individuals, where
they are etc., the details will be useful and will be treated in the strictest
confidence. Preferably details required on people connected in any way
with hunting, police forces, MP's etc. Also wanted any information on
gentleman's clubs. All details will be of some use! If you can help...
A response to this appeal featured in the winter 1995/96 issue of HOWL. It
is reproduced here in full along with the editor's note which followed:
Dear Sir
I have noticed in the Summer issue No.58 of "The HOWL" a short piece
asking for information about Freemasons. I would be very interested to
know what the Hunt Saboteurs Association may have against
Freemasonry.
Let me tell you straight out that Freemasonry has absolutely nothing at all
to do with hunting or any form of blood sport. To advertise for information
about Freemasons in connection with hunting therefore makes as much
sense as advertising for information about people who practise any other
spare-time activity (which is all that Freemasonry is) such as pottery
classes, cycling or going to car boot sales.
If you want to know what Freemasonry is really about you are very
welcome to write to me or visit Freemasons' Hall in London where we have
a museum and an exhibition on the history of English Freemasonry.
Yours Sincerely
M.B.S. Higham
Commander, Royal Navy
Grand Secretary
United Grand Lodge of England
Freemasons' Hall
Great Queen Street
London WC25 5AZ.
Ed's note - Just one little question - if there aren't any connections
between Freemasonry and bloodsports how ever did you manage to get

--- Sayfa 141 ---
your hands on a copy of HOWL ... ? Oh, and how do you account for the
fact that the current Chairman of the Master of Foxhounds Association,
Sir Michael Richardson (also Joint Master of the notorious Crawley and
Horsham Foxhounds) is one of England's most senior and influential
Freemasons? Interestingly he is wining and dining the Chief Constables of
the Home Counties police forces at the moment! I wonder how we found
that one out - research possibly?
With Freemasons in significant positions within schools, colleges,
universities, hospitals, the vivisection industry, pharmaceutical
companies, the police, the legal profession, the prison service, insurance
companies, local and national Government(s), the Courts.....and
inextricably linked with bloodsports, vivisection, animal farming.....it
becomes easy to see why animal liberation activists such as Ronnie Lee,
Keith Mann, and Dave Callender were given prison sentences of 10, 14,
and 10 years respectively.
One wonders whether the judges who tried and convicted Ronnie Lee,
Keith Mann, and Dave Callender were members of the Brotherhood? And
whether their decision was based upon their adherence to their Masonic
principles, loyalties, and oaths? Were the detectives pursuing Lee, Mann,
and Callender masons? Were the detectives form the Sussex police - DI
Gaylor and DCI Davies - who visited Mann in Full Sutton prison after his
conviction masons? They wanted him to inform on animal liberation
activists in the South of England who are supposedly committing criminal
acts and getting away with it. They hinted that Mann would be arrested for
actions in Sussex upon release if he did not help them. Mann is also aware
that other inmates at HMP Full Sutton have been approached by police
with tempting offers if they can get into his head. What about Lee's,
Mann's, and Callender's legal representatives, were/are they members of
`the Square'? Can we be sure they only had their clients' interests at heart
and carried out their legal matters professionally and without bias or
prejudice?
To those who have a vested interest in maintaining the status quo, and all
that goes with it, anyone actively opposing animal abuse and fighting for a
fair and free world for all is, ironically, regarded as an extremist and/or
terrorist. Specific laws and police departments are increasingly being
directed at those groups and individuals who are being effective, legally or
otherwise. For some time, Scotland Yard has been home to ARNI - the
Animal Rights National Index. This is a computer which collates
intelligence on animal rights activists and activity. It contains the names,
details, of thousands of people `who have committed or are suspected of
having committed criminal offences'. However, it is not simply
suspected/convicted ALF activists that find themselves on ARNI. Hunt
Saboteurs, those who frequent demonstrations, and even students
studying animal welfare at university, will be amongst those listed. It is
said that an equivalent has now been set up for Earth Liberation activists.
On November 3, 1994, sections 68 and 69 of the Criminal Justice and

--- Sayfa 142 ---
Public Order Act came into being. Within 48 hours Hunt Saboteurs had
had 6 arrests. By February 1995, 95 Hunt Saboteurs had been arrested
compared with 4 Road Protesters, 2 Tree Defenders, and 1 Traveller.
Around this time it was reported that Scotland Yard's Anti-Terrorist
Branch would be setting up a national police unit to target `animal rights
extremists'. The report went on to say that, `the main task of the antiterrorist
detectives would be to bring to animal extremist cases their
investigative skills, gathered over more than 20 years of tackling IRA and
international terrorism'.
On September 14, 1826 William Morgan, a stonemason living in Batavia,
New York, was abducted by Freemasons in an attempt to stop the
publication of his expose, "Illustrations of Freemasonry". His badly
decomposed body was found roughly one year later in Oak Orchard
Harbour and identified by his wife and dentist. The failure of the courts to
effectively punish the perpetrators gave rise to a grassroots political
movement concerned over the ability of Freemasons to obstruct justice,
subvert the law, and manipulate the media. Acacia.
MASONIC GOD
The true name, although not the nature, of the Masonic God is revealed
only to those Third Degree Masons who elect to be `exalted' to the Holy
Royal Arch. The Royal Arch is often thought of as the Fourth Degree but
the Fourth Degree is that of Secret Master. In fact the Royal Arch is an
extension of the Third Degree, and represents the completion of the
`ordeal' of the Master Mason. Only about one-fifth of all Master Masons are
exalted. But even these, who are taught the `ineffable name' of the Masonic
God, do not appreciate its true nature. This is basically because of
deliberate obfuscation of the truth by some of those who know, and a
general acceptance that everything is as they are told by most members of
the Brotherhood.
In the ritual of exaltation, the name of the Great Architect of the Universe
is revealed as JAH-BUL-ON, not a general umbrella term open to any
interpretation an individual Freemason might choose, but a precise
designation that describes a specific supernatural being - a compound
deity composed of three separate personalities fused in one. Each syllable
of the `ineffable name' represents one personality of this trinity:
JAH = Jahweh, the God of Hebrews
BUL = Baal, the ancient Cameanite fertility god associated with
`licentious rites of imitative magic'
ON = Osiris, the Ancient Egyptian god of the underworld.
Baal was the `false god' with whom Jahweh competed for the allegiance of
the Israelites in the Old Testament. But more recently, within a hundred
years of the creation of the Freemason's God, the sixteenth century
demonologist John Weir identified Baal as a devil. This manifestation of
evil had the body of a spider and three heads, those of a man, a toad,
and a cat.
In 1873, the renowned Masonic author and historian General Albert Pike,

--- Sayfa 143 ---
later to become Grand Commander of the Southern Jurisdiction of the
Supreme Council (of the 33rd Degree) at Charleston, USA, wrote of his
reaction on learning of Jah-Bul-On. He was disquieted and disgusted by
the name, and went on "No man or body of men can make me accept as a
sacred word, as a symbol of the infinite and eternal Godhead, a mongrel
word, in part composed of the name of an accursed and beastly heathen
god, whose name has been for more than two thousand years an
appellation of the Devil".
Inside the Brotherhood, by Martin Short, carries on Stephen Knight's
research into English Freemasonry and gives additional information on
American Freemasonry. In it he suggests the racist Klu Klux Klan was
created by American Freemasons around 1860 and revived in 1915 "by a
new generation of Masons". He notes, "It seems that wherever Masons have
common political aims, but cannot pursue them through Freemasonry,
they set up parallel public movements" (p.239, IB). Acacia.
Against all this, the Church of England's Society for the Propagation of
Christian Knowledge (SPCK)
for example, even today carries no literature examining Freemasonry and
discussing whether a Christian should be a mason. The SPCK issued a
directive to their book shops that the book "Darkness Visible", probably
still the most accurate and scholarly general work on the matter, should
not be stocked. The Archbishop of Canterbury is the President of SPCK.
The Archbishop of Canterbury responsible for banning this book was Dr
Geoffrey Fisher - a Freemason of long standing.
There is no doubt that Freemasonry is extremely anxious to have, or
appear to have, good relations with all Christian Churches and, knowing
that no serious Masonic scholar and no Christian theologian has been
prepared to argue compatibility, the movement remains silent. There is
evidence of very considerable efforts being made by Masons, including
pressures on publishers, distributors, and libraries, to suppress works
critical of the Brotherhood. This even extends to the Brotherhood's own
publications. When the British Library applied in the normal way to
Freemasons Hall for two copies of the Masonic Yearbook for the Reading
Room in 1981, it was informed that it would not be permitted to have
copies of the directory then or in the future. No explanation was given.
There is a deliberate policy in operation within the English hierarchy of the
Roman Catholic Church to keep its members in ignorance of the true
standing of the Church on the question of Freemasonry. This policy is
intended to cover up a huge mistake made by the English Catholic Bishops
in 1974 which led to Catholics in Britain being informed that, after two
hundred years of implacable opposition from Rome, the Holy See had
changed its mind and that with the permission of their local Bishop
Catholics could now become Freemasons. As well as covering up what can
now be revealed as this blunder on the part of the English hierarchy, the
wall-of-silence policy conceals, perhaps inadvertently, a more sinister
situation in Rome. There is evidence that the Vatican itself is infiltrated by

--- Sayfa 144 ---
Freemasons.
Freemasonry has many ranks or degrees and is rigidly hierarchical. Master
Masons are "sworn to obey all the edicts, whims, etc., of those high and
mighty grand sublime
Sublimities" (pg.24, Masonic Salvation, Fred Husted, circa 1910) above
them. Acacia.
Betrayal of the Brotherhood is the worst crime possible in the eyes of its
members and is ultimately punishable by death.
The Brotherhood is all powerful: all top level members of the police and
military forces are placed there through the Brotherhood as Brotherhood
tools. Judges and lawyers, media moguls, businessmen, and politicians,
are recruited so that no member of the Brotherhood elite is ever in danger
of being held accountable by the System for any crime or misdemeanour.
The Brotherhood can, and quite literally does, get away murder because it
is also the law which opposes it. If a non-Brotherhood member should slip
through the net and achieve high status then there are ways to ensure
that such people are unable to achieve their full potential. It infiltrates
every area of our society at all levels but at the top, in the highest social
and monetary bracket, the Brotherhood prevails almost in total.
While the first three degree Masons are raising money for charity and
enjoying relatively harmless social events, their superiors in the Craft are
organising wars, drug pushing, co-ordinating assassinations, mindcontrol,
raping and murdering young children in Satanic abuse, and
formulating plans for world domination.
NEWS REPORTS
December 9 1996 - Dunblane:
....Meanwhile Frank Cook, Labour MP for Stockton, will attempt to raise
questions in Parliament tomorrow about Thomas Hamilton's links with the
Masons: "I feel there is cause for an enquiry into the relationship between
the police and Thomas Hamilton." Specifically, he'll question the role of
Central Scotland Police in allowing Hamilton to build up his arsenal of
weapons and ammunition. (John Cookson, Sky News).
December 26 1996:
Exactly how much power and influence is wielded by Freemasons has long
been a source of controversy. The Police Complaints Authority has taken
its view even though it recognises that suspicions about Masonic influence
in the police may outweigh reality.
PETER MOORHOUSE - CHAIRMAN, POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY:
"Where there is, in the public's mind, a very strong belief that the Masonic
order has many members within the police force, this is a very strong part
of the belief of secrecy and that is what we're trying to remove".
At one time as many as one in five officers in London was thought to be a
mason. In the name of openness, Chief Constables now want a compulsory
register of members. But the other representative organisations argue that
police are being unfairly singled out.
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN MACKENZIE - POLICE

--- Sayfa 145 ---
SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION:
"It's a nonsense to have the police registering if in fact you could have
accusations against judges, for example, and prosecutors, who actually
take the decisions on prosecuting which are far more serious than the
police."
Masons in the police are used to the charge that their first loyalty is to
each other. The leadership's response is that masons know their duty to
the law is paramount. The Metropolitan Commissioner has repeated advice
against joining the masons, and though there is a lodge only a stones
throw from here (outside New Scotland Yard) few senior officers are
thought to be members. (SKY NEWS).
December 26 1996:
The Police Complaints Authority has called for officers to register their
membership of organisations such as the Freemasons. The watchdog says
it would help dispel the belief that some policemen put their loyalty to the
brotherhood above their official duties. The Superintendents Association
said they had no objections as long as Judges and Lawyers also came out
into the open.
The suggestion that there should be a legally binding public register of
Mason officers has angered some members of the police and judiciary who
feel it is unnecessary and irrelevant.
The idea is being put forward by the Police Complaints Authority in its
recommendation to MP's investigating the issue. While there's no evidence
of abuse in the system, it's the public's perception of secret deals that's
proving harmful. With an estimated 475,000 Freemasons in Britain, most
members say such a notion is ludicrous:
LORD JUSTICE MILLETT - FREEMASON: "No earthly reason why a judge
should favour somebody he doesn't know at all, just because he happens
to be a member of a lodge which he has never been to, at the other end of
the country, it's complete fantasy".
There are nearly 9,000 lodges scattered across Britain. Members include
police officers, judges, magistrates, prosecutors, criminals, and MP's, some
of whom, it is alleged, sit on the Commons Home Affairs Select Committee
which is examining the influence of Freemasons on the Criminal Justice
System to see if restrictions are required. (SKY NEWS).
Except where otherwise indicated, the sources of information for this
article were - "The Brotherhood", a book by Stephen Knight, and "The
Brotherhood and the Manipulation of Society" from the December 1996
newsletter of `The Truth Campaign'.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
Below - Msonic Death Ritual

SYMBOLS PROVE INVISIBLE FRATERNITY OF FREEMASONRY IS
SATANIC!
Since pictures are worth 1,000 words, we have created an article in which we
show you that Freemasonry utilizes many of the identical symbols as does
hardcore Satanism.  The chances of these many common symbols being used
accidentally is so high as to be impossible.
Too many times, Masons and Christians get into an endless exchange of emails
trying to convince each other that they are right:  Masons argue that I am
presenting a totally false view of Masonry, and usually end their argument with
the statement, "I have never seen anything like that is my Lodge"!  We Christians
realize that the reason these Masons have never seen anything like what we are
divulging is that the Masonic Fraternity consists of two organizations, on Visible
and one Invisible.  We have written an extensive article on this subject above.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
The power and influence over world affairs exercised by
the Invisible Fraternity of Freemasons is enourmous, and
has largely succeeded in remaining almost invisible to the
average person on the street.  The Invisible Fraternity is
no more than 5% of all Masons, which means that 95% of
all Masons are totally unaware of the inner secret cadre.
Most of the books we quote are from the Invisible
Fraternity, but this is the fraternity that is Satanic to the
core, and which is secretly directing the Visible Fraternity.
Since the old adage is certainly true that a "picture is worth a thousand words",
we have written this article to demonstrate that Freemasonry uses many of the
same filthy occult symbols that Satanists use.  As I have delved deeply into
Satanism over the past 16 years, I have constantly discovered that Satanism
uses the same symbols as does Freemasonry; since Satanism goes back 4,000
years, and Freemasonry only about 300, you can easily see that Freemasonry
has gotten many of its symbols from Satanism.
Finally, if you do not recognize some of the occult interpretations of some
Masonic/Satanic symbols, remember that you have been given false
interpretations of those symbols, just as Albert Pike directed:  "Masonry, like all
the Religions, all the Mysteries, Hermeticism, and Alchemy, conceals its secrets
from all except the Adepts and Sages, or the Elect, and uses false explanations
and misinterpretations of its symbols to mislead those who deserve only to be
mislead; to conceal the Truth, which it calls light, and draw them away from it."
[Morals and Dogma, p. 104-5, 3rd Degree]
Did you see those words, "uses false explanations and misinterpretations of its
symbols"?  In most instances, I will be quoting from both a Satanic source and a
Freemason, usually an Inner Fraternity Mason, to explain the interpretations of
these symbols.
COMMON SYMBOLS USED BY BOTH SATANISM AND FREEMASONRY
ALL-SEEING EYE -- The All-seeing eye originated in Egypt in those Satanic
Mysteries which God physically judged during the time of Moses, when he lead
the Israelites out of the land by the mighty hand of God.  The All-Seeing Eye was
representative of the omniscience of Horus, the Sun God, [Magic Symbols, by
Frederick Goodman, p. 103, Satanic symbols book].  As one Masonic book says,
"These considerations lead us to an interesting topic, the Eye of Mind or the Eye
of Horus ... and conveying the idea of the 'All seeing Eye'.  The end set before
the Egyptian neophyte was illumination, that is to be 'brought to light'.  The
Religion of Egypt was the Religion of the Light". [Thomas Milton Stewart, The
Symbolism fo the Gods of the Egyptians and the Light They Throw on
Freemasonry, London, England, Baskerville Press, Ltd., 1927, p. 5]

--- Sayfa 148 ---
Anyone who knows their Scripture and thinks of themselves as "Christian" should
feel right now like they have been slapped alongside their head with a two-by-
four!  This Masonic author has just told you that the Light to which Masons
constantly refer, and toward which they are to constantly move, is the Religion of
Horus!  This is damning, because in Egyptian
Mythology, Horus IS Lucifer [Former
Satanist, William Schnoebelen, Masonry:
Byond The Light, p. 197]
However, the evidence that Lucifer is the god
of Masonry resides elsewhere in the writings
of the Invisible Fraternity.  Albert Pike writes
in Morals and Dogma that Lucifer is the "light-
bearer" [p. 321, teachings of the 19th
Degree], and is the "Angel of Light" on p. 567,
teachings of the 26th Degree].  Finally,
Masonic author, Manly P. Hall, says that,
once the Mason really learns the secret of his
Craft, he shall have the "seething energies of
Lucifer in his hands". [The Lost Keys To
Freemasonry, published by the Macoy
Publishing and Masonic Supply Co., 1976, p.
48]
However, Freemasonry also depict this Eye of
Horus within a pyramid.  All Satanists love the pyramid, because it represents the
Pagan Trinity of Satan, Antichrist, and False Prophet.  They use this 3-sided
geometric shape constantly.  In this symbol, called the Euclid, we see that the
All-Seeing Eye is positioned above the traditional Masonic symbol of the
Compass/Square, with the "G" in the middle.  This means that the All-Seeing Eye
controls Freemasonry, which is exactly correct.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
However, this symbol of the All-Seeing Eye within a pyramid was appropriated in
1776 by the Illuminati.  [Robert Hieronimus, Ph.D., America's Secret Destiny,
White Magic book, p. 59]  In 1789, a secret meeting of Masonic members of the
Constitutional Congress approved the symbol, but declared it should be kept
secret.  These Masonic members of the Constitutional Congress rightly feared
the general public would immediately recognize this symbol as being Masonic
and reject it outright.  You see, the General Awakening Revival had been
underway since the mid-1740's, resulting in perhaps one-half of the population in
the American Colonies being Born Again Christian, a proportion never to be seen
again.

OBELISK

--- Sayfa 150 ---
All pagans love to worship the
creature rather than the Creator
[Romans 1:25]; therefore, every
single pagan group in the world
worships the Sex Act.  Both Satanism
and Freemasonry absolutely love the
Obelisk.  The Egyptians created the
obelisk, believing that the spirit of the
Sun god, Ra, dwelt in there. [H.L.
Hayward, Symbolic Masonry:  An
Interpretation of the Three Degrees,
Washington, D.C., Masonic Service
Association of the United States,
1923, p. 207; 'Two Pillars' Short Talk
Bulletin, Sept., 1935, Vol. 13, No 9;
Charles Clyde Hunt, Some Thoughts
On Masonic Symbolism, Macoy
Publishing and Masonic Supply
Company, 1930, p. 101]
Satanists -- and Invisible Masons --
also depict the obelisk as the erect
male organ. One Luciferian author
writes that "... the lingam [male
phallus] was an upright pillar" [W. Wynn Wescott, Numbers: Their Occult Power
and Mystic Virtues, Theosophical Publishing Society, 1902, p. 33]  A Masonic
author both admit that these pillars of the obelisk were used to represent sex
[Haywood, quoted above, p. 206-7 and Rollin C. Blackmer, The Lodge and the
Craft: A Practical Explanation of the Work of Freemasonry, St. Louis, The
Standard Masonic Publishing Co., 1923, p. 94]
In the Bible, we see the obelisk in use in Baal worship, the priests killed on God's
orders, and the obelisks destroyed.  Listen to the account i which God destroyed
these obelisks: King Jehu said to the guards and to the officers, 'Go in and slay
them; let none escape'. And they smote them with the sword; and the guards
before the king threw their bodies out, and went into the inner dwelling of the
house of Baal. They brought out the obelisks [pillars] of the house of Baal and
burned them." [2 Kings 10:26, Amplified Bible]
The next time you see an obelisk in your Freemasonry organization, you now
know you are looking at one of the supreme objects in Baal worship, for which
God ultimately destroyed Israel.  You are also tolerating a Satanic symbol of the
sex act.
CIRCLE WITH A DOT

--- Sayfa 151 ---
Since the Satanist worships
the Sex Act, he must have a
symbol of the female organ,
to go along with the male
organ -- the Obelisk.  And,
indeed, Satanists do have a
symbol of the female organ -
- the Circle. And, when
a point is added to the
middle of the circle, you
have the complete sex act,
the male being the point and
the female being the circle
["Point Within A Circle",
Masonic Short Talk Bulletin,
August, 1931, Vol. 9, No. 8,
Reprinted July, 1990, p. 4.]
Listen to Albert Mackey, a
33 Degree Mason, describe
this Satanic belief:  "The
point within the circle is an
interesting and important
symbol in Freemasonry ...
The symbol is really a
beautiful but somewhat
abstruse allusion to the old
Sun-Worship, and
introduces us for the first
time to that modification of
it, known among the ancients as the worship of the Phallus." [Short Talk Bulletin,
February, 1936; Vol. 14, No. 2, Reprinted July, 1980, p. 7].  Isn't this wonderful?
Mackey tells us that this point within a circle is really the old Sun Worship which
Masons have copied the Ancient Mysteries Religions to modify it as a phallus
symbol.
But, you may ask, how does a point or a dot within a circle represent the
phallus?  Good question.  For the answer, we turn to the Masonic Short Talk
Bulletin, "Point Within A Circle", August, 1931, Vol. 9, No 8, Reprinted July, 1990,
p. 4.  Listen:
"The Indian interpretation makes the point the male principle, the circle the
female; the point became the sun and the circle the solar system which anicent
peoples thought was the universe because the sun is the vivifying, the life-giving
principle, for all that lives."

--- Sayfa 152 ---
Truly, Freemasonry copies the Biblical definition of a Pagan perfectly.  Listen:
"Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever." [Romans 1:25]
Freemasons make the King James Bible their translation in the Bibles they
publish for members, so they have the "truth of God"; but, they changed this truth
of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the
Creator", worshipping the Sun and Moon, and the Phallus, just as have the
Ancient Satanic Mysteries of olden times.
We will be adding to this article as time allows, for there are so many other
symbols that Freemasons use that regular, run-of-the-mill Satanists use that your
mind will be boggled.
But, let us end our discussion about this Dot Within A Circle symbol by noting
that Adam Weishaupt, the Satanic priest of the Masters of the Illuminati, who
formed the New World Order Plan to produce Antichrist, used this symbol to
represent his Satanic coven.  Listen:
"Because the true purposes of Illuminism were so shocking, Weishaupt
constantly encouraged the secretive nature of the order.  No member was ever
allowed himself to be identified as an Illuminati.  The words Illuminism or
Illuminati were never to be used in correspondence, but were to be replaced by
the astrological symbol of the sun, a circle with a dot in the middle." [William Still,
New World Order:  The Ancient Plan of Secret Societies, Lafayette, Louisiana,
Huntington House, Inc., 1990, p. 73]
The Masters of the Illuminati, the most Black Magick Satanic group in all of
human history, uses the symbol of a dot within a circle to represent its group.
You can find this dot within a circle in Freemasonry.  This is hardly a coincidence,
and one of the more definitive proofs that Masonry is Satanic.

Truly, the End of the Age, along with its unparalleled deception, is upon us.
Are you spiritually ready? Is your family? Are you adequately protecting your
loved ones? This is the reason for this ministry, to enable you to first understand
the peril facing you, and then help you develop strategies to warn and protect
your loved ones.

Above - Anti Freemason Stamps from Serbia 1941
Opposition to The Freemasons the world over has not been without occurence.
Many times have they been closed, and arrested, and worse. The problem is that
they have now got to the stage where they (at the top of the pyramid, with the

--- Sayfa 153 ---
illuminati) control all governments and therefore there is nobody under their
control that has any power to do anything.
These anti masonic stamps are a good example. They read "Anti-Masonic
Exhibition" and "Serbia" in Cyrillic letters.
The first stamp (top left) shows a hand (representing God) coming down from the
light and choking a snake! The snake represents evil, (the serpent) and is
covered with the satanic 5 pointed star as used in masonry, (this is sometimes
refered to falsley as 'the star of David' see The Illuminati page for more info.
The second stamp (top right) shows Masonry, as a hooded figure wearing an
apron and star of David upon its bosom, as worn in masonic rituals. This hooded
figure is shown cringing from a strong ray of light, representing God.
The third stamp (bottom left) I will let you ponder for yourselves. I will add a write
up shortly.
The last stamp (bottom right) of the series shows a 5 pointed star upon the
surface of the earth between two pillars which are being forced aside by a
Serbian of the times. These pillars  represent the two pillars in the porch of King
Solomon's Temple, and facism.
These stamps are looked upon badly by The Masons and The Illuminati, it
is commonly believed that these symbols have a positive effect against the many
negative Illuminati and Masonic symbols around.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
Below - The great seal. Here you can see how the satanic symbol clearly
has 'MASON' on each point!
http://www.tonysomers.50megs.com/photo4.html

“MASON” ENCRYPTED
ON SEAL OF U.S. DOLLAR BILL

--- Sayfa 155 ---
D.A.R.P.A. IS FUNDING AN IMPLANTABLE CHIP FAR MORE ADVANCED
THAN "DIGITAL ANGEL"!

Above - (left) The DARPA Logo. (With Illuminati symbol, due to recent awarness of what this
symbol means and controversy caused, this has recently been ordered to be changed!) Above
right - The verichip implant which has already been implanted in many people world wide (more
examples below).
(M.M.E.A.  = MULTIPLE MICRO ELECTRODE ARRAY)
Resources to aid your Understanding
Panopticon - Big Brother's Eye Is Watching Us
Subtitle: We explain the actual science of MMEA in this article so you can see how all humans on
earth can be completely controlled by this implantable chip! Emotions - fear, euphoria, depression --
plus pleasure and pain, can be controlled and even caused, by R.F.(Radio-Frequency signal)! Silent,
large funding is occurring that soon will be ready for "The Pretend Christ" to use once he arises.
RFID is just the "tip of the iceberg". Whether you are a christian or atheist, it has to be aknowledged
that the people behind this and other 'new world order' ideals (the illuminati as they are commonly
known), are heavily into occult and strange rituals. It is the choice of the reader to decide if the
scripture references are man mad plans of old, modern plans mocking the scripture, or in actual fact
prophesy taking place! For more information about The Illuminati and the occult please see the
Illuminati page.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
The New World Order is coming! Are you ready? Once you understand what this New World Order
really is, and how it is being gradually implemented, you will be able to see it progressing in your
daily news!!
Learn how to protect yourself, your loved ones! Stand by for insights so startling you will never look
at the news the same way again.
YOU ARE NOW ON THE CUTTING EDGE
"And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads: 17
And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of
his name." [Rev 13:16-17]
For many years, Christians have looked at the development of an implantable device as one of THE
signs that the Kingdom of Antichrist is drawing close.
When Digital Angel publicly began to promote their human implantable chip, Christians the world over
gasped in excitement that an implantable chip was now on the world scene, being promoted for all the
medical, financial, and personal benefits it could provide the human host.
When Digital Angel went public on Wall Street, and when they began to get large orders, we all felt that
the prophetic time table was moving ever faster forward.
However, behind the scene and very quietly, that superscret DARPA "Antiterrorist" organization headed
by Admiral John Poindexter began to pump significant dollars of research behind a new implantable chip
called MMEA,
Multiple Micro Electrode Array. This chip is so far ahead of the Digital Angel Veri-Chip product, it took
my breath away. Once you fully understand its capability, you will realize its probable full prophetic
significance, and will realize that we may have probably been pointed to Digital Angel simply so we would
not be aware of MMEA.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Always, when discussing a matter that is both complex and ill-understood bythe reader, we need to
properly identify key terms. There are two key terms we must properly and clearly understand if we are to
comprehend the importance of this implantable chip coming upon mankind at this point in history. These
two terms are:
* BMI - Brain Machine Interface: Technically, this term defines the project on which scientists are
working, or the type of Hardware and Software used to connect the Brain or Nervous system to a computer.
Please understand that this chip is designed to work within the nerves and soft tissue of the body in order to
gather electrical signals from the body and/or transmit electrical signals received from the outside to the
body through the nerves!
Brain Machine Interface is simply the computer software that will send out the signal to the chip; therefore,
BMI is the software that will interact with the chip, to control the chip and the person in whom the chip is
inserted!
* MMEA, Multiple Micro Electrode Array: Multiple Micro Electrode Array, this is the actual Chip. This
chip will be surgically implanted directly into a human nerve or into specific area of the brain. The Chip at
the moment is a little smaller than a Tic Tac breath mint. The chip implanted into the pioneer, a Professor
Kevin Warwick, had 100 Electrodes; each electrode looks like a small needle and is capable of detecting
electric signals traveling through the nervous system and also sending electrical signals to the nervous
system, this was all performed via a RF (Radio Frequency) device connected to the MMEA.
As you can see already, this implantable chip is far ahead of anything Digital Angel has on the market;
further, MMEA is light-years ahead of the RFID technology which retailers like Wal-Mart are racing into
production. As we unfold the science of this chip, you will see that it offers a repressive global government
the capability of controlling entire captive populations with a sophisticated software program! You will
clearly see how an entire population of the earth might actually fulfill these prophetic verses:

--- Sayfa 158 ---
"... the whole earth went after the beast in amazement and admiration." [Revelation 13:3;
"And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads: And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name." [Rev 13:16-17]
Recording From Biological Tissue
"The essential requirements for a working multiple-microelectrode to record from biological tissue include:
1. A conductor forming the active electrode and the tracks, e.g. indium-tin oxide (ITO), titanium nitride;
2. An electrical insulation layer, e.g. polysiloxane, polyimide, or silicon nitride;
3. The microelectrode must be biocompatible, resistant to a physiological saline environment and
sterilisation, and easily maintained in cell culture conditions for many days or weeks."[Neuronal Networks
Electrophysiology Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Nottingham Medical School]
Carefully contemplate the basic requirement listed above for an MMEA: "to record from biological
tissue"
One of the fundamental goals of the MMEA is to intercept and record electrical impulses from biological
tissue. Currently, extensive tests are being carried out on human subjects to discover the exact electrical
frequency of a wide variety of human emotions, feelings, and various mechanical actions. Each different
emotion and/or feeling has a slightly different radio frequency! Therefore, by intercepting and recording the
exact frequency of each emotion and/or feeling from their human test subjects, the exact frequency of each
feeling can be identified and then stored into the BMI -- Brain Machine Interface software!

Above - Mexicans recieve The VeriChip  for Solusat medical program & Veriguard
Security Company - July 2004
At some future point, a person may be sent a signal from an RF transmitter that will give that person
pleasure or pain, with the exact frequency coming from the BMI software! Or, the exact frequency of
various mechanical orders the brain is continuously giving the muscles can be recorded and stored in the
Brain Machine Interface Software; this type of software capability seems to have great promise for people
suffering neural damage that prevents them from walking, for example.
How scientists plan on doing this in theory is very simple. A person's body functions by small amounts of
electrical energy sent in patterns that determines what a person wants to do, operating much like the Binary
Code of a Personal Computer. The Brain acts a processor, sending electrical signals in proper sequence
throughout the nervous system to tell the specific parts of our body what to do. These signals also travel
back to our brains to tell us what we Feel, See, Hear and Smell.
If we have a device implanted into a specific area of our nervous system which has the ability to detect
these electrical patterns and then transmit to a computer with special software to record and analyze this
data, we can, for example, determine what types of electrical patterns make us move our leg up or down. If
this data was transferred to a central computer for analyzing and storage then it could be transferred back to
the nervous system. This data from one person can even be transmitted to another person, or to many other

--- Sayfa 159 ---
persons, making them move their leg up or down, or making them feel a great variety of emotions and
feelings, and/or do a variety of actions that the controller wants them to do.
Instilling Thoughts In A Person's Brain
NEWS BRIEF: "Defense Department funding brain-machine work", Tuesday, August 5, 2003, BY
GARETH
COOK, The Boston Globe, reprinted in The Post and Courier, Chareleston.net,
http://www.charleston.net/stories/080503/wor_05darpa.shtml
"What most people don't know is that the Department of Defense is already funding a research program
with far creepier implications. The $24 million enterprise called Brain Machine Interfaces is developing
technology that promises to directly read thoughts from a living brain -- and even instill thoughts as well.
The research, some of which is being done at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is already
surprisingly advanced.
Monkeys in a laboratory can control the movement of a robotic arm using only their thoughts. And last year
scientists in New York announced they could control the skittering motions of a rat by implanting
electrodes in its brain, steering it around the lab floor as if it were a radio-controlled toy car."
"It does not take much imagination to see in this the makings of a 'Matrix'-like cyberpunk dystopia: chips
that impose false memories, machines that scan for wayward thoughts, cognitively augmented government
security forces that impose a ruthless order on a recalcitrant population. It is one thing to propose a tasteless
market for gambling on terrorism. It is quite another to set some of the nation's top neuroscientists to work
on mind control."
As you can see, this research is getting to be quite advanced. However, we must not lose sight of the
original brains behind this technology -- Professor Kevin Warwick -- and how he and his wife are currently
conducting very specific research.
Brief Bio of The Professor
The leading scientist in this entire field is Professor Kevin Warwick: "Professor of Cybernetics at the
University of Reading, UK where he carries out research in artificial intelligence, control and robotics.
Kevin has published over 300 research papers and his latest paperback In the Mind of the Machines gives a
warning of a future in which machines are more intelligent than humans ... In 1998 he shocked the
international scientific community by having a silicon chip transponder surgically implanted in his left arm.
A series of  further implant experiments have taken place in which Kevin’s nervous system was linked to a
computer ...
Kevin's new implant experiment called 'Project Cyborg' got underway in March 2002 and is providing
exciting
results." http://www.kevinwarwick.com/
The In/Out Principle
NEWS BRIEF: "Brain-Machine Interfaces: Current and Future Applications", CHI Labs
"The purpose of Brain-Machine Interface (BMI) research is to create outputs from or inputs to the brain
that are additional to those that occur naturally. There are two possible directions of data flow (data from

--- Sayfa 160 ---
the brain to outside machinery and data to the brain from outside machinery). In whole, this research
suggests that the brain is a much more adaptable organ than it is commonly thought to be."
Did you catch the extremely important phrase? "create outputs from or inputs to the brain that are
additional to those that occur naturally".
In computer language, if there is a way out then there is a way in. Kevin Warwick has already started work
on this principle in experiments with his wife; there is nothing mysterious here about their manner of
exchanging feelings. Basically, what is happening is simply understood; the electrical signals that are
detected by the MMEA in one person -- Kevin, for example, touching his arm -- are transferred via RF
from the Chips transceiver to a RF receiver. This sends the signal to a remote computer for analysis and
storage.
Then, if the command is given, the data can be forwarded to another person -- his wife in this current round
of experiments -- who will have the same MMEA Chip with I/O capability and an RF link. This chip will
then be told by the RF signal to send the same patterns of electrical signals to the nerve via the electrodes
which should in theory reproduce the same action and or feeling that was originally performed and felt by
Kevin.
In other words, if Keven touches his arm, his wife should feel a touching sensation in her arm, in the same
place and to the same degree that Kevin felt it when he touched his arm. Theoretically, Kevin could touch
his arm in London and his wife could feel a touch in her arm in the same place and to the same degree,
even if she were in New York City!
Now, if this device will allow that type of activity, then the possibilities are many, if not endless. For
example,
Kevin has the idea that pain such as the type that comes from headaches have a specific electrical signal;
we could manipulate the nervous system to where we would no longer feel headaches. By altering the
electric current, we could also sedate people or reduce the affects of stress by recording our emotional
feelings on days that we are happy and simply replay them on days we are feeling depressed. This is just
the beginning of possibilities that are being discussed. If there is the possibility of manipulating people's
mental and physical feelings and actions, this MMEA toolwould have many practical uses by the medical
community, by the individual, but most of all, by the government.  Imagine having the ability to direct
much needed medicines via this technology to a tumor deep in the brain and have these medicines eradicate
a once-fatal condition. Scientists at the University of Michigan areworking on, this very possibility right
now.
But, we must also seriously consider the huge potential for tight control over entire populations! It may be
possible to sedate an entire population, or to make them think the same thoughts at the same time! Can you
imagine this kind of weapon in the hands of the Illuminati, as they press toward their goal of tightly
controlling the whole world?

--- Sayfa 161 ---
The Wireless Cloud Experiment
What government wouldn't want the ability to tranquilize a entire city during a Riot, or better yet keep all
of its citizens content or happy by continually feeding them prerecorded emotions! Imagine how small
Police Forces might become if we could be controlled in this manner. Imagine how thrilled tyrants like
Adolf Hitler , Josef Stalin, or Saddam Hussein would have been had they had devices like this, which could
control the feelings and emotions of entire populations!
Our government evidently understands the potential of control over entire populations, as evidenced by
their recent "Wireless Cloud Experiment"!
NEWS BRIEF: "How can people tap into a wireless 'cloud'?", By Marsha Walton, CNN Sci-Tech, July 31,
2002. "ATHENS, Georgia (CNN) -- Applications for a wireless "cloud" may not seem obvious at first, but
organizers of the high-tech project in Athens, Georgia, say there are many ways in which it can be used.
The University of Georgia has joined with local government to create WAG, the Wireless Athens Group.
They're building a cloud over several blocks of the downtown area where anyone with the right equipment
can have free Internet access.
The cloud now covers about three blocks, and it will soon expand to 24. CNN's Marsha Walton looks into
how users can tap into it.
* Sports -- University of Georgia students already have successfully tested some options ... They used
wireless technology to provide instant replays on personal digital assistants (PDAs) at a recent college
baseball game. for the really devoted (or lazy) fan, students have come up with a prototype for this
possibility: Beam your beer and snack order directly to a computer at the concession stand, punch in your
seat number, and the food will be delivered. You never have to miss a pitch, a hit, or an argument with the
umpire.
* Music -- On any given night in this college town, 40 bands might be taking the stage at local bars and
coffee houses. For a student unfamiliar with most of the performers, and unwilling to part with a $3 cover

--- Sayfa 162 ---
charge for music he or she doesn't like, the wireless "cloud" could provide a chance to sample a song or two
from some of these bands.
* Retail -- People walking out of class or an office and in a rush for lunch could pull up a menu from a
local restaurant, place an order, even pay online via their PDA. By the time they walked a few blocks to the
cafe, their food would be ready to go.
* World market -- A wireless cloud in central or south America could empower people who have little
access to telecommunications infrastructure now ... (customers will) be able to communicate at a very
cheap rate."
However, this technology has a very dark lining. This same "Wireless Cloud" hovering over a city can also
communicate with, and control, MMEA chips implanted in people! Conceivably, RF transmissions from
this cloud could cause everyone in whom this chip is implanted to feel euphoria, depression, or any other
emotion at the same time, totally at the will of the people controlling the BMI software. If the controllers
wanted to sedate the entire population, they could easily do so. If they wanted to implant thoughts in the
minds of the people, they conceivably can implant them.
Therefore, when New Age writings say that thoughts will be implanted in people's minds when "The
Christ" arises, is this the technology which will produce those implanted thoughts?
Cheap Technology Even Third World Nations Can Deploy
The Reason that wireless transmission is so cheap is that there is very little hardware to install. All the
hardware that is needed is a telecom link to a city; this can be done via Satellite or Land Line Links. From
this, all you need to install is an RF transmitter and receiver on the tallest building in the City. Anyone with
the proper RF equipment would have constant internet access.
Most remote locations in the Third World are all currently running via RF and Satellite uplinks; in most of
these areas, existing phone lines are turn-of-the Century Era Pulse. There are no Coin Digital Lines in many
of these places, so most people are using RF in some form for internet access and mobile phones for voice
communication; it is very doubtful they will ever run land lines again.
In this manner, Third World Nations seem further along in this particular area than people in more
advanced nations. RF is becoming day-to-day use throughout the entire world. and  we now see it more and
more in day-to-day use.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
http://www.leavingbabylon.com/modules.php?name=News&new_topic=9

http://www.freemasonbooks.com/

America's Dog Star Days
http://rigorousintuition.blogspot.com/2005/06/americas-dog-star-days.html

Twinkle, twinkle

Remember the Order of the Solar Temple? In 1994 the neo-Templar secret
society, founded by Joseph Di Mambro and Luc Jouret, embarked on its very own
cultic auto-destruct sequence, when 69 of its members, including children, either
killed themselves or were murdered in their chalet-compounds in Switzerland
and Quebec. (The trigger for the group's termination appears to have been the
ritual slaying of a three-year old infant with a wooden stake, on order of Di
Mambro.)

The OST was not just screwy and dangerous; it was also implausibly, yet
undeniably, connected. Alex Constantine tells us to what in his Psychic
Dictatorship in the USA:

French-Canadian journalist Pierre Tourangeau investigated the sect for two
years. A few days after the mass murder, he reported that the sect was financed
by the proceeds of gun-running to Europe and South America. Simultaneously,
Radio Canada announced that Jouret's Templars earned hundreds of
millions of dollars laundering the profits through the infamous Bank
of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI), closed by authorities
worldwide in 1991. Montreal's La Presse observed: "each new piece of
information only thickens the mystery."

So this seemingly outlandish Order, which played out deadly Templar fantasies,
were themselves yet another facet of the even more bizarre military-occult
complex. Like the fascist-Masonic P2 Lodge, the Solar Temple violated the
conventions most people presume for the world. And yet, there it is: one more
crypto-criminal node in the international arms trade, laundering hundreds of
millions through BCCI.

And because of the secret Order's deep and weird politics, we should pay some
attention to its mythology. Perhaps particularly to the teaching that members
would be reincarnated, after martyrdom, on a planet orbiting Sirius, the dog star.

Though Sirius must mean little now to most urbanites bedeviled by light
pollution, for much of human history our nights were lit chiefly by the stars. And
the brightest star in the sky - and the nearest star visible with the naked eye -
certainly has loomed large in the Western Hermetic tradition.

Consider Freemasonry, from which the OST liberally borrorowed, and the high

--- Sayfa 164 ---
regard in which it holds Sirius, and with whom - Set/Lucifer - the star is
identified.

In Morals and Dogma, Albert Pike writes that Sirius was "the inventor of
language, grammar, astronomy, surveying, arithmetic, music, and medical
science; the first maker of laws; and who taught the worship of the Gods, and the
building of Temples." He adds that the "Blazing Star" pentagram of Masonic
Lodges represents Sirius, the "Guardian and Guide of our Souls."

Alice Bailey, successor to Helena Blavatsky and founder of the Lucifer, later
Lucis, Trust, went Pike one better, and claimed that Sirius was actually the source
of a "higher form" of Masonry. She wrote:

One great fact to be borne in mind is that the initiations of the planet or of the
solar system are but the preparatory initiations of admission into the
greater Lodge on Sirius.... The first four initiations of the solar system prior
to the first cosmic initiation. The fifth initiation corresponds to the first cosmic
initiation. that of "entered apprentice" of the Lodge Sirius. The sixth initiation is
analogous to the second degree in Masonry, whilst the seventh initiation makes
the Adept a Master Mason of the Brotherhood of Sirius. A Master, therefore, is
one who had taken the seventh planetary initiation, the fifth solar initiation,
and the first Sirian or cosmic initiation.

And from Bailey's The Rays and the Initiations:

These ancient mysteries were originally given to humanity by the Hierarchy,
and were - in their turn - received by the Hierarchy from the Great White
Lodge on Sirius. They contain the clue to the evolutionary process, hidden in
number and words ...they veil the secret of man's origin and destiny.

Bailey's remark that initiations into Earthly orders are preparatory for admission
into Sirius' Great White Lodge reminds me of our discussion here regarding the
resemblance of UFO abductions to occult inititations.

Robert Temple, author of The Sirius Mystery, summarizes Bailey's views this
way: "The Sirians have tried hard to civilise us without much success.
Freemasonry is meant to be one of their civilising forces here. (Of
course the corrupt Masonic lodges such as P-2 would form no part of this.)"

(Naturally Temple would find Bailey's remarks interesting, as his central
"mystery" concerns the apparent oral tradition of the Dogon people of Mali that
Sirius has a companion star, which it does, though it wasn't discovered by science
until the mid-19th Century. Temple infers from the Dogon's teachings that they
were visited in antiquity by Sirians. It's another discussion, but I'll just say here
I'm not persuaded by Temple's work, nor convinced of the rigour of his methods.)

Kenneth Grant, student of Aleister Crowley and founder of the "Typhonian OTO"

--- Sayfa 165 ---
and its "Cult of Lam," writes in The Magical Revival that Crowley "unequivocally
identifies his Holy Guardian Angel with Sothis (Sirius), or Set-Isis." Set, of
course, will be familiar to those who've followed the career of Colonel Michael
Aquino, who created the Temple of Set when he found Anton LaVey and his
Church of Satan not serious enough in their devotion to the Left Hand Path.

Adam Gorightly, in "Ritual Magic, Mind Control and the UFO Phenomenon,"
writes how, in the 1950s and '60s, alleged contactee George Hunt Williamson is
said to have "summoned forth certain denizens purportedly from Sirius,
conversing to them in the same 'Enochian' or 'Angelic' language used by John
Dee and Aleister Crowley." Williamson also claimed that a secret society on Earth
had been in contact with Sirius for "thousands of years, and that the emblem of
this secret society is the eye of Horus, otherwise known as the all-seeing eye."

In "Sorcery, Sex, Assassination, and the Science of Symbolism" (available in Jim
Keith's anthology Secret and Suppressed: Banned Ideas and Hidden History),
the late James Shelby Downard argues that a Sirius cult exists today at the
highest levels of US military intelligence. Downard goes so far as to say that the
viewing chamber of the Palomar Observatory is used for its rituals, which evoke
those of ancient Egypt, and are performed in the star's focused light.

And according to David Ovason's book The Secret Architecture of our Nation's
Capitol, Freemasons oriented and consecrated Washington to the astrological
representation of Lucifer, Sirius.

More here on Washington's Masonic grid:

According to occultic/Satanic doctrine, the upper four points of the [inverted
Pentagram] represent the four elements of the world, Fire, Water, Earth, and
Air. The bottom fifth point represents the spirit of Lucifer. [As in the Baphomet
pentagram, where it points at the goat.] ... In the street layout of Washington
D.C., the fifth point is the White House, a symbol placement which
represents the intention that the spirit and the mind of Lucifer will be
permanently residing in the White House.

In the map above, beginning from top left to top middle:

1. Dupont Circle, Logan Circle, and Scott Circle in the middle, form the top three
points of the Devil's Goathead of Mendes, one of the most important types of the
Five-pointed Devil's Pentagram.

2. Washington Circle forms the extreme left-hand point of the Goathead.

3. Mt. Vernon Square forms the extreme right-hand point of the Goathead.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
4. The White House forms the fifth and bottom point of the Goathead.

There is a 666 evident in the most important top three circles of the Goathead,
Dupont Circle, Scott Circle, and Logan Circle. Each of these streets has six major
streets coming into them from all angles of the circle. This type of encoding is so
typical of the occultist.

You can't be Sirius?

It's not my contention that entities from Sirius are now, or ever have been, an
influence upon human affairs. Rather, I would suggest that the Sirius mythology
is a purely human construct, a very ancient and very natual one, which has been
exploited by trickster, transdimensional entities much closer to our home. (John
Keel's ultraterrestrials, who may reside a "vibration" or two away from our own
reality.)

That Sirius would be of global significance to both ancient and modern human
cosmologies should be no surprise. After all, "intrinsically", Sirius is 20 times
brighter than our Sun, and more than twice as massive. Now consider what our
mediocre and virtual dwarf star must look like from Sirius. It's highly unlikely we
would be noticed at all by hypothetical Sirians, let alone the object of their
intense study going back millenia.

Yet entities have claimed to be from Sirius. Well, naturally they have. They've
claimed a lot of things. The entities with whom we share hyperspace found a
ready-made cult, as Cortez did in Mexico. And not just the Sirius cult, when we
consider such things as the possible counterfeit apparitions of the Virgin Mary.
The human religious impulse has been exploited for millenia, and not just by
humanity. Why would transdimensional entities disabuse the primatives living
behind their veil of flesh of the notion that they are Sirian gods? Hell, it sounds
like a party. And since when have such tricksters told us the truth about
anything?

I know how crazy this sounds. But as I've said before, how crazy any of this
sounds to us is beside the point. In fact, its craziness can be a stumbling block to
our apprehending the processes at work. Because what is at work is only
tangentially about us, even though it could get us all killed - or worse. It is about
those for whom none of this is crazy: not the ceremonial robes, not the ritual
sacrifices, not the reverence for Sirius, not the worship of Lucifer. Hey, not even
the laundering of hundreds of millions of dollars in arms deals.

In Cosmic Trigger, Robert Anton Wilson writes that "July 23 is the day when,
according to Egyptian tradition, the occult link is most powerful between Earth
and Sirius." The 23rd is the Sumerian and Egyptian New Year, when Sirius rises
from behind the Sun. This marked the beginning of the "Dog Days" of Summer,
which the Egyptians observed until September 8, "when the last rituals to Sirius
were performed."

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Is this really why the elite will gather next month in Bohemian Grove? To
celebrate New Year's in July?

Then the traveler in the dark
Thanks you for your tiny spark;
He could not see which way to go,
If you did not twinkle so.
Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
How I wonder what you are.

http://www.nbcsandiego.com/money/9154947/detail.html

Previous Stories:
•
October 31, 2005: Soledad Cross Supporters Outraged By Judge's Decision
•
July 27, 2005: Measure To Preserve Cross Passes Easily
•
July 23, 2005: Judge: Soledad Cross Measure Needs Two-Thirds Majority
•
May 16, 2005: Bill Would Keep Cross On Mount Soledad
•
April 19, 2005: Soledad Cross Issue Qualifies For Special Election
•
April 7, 2005: Soledad Cross Supporters Turn In Nearly 100K Signatures
•
March 9, 2005: City Rejects Plan To Save Soledad Cross
•
March 8, 2005: Hundreds Jam Council Meeting On Soledad Cross
•
November 10, 2004: Church Scraps Offer To Take Soledad Cross
•
November 4, 2004: Work On Plan To Move Mount Soledad Cross Begins
•
November 3, 2004: Voters Reject Room Tax, Sale Of Soledad Cross
•
September 29, 2004: Prop. K Could Decide Fate Of San Diego Landmark
•
July 20, 2004: City Attorney Advocates New Owner For Soledad Cross
•
March 31, 2004: City May Agree To Move Soledad Cross
•
April 21, 2003: High Court Won't Hear City's Cross Appeal
•
June 27, 2002: Court Rejects City's Sale Of Soledad Cross
http://www.freemasonrywatch.org/siteindex.html

--- Sayfa 170 ---
'...Hiram Abiff, The Masonic Christ, a.k.a. Lucifer, The Blazing Star...'

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Introduction

--- Sayfa 172 ---
Secret Society - Any of various oath-bound societies devoted to brotherhood (or
sisterhood), moral discipline, and mutual assistance.
Such societies usually conduct rituals of initiation to instruct new members in the
rules of the group (see rite of passage). Greek and Roman mystery religions had
their secular counterparts in clandestine social clubs, some of which served as
platforms for political dissent. In West Africa secret societies such as Poro (for men)
and Sande (for women) serve to translate slight advantages of wealth and prestige
into political authority. In parts of New Guinea secret men's societies serve as
repositories of tribal knowledge. Fraternal orders such as the Freemasons (see
Freemasonry) may be considered secret societies, as may criminal groups such as
the Mafia and the Chinese Triads and hate groups such as the Ku Klux Klan.
Encyclopedia Britannica
www.britannica.com

Topics covered on Freemasonry Watch

--- Sayfa 173 ---
Freemasonry Rituals and Symbols, Freemasonry History, Freemasonry Secrets and
Passwords, Freemasonry Images and Graphics, Masonic Religion, Freemasonry and
Christianity, Masons and Tubal-Cain, Freemasons and Dollar Bill, Freemasons and
Washington DC, Freemasons and Pentagram, Masonry and the Da Vinci Code,
Masonry and Jack the Ripper - Police Corruption, Masonry and the Knights Templar,
Freemasonry and The Priory of Sion, Masons in the Vatican, P2 Masonic Lodge,
Freemasonry and Lucifer - Satan - Devil, Murder of Roberto Calvi, Murder of Captain
William Morgan, Freemasonry and Satanism - Witchcraft, Freemasonry and
American, French, Mexican, Italian, Spanish, Phillipines, Portugese, Russian
Revolution, Enlightenment, Seperation of Church and State, The Anti-Masonic Party,
Masonry and Anti-Masonry, Masons and the Assassination of JFK - President John F.
Kennedy, Freemasonry and Neo-Conservatism - Neocons, Freemasonry and E.U. -
European Union, Freemasons and N.A.T.O. - NATO, Freemasons and U.N. - United
Nations, Freemasons and One World Government, Freemasonry and Communism -
Socialism, Freemasonry and Darwinism - Eugenics - Abortion, Occult and Hitler,
Thule Society and Nazi, Masons and Demolay, Solomans Temple, Ark of Covenant,
Rennes-le-Chateau, Roslin Castle, Aleister Crowley, Helen Blavatsky, Benjamen
Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Napoleon Bonaparte, Voltaire, Bolivar, Fidel Castro, Leon
Trotsky, Mozart Magic Flute, Timothy McVeigh, Albert Pike, Ku Klux Klan, Knights of
the Golden Circle, Orange Order, 33rd Degree, Paul Bernardo, Benjamin Franklin,
Adam Weishaupt, Silvio Berlusconi, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld, Bill Clinton, Gay
- Same Sex Marriage, Freemasonry and the Illuminati;

Is There No Help For The Widows Son?
http://www.freemasonrywatch.org/