--- Sayfa 1 ---
MIDI 'Nobles of the Mystic Shrine', by Brother John Philip Sousa
'We do it all for the kids'

The Shrine's Ritual is taken from an Arabic Sufi Secret Society
Freemasonry & Qaballah Occultism owe much to Sufism
The Muslim Brotherhood is a Sufi Secret Society
A.A.O.N.M.S. - A MASON...
The Shriners' Recognition Test

--- Sayfa 2 ---
benevolent and secret. It is devoted to the cause of justice, truth and
mercy. It is ancient as the corner-stone of Mohammed's Temple of Mecca;
as secret as the Moslem that bound the tribes of Arabia to Allah or their
god; as honorable as the Christian, and the tenets to which it is dedicated
when once assumed cannot be eschewed or cast aloof. ...We require
absolute secrecy and desire all our disciples to hold and interest in our
noble cause and a just observance of the tenets of our faith. ...By the
existence of Allah and the creed of Mohammed; by the legendary sanctity
of our Tabernacle at Mecca we greet you, (p. 17-18)
Grand Potentate--
Who is he who hath professed to have conversed in person with the
Supreme and maketh himself mightiest of his Mohammed, the Prophet of
the Arab's creed? (p. 18)
Priest --
There are Moslems among us; there are others who swerve from propriety;
but whoso seeketh Islam earnestly seeks true direction; but those who
swerve from truth and justice shall merit and reap abundance of
chastisement. (p. 19)
Obligation
...I do hereby, upon this Bible, and on the mysterious legend of the Koran,
and its dedication to the Mohammedan faith, promise and swear and vow
on the faith and honor of an upright man,... (p. 20)
...and now upon this sacred book, by the sincerity of a Moslem's oath I
here register this irrevocable vow, subscribing myself bound thereto as well
as binding myself by the obligation of the prerequisite to this membership
m that of a Knight Templar or that of a thirty-second degree A. and A,
Scottish Rite Mason. ... may Allah, the god of Arab Moslem and
Mohammedan, the god of our fathers, support me to the entire fulfillment
of the same, Amen, Amen, Amen. (p. 22)
Priest --
And may Allah protect and support you, that you be not cast into 'al
hotama' (hell).... (p. 24)
Conductor --
This is the place where our brethren stop to sprinkle the Devil's Pass with
urine. You will contribute a few drops of urine to commemorate the time
and place where all who pass here renounce the wiles and evils of the
world to worship at the Shrine of Islam. Only a few drops will do. (p. 28)
GRAND HAILING SALAAM
...This sign must be given on entering and retiring. Word of entrance given
to Outer Guardian, Mecca. Word of entrance given to Inside Guardian,
Nemesis (the pagan Greek goddess of punishment). (p. 40)
"The Mystic Shrine an Illustrated Ritual of the Ancient Arabic Order Nobles
of the Mystic Shrine"
Revised Edition 1975
Ezra A. Cook Publications, Inc. ("Serving the Craft Since 1867)
Chicago.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
and numerous magazine articles, and a retired Professor of Journalism of 42 years at Purdue
University.
They claim about 300 Million Dollars a year to hospitals and
other institutions, which is good but not that much,
considering that if every Mason contributes just 5 Dollars per
week, they can collect 1.3 Billion Dollars per year... they are a
good way to deceive the outsiders, like its secrecy, it is often a
cloak to hide its real teachings and goals, and a good way to
obtain propaganda... and even the so called "charity" is a way
to get money for the Order: In 1985, "Circuses" of the
Shriners generated 23 Million Dollars, and only 2% went to
medical care of children. In 1984, out of 17 Million Dollars
only 1% went to charity, the rest for the Order!
Orlando Sentinel
June 29, 1986.
KOB TV - Albuquerque, New Mexico
http://www.kobtv.com/index.cfm?viewer=storyviewer&id=15927&cat=CONSUMER
World’s worst charities
Last Update: 12/27/2004
By: Stacy Johnson
There’s no question that without charitable works, the world would be a worse place to
live. And that’s all the more reason that when we give money to a non-profit group,
we need to make sure it’s the right one.
The American Institute of Philanthropy is one of several national charity watchdog
organizations. It recently published its report card on 100 “failing” charities… charities
that the AIP would not recommend you donate money to.
And you might be surprised at some of the results. Top failing charities in AIP’s
estimation?
1. Research to Prevent Blindness
2. Shriners Hospitals for Children
3. Seeing Eye
4. Guide Dogs for the Blind
5. Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch
6. Diabetes Trust Fund
7. Give Kids the World

--- Sayfa 4 ---
The 1998 National Charity Report for the Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine - 'The Shrine', recorded a staggering 8 Billion Dollars in Assets, a 1.2 Billion
Dollar increase over the previous year. Interestingly however only a mere 6 percent or
500 Million Dollars of that asset base was fixed assets - it's hospitals and rehabilitation
facilities. The other 94 percent is listed simply as investments.
Also the Shriners posted an amazing 233 Million Dollar profit for the same year.
Furthermore this proft was of staggering proportions in relation to the amount it spent
on program services. In fact the profit almost equalled the 310 Million the Shrine spent
on all it's hospitals and care giving for the entire year.
In 2001 the Shrine announced another fundraising drive, despite already enjoying a
massive operating surplus, using a glitzy national advertising televison and radio
campaign featuring celebrity endorsements. The reality is this was likely a P.R.
campaign or membership drive for Freemasonry's leading and most prominent
organization, The Shrine, because of the staggering excess of funds raised over funds
expended they already were enjoying. The Shrine didn't need the money, they had a
massive annual operating surplus exceeding $200 million dollars, so why the huge new
campaign? What was it's purpose?
The largest charity in North America continues to convey a much lower percentage of
it's revenues to program services than charities such as the Red Cross and Easter
Seals, where the percentage of funds going to end users is 80% or better.
However the Red Cross and Easter Seals don't have Temples which contain private
bars, dinning and meeting rooms, nor Regional Golf & Country Club Recreation Centres
for it's membership across the country to maintain, subsidise, or enjoy. Membership
has it's privledges.
http://www.itsgreattobeamason.org/Newletter/hotsandsabuse.htm
Inapproptiate use of Sick Children Transportation Fund for Social Gatherings
Sept. 25, 2006
'The Divan and their wives got their travels reimbursed by the Transportation Fund. it
had money.. with the lame statement that they were spreading the word about the
Hospitals. At Imperial and at the Region Shrine Conventions.. this was in the range of
$10,000 for the year depending on where the events took place. Las Vegas..
Vancouver.. the CPA said he was praying no one looked at the tax return and saw the
money going to a Casino in Vegas'
http://www.itsgreattobeamason.org/Newletter/hotsandsabuse.htm
Health and Legal concerns of Shriner 'Hot Sands' Initiation Hazing Ritual
Sept. 25, 2006
Nobles:
As long as we continue to allow practices, such as the hot sands, in the Shrine, we will
continue to dig our own grave for Shrinedom. And the Directors Staff units that help
put them on, should be renamed the "Funeral Directors Staff."
I'm sure by now, the subject line and that first sentence have raised the blood
pressure of more than a few people. No doubt, some on this very list will fire back
some highly emotionally charged reply defending the hot sands, criticizing me, extolling
the bonding benefits of events such as the hot sands, reporting how THEY walked the
sands and "all good Shriners should do likewise", etc..... (I'll bet that some are already
writing a reply without reading the rest of this!)
However, all that has been said and all that may be said does not change the fact that
we DO live in a very litigious society. Is it really going to take a major lawsuit
(actually, as I understand it, we've already had some) which will cast a very black eye
on our hospitals, to shut the hot sands down once and for all? Do you honestly think
that we are immune from someone having a heart attack and dieing during the hot
sands, based on how they operate? And if you think the "medical exam" that is given
before allowing people to walk the sands is adequate to defend us in court, you have
another think coming to you... Can you see the headlines in your local paper? Can you
hear the national news anchor telling that story? Do you honestly think if (when) some
tragedy occurs that it won't SEVERELY impact the hospitals? If you think that it WON'T
impact us, please oh please, explain why. I'd love to hear that argument.
If the hot sands are okay, then why close the ceremony to non-Shriners? Invite the
press! If it's that much fun, then the more, the merrier! Right? Wrong!!
http://www.itsgreattobeamason.org/Newletter/hotsandsabuse.htm
Behaviour at Shriners Conventions
Sept. 25, 2006
Shriners Convention Center Worker: 'As long as I don’t have to be in the same room
as those b****** Shriners! They are nothing but a bunch of foul mouthed dirty old
men who grab at anyone wearing a skirt'

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Welfare Act (AWA). The USDA has cited Shrine Circus exhibitors for failure to
provide veterinary care, adequate shelter from the elements, nutritious food, and
clean water, as well as failure to handle animals in a manner that prevents trauma
and harm and ensures public safety. Animals used by Shrine Circus have caused
deaths and injuries. Contact PETA for documentation.
May 29, 2000: The Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported that Shriners membership had
dropped to 528,000 by 1999, from a peak of 940,000 in the 1980s.
April 29, 2000: The Tebala Shrine in Rockford, Ill., reneged on assurances that it would
not use exotic animals in the circus. Elephants, tigers, and lions were featured.
April 13, 2000: An elephant named Tina used in Shrine Circuses was quarantined after
testing positive for a human strain of tuberculosis.
February 11, 2000: The Albuquerque, N.M., shrine reneged on a promise to use an
animal-free circus. The shrine featured numerous animal acts, including a killer elephant
named Misty.
January 26, 2000: A 4,500-pound female African elephant named Kenya, who had been
featured in Shrine Circuses, attacked and killed a circus worker in Florida. The 18-year-
old elephant knocked her to the ground and crushed her.
October 15, 1999: The San Antonio Express-News reported, "The money coming
from this weekend's [Alzafar Shrine] circus proceeds does not go toward the 22
childrens hospitals in the United States, Mexico, and Canada."
April 29, 1999: As a result of sustaining multiple injuries from an elephant while
performing for the Shrine Circus in Duluth, Minn., an animal handler was hospitalized in
serious condition.
March 1999: An evaluation by the Council of Better Business Bureaus determined
that the Shriners did not meet its standards, which recommend that at least 50
percent of a charitys income be spent on programs directly related to the
organizations stated purpose. According to the evaluation, Shriners had spent only
24 percent on program services.
February 1999: During a risk management presentation to the Shrine Treasurers
Association of North America, the Shriners learned that they had been provided by a
circus insurance agent with a fraudulent certificate of insurance on a policy that did not
exist after an attendee was injured at a Shrine Circus.
November 13, 1998: The same tiger used in Shrine Circuses who killed his trainer on
October 8, 1998, attacked and killed his owner in Newberry, Fla. The tiger was shot
dead.
October 8, 1998: A tiger attacked and killed his trainer in Newberry, Fla. The tiger, who
had been featured in numerous Shrine Circuses, grabbed the trainer by the throat.
May 15, 1997: A transient who came to Omaha, Neb., with the Shrine Circus was
convicted of second-degree murder. The victims partially nude, badly decomposed body
was found on June 16, 1995. She had been beaten to death with a chunk of concrete.
April 13, 1997: A spooked elephant performing at a Shrine Circus in the city of Calgary
in Alberta, Canada, slapped a handler with her trunk and bit him on the head and back,
causing injuries serious enough to require hospitalization.
March 18, 1997: A bear with the Shrine Circus in Grand Rapids, Mich., bit off the
tip of a 2-year-old childs finger. There were no safety barriers around the bear
cages, and 30 other children had been petting the bear.
August 20, 1994: An elephant named Tyke who had rampaged at the Altoona, Pa.,
Shrine Circus on April 21, 1993, killed her trainer while performing in Honolulu, Hawaii,
stomped on a circus groom, and injured a dozen spectators.
April 1994: Three children were injured when an elephant giving rides at a Shrine-
sponsored circus in Muskegon, Mich., fell into the passenger loading platform, spilling the
riders and bending the platform.
August 8, 1993: A Tucson, Ariz., Shrine Circus clown was arrested on charges of
molesting three girls, ages 6, 7, and 10, he met at the circus.
April 21, 1993: An elephant named Tyke charged through an arena entryway during a
Shrine Circus performance in Altoona, Pa., ripping away part of the wall and causing
10,000 Thousand Dollars in damage. More than 3,000 children were in the audience, and
one young girl was injured.
July 8, 1990: A 600-pound tiger terrified hundreds of children and their parents when he
ran loose for 15 minutes at the Shrine Circus at Mississaugas Square One mall in Ontario,
Canada.
1978: A Hawthorn Corporation elephant performing in Chicago with the Shrine Circus
picked up her trainer with her trunk and threw him into a pillar, killing him.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Dollars.
Organizers of the Shriners' Motor Patrol "V.I.P. Gentlemen's Dinner," attended by more
than 400 men, told the Free Press on Friday that proceeds from the event would be used
to cover motor patrol operations and support Shrine children's charities.
The Manitoba Liquor Control Commission has launched an investigation, while the
Winnipeg Police Service said it will investigate if formal complaints are brought to them.
But Greasley said the local organization itself, affiliated with 525,000 male members
belonging to 191 Shrine Temples across North America, is working quickly at damage
control.
At least one of the charity's major supporters, Canada Safeway, is looking for answers.
One member of the Daughters of the Nile, one of the women's arms of the Shriners, said
yesterday she was "very disappointed" when she read about the event in the Free Press.
"I don't understand the whole thing," she said. "Being a woman, I read it with disgust.
Yesterday, the only three patrons drinking at the Shriners' Temple on Wilkes Avenue
refused comment.
Diane McGifford, provincial minister responsible for the status of women, said she will be
talking tomorrow with Justice Minister Gord Mackintosh about the incident.
"It appears something very degrading to women took place," McGifford said.
"What seems apparent is although many people believe that men and women enjoy equal
opportunities and are equally valued, that doesn't seem to be the case".
McGifford said she hopes there were many men at the event who were disgusted with
the goings-on.
"They have daughters and wives too," she said.
Noting the Shriners raise money so sick or burned Manitoba children can go out of
province for help, McGifford said: "It just seems ironic of them -- we're going to help one
group by dehumanizing another group".
Naomi Levine, a Winnipeg lawyer and workplace dispute consultant, said she's shocked
not only at the sex acts which went on at the banquet, but also at the fact that it
involved Shriners.
"It's extremely disappointing to see the Shriners can be so injudicious," Levine said. "It's
certainly not consistent with the way they present themselves.
"It smacks of indignity. It smacks of exploitation. There's just nothing positive about this
and these are the persons who put on circuses for kids.
"They should grease their brains and not their wheels".
Mon, Jan 29, 2001
Winnipeg Free Press Editorial
Shrine circus
IT is unlikely that Manitobans will think about the Shrine Circus in quite the same way in
the future as they did in the past. Is the Shrine circus the wholesome, three-ring affair
sponsored annually by the local Khartum Shrine Temple, the circus of cotton candy and
childish cries of delight at the hijinks of performing animals and clowns? Or is it the
private Shrine circus where clowns of a different sort engage in sordid and perhaps
criminal behaviours and where the cries are of pain inflicted to the genitals of naked,
perhaps drunken women by louts with grubby hands and beer bottles?
Khartum Temple did not authorize the so-called VIP Gentlemen's Dinner that attracted
about 400 men to the Garden City Canad Inn last week. That event was organized by a
branch that operates the Shriners' Motor Patrol, those seemingly loopy men in fezzes
who ride miniature cars and motorcycles in parades. It stretches credulity, however, to
think that everyone within the charity's membership, and especially the executive
charged with maintaining its reputation, was unaware of what goes on at the annual
stag. Clearly, base behaviour injurious to the organization's charter and noble purposes

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Vaughan was knocked unconscious.
Theodore Corsones, lawyer for the national Shriners' organization, said he could not
comment on the case but that his own initiation as a Shriner was spiritually uplifting. He
said he toured a Shriners hospital for crippled children.
"As for what went on in Lexington, I haven't the foggiest because I wasn't there,"
Corsones said.
Rules are issued each year on proper initiation techniques, he said.
Robert E. Manley, whose Cincinnati law firm specializes in fraternity law, said at least 35
states, including Kentucky, have laws that ban hazing. Manley is not involved in
Vaughan's lawsuit.
Manely said he wasn't sure if Kentucky's hazing law would apply to the Shrine case. But
if the allegations are true, Vaughan could file an assault and battery complaint, he said.
Dear Brother Hiram wish you were here...
From: "H"
To: editor@
Subject: Shriners & Shriners Hospitals
Date: Thu, 23 Mar 2006
You should look at the following web site that lists actual certified IRS Tax Returns on
several of the largest Shriner Temple out of a total of 161 in the US.
The Shriners raise millions of dollars each year and the Officers give maybe 10% to
30% IF ANYTHING AT ALL TO THE SHRINERS HOSPITALS. The Officers have good
times, excellent perks and refuse to answer my questions of financial accountability.
Example:
on 2004 Tax Returns
$1,026,994 for SOCIAL ACTIVITIES/MEALS
$225,361 for DINNER & PARTIES
$59,022 for MEALS & SOCIAL & SOCIAL ACTIVITIES.
www.help-page-nonprofit.org
The site is done by a Former IRS Agent.
H
From: "H"
To: @businessweek.com

--- Sayfa 8 ---
So ... before anyone goes all high and mighty and takes offense ... the ones who yell
the loudest are usually the ones who are perpetrating the deed.
The cure is simple if you are innocent ... disclose now ... and do so as completely as
possible. It is, after all, a charity involved here and disclosure, at least to the Nobles,
should be a way of life.
g
*former* noble of the mystic shrine
albuquerque, NM, USofA
----- Original Message -----
> > [Shriners-2000] "Follow The Money" Web Site
> > Date:8/26/05
> > Sender: Shriners-2000@yahoogroups.com
> > Reply-to: Shriners-2000@yahoogroups.com
> > To: Shriners-2000@yahoogroups.com
> >
> > Nobles:
> > I do not know why the Attachment to the web site was
> > not attached so you could open it.
> >
> > www.help-page-nonprofit.org is where you want to go.
> > It is updated several times weekly.
> >
> > In any event, if you wish to see the actual IRS
> > Returns on some Shrine Temples and Imperial, please go
> > to the web site.
> >
> > It's hard to question the actual IRS Returns that
> > Imperial and Shrine Temples have signed off on and
> > submitted to the IRS on an annual basis.
> >
> > Most people would be concerned that the Shriners
> > Hospitals are receiving "very little and/or NO MONEY"
> > and this is documented. WE SHOULD BE ASKING WHERE THE
> > HELL IS IT GOING AND DEMAND DOCUMENTION OF CASES WHERE
> > MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES ARE OVER $10,000.
> >
> > Sudan Temple on their 2001 IRS Tax Document list on
> > the FEDERAL STATEMENT in the 990 tax form a total of
> > $153,688 in MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES. Something is wrong
> > with this situation.
> >
> > We the Nobility need financial accountability from
> > Imperial and The Temples not BS and excuses.
> >
> > In the days ahead the 990 IRS TAX Returns from
> > Imperial
> > other Temples, secret groups within the Shriners,
> > Jesters, Groups, etc; will be posted for
> > 2001-2002-2003-2004.
> >
> > I understand the people doing this are former IRS
> > Agents, present and former Shriners that want full
> > accountability from the Officers.
> >
> > H
> > Sudan Temple
From: H
Sent: Tuesday, September 06, 2005
Subject: Charity Watch Center for Non-Profit Fraud Follow the Money Trail of Shriners
Corporate
New update as of Tuesday, September 6, 2005. Look at each individual year. These are
the actual copies of the IRS Tax Returns submitted to the IRS BY IMPERIAL SHRINERS
CORPORATE OFFICERS which are "Public Records" purchased from the IRS Office in
Ogden, UT.
Nobles look at page 10 for year 2003 Tax Returns. $184,284 spent for IMPERIAL
JEWELRY. Go to page 9 for year 2002. $160,472 spent for Imperial Jewelry. The
Shriners Hospitals, The Nobles and Public are being SCREWED. Charlie Cumpstone
Salary is also posted.
This is why Shrine Members & the Public need total Financial Accountability by both
Corporate and each Individual Shrine Temples. If you know of areas that need to be
looked into, please advise the web site on a confidential basis. THE SHRINERS
HOSPITALS NEED EVERY DOLLAR THE PUBLIC DONATES TO THEM.
From: "H"
To: Undisclosed-Recipient@,
Subject: Charity Watch Center for Financial Accountability Shriners Imperial Divan
Money Trail
Date: Sun, 11 Sep 2005

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Q&A with Sandy Frost about new her ebook 'Shriners Shame' - 07/01/09
Former Jester confirms 'Sam Houston' E-mail - 06/12/08
Former N. Y. judge convicted of transporting hookers to Jesters Ontario
meeting - 08/09/08
Wall Street Journal: Surely You Jest - Former New York Judge Admits to
Violating Mann Act - 08/09/08
Prostitutes Procured By Former Police Captain were illegal aliens being
held as virtual captives - 05/09/08
Jester Confesses to Wife He Organized Prostitutes - 25/08/08
Forbes: Ex-Shriners CFO pleads guilty in stealing scheme - 21/08/08
Missori Shriners CFO pleads guilty to stealing $828K from hospital -
21/08/08
Judge Central Figure in FBI Probe, the S.O.B.I.B. and the Jesters' Half
Million Dollar Weekend Parties - 12/04/08
Senate Finance Committee Hires Tax Counsel - 11/04/08
Judge Tills traveled with woman he jailed on prostitution charge - 06/04/08
Update: The Shriners of North America vs. Noble Vernon Hill - 03/04/08
Social Paths: The Trouble With Jesters - 30/03/08
The Book of the Play: The N.Y. Royal Order of Jesters Scandal - 28/03/08
Omar Shrine Moonshiners Arrested in South Carolina - 27/03/08
Buffalo News Editorial on Jesters prostitution Mann Act scandal
New York Governor, David Paterson, a Freemason - More on the Royal
Order of Jesters Mirth Missives story out of Buffalo - 25/03/08
VIDEO: Buffalo TV Report, The Royal Order of Jesters, Watch the Story -
21/03/08
Judge Resigns, Police Chief to Plead Guilty as FBI Investigates Royal
Order of Jesters for Prostitution - 18/03/08
Former State Supreme Court Judge, Police Capt. resign amid F.B.I.
investigation of Royal Order of Jesters prostitution and human trafficking
case - 09/03/08
VIDEO: Member of secretive Shriners insider group pleads guilty in Mann
Act case
Retd. N.Y. Police Capt. guilty plea in Jesters prostitution case
Jesters Exposed - Bilikens Thingy - 15/02/08
Child Died Before Surgery at Shriners Hospital for Children Philadelphia -
14/02/08
Shriners Make SLAPP History? Part: 21 - 11/01/08
Taxes force Arabia Shrine Center to sell - 05/01/08

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Shriners lament takeover of club; Members of Dorchester group say new
leaders harm mission - 29/01/07
U.S.A. - Abu Bekr Shrine White Horse Mounted Patrol holds Installation of
Officers - 15/01/07
U.S.A. - 'East-West Shrine Game' relocates from San Francisco to
Houston - 15/01/07
U.S.A. - Shriners Perfect Storm? Charitable Funds Usage Scandal
Continues - 11/01/07
U.S.A. - Ice Storm halts 13th annual Bedouin Shrine Classic high school
basketball tournament - 13/01/07
Whistleblowers in Court – Shriners: Part 12 - 25/12/2006
"The Minimum of Disclosure to the IRS" Shriners: Part 11 - 12/12/2006
Above the law? Shriner Treasurers' Minutes, Part 10 - 16/11/06
U.S.A. - New York Times Investigates Shriners Bingo Problems - 07/11/06
U.S.A. - Shriners seize affiliates clubhouse over charity bingo funds usage
- 07/11/06
U.S.A. - Former Exec-VP Knew of Crimes, Shriners: Part 9 - 28/10/06
Shriner sends Rant-to-the-Editor over Newspaper coverage - 25/09/2006
Protesters Try to Stop Georgia Shriners Circus - 24/10/06
Shriners file lawsuit against Charity Watch Center as they were engaged
in an active investigation of Shrine financial irregularities using a retired
I.R.S. agent, Shriners: Part 8 - 21/09/06
www.help-page-nonprofit.org
High school students protest Shriners Circus - 18/09/06
It's a circus out there; Georgia Newspaper reports on Shrine Circus
Protest - 17/09/06
L.A. Shrine Auditorium to sell naming rights and try to lure back Oscars
and Emmys - 17/09/06
Pennsylvania Shriners Rodeo Causing a Ruckus - 15/09/06
Latino Concert Canceled, Shrine Temple Accused of Racism - 24/08/06
Concert Promoter Accuses Shriners of Racism and Fraud - 18/08/06
Dwindling Shriners find few to wear John Wayne’s hat - 16/08/06
Unanswered Questions - Shriners Investigation Part 7, by Sandy Frost -
14/08/06
Disclosure and Watchdogs - Shriners: Part 6 - 06/07/06
Follow the Money: Shriners Part 5 - 29/06/06
Florida Bar Investigating Complaint Against Shriners Corporate Attorney -
27/06/06

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Newspaper: Money From Shriner Circuses Goes to Temples, Not
Hospitals - 30/06/86
The FW Middle Chamber
Search Freemasonry Watch
powered by FreeFind
Our MasonStoppers Line
Send us in confidence details of cases where you think
Organized Freemasonry has personally hurt yourself,
family, friends, aquaintances, or community. We would
also appreciate any additional background information,
links, and references on Freemasonry and the Occult.
Help us take a bite out of Freemasonry.
13,361,778 (13/02/07)
FastCounter by bCentral
Date Of Raising
June 24, 6000 A.L.
Save this site. Mirror it, if it goes 404.
X Network Banner Exchange
Truth about Scientology
You’ve heard the controversy. Now Get
The Facts. Watch Online Videos!
Origins of Masonic Lodge
Egyptians, Africans and Masons Learn
The Connection: 2-DVD Set $29