--- Sayfa 2 ---
THE
MYSTIC SHRINE
AN
ILLUSTRATED RITUAL
OF THE
Ancient Arabic Order
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine
REVISED EDITION
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
26 E. Van Buren St., Chicago
J

--- Sayfa 3 ---
By
EZRA
COPYRIGHT, 1921
A. COOK, Publisher
([ncorporated)
PREFACE.
Ezra A. Cook, who founded this publishing busi-
ness in 186~’, was unalterably opposed to secret orders.
While many of our publications reflect his spirit, our
books have been extensively adopted as text books in
conferring the secret work of all standard orders, and
the pub~shers, in continuing their sale, believe they
are filling a much felt want.
In further justification, we submit the following
from the pen of a noted Masonic authority.
This
quotation will naturally apply to treatises upon other
secret orders
“The objection to treatises and disquisitions on
Masonic subjeds, that there is danger through them of
giving too much light to the world without, has not
the slightest, support from experience.
In England, in
France, and in Germany, scarcely any restriction has
been observed by Masonic writers, except as to what
is emphatically esoteric; and yet we do not believe
that the profane world is wiser in those countries than
in our own in respect to the secrets of Freemasonry.
In the face o ~these publications, the world without has
remained as ignorant of the aporrheta of our art, as
if no work had ever been written on the subject, while
the world within—the craft themselves—have been
enlightened and instructed, and their views of Ma-
sonry, (not as a social or charitable society, but as a
philosophy, a science, a religion), have been elevated
and enlarged.
“The truth is that men who are not Masons never
read authentic Masonic works.
They have no interest

--- Sayfa 4 ---
PREFACE.
in the topics discussed, and could not understand them,
from a want of the preparator5~ education which the
Lodge alone can supply.
Therefore, were a writer
even to trench a little on what may be considered as
being really the ‘arcana’ of Masonry, there is no danger
of his thus making an improper revelation to improper
persons.~~
Mackey, Encyc. of freemasOnry, 188~ ed., p. 617.
CHAPTER I.
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ORDEI~.
The Ancient Arabic Order, Nobles of the N{ystic
Shrine, was instituted at Mecca, Arabia, hi the year
5459, or the year of Our Lord 1608.
The ritual was
prepared and issued at Aleppo, Arabia,
by Louis
Maracci, the great Italian translator of Mohammed’s
Alkoran.
The order was revived and established at
Cairo, Egypt, in 5598.
(June 14, 183~’.
Freemasons
have been accustomed to date all of their acts and in-
struments according to the Hebrew Calendar.)
The primary
purpose of the
Ancient
Arabic
Order, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, was the forma-
tion
of an
Arabian
and
Egyptian
Inquisition, or
Vigilance Committee. The order was composed of the
brave and upiight men of the time, who performed
their duties fearlessly.
It is said to have been an or-
ganization much like the Vigilantes of California, who
at the time of the rush to the gold fields, before any
legal government was yet organized there, assumed
the duties of captors, judges, jurors, and executioners
of criminals.
Since the courts of justice are now able to cope
with lawlessness, and vigilance committees are not con-
sidered necessary in modern times, the Ancient Arabic
Order, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, has adopted other
interests.
The Shrine pin, however, is still considered

--- Sayfa 5 ---
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
a badge of true an& honorable manhood, devoted to
high ideals., In various cities ‘of Europe, Temples of
the Mystic ‘Shrine were instituted
some years ago,
and they are thriving charitable and social organiza-
tions.
In 187.1 one of the foreign representatives of the
order brought the ritual to America and placed it in
the hands of Dr. Walter M. Fleming, 33rd degree,
Sovereign Grand Inspector~General, Ancient and Ac-
cepted Scottish
Rite, and
Eminent
Commander of
Columbia ~ommanderyNo.
1, Knights Templar, New
York.
Dr. Fleming, with other 33rd degree Masons,
(including William J. Florence, Edward Eddy, S. C.
Campbell, Oswald Merle D’Aubigne, G. W. Miller,
John A. Moore, William S. Patterson, John W. Sim-
mons and Albert P.
Moriarty) and nearly
all the
Knights Templar of Columbia Commandery No.
1
instituted Mecca Temple No. 1, of the Mystic Shrine
in New York.
Dr. Fleming was unanimously chosen
as Grand Potentate (or presldlng officer).
For several years this Temple remained inactive,
owing to the death of some of the leaders, and the
lack of interest of the others.
[n 1875 W. J. Florence
brought from Europe the Oriental Ritual of the order
as it was worked in foreign countries.
In 1876 he
called together the remaining members of the original
Mecca Temple No. 1.
A committee under his leader-
ship was appointed to draft a constitution and ritual
for the
order in America.
The
constitution was
adopted June 6, t876.
Since Mr. Florence, the chairman of the commit-
tee, and Dr. Fleming, Grand Potentate, were at that
time members of the old buirlesque association known
as the Sons of Malta, a portion of the ritual of that
order was used.
Pa9rt of the work was adapted from
A BRIEF 1-IISTORY OF THE ORDER.
7
the higher degrees of the Rite of Memphis and the
Scottish Rite, and also the Royal Arch and Templar
degrees, York Rite, and it was then decided that only
Masons of the 32nd degree by the Scottish Rite, or
Knights Templar by the York Rite should be eligible
to admission to the order.
The EvEystic Shrine in America is a charitable and
social organization devoted to the welfare of Free-
masonry.
The Imperial Council is
the governing
body, with subordinate branches called Temples. There
are now about one hundred and fifty Temples in the
United States.
One adverse vote or blackball will reject a can-
didate for th~ term of thirteen weeks.
The initiation
fee was originally placed at ten
9 dollars as the minimum
sum, and the dues were not less than two dollars ant.
nually.
These sums are smalkr than the amounts re-
quired by the majority of Temples at the present time.
The Mystic Shrine is called an Arabic Order, but
it is only in a spirit of frolic that Shrin~rs assume the
~‘arbe and role of Arabs.
They do not worship the
Mohammedan Allah, and they do not accept the re-
ligion of Islam.
Shriners are all Masons, believing in
deity, and theyare all liberty-loving Americans.
Organized for fun, the Shrine is called a “play-
ground for Masons”.
Its
principles
are pleasure,
hospitality and jollity, without intemperance, coarse-
ness or rudeness.
It is a mistake to call the Mystic
Shrine the highest degree of Freemasonry.
It
is
not a part of the Masonic Lodge, but it ‘is perhaps the
best loved of all the non-Masonic bodies composed of
Masons.
The brder in the United
States numbers
thousands of members, all enthusiasts at the Shrine
of fraternal affection and good-fellowship.
6

--- Sayfa 6 ---
8
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ORDER.
9
RANK, TITLES AND POSITIONS or OFFICERS; THEIR
COSTU?~IES AND JEWELS.
Illustrious Grand Potentate, first officer, in the
East.
Costume—Velvet purple robe or domino; flowing
sleeves, trimmed with yellow or gold braid, yellow or
gold colored sash; high purple and yellow silk or satin
turban, with crescent of gold and jeweled; jeweled
sceptre with crescent at top.
Jewel of Office—Pyramid, with large, gold sur-
faced sun, with rays and a frowning face, or visage,
in the sun; suspended from left breast.
Illustrious Chief Rabban, second dfficer, in the
West.
Costu~ne—Velvet bright green robe, or domino;
full flowing sleeves, trimmed with puriAe, and broad
purple sash; green and purple turban, with crescent at
front.
Jewel of
Office-Pyramid,
with silver
moon,
faced; suspended at left breast.
Illustrious Assistant Rabban, third officer, in the
South.
Costume-Velvet blue robe,
or
domino; large
flowing sleeves, trimmed with orange; broad orange
sash; blue and orange turban, with crescent in front.
Jewel of Office—A gold-faced pyramid, covered
with silver stars.
Illustrious Most High Prophet and Priest, fourtl~
officer, right of East.
Costume-Robe made of woven metal cloth, gilt
with silver, and covered like damask; flowing sleeves,
and fringed; broad gold and yellow turban, crown
shaped, yellow, gold and black-jeweled; and carries a
crozier.
Jewel of Office—Large gold form of book, or
scroll, with pyramid on one page, in silver, and cres-
cent on the other, suspended about the neck, hanging
on front of breast.
Illustrious Oriental Guide, fifth officer, right of
the East.
Costume—Orange robe, or domino, trimmed with
purple; broad purple sash, belt and sword; orange
and purple turban,
crescent in front;
carries long
Arab staff
or spear, trimmed at spear-head with
orange and purple ribbon.
Jewel of
Office—Pyramid with gold-surfaced,
panther bodied,
female headed
Sphynx,
suspended
from left breast.
Illustrious Treasurer, sixtEi officer, right of East.
Illustrious Recorder, seventh officer, left of East.
Il1ustri~us First Ceremonial Master, eighth offier,
right of West.
Illustrious Second Ceremonial Master, or Stan-
dard-Bearer, ninth officer, left of West.
Illustrious Captain of the Guard, tenth officer,
inside door.
~
Illustrious Outside Guar~1, eleventh officer, out-
side door.
The first seven officers are elected annually, and
the remaining four appointed by the Grand Potentate.
ENTHRONEMENT.
Previous to the enthronement of a
Potentate-
elect, the Imperial Council requires his assent to the
following ordinances, viz.:
1. Do you solemnly vow, upon your honor, that
you will exert your bess endeavors to promote the
true happiness of your brother Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine?
2. That you will endeavor to promote the general

--- Sayfa 7 ---
10
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
good of the order and preserve the solemnity of our
ceremonies with profound respect and reverence?
3. That you will not ~ck~owledge, or have inter-
course with, any Temple which does not work under
constitutional authority, as recognized by the Imperial
Grand Council?
4. That you will ever maintain and support the
authority of the Imperial Grand Council of the United
States, and enforce obedience to its statutes, edicts
and regulations?
Do you submit to all these ordinances, and promise
to observe and practice them faithfully?
CHAPTER II.
Tan MYSTIC SHBINU ILLUSTRATED,
FURNITURR AHD OP~NINQ GnRRMoNI~s.
The Lodge Room is termed the Temple and the
furniture is similar to the Masonic with t’ome additions,
the room being draped with black alpaca or white,
edged with purple and blue.
rURNITURR.
A Canopy or tent in a cart, a Pedestal with Gavel,
large Cymitar across the Pedestal, Altar of Obligation
covered in black, having on it the Bible and the Koran,
the Black Stone or Holy Stoneof black marble, one foot
square or more, and two Crossed Swords; right of East,
Altar of Incense with burning incense of myrrh, etc.;
left of East, Bier and Coffin, each half way between
East and Altar of Obligation; Layer of Water in the
South; Organ, etc. The Working Tools, etc. are a large
Cylinder of Tin or Sheet Iron about 30 feet long, and
3 feet in diameter and constructed so as to telescope to-
gether when not in use; a Galvantic Battery, an Altar
on which is placed a Gold Book with crossed swords on
it; three Gavels;
Block and Tackle; Hoodwinks and
Blindfolders, Boxing gloves; a short Ladder, four pair
j

--- Sayfa 8 ---
12
TH3 MYsTIc 5HEINJ.
of Drawers, three pair of Hand Cuffs; a Bumper, sort of
Dusk six feet high constructed so as to fall to pieces
when required for work, a largefive gallon Sponge, sev-
eral Chairs from three to six feet long a Chinese Gong;
Horse Fiddle and any other instrument on which a hid-
eous noise can be produced; twelve Suits of Uniform
with sabers for Arabic soldiers; several Masks or false
faces, a Rough and Rugged Road made of Ropes etc.;
Bridge of Sighs, three small syringes, Dolman; Sand.
ale; Fire Arms;
Collapse; and
any other uncouth
dress or ~gure to create terror ~r fear to the candidate.
OPRI~I~G CERRMONL~5
Grand Potentate—(One blow with gavel, or scep-
tre), Chief Rabban, that no intetloper or spy may in-
trude upon the ceremonies of our Mystic Shrine, it is
my command that you summon your proper officers and
receive from them our mystic pass; disperse them with
alacrity in and about our Temple, to receive the same
from all within our portals, and communicate to you,
that you may give me the assuraz~ce that no ignoble
here intrudes.
Chief Rab~an—(Two raps,) ~‘irstand Second Core.
monial Masters, approach the Orient.
[They arise and approach the East.]
Have you your Mystic pass?
First and Second Ceremonial .A[astere—Chief Rab-
ban, we have.
Chief Rabl~an.—Approach and give it.
First and Second Ceremonial Masters approach,
and each whispers Mecca.
Chief Rabban.—It is the command of our Grand
Potentate that you forthwith receive the mystic pass
from each and every one in or about the body of the
Temple, and return the name to me, that I may give
II
OP~UNG C.~RaMONIUS.
18.
assurance that no ignoble
spy intrudes upon the oem-
monies of our Mystic Shrine.
First and Second Ceremonial Masters, each on one
side of the Temple, receive the mystic pass, “Mecca.’
in a whisper, and returning, communicate the same to
the Chief Rabban; if one be present without the pass,
the C. M. announces aloud:
“An intruder!”
Member arises, is vouched for, or expelled.
ChiefBal~ban—Grand Potentate, our MysticShrine
is secure and free from jeopardy; there are none present
nave Nobles of our rite.
Grand Potentate —(To assistant Rabban.) Assist-
ant Rabban, inform the Captain of the Guard, and he
his comrade,’ the outer Guard, that our Temple is now
duly and regularly opened for the business and cere-
monies, and both take heed who enters.
Captain of the Guard informs the Outer Guard as
above, and reports (after closing the doori)
Captain of’ the Guard.—Noble Assistant Rabban,
‘our outer Guard stands instructed and under double
guard, picketed by a tried and trusted officer without,
one who knows hi~ duty, vigilantly assisted by the
Captain of the Guard within.
Assistant Rabl3an.—Illustrious Grand Potentate,
our sacred Temple is under a double and trusty Guard.
Grand Potentate.—Tis well.
Since all present are
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine, and our Temple securely
guarded, I proclaim this Temple regularly open for
business and ceremony, and hereby forbid all confusion
and discord that may mar our mystie rites.
Regular business is now in order, as usual in all
such bodies conducted on Parliamentary law and rules.
If an iuitiate presents himself, the Recorder and Treas.
iarer discharge their duties respectively.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
INITIATIoN.
15
CHAPTER III.
THE MYSTIC SHRINE ILLUSTRATED.
INITIATION
Temple is now darkened,
officers in their places,
when Grand Potentate says:
First Ceremonial Master
you will retire to the outer walls and ascertain if any
novice awaits our pleasure.
First Ceremonial Master retires, ascertains, and re-
turning before the Altar, reports after giving the sign.
GRAND HkILJNG SALAAM,
Given by f~cing the Orient,
zeaning forward as if making a low
bow, Arms
raised and
extended
palms out, head thrown forward in a
reverential and beseeching manner,
like cut exceptleaning forward more.
F~r8t Ceremonial ljlaster—Il lus-
trious Grand Potentate, there are
without (one, two or three) Sons of
the Desert who seek admissionto our
Mystic Shrine.
Grand Potentate.—’ ‘Illustrious First and Second
Ceremonial Masters accompanied by our Grand Mar-
shal, you will retire without the Temple and prepare
those novicesfor reception in our Mystic Shrine.”
They salute and retire, and prepare candidates by
taking off the shoes, coat, collar and vest and clothing
them inwhite dominoes and slippers, handcuffed, or tied
at the wrist loosely.
When the candidate (one, two or three) is ready, the
Ceremonial Masters take charge of him.
Three loud
knocks at the outer door of the temple call the Orient-
al G.iide to admit them.
The response is, inside, a
horrible clatter, the rasping of iron rings over an iron
bar and the withdrawal of several large bolts; then the
door opens:
“What is the cause of this clamorous
alarm?
Who dares intrude
upo~i the ceremonies of
our Mystic Shijue?” asks the Oriental Guide.s
First Ceremonial ffaster.—”(one,
two or three)
poor Sons of the Desert, who are weary of the hotsands
and the burning sun of the plains and humbly crave
shelter under the protecting dome of the Temple.”
Oriental Guide.—How may we know them to be
worthy and not of treacherous or ignoble purpose?
First Ceremonial Master—”Their characters having
been
canvassed
and
coming
within
the
bounds
of good report; they have passed the ordeal of the Se-
cret Ballot of our Mystic Shrine unsoiled, andI espouse
their cause ~nd sanction their reception with, the Secret
Pass.”
Oriental Cuide—”Give me the pain.”
First Ceremonial
Master advance,
and whispern:
“Mecca”.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
18.
TEE MYSTIC 5HBINL
DflTIATION.
It
Oriental Guide—”’Tis well; let them enter.”
-
They enter, preceded by Marshall, CeremonialMas-
ters, etc,., conducting them, the guide leading all.
Grand Potentate—(three
raps,
all rise.)
Gong
sounds once, organ music.
They march twice around,
organ or singing or both; the gong sounds when they
pass the East and when they halt there the second time
around.
Grand Potentate strikes once; all are seated.
Candidates halt.
Grand Potentate— “What strange intruders have
we here?
Ourpleasures were most perfect and should
be sacred from this turmoil and display.”
Previous to the entrance of the candidate, the
captain of the Guard
chooses twelve members who
dress like Arabic soldiers with large broad Cymitars,
and are stationed outside; drill, and are ready for duty
when wanted.
The candidates are seized and carried
out by the soldiers in a rough
manner, at which
the
the Oriental Guide supplicatingly answers.
Oriental Guide—”Illustrious Grand Potentate “tis
I who have ushered in (one, two or three) poor Sons of
the Desert, who being weary of the hot sands andburn-
ing sun of the plains, humbly crave that sacred boon to
the weary and thirsty traveler, a cup of water and shel-
ter under the protecting dome of our goodly Temple.
I
do commend them to your favor, having found them
worthy and notof treacherous or ignoble purpose, each
having passed the ordeal of the Secret Ballot of our
Mystic Shrine unsoiled and vouched for by a Noble with
our secret pass.”
Grand Potentate—”Most Noble Guid~e, know you
the penalty of broken faith and do you stand ~forth as
ransom for them all?”
Oriental Guide—’~Illustrious Grand
Potentate, I
do.”
Grand Potentate—”So be it, theh.
Conduct them
once again about our Shrine and to our Most High
Priest,that he may imprint upon the tablets of their
•
memories a knowledge of the duties they do here as-
sume.”
Candidates are conducted around to the Prophet
and Priest,, who is robed and wearing a mitre.
Priest—’~Strangers,are your motives for coming
among us honorable, pure and free from hope of gain
or pride of knowledge?
Candidates—They are.
Priest-—Have you a belief
iii,, the existence of a
Deity, future rewards and punishments?
Candidates—I have.
Priest—Have you a desire to promote justice and
suppress wrong?
Candidates—I have.
Priest-—Have you a due regard for female virtue?
Candidates—I have.
Priest—Are you willing to jeopardize your life, if
need be, to punish thc guilty and protect the innocent
and labor in thecause of justice, truth and common hu-
manity?
Gandidates—I am.
Priest—Have you still a desire to unite with us in
the inseparable bonds of the Mystic Shrine for the pur-
poses to which you have assented?
Candidates—I have.
B~gk Priest—If you have answered in sincerity
and in truth in these replies I can
assure you that no
conflicting sentiment
nor requirement here will mar
your principles noi your duties in the outer world, be
they what they may.
Our alliance or the Rite of our
Mystic Shrine is ancient, honorable, beneiolent and
secret.
It isdevoted to the cause of justice, truth said

--- Sayfa 11 ---
18~
WE MYSTIC SHRINE.
mercy.
It is ancient as the corner-stone of Moham-
med’s Temple of Mecca; as secret as the Moslem that
bound the tribes of Arabia to Allah or their god; as
honorable as the Christian, and the tenets to which it
is dedicated when once assumed cannot be eschewed or
cast aloof.
We know no retrogression; justice is our
escutcheon; charity beyond reason we do not expect;
virtue must be regarded for its peerles worth and
mo-
rality observed for the general good of all. We require
absolute secrecy and desire all our disciples to hold an
interest in our noble cause and a just observance of the
tenets of our faith. Let these preliminary teachings be
deeply graven upon your hearts.
They are priceless
when well observed and attributes
that cannot be
bought with paltry, sordid gold.
By the existence of
Allah and the creed of Mohammed; by
the legendary
sanctity of our Tabernacle at Mecca, we greet you, and
in commemoration of the Arab’s faith in purity and in-
nocenee, we acceptyour answers as sincere, and you will
now be permitted to proceed in the rites and ceremo-
nies of the mystic Shrine.
The Oriental Guide and es-
cort will now conduct you onward, while you will rev-
erently lend an attentive ear to our preparatory service.
Gong, music, verse.
Candidates proceed.
Grand Potentate.—Who is he who hath professed
to have conversed in person with the Supreme and
maketh himself mightiest of his Mohammed, tbe Proph-
et of the Arab’s creed?
Gong, music and short verse.
CkiefRablian.—Who but Mohammed mingled his
religion with his Hourii and said: Are not these the
true sourcesof happiness?
4
U~ITIATIoN.
Gong,music, verse.
Aesiatang .Ra~6an.—Whatshall befall them who
have reflected with abhorrence that which the Prophet
bath revealed?
Wherefore their works shall not avail;
do they not travel through the earth and seethe end of
those who were before them?
Gong, music, verse.
.Pr’iest..—Why do unbelievers indulge themselves
and eat as beasts; shallnot their portion be a torment?
Appeal to the Prophets for the truth.
Gong, music, verse.
Grand Potengate.—To whom shall be meted out
the boiling Waters to drink, that they shall burst their
bowels and shallbe cast into molten lavato be consum-
ed?
The infidels who wait until the last hour of
justice.
Gong, music, verse•
6Aief.Ra6l~an.—Let us be of the number of those
wjio bathe in the fountain of incorruptible waters and
rivers of milk, the taste whereof changeth not, and riv-
ers of wine, pleasant and purifying to those who drink,
and enter into the vineyards where fruits rare and plen-
ty ever abound, and no evil exists.
Gong, music, verse.
Assistant Bab~an.—He who follows the plain dee-
Istation of his dictator will ever avoid those whose
evil works have been dressed for them by the devil and
who follow up their own lusts.
Gong. music, verse.
Priest—There are Moslems among us; there are
others who swerve from propriety; but whosso seeketh
I

--- Sayfa 12 ---
go
THU MYSTIC SHRINE.
Islam earnestly seeks true direction; but those who
swerve from truth and justice shall merit and reap
abundance of chastisement.
Gong1 music, verse.
GrandPotentate—Let us purify one another. There
are two highways to good and evil;attempt not the city
of destruction.
Be ye all possessed of the faculty of
distinguishing and the power of choosing wickedness
and piety.
For the punishment of each will be equal
to the measure of his sin.
Gong and music, until the candidates, arriving at
the East, halt.
Gran,d Potentate—Sons of the Desert, you have
advanced through the preliminary ceremonies of the
Nobility of the Mystic Shrine, as far as it is possible,
unobligated.
Before advancing further in our course
you will be required to assume a most powerful and
binding oath, inseparably uniting yourselfwith us, and
when once taken it can never be retracted or departed
from.
But, I assure you, therein is not contained a
sentiment exceptionable to all that may become an hon-
est, upright man, be his beliefs what they may.
Are
you willing to assume such an obligation?
Candidate8—I am.
Candidates are conductedaround to the West and
to the Altar of Obligation amid sound of gong, drum
and music. Kneel at altar with bound arms leaning upon
the top, heads bowed.
Grand Potentate strikes thrice
to call all around the altar, and then to candidates:
Repeat after me.
DUTIATION.
91
OBLIGATION.
“.—.---,
of my voluntary desire, uninfluenced and
of free accord, do hereassume, without reserve, the Ob-
ligation of the Nobility of the Mystic Shrine, as did
the eFect of the Temple of Mecca, the Moslem and the
Mohammedan.
I do hereby, upon this Bible, and on
the mysterious legend of the Koran, and its dedication
to the Mohammedan faith, promise and swear and vow
on the faith and honor of an upright man,come weal or
woe, adversity or success, that I will never reveal any
•
secret part or portion whatsoever of the ceremonies I
have already received, that are about to be communL
cated to me or that I may hereafter be instructed in, to
any person in the world, except it be to a well-known
member of the Order of Nobles of the Mystic Shrine,
and I, knowing to an absolute certainty that he or they
be truly a~id lawfully such, and of good standing with
such l{obility
That I will not’ke present, aid or coun-
~enance the
conferring of the ‘Order of the Mystic
Shrine upon any person who is not a Masonic ‘Knight
Templar or a thirty-second degree A. and A. Scottish
Rtte Mason in good standing.
I further promise and vow that I will not willfully
write, cut, speak or portray any detail that might be
construed into even a clue to the same, except for’ ofll~
cial Temple work.
Furthermore, I do here registera sacred vow, prom-
ising, should I live to become a member, I will im-
partially cast a black ballotwithout fear or~faVoragainsi~
friend or foe applying for membership in the Nobility
of the Mystic Shrine, whom I believe to be disgraced,

--- Sayfa 13 ---
em
TER itIYSTIC 9flRINE
dishonored, a thief, a perjurer, a murderer, a lunatio, an
idiot or a criminal.
And should I undismayed pass
safely through the Moslem test and be found worthy
the confidence of my fellows albeit I do not actively
espouse the cause, still I do promise to be silent, even
if neutral, and not oppose the purposes of the order.
I furtherpromise and vow that I will obey the laws
and submit to the decrees of the Parent Temple, the
Imperial Grand Council of the United States of Arner-
ica, and that I will not acknowledge, recognize nor be
present in any other body of Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine, claiming to be Superior in authority, nor be
present in any clandestine Temple not holding consti-
tutional authority from the Imperial Grand Council of
the Mystic Shrine.
“I furthermore promise and vow that to the full
measure and of my ability I will never swerve from
justice nor duty. That I will respect virtue; protect the
innocent; assist the distressed; promote the inculcation
of honor and integrity and dispense reasonable charity.
That I will protect and defend the unsullied honor of
any Noble of the Mystic Shrine, when absent, if assail-
ed; and now upon this sacred book, by the sincerity of
a Moslem’s oath I here register this irrevocable vow,
subscribing myself bound thereto as well as binding
myself by the obligation of the prerequsite to this
membership, that of a Knight Templar or that of a
thirty-second degree A. and A, Scottish Rite Mason.
In willful violation whereof may I incur the fearful
penalty of having my eyeballs jierced to the center
INITIATION.
with a three-edged blade, my feet flayed and I be forc-
ed to walk the hot sands upon the sterile’shores of the
Red Sea until the flaming sun shall strike me with livid
plague, and may Allah, the god
of Arab, Moslem and
Mohammedan, the god of our fathers, support me to the
entire fulfillment of the same, Amen
B men Amen.”
Grand Potentctte—”In token of your sincerity sa-
lute the Sacred Book, the Bible,”
Priest—”Unbind the Sons of the Desert. They are
now of noble birth.
The rays of the hot, flaming sun
upon the sterile shores of the Red Sea are strong and
more scathing than the hempen thong.”
Nobles are all seated by the Grand Potentate’s
striking once.
Candidates are ordered to arise and
their wrists are unbound.
Priest—”Our Oriental will now conduct the Sons
of the Desert to our purifying cavern in the South. It is
the fountain of Mecca.
Let them there wash their
hands in innocency, cleansing themselves of the snares
~f sin and vice that may have surrounded them, and let
them be returned tous freefrom the stains of iniquity.”
Conducted to fountain or urn, with music and
versesthen conducted to to the East.
Grand Potentate—’‘My friends, it is with pleasure
that I extend to you the greeting of the Nobles of the
Mystic Shrine and congratulate you upon having thus
far passed the ceremonies of our order; bear bravely up
to the Moslem test and proveyour fidelity to our cause.
Although vague may appear the prospect in our cere-
mony andthe aspect of our purpose, let me assure you

--- Sayfa 14 ---
ININTIATION.
25.
TEE
MY5~IO SRRIN~.
that there isa deep and formidable meaning in it all,
and when you shall have passed unflinching and undis.
maved our final test of your fidelity, nerve and courage
then will you, ii1deed, be worthy to espouse our cause;
but, niark well, should you ultimately decline to enlist
in active part you are still bound by the strongest
ties
to remain neutral.
Remember this and continue faith-
ful to the death; but ere we impart toyou
our formid-
able purpose, you must prove your fidelity and courage,
We do not expect all to join in active part, but those
who do not unite in the task must
applaud our deeds,
or by silence favor not an adverse faction to gain sway.
With thisadmonition I yield you up to our Guide and
his cohorts, who will conduct you to the ante-roQm and
blindfold you, and one by one you will be subjected to
the Moslem test of courage.
And should an unfore-
seen disaster come we are in duty bound to honor and
protect those who are left near and dear to you.
Ere
you depart we bid you God-speed and adieu.
Priest (approaching to East and raising both hands)
—And may Allah protect and support you, that you be
not cast into ~al hotama’ (hell).
Now’ let
our secret
vaults open to their width, that the vapors of damp
stagnation may pass away., Open the passage to the
desert and disperse our trusty Arabs in full array for
the Moslem test.
Away!
Candidates conducted outunder solemn music to
~beprepared for the secoud section.
I
Each candidate is in the custody of an Arabic soldier
They are seated and a drawing of lots takes place if
there is ~morethan one candidate and each takes his
turn for initiation.
They are put throngh blindfolded,
1, 2, and 3 etc. according to number, six being the
highest number actually initiated any one night.
The
others if any are secretly taken aside,
the blinder, re-
moved, and they witness the initiation of the others and
have only to take the obligations themselves.
in the Preparation Room they are told:
A rough
and rugged road is before you, and it is beset with
danger
and
with difficulties.
Your life will be
threatened, and you may loose it.
But remember those
who die in the faith, will be resurrected in glory; there-
fore summon to your aid courage—that, ti~nly
Masonic
qualification, that puts on a fearless and courageous
attitude; that scorns the acts of a coward, who but apes
the conduct of a hero.
‘rherefore suffer yourselves to
be initiated with all the forms and ceremonies of this
an~ient and honorable institution.
Do you all assent
to this trial of fortitude—that truly Masonic qualifi-
cation?
Candidates~—I do.
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 are first led into the room with
hands pinioned behind them, blindfolded: wlien they
are put on the journey ovei the “Hot Sands,” [rugged
road] each with an Arab Soldier on each side, pricking
him with his saber to hurry him along, and when one
falls down, a whack with th’e flat of a saber causes him
t~ arise.
After they have gone around two or three
times, two are selected to escape enemies who they are

--- Sayfa 15 ---
26.
THE MYSTIC
SHRINE.
INITIiTION.
27.
told are upproaching on a mission of murdering all who
have not passed “The Bung Hole Test.”
THE BUNG ROLE TEST.
The large metal cylinder is then produced, stretch-
ed out about 30 feet.
Each candidate is asked if
he was ever called a coward, or turned his back on an
enemy.
[lie is.prompted to say No, I perform all I un-
dertake, and never back down or out.
They are then
led to opposite ends of the big cylinder, caused to en-
ter and are told to hurry up as the enemy is approach-
ing.
The center of the cylinder contains a strong net-
work of cord or wire, preventing either from passing
through.
They meet in the middle of the cylinder and
strive to pass each other while the Arabs pound on the
outside with clubs and swords till they are satisfied,
when they slide an opening in the door and ask if they
wish to go on or back ont.
They of course back down
and out, when they are given a lecture on their assur-
ance, and told never to be too sure of a thing till they
have tried it.
They are one by one taken into another
apartment, often stretched
out on
a plank to rest.
While in this position a small dog or one who can imi-
tate a dog. is caused to give a sharp yelp, just after a
few drops of warm water has been squirted on the can-
didates face, with the remark, “Take that dog out, he
has just pissed in the face of Mr.
—‘ when a gen-
eral laugh takes place and the candidate is shown the
trick.
The ~Burnper~~is next used.
A Box about sixfeet
high; perpendicular on one side, and concave on the
other side.
A ladder is then placed on the concave
‘‘I
aide.
The candidate acends the ladder and isseated on
the top, his legs hanging over the concave side.
Then
he is told to take hold of the end of a large rope, about
two feet long: held up by a small string or thead.
He
is told under no circumstances to let go of the rope,
which he Ilrmly grasps, when the box falls to pieces,
and he is shot down the concave side of the box,thump-
ing his head and bnttocks on a partition that is fixed to
receive him.
He is then conducted to the Grand Po-
tentate, whom he is commanded to approach with hum-
ble and great reverence, stooping very low on his knees,
his head near the
ground,
his
but-
tocks elevated,
where he receives
the”Grand Salaam”
that is a blow on
his buttocks with two pieces of board between which
are placed some torpedoes that explode with a loud re-
~,port when they come together.
This is called the
Grand Salaam or stroke of introduction.
Re is then
introduced to the Grand Potentate, near whom is a
Galvanic Battery, so arranged (under the carpet) that
when the candidate is introduccd~tothe Grand Poten-
tate, he receives a severe electric shock.
All those to
whose lot it fell, in the casting of lots, are allowed to’
come into the room and be seated.
After a social meeting with the members, each of
which pass around the room and are personally intro-
duced to the officers and members present as well as
the Arabian soldiers, two of the best boxers are left
with the candidate talking. when one says to the other,
I will bet you a dollar that I can guess nearer to this
brother’s age than you can.
The other takes the bet.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
28.
THE MYSTIC 5HBINE.
The money is placed in the hands of another Noble.
The
bettor, after they have made some ridiculous
guesses, asks the age of the pelson.
When ~hetells his
age, they get into a quarrel about it; each gives the
other the lie.
A challenge is then given and accepted.
A ring is formed, two of the candidates are chosen a~
seconds, and as soon as the gloves are produced, (large
boxing gloves) the Grand Potentate appears, stops the
fight, fines each of the tigbters One Hundred Dollars,
and declares that tl~e seconds (candidates) must fight it
out for their respective clients.
That is, supposing A
arid B to be the professional boxers, A’s second must
fight with B; and B’s second with A. A ring is formed
and the novice candidates meeting of course with some
skilled Noble, get some rather bard knocks, which the
Nobles and other candidates enjoy.
While the fighting is going on, some Noble makes
complaint that he has been robbud, his pocket picked.
He had previously put a package, or some valuable
article in the pocket or clothes of one of the candi-
dates.
A general search follows; the stolen property is
found on a candidate who has not been exercised much
and he is at once charged wilh the theft, is pitched on
to by two or three of the Nobles, roughly hustled out’
of the room for trial, stripped of his clothing except a
pair of drawers; he is then blindfolded, and after being
led around the room, is
seated on a large sponge fill-
ed with ice water, when the news comes that he has
been forgiven on account of his good character, which
has just been received by telegraph; he is led out and
invested with his former clothes.
While the foregoing is being enacted, candidates
who have escaped the Prize Fight
etc. are conducted
into another room, where they either find several mem—
cers disguised as women, or find them discussing an ex-
J
fl~ITIATIOM.
29.
pected visit of “LadyNobles of the Shrine” or they are
squarely told that there is to be such a visit that even-
ing and a committee may be appointed to receive them
in a proper manner.
Candidate is stripped to shirt, drawers ~nd slippers,
blindfolded, and led around the room several time
when he is halted.
Conductot-.—(to candidate)
This
is• the
place
where our brethren stop to sprinkle the
Devil’s Pas.
with urine.
You will contribute a few dro?s of urine
to commemorate the time and place wher. a I who pas.
here renounce the wiles and evils of the world to wor-
ship at the Shrine of Islam.
Only a few drops will do.
Candidate begins to obey instructio~s when the
blinder is jerked from his eyes and he
beholdN before
him a group disguised as women, with bonneted feces
and capes showing, the rest of their bodies hid by a
screen.
He is allowed to escape from the room amid a
roar of laughter from the on-lookers.
Meanwhile,
and
during
these
scenes,
another
Drama takes place, while the last isgoing on as follows:
Some member goes out and calls the most
timid
candidate aside, or if there be but one, some delay
takes place, and ~heis left alone with the member who
should be his friend.
The member then hastily
en~
deavors to encourage him, ‘and tells ‘him confidentially
that he will not be harmed; that it is all ceremony, etc.
and although organized as a vigilance inquisition a•
broad, in this country it will become entirely a social
order.
Then he gives him the password, signs, etc.,
hastily, in confidence and iii full.
When fully confided, he is discovered by some of-
ficer or member who becomes ‘enraged at the member
so disclosing and they have some sharp words; and the
discoverer declares that he will report him to the Grand
Potentate for censure.
Memberreplies, “Do as you please~J (this all out-
side).
It is then whispered about so that the rest of
•0

--- Sayfa 17 ---
nnruuow.
31
SO
TUE MYsTIC mum,
the candidates can hear it (if more than one) and opin-
ions areexpressed that there will be trouble forsuch ex-
before the candidate sees the end of the ceremo-
nies, etc., or that it was unlawful information given be.
fore the candidate is through the initiation.
(This candidate is then left until last, if there are
more than one).
Meantime the friend (member) who has betrayed
the signs departs to another room, divests himself of
all buthis shirt, pants and shoes.
Whitening his face~
and at proper time bound at the wrists, blackened un-
der the eyes and on the lips to give him a ghastly ap-
pearance.
Keeps out of sight and awaits the coming
ceremony or clothes
himself with a domino and mask
and waits until required (all this should occupy but a
short space of time).
Furthermore, another member, a
slender, fragile, smooth.faced young man (preferable)
is selected to be robed as a woman or Arab girl.
In
white or brown flowing robes, gathered tightly at ~he
waist, bare arms and neck, female wig or striped silk
handkerchief about the head, face painted pale (with
zinc and bismuth), eyebrows blackened ‘and arched,
under eyelids penciled with India ink to disguise as
much as possible.
He is covered with domino and
masked to enterthe Temple and seated with a member
of light weight or spare man,one not too prominent or~
well known.
This member has a domino on, beneath which he
has his coat, vest, etc., and white shirt; under the
shirt
is buckled a wide, soft padded belt fastened around
under the armpits with two straps from front of should-
ers passing over the back and two from the shoulder
blades; behind all four unite in a ring or swivel at the
back of the neck, ready for harmless execution b~y hang-
ing at their proper time.
These disguised members, being all prepared, sit
aside in dominoes and masked in some obscure corner
to await the ceremonies.
Officers and members all rob-
ed and masked.
Arrangement of the temple.
Immediately after
the candidates leave the Temple room a large banquet
‘table is placed in the position of the Altar, provided
with luncheon or banquet (as can best be done, in vari-
ety, according to ability ‘of body); when all is properly
set a frame is placed upon the table, viz.: Fonr square
sticks, forming a post for each corner, about fourteen
inches or more high, with bars from each
corner,
forming a square frame the size of the table.
All this
is above the banquet and the supports a black cloth or
cover, elevated in the center, ostensibly forming a tomb.
The cloth is ornamented with sphynx, urn, crescents,
etc., and should reach to the floor on all sides and
be
fringed; this conceals all the table and banquet.
The Layer, Altar ox Incense and all the furniture
are placed about the Temple on each side.
In the
North a scaffold iserected of two upright and one hori-
zontal joists,painted black and strong enough to sup-
port the weight ofa man whei~ suspended; a hole is in
the center of the horizontal bar and a pulley on the
right corner for a rope to slide over; also a strong peg
on the center of the right perpendicuQar bar or post on
which to fasten the rope after elevating the man, with
a~clasp on the end of the noose in the center to hook
Into the ring at the back of the culprit’s neck.
The gibbet should be high enough to enable the ex-
ecutioners to raise the extremities about three feet from
the floor and leave a space of two or three feet above
the head (all these appointments need cost but a small
sum; the whole equipment has been so arranged as not
to be too expensive, unless extravangant properties are
desired).
A member with white robe, skull and skele-
ton-faced mask stands front of scaffold to adjust noose
at proper time. ‘Two strong members at the side of
scaffold, robed in black, to elevate the culprit.
(Scaf-
fold may have black curtains about it if desired to con.
mal the executioners at the side).

--- Sayfa 18 ---
82
TUB MYsTIC IHUJUN.
Furthermore, a headaman’s block is placed in the
South covered with black.
A headsman with a carved
blade battle ax, clotbed in a scarlet robe gathered at
the waist, with belt and sword, wearing scarlet mask,
presides at the block.
Beside the block lies a false
head on the floor with a black cloth covering it (with a
beard to resemble a member, if desired). A small bowl
or dish should also be in readiness on a stand for the
ceremonies of bleeding.
The gong should be attended by
some competent
member and tbe organist at his post.
All is now’ in
readiness for second section; the rough or Artificial
Desert.
SECOND 5EC~iON.
The rough or Artificial Desert, etc., is then pre~
pared as follows:
The candidates are hoodwiuked and
m stocking feet enter after three loud alarms (violent
blows from the mallet).
At first they proceed one by
one on carpet, then upon a spread of corn husks, then
a strip of stair cover or sheeting strewn with pebbles,
followed by a ladder with close rounds, camp stools
folded and a roller or any rough road most convenient-
ly prepared, o~t through the hallways, etc., according
to facilities.
During this intercourse drum, fife, gong.
organ, rattle, bugle, etc., etc., or any hideous pandemo-
nium instruments desired.
Then persecute and test
candidates as much as they will stand.
Finally they
are returned, one by one, to the Temple again amid the
din, overpowered, laid in a hammock or canvas and
folded in and swung from side to side or thrown up-
ward, carried hastily about and finally placed in some
outer apartment to await the other eandidates.
When
all have passed this ordeal, collect them together in the
ante-room, remove the relics of the desert and at once
place the Temple in order for the last ceremony or
third section.
All being in readiness, officers should be at their
posti, executioners at scaffold, skeleton masked in front
!3WZIATRON.
82
of same, and headsman at the block, etc. ~ In front of
East seven seats are prepared for seven’ men called
“Council of the Inquisition.”
Before the alarm the Potentate calls seven officers
or members for inquisitors to the East.
Potentate oc-
cu~ies the center; two Rabbans (One on each side); the
Priest occupies the chair in the East, wielding the scep-
tre; all masked except Potentate
and Priest; room
quite dark.
Ceremonial Masters are outside with can-
didates, clothed in white robes or dominoes, with shoes
on and not hood~vinked,
THIRD SECTION.
.Firat Ceremonial .Zllhster. — (Outside, strikes thrice
loudly upon the door with a wooden maUet).
Oriental
Guide, inside, returns thealarm, opens the wicket and
says:
Why this clamorous alarm?
C’et-ernonial .Maater.—(One, two or three) candi-
dates pursuing the secrets of the Mystic Shrine.
Oriental Guide—Have the Mystic Pass?
C~remoniql Master—Whispers. Nemesis.
Oriental Guide—Let them enter.
Cbains drawn; gong sounds low: organ music and
door is opened.
Candidates conducted
to front of
~West and seated.
Grand
Potentate—My
friends,
having
passed
through the ordeal of traversing the hot sands of the
desert undismayed, you are now returned for the final
ceremonies. But we find ourselves compelled most unex-
pectedly, to hold a secret inquisition to judge and exe~
cute upon a traitorous element within our Temple.
I
must, however, stay those proceedings to briefly invest
you with the knowledge of our secret~.
If it be your desire to decline th~ active part you
are sacredly’boundto secrecy and silence.
Our mission is to succor the distressed, relieve the
oppressed, protect the innocent and punish the guilty,
equalize station, establish harmony in all creeds, crush
Wmwk~d.
fanaticism and intolerance and perpetuate the welfare

--- Sayfa 19 ---
34
tHU MYSTIC 333133.
Crime is runningrife over the land; our laW. a,,
deemed inadequate for the emergency and we are ex-
ponents of a vigilance inquialtion to promptly execute
and punish the malefactor, the thief, the murderer, the
despoiler of innocence and virtue, the violator of obli-
gation and the desecrator of Masonic vow. Our purpose
is to strike terror to the heart of the criminal class by
bringin~ them speedily and without mercy tothe block
or to the bowtsring of the Mystic Shrine.
“To arrest, judge and execute within the hour, and
thus take the law within our own grasp and summarily
punish the malefactor.
Blood for blood and life for
life, and as our fleet-footed justice overtakes and pun-
ishes the evil-doer, aye, even in the heat of misdeed, it
will be a lesson to those who remain and know not the
fate of the departed.
“The day is not far distant when the name and the
escutcheon of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine will
strike a pallid terror to the wild devouring element of
crime, and the thankful prayers of the unprotected will
attest the justice of our cause.
“1 will now invest you with the salutations,
signs,
grips and passwords of our order.
WORE OF THIRD SECTION.
Captain ofthe Guard.
(discovering a member with
a female in the Temple in disguise, shouts)— “Most
Noble Prophet and High Priest, a spy, an intruder, a
traitor is in the Temple!”
All arise; confusion.
Officers of Ceremonies, Guide
and Priest proceed to the scene•
Captain of the Guard.—”Most ~ oble Priest, I have
butnow discovered an intruder accompanied by a woman
both without Secret Pass have gained admission into
Temple.”
Pointed outand mask removed:
Priest—”By our faith, Nobles, we are betrayed!”
Both are seized by the Oriental Guide and Marshal
and surrounded by Inquisitors, exclaiming:
“To the executionerwith them!”
Iite~eat.—Bold! stand all apart; disrobe our mant~q
INITIhTION.
85
from that female form;bind and hold her fast.”
Domino and hood taken of and the woman stands
held fast, robed in white anddismayed; bare arms and
neck.
Potentate (pointing to male member) .—“Strip and
hang that spywithout delay.”
Officers roughly strip member to shirt and pants (he
is previously painted pale and haggard and is prepared
for execution as before directed.
Potentae—”Stranger, have you no defense? If not,
you must meet the death of a spy-”
Culprit shakes his head (No.)
Pocentate—”Then let the culprit be executed.”
He is hurried to the scaffold; the executioner
in
skeleton mask, adjusts tbe noose.
He has a loose ope
then placed about the neck (to appear real)~
Priest (kneels before the gallows)—”Thus do we
yield up thy life forour own security and may justice,
peace and mercy abide with thee.”
Executioner places on the black cap; Priest arises
and holds up handkerchief and drops it; gong sounds,
and the victim is suspended in the air.
He struggles
an instant and hangs silent and apparently lifeless.
Potentate—”Thus perish all our enemies.
Noble
Guide, seat that miscreant woman by the block and cut
a deep crescentupon her naked breast. We ‘iannot take
her life,”
She swoons and falls in chair orarms.
Oriental Guide—’~Illustrious Grand Potentate, she
has already swooned.”
Potentate—”The better still; she will not know her
pains.
Cut the crescent on her breast and drag her
from our Temple.
She’ll not forget the Nobles of the
Mystic Shrine.”
She is dragged in a chair to the the block, a bowl
brought, her breast bared and a knife is seen in the offi-
cer’s hand.
The bowl isheld in front and an officer
from behind holds under the arm a rubber bulb with
item, that holds a pint~ of red wine; a cut, a groan
and the blood (wine) flows into the bowL
The bowl.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
30
fUR MYSTIC IHUIND
mt onthe block, a blood-stained towel is also throw.
down, and she is borne from the Temple in the chair to
an outer chamber.
.l+icat(taking up the bowl)—Most Noble Council of
the Inquisition, now, in testimony of the justice of Qur
cause, let us in this maiden’s blood seal the alliance of
our bond of secrecy and silence.
And let this day’s
bloodywork in the deepest recesses of every Noble’s
heart be buried~
(Priest and seven Inquisitors drink.)
Curtain in front of scaffold may be drawn and the
executed let down for rest-
The officer who detected
the member exposing the work now arises hastily (the
member being all prepared ~without.)
Priesg—Illustrious Grand Potentate, I now demand
censure or punishment upon a member (mentioning
name) upon whose case this Inquisitor’s Tribunal has
deliberated for the crime of treason in our midst, expos-
ing our secrets to a friend and candidate within our
ve~ Temple.”
him be brought before us.”
Second culprit brought in, stripped (as described) to
shirt and pants.
Potentate—” Sir, you have been openly accused of
treason and betrayal of our faith, not only here but
without our Temple’s walls.
The VigilanceInquisition
have tried, judged and sentenced you; what is your de-
fense ?“
Oriental Guide—”Grand Potentate and Inquisitors
of our Council, let me appeal to this tribunal to temper
justice with mercy, and in slight extenuation of this
crime,
let me offer this defense:
Being loose of
tongue when plied with wine and most earnestly ‘im-
portuned by his beat beloved friend, he, in part, did
yeld, all in good nature, but intent on friendship and
and not meaning harm, frivolously related who and
what we were and the object of our cause.
And this
his fri~nd and companion, now comes to beard us in
our lair and exonerate himself by the assumption of our
vows.
Therefore, [do opine, their punishment should
be equal and each to sasume the wrong or let the nova
I!~ITIATX0N.
‘
37
ice assume it all, for ‘tis monstrous to leave his friend,
to perish for a crime prompted by himself,,”
Potentate (to candidate)—”Stranger Knight thus ac-
cused, arise.
What say you to this grave charge?”
Candidate answers (no matter what).
Culprit member—”By my Moslem oath, Illustrious
,G~and Potentate, all that has been said by our Noble
Guide is true.
That I have erred I cannot deny, but
all that I in confidence imparted to him I am informed
that he has loosely brawled about, hence I must mffer
for his crime.”
Potentate—’‘Hold, enough! Most High Prophet and
Priest, to ydu do I appeal for judement.
Although
our council has before decided, still do I appeal toyou.”
Priest (advancing on the floor)—’ ‘Grand Potentate
and Council of Inquisitors, our cause is sorely tried,
our Temple and our Shrine in jeopardy, the crescent
turns perpendicular, point and point, and spills its mys-
tic blood; the hourii weep and
Justh~e drops
her
scale, for by their fault spies have fallen in our midst.
Our safety commands judgement on them both.
Let
the first in fault and hisfellow go tothe block together.
All the Inquisitors arise and exclaim: “To the block!
to the headsman!”
~First and second Ceremonial Masters seize culprit
member and conduct him to the block, then seize candi-
date and conduct him to th~ West.
Take offhis robe,
coat, collar, etc., except pants and shirt, same as cuL-
prit member, and bind his hands.
Potentate—” Let the the traitor suffer first.”
Culprit is hurried to the block, blindfolded and made
to kneel; head on block (afalse wax or carved head lies
beside block, with black cloth over it, out of sight).
Priest (holding up sceptre)—”And now may justice.
peace and mercy abide with you.
Strike!”
~he axe
falls, culprit tumbles on floor, executioner stoops, lifts
black cloth from false head and covers head of culprit,
~iezes false head by hair, raisesit to view and exclaims:
“Nemesis!”
Candidate is hoodwinked and made to appoach tbe

--- Sayfa 21 ---
38
fUR MYSTIC SNRINU.
blockand la~ him head upon it.
.P.*aC—”~Iold! Executioner,
mark this
strangerPe
neckwith the scimetar, but do not slay him.”
The headsman slaps the candidate on the neck with a
damp towel and he is at once taken by force and pinc.
ed in the hammock or canvas, carried and placed in a
•
coflin at the East end of the catafalque, while the
cul-
prit and the head are borne into an outer room. Officers
all return.
Potentate—’‘Thus doth the evil doer and the malefac-
tor meet with ‘Nemesis’ at the Inquisition of Mystic
Shrine and itnow becomes our duty to deposit the result
•
of our virgilance in the tomb, isolated from the eyes of
the meddling world, a fit abiding place for the remains
of the unfaithful.
Most Noble Oriental Guide, lest the
secret clasp of our Mystic Catafalque be permaturely
known to our novices, let them be again hoodwinked,
that their hearts may be taught secrecy and their
tongues silence ere they are entrusted with the secrets
of the Mystic Shrine.”
Candidates all blindfolded.
The coffin isthen stood
on end or placed at an
angle with head on chair, at
end of table or tomb, toward the East; the block and
executioner placed at the West side.
The culPrit a-
gain elevated by the noose, skeleton executionei~ at his
side; the woman seated at the North; officers and mem-
bers gathered around table in tableaux and lights turned
up; black cloth and frame removed from banquettable
andall is in readiness for the finale.
Grand Potentatc—”Now let us rejoice that iniquity
has lain her proud idol in thc dust and that justice has
triumphed over sin.
And ever thus let our light so
shine before men that they may
behold our good
works.”
Gong; hoodwinks removed; music and general jubilee
at banquet.
Candidate is provided and eats and drinks
from coffin, the culprit also from the gallows, as also the
female, still in costume, at the North,etc., etc.
After general banquetthe meeting is closed an a for.
malmanner.
INITIATIONS.
39
After a genernl banquet but before the meeting is
formally closed, can~1idates are required to sign name,
occupation, residence and age when they are instructed
in the secret work as follows:
TEE SALUTE.
Grasp
left
hands,
shake,
and
raise right hand to side of the face
as if to brush off a fly.
GRAND HAILING SALAA~d,
The sign is given by facing the
Orient, leaning forward as if mak-
ing a low bow, arms raised and ex-
tended palms out, head thrown for-
ward in a reverential and beseech-
ing manner, body bent more than
shown in ci~it

--- Sayfa 22 ---
40
THE MYSTIC SHRINE.
This sign must be given on entering and retiring
•
Word of ‘entrance given to OuterGuardian. ‘Mecca.
Word
of
entrance given
t~ Inside Guardian.’
Nemesis.
THE ]6I~D.
N. B.
In difl!erent places, this, lA worked in, dif
ferent ways, and not always according to the time num
ber of car~didates etc. given here,
This is the Stand
~d
Work.
‘I
Publisher’s Announcement
Ezra A. Cook, who founded this publishing business in 186’?.
was unalterably opposed to secret orders.
While many of our
publications reflect his spirit, our books have been extensively
adopted as text books in conferring the secret work of all
standard orders, and the publishers, in continuing their sale,
believe they are filling a much felt want
In further justification, we submit the following from tbe
pen of a’ noted Masonic authority.
This quotation will natur-
ally apply to treatises upon other secret orders:—
“The objection to treatises and diaciuisitiona
on Masonic
subjects, that there is danger through them of giving too
much light to the world without, has not the slightest support
from experience.
In England, in France, and in Germany,
scarcely any restriction has been observed by Masonic writers,
except as to what is emphatically esoteric; and yet we do not
believe that the profane world is wiser in those countries than
in our own in respect to the secrets of Freemasonry.
In the
f~ace of these publications, the world without baa remained as
ignorant of the aporrheta of our art, as if no work had ever
been written on the subject, while the world within—the Craft
tbem~elves—have
been
enlightened
and
instructed,
and
theit
~views of Masonry (not as a social or charitable society, but
as a philosophy, a science, a religion), have been elevated and
enlarged.
The truth is that men who are not Masons never read au-
thentic Masonic works.
They have no interest in the topica
discussed, and could not und~rstand them, from a want of
the preparatory education which the Lodge alone can supply.
Therefore, were a writer even to trench a little on what may
be considered as being really the ‘arcana’ of Masoni~y, there
is no danger of his thus making an improper revelation to
improper persons.”—Mackey, Ency. of Freemasonry, 1887 ed.,
j~. 617.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 23 ---
ThE FORESTERS ILLUSTFtATED.
The Complete
Illustrated
Ritual
with
Installation
Cere-
monies.
Paper cover, 85 cents
TEMPLE OF DONOR ThLUSTBATED.
A full and complete illustrated
ritual of “The Templars
of
Honor
and
Temperance,”’
commonly
called
the
Temple
of Honor.
An historical sketch of the order and an analysis
of its character.
A complete exposition of the subordinate
Tempie, and the degrees of Love, Purity and Fidelity, by a
Templar of Fidelity and Past Worthy Chief Templar.
Paper covers, price 85 cents
GOOD TEMPLARISM ThLUSTIIATED.
A full and accurate exposition o~ the degrees of the Lodge.
Temple
and Council, with
engravings
showing
the signs,
grips, etc.
Paper covers, 88 cefltl
RITUAL KNIGHTS OF LABOR ILLUSTRATED.
The complete illustrated Ritual of the Order, Including the
“Unwritten Work,” and ~a brief history of the order; also an
article on Anarchism by John V. Farweli, etc.
Paper covers, 88 cents
UMTED SONS OF INDUSTRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of the secret pass-
words, etc.
Paper covers, price<25 cent.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION—HOW TO ORDER.
Always remit the full amount for your order by Bank Draft
on Chicago or New York Post-office or Express Money Order:
or enclose currency or stamps in a Registered Letter (do not
send Coin if you can avoid it).
Please do not send personal
checks; if sent, add 10 cents for exchange.
Small orders will be sent by Eegistered Mail or Insured
Parcel Post if 10 cents extra is remitted with
order, and
delivery of books, in good order, is then Guaranteed.
State Einding and Price of Each book ordered.
Terms;
Cash With Order.
Write your name and post-office address Plain3~v and In
Pull, giving street addressl
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago
KNIGHTS of
COLUMBUS
Illustrated
A COMPLETE RITUAL AND HiSTORY OF THE FIRST
THREE
DEGREES, INCLUDING
ALL
SECRET
“WORK”, FULLY ILLUSTRATED, BY
A FORMER MEMBER OF THE
ORDER.
This work gives the proper position of each officer dur-
ing the meetings,
the proper manner of conducting
the
business
of the Knights
of Columbus, order of opening
and closing of the Lodge, dress of candidates, ceremony of
initiation;
giving the signs, grips, pass words, eta.
Con-
venient pocket size.
Paper Covers, $0.78; Cloth Covers, $1.00
Sent postpaid oz~ receipt of price.
Liberal terms to agents.
THE KLAN INSIDE OUT
By
Marion
Monteval.
The
only
authentic
story
ever
written by one who is familiar with the KIu Klux Klan.
The book is divided into four subdivisions,
and the follow’
ing subjects are well represented.
The Origin of the Klan,
Conquests of Masonic Fraternity
by the Klan, The Klan
Conquests of the Church, Story of Mr. Rouge, etc., etc.
A book of sensational revelations,
startling
disclosures,
of political machinations, intrigues and corruption,—shock-
ing exposures of Klan practices.
199 pages bound In heavy ‘wrappers, Postpaid7 $1.00
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Miscellaneous Masonic
FINf~JEY ON MASONRY.
The
character, claims and practical
workings of Free-
masonry.
By President Charles G. Finney. of Oberlin Col-
lege.
President Finney was a “bright Mason” but left the
Lodge when he became a Christian.
This book has opened
the eyes of multitudes.
Cloth. $1.25; paper cover. 75 ce~tu
ECOE ORIENTI.
The complete Standard Ritual
of the First
Three Ma-
sonic
Degrees
in Cypher, with
complete Floor Charts of
IniI.iating. Passing and Raising a Candidate.
Special edi-
tions give exact “work” of each State.
Poc~et size, Full
Roan. Flap
p.80
Cabala—Standard cypher 4th to 7th degrees
MO
Council of the Orient, cypher 8th to 10th degrees
0.80
Knight. of the Orient, cypher 11th to 18th degrees
9.50
Kichardaca’s Monitor of Preemasonry’, paper
75 cents;
cloth
1.35
Lester’s Look to the East, cloth
2.00
King Solomon and His Pollowers, Leather
1.50
A.maranth, Kite of Adoption
1.25
Duncan’s Masonic R.itual and Monitor, cloth
0.50
Mackey’s Masonic Ritualist, tuck
3.00
Suckles’ Masonic Monitor, tuck
0,25
Masonic Pacts
for Masons
50
Modern Secret Societies, filanchard
1.98
Robert’s Ritual. Knights of Pytbias, paper. 60 cents; cloth 1.00
HOSTiLITY OF THE CHURCH OF ROME TO
FREEMASONRY.
The causes investigated; an inquiry into Freemasonry as it
was and is; and criticism as to how far the Order fulfills its
functions.
Paper covers, 26 pages.
Price. 19 .80
MISCELLANEOUS BOOKS OF INTEREST
LAW OF FINANCIAL SUCCESS.
fly Edward E. fleals
The author of this popular book
demonstrates
scientifically that financial success results not
from luck, chance or accident but from the operation of a
great LAW; this great law, when understood, can be applied
practically and will benefit all who desire Financial Success.
Eound in cloth
80.75
Paper
0.80
POPULAR RECITATIONS.
A selection of over 100 dramatic, pathetic and humorous
recitations, suitable
for every occasion.
Contains man
old
favorites, such as “The Face on the flar-Room Floor”,”~aseY
at the nat”, etc.
92 pages, wrappers
~.
. .$0.25
MILLS’ UNWERSAL LETTER WRITER.
An up-to-date treatise
on letter writing.
Contains choice
specimens of letters on all subjects, business or social: Appli-
cations
for
Employment,
Recommendations,
Introductions,
Invitations, Letters of Love, Congratulation, Condolence, and
the art of Secret Writing (Cipher).
118 pages, pictorIal cover
$0.85
COMPLETE PALMISTRY.
By
ma
O’xenford,, Honorary
Secretary
of
the
London
Cheriological
Society,
and
A.
Aipheus,
Secretary
of’ the
Astrological Society of England.
Here we have the simplest
presentation
of the Science of Palmistry.
All of the dis.’
coveries,
investigations
and
researches
of
centuries
arc
summed up in t1~is practical treatment on ?almistry.
There
is no trait, no characteristic, no inherited tendency that is
not marked on the palm of the hand
Character can be traced
with unerring accuracy by following the principles and In-
structions laid down in this book.
115 pages, fully iLlustrated, paper covers
$0.85
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 25 ---
ELKS
AN AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF THE BENEVOLENT AND
PROTECTIVE ORDER OF ELKS.
By Chas. Edward Ellis
Royal 8vo., decorated cloth, gilt top, 473 pages, colored
frontispiece, numerous
portraits.
Originally published at
$5.00.
$300
KU KLUX KLAN
secrets exposed
The publication of the hour!
Complete story of the Masked Riders of the Night.
Their
oath of blood and death.
Bound in pictorial wrapper.
Prepaid 25c.
ROBERTS’ RUL’~S OF ORDER
ke’vised for Deliberative Assemblies.
Part I Rules of Order; Part 2 Organization and Conduct
of Business—How
business
is
conducted
in
deliberation
assemblies, lodges, clubs, etc.
323 pages.
Bound In clotL
Price, Postpaid, $1.50
‘F
‘KNIGHT TEMPL.’AIUSM ILLUSTRATED.
A full illustrated ritual of the six degrees of the Council
and
Commandery,
comprising
the
degrees of Royal
Mas-
ter, Select Master.
Super-Excellent
Master,
Knight of the
Red Cross, Knight Templar and Knight of Malta.
A book
of 341 pages.
Paper covers, $1.95; Cloth, $8.00
THE MYSTIC SHRINE ILLUSTRATED.
Revised and enlarged edition.
A cornplete illustrated Ritual
of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine,
This is a side Masonic
degree conferred only on Knights Templar and on Thirty-two
degree Masons.
Paper cover, 40 cents; Cloth, 75 cents;. Abridged Edition,
Paper cover, 25 cents
ADOPTIVE MASONRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete ritual of the live Eastern Star or
Ladies’ Degrees, by
Thomas Lowe. comprising
the degrees
of Jephtha’s
Daughter
Ruth, Esther,
Martha
and Electa,
and known as the Daugiater’s Degree, Widow’s Degree, Wife’s
Degree, Sister’s Degree and the Benevolent Degree.
Paper cover, 60 cents; Cloth, 75 cents
MASONIC OATHS.
By Edmond Ronayne, Past Master of ECeystone Lodge, No.
639, Chicago, 183 pages.
Paper cover, price 50 cents.
A masterly discussion of the Oaths of the Masonic Lodge,
iliustrating every sign, grip and ceremony of the Masonic
‘4,Lodge.
This
work is highly
commended
by
leading
lec-
turers as furnishing the best arguments on the character 01
Masonic obligations of any book in print.
FREE MASONRY AT A GLANCE.
By Edmond
Ronayne, Past
Master
~eystone
Lodge, No.
639, Chicago, 32 pages.
Price, postpaid
15 cents.
It illus-
trates every sign, grip and ceremony of the first three degrees,
and gives a brief explanation of each.
FREEMASONRY EXPOSED.
By
Captain William
iAorgan.
The genuine
old Morgan
book
republished
with
engravings
showing the
Lodge-
room,
dress of candidates,
signs, due guards
grips, etc
Also
portrait of the author and engraving
o~ the
monu~
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(incorporatedl
1350 No. Clark St.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago
Chicago

--- Sayfa 26 ---
mont erected to his memory at Batavia, N. Y., in 1882, by
over two thousand contributors.
Paper cover, 86 cents; Cloth. 75 eents.
CONFESSION OF TIlE MURDER OF MORGAN.
of
this Confession Henry L. Valance says that he was one
the three chosen by lot to drown Capt. Win. Morgan in
the Niagara River for exposing P’ree Masonry.
Paper cover, 36 centm deli
HISTORY OF THE ABDUCTION AND MURDER OF
“Capt. Win. Morgan.”
As prepared by seven committees
of citizens. appointed to ascertain the fate of Morgan.
This
book contains indisputable legal ,~vidence that P’ree Masons
abducted and murdered Win, Morgan, for no other offense
than the revelation of Masonry.
SYMBOLISM OR MYSTIC MASONRY,
and the Greater Mysteries of Antiquity.
PuI* 8
outs
By J. D Buck, M. D.
(This Is the most popular work ever
written
on the subject of Masonic
Symbolism.
Outlines the
Philosophy of Masonry and explains
many of the Symbols.)
“Symbolism”
throws a great light upon the hidden meaning
and teachings of Masonic emblems.
No officer or student of
Masonry can afford
to
be without
it.
Every
page
full of
wonders to the Masons.
“Symbolism,” a large, handsomely bound book, deals with
many Masonic symbols and emblems, and more especially the
“Playthings”
of Masonry.
Profusely
illustrated.
Chicago,
1925.
Price, Post Paid, $4.00
THE COMPASS AND
SQUARE WITH SYMBOLISM.
An interesting book devoted to the lost meanings of the
traditional
symbols of
Masonry.
Dedicated to woman’s
attainment of the Mystic and Higher Knowledge.
112 pages, bound in paper with gold stamping, $1.00.
SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.
(TWO BOOKSIN ONE.)
This rare
and wonderful book has been
translated
with
exnct
copies of over
One Hundred and
Twenty-five Seals,
signs,
Emblems,
etc.,
used
by
Moses,
Aaron,
Israelites.
Egyptians, etc., in their astounding magical and other arts,
including
the period of time covered
by the
Old and New
Testaments.
This
book
will
prove
a Ireasure-house
of
knowledge
for
those who desire to delve into antiquity.
128 pages, 125 illustrations, wrappers
$0.50
EGYPTIAN SECRETS.
By Albertus Magnus
White and Black Art for Man and
Beast,
the
book
of Nature
and
the Hidden
Secrets
and
Mysteries
of Life
Unveiled, being
the
E’orbidden
lCnowledge
of Ancient Philosophers,
‘I’ranslated from the Original German
end now published
in one volume
160 pages, ilinstrated,
paper covers
$0.50
ALT BABA’S FORTUNE TELLER.
A fortune
teller
With the science of Moses
and questions
and answers.
The Mystic Circle alone
In this book is worth
the price asked for It.
The contents are so precise and clear
that a child could understand
the interpretations
of the ques-
tions and answers.
Fortune
telling by motes on any part of
the human
frame;
by the hour of the day, week or month,
dice, dominoes,
cards,
tea aiid
coffee grounds,
the features,
the hair; what your future husband or wife will have, to see
your
future
husband,
dumb cake;
fortelling
future
events,
~ lucky articles
and animals,
and
alt
other
welt-known
tests
uled by the best professionals.
85 pages, pictorial
cover
$0.25
ALl BABA’S DREAM BOOK.
Contains an alphabetical
list of dreams
on every subject,
including the lucky numbers.
A thorough
and complete
explanation
of dreams and what
they mean, with
Policy Player’s Numbers
appended
to eacn
definition.
85 pages, pictorial
cover
$0.25
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
EZRA A. COOK? Publisher
(Inc
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 27 ---
THE FORESTERS ILLUSTRATED.
The Complete
Illustrated
Ritual
with
Installation
Cers-
monies.
Paper cover, 88 cents
TEMPLE OF HONOR ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of “The Temptara
of Honor and
Temperance,
commonly
called
the Temple
of Honor.
An historical sketch of the order and an analysis
of its character.
A complete exposition of the subordinate
Temple, and the degrees of Love, Purity
and Fidelity, by a
Templar of Fidelity and Past Wortby Chief Templar.
Paper covers, price 88 eent¶
GOOD TEMPLARISM ILLUSTRATED.
A full and accurate exposition of the degrees of the Lodge,
Tempte
and Council. with
engravings
showing
the
signs,
grips, etc.
Paper covers, 88 cents.
RITUAL KNIGHTS OF LABOR ILLUSTRATED.
The complete illustrated Ritual of the Order, including the
“Unwritten Work,” and a brief history of the order; also an
article on Anarchism by John V. Farwell, etc.
Paper covers, 85 cents,
UNITED SONS OF INDUSTRY ILLUSTRATED.
A full and complete illustrated ritual of the secret pass-
~words,etc.
Paper oovers, price 28 cents.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION—floW TO ORDER.
Always remit the full amount for your order by Bank Dr&ft
on Chicago or New York Post-office or Express Money Order:
or enclose currency or stamps in a Registered Letter (do not
send Coin if you can avoid it).
Please do not send personal
checks; if sent, add 10 cents for exchange.
Small orders will be sent by Segistered Xa.fl or Inenred
Parcel Post
if
10 cents
extra
is
remitted
with
order, and
delivery of books, in good order, is then Guaranteed.
State Rinding and Price of Itach book ordered.
Terms:
Cash With Order.
Write your name and post-office address PlaSzll
and In
Pull, giving street address.
Other Secret Society
Rituals
REVISED KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS ILLUSTRATED.
By a
Past. Chancellor.
A
full
illustrated
exposition
ef
the three ranks
of the order,
with
the addition
of the
“Amended,
Perfected
and
Amplified
Third
Rank.”
An
exact copy of the Official Ritual “adopted by the Supreme
Lodge, August
29,
1802,
P. P. XXIX.”
With the
secret
work
added.
The
lodge-room,
signs,
counter-signs,
grips,
etc., are shown by engravings.
Cloth, $1.90; Paper, 80 cents
REVISED RITUAL UNIFORM RANK. K. OF P.
Exact Copy of the Official Ritual Uniform Rank, Knights
of Pythias,
authorized by Supreme Lodge Knights
of Pythias
of the World. with Secret Work added.
Fully illustrated.
Paper cover, 88 cents.
KNIGHTS OF’ THE ORIENT ILLUSTRATED.
The full Illustrated Ritual of Ancient Order of the Orient.
or the Oriental degree.
This is a side degree, conferred mostly
in Knights of Pythias Lodges.
Paper oover, price 56 cents
SECRET SOCIETIES ILLUSTRATED.
Containing the signs, grips, pass-words, emblems, etc., of
Free Masonry (Blue Lo~ge to the Fourteenth degree of the
York Rite), Adoptive Masonry, Revised Odd-Fellowship, Good
Templarism, the Temple of Honor, the United Sons of In-
dustry, Knights of Pythias and the Grange, with affidavits,
etc.
Over 250 cuts~ 99 pages.
Paper covers, 85 cents each.
MODERN WOODMEN OF AMERICA ILLUSTRATED.
Complete Revised Official Ritual of the Beneficiary and E’ra-
ternal
Degrees,
with
Unwritten
or Secret
Work,
[natalla-
tion, Funeral Ceremonies, Odes and Hymns.
Paper covers, priee 48 cents,
RED MEN ILLUSTRATED.
The complete Illustrated Ritual of the Improved Order of
Red Men, comprising the Adoption Degree, Hunter’s Degree,
Warrior’s Degree, and Chief’s Degree, with the Odes, etc.
Cloth, 75 cents; Paper cover, 45 cents.
KNIGHTS OF TIlE MACCABEES ILLUSTRATED.
Complete
Illustrated
Ritual
of
Order,
with
Unwritten
Work.
Paper covers, price 45 cents.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago

--- Sayfa 28 ---
ELKS
AN AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF THE BENEVOLENT AND
PROTECTIVE ORDER OF ELKS.
By Chas. Edward Ellis
Royal 8vo., decorated cloth, gilt top, 473 pages, colored
frontispiece, numerous
portraits.
Originally publisbed at
$5.00.
$3.00
KU KLUX KLAN
secrets exposed
The publication~ of the hour 1
Complete story of the Masked Riders of the Night.
Their
oath of blood and death.
Bound in pictorial wrapper.
Prepaid 25c.
THE COMPASS AND SQUARE WITh
SYMBOLISM
An interesting book devoted to the lost meanings of the
traditional
symbols
of
Masonry.
Dedicated to
woman’s
attainment of the Mystic and Higher Knowledge.
112 pages, bound in paper with gold stamping, $1.00.
EZRA A. COOK, Publisher
(Incorporated)
1350 No. Clark St.
Chicago