--- Sayfa 1 ---
5
PERCEPTIONS, Autumn 2011, Volume XVI, Number 3, pp. 5-23.
İbrahim KALIN*
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
Introduction
The
rapid
transformation
of
Turkey’s internal and external dynamics
manifests itself in a wide range of
fields and presents new risks and
opportunities. Reconnecting with its
history and geography, Turkey ascribes
strategic value to time and place in a
globalized world, and is leaving behind
the one-dimensional and reductionist
perspectives of the Cold War era. From
foreign policy, economy and public
policy to education, media, arts and
sciences, Turkey’s newly emerging actors
position themselves as active players
demanding the global transformation
of centre-periphery relations in order to
create a more democratic and fair world-
system.
Political legitimacy has become an
integral part of international relations
in the 21st century. It is impossible to
implement a policy that does not stand
on legitimate grounds in a globalized
system. In cases where there is lack of
legitimacy, crises are inevitable and the
cost is often too high. International
public opinion has become a key point
Abstract
Turkey’s soft power capacity comes from
its history, culture and geography. Rather
than seeing them as obstacles or burdens, the
Turks are now turning them into strategic
assets in both domestic and foreign policy. The
new Turkish public diplomacy is building on
Turkey’s expanding soft power in the Balkans,
the Middle East and the Caucasus. As Turkey
engages new regions and emerging actors as
well as continues relations with its old allies, it
develops new capacities for the various elements
of soft power and strategic communication in
regional and global contexts. The new Turkey
that is emerging is also creating a new Turkish
narrative with multiple dimensions and faces.
The task of the new Turkish public diplomacy
is to tell the story of the new Turkey to a wide
ranging audience across the globe. As Turkey
overcomes its old fears and builds a new identity
for itself, the process of change transforming the
country will have a deep impact on Turkish
domestic and foreign policy.
Key Words
Public diplomacy, soft power, Turkish
foreign policy, Office of Public Diplomacy,
smart power.
*	 Associate Professor İbrahim Kalın is Chief
Advisor to Prime Minister, Turkey. The views in
this article are the author’s personal evaluations.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
İbrahim Kalın
6
of reference for countries to define
and implement their foreign policy.
The legitimacy crisis of modernity,
to a large degree, stemmed from the
attitude of placing oneself at the centre
and failing to provide any convincing
explanations for doing so. Today one of
the legitimacy problems of the global
system is the lack of a consensus as to its
priorities and methods by the majority
of the world community. The foremost
condition for legitimacy is a fair sharing
of resources; and this also applies to the
international system. The legitimacy
crisis of the global system can only end
if the world’s economic, political and
cultural resources are shared fairly, and
ethnocentric hierarchies are overcome.
The
growing
relationships
of
interdependency necessitated by the
global economic system, the rising cost of
centrally controlling the global political
system and the experience of multiple
modernities affect national and regional
dynamics and provide opportunities
for the formation of new patterns of
relationship. The state of “chaotic order”
emerging after September 11 makes it
possible for centrifugal forces to influence
regional systems. Such new actors as
international courts, media, public
opinion, human rights organizations
and non-governmental organizations
are being added to the main actors of
the Cold War era, and this forces the
global system to be more dynamic,
multidimensional and less controllable.
One of the most important results
of this dizzying chain of developments
is the overcoming of the Eurocentric
notions of history and society. The
ruptures of modernity within Western
civilization, and the zigzagged paths it
followed in non-western societies, both
necessitate and make possible the idea
of a new global order. It is no longer
possible in the 21st century to say that
the narrative of the Enlightenment
and the French Revolution is the only
force shaping the dynamic relationships
between history and geography, time
and place, individual and society, reason
and faith, self and other, and centre
and periphery. A new “geographic
imagination” is emerging and making
itself more palpable by the day.1
This new idea of time and place
makes it possible for Turkey to produce
its own concepts and build a new
vocabulary. From a semiotic perspective,
even the new vocabulary and concepts
of Turkish politics and foreign policy
should be noted as indicators of a
profound
mental
transformation.
This new platform of imagination and
Turkey, which has become one
of the important actors in the
regional order and the global
system, is experiencing this
transformation in tandem with
its unique conditions.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
7
platforms, ranging from international
relations to political science and cultural
studies.3 These new dynamics which
have emerged in the recent episodes of
Turkish modernization are also adding
new dimensions to Turkey’s traditional
relations with Europe and the United
States.4 As I have discussed elsewhere,
the new Turkey is emerging as a result
of a new geopolitical imagination on
the one hand, and Turkey’s economic
and security-based priorities on the
other. The tectonic changes in Turkish
foreign policy can be reduced neither
to ideological considerations, nor to
Realpolitik anxieties.5
This article takes a look at two core
elements of Turkish foreign policy: “soft
power” and “public diplomacy.” Turkey’s
soft power capacity will be explained as
a confluence of the country’s history,
geography, cultural depth, economic
strength and democracy, and its place
in Turkish foreign policy will be
highlighted. Public diplomacy, which is a
platform for the implementation of soft
power, is a new concept in Turkey and
is increasingly being discussed especially
since the launching of the Office of
Public Diplomacy within the Turkish
Prime Ministry. Since the publication of
decree 27478 announcing its launch on
January 30, 2010 in the Official Gazette,
the Office of Public Diplomacy has
been pursuing various public diplomacy
activities. The following excerpt describes
how the decree explained the need for
comprehension provides opportunities
for Turkish scholars, intellectuals and
policy makers to produce their own
concepts and theories, and expands the
horizons of Turkish intellectual life. The
“open horizon” provided by this process
of transformation also enables the
reconsideration of Turkey’s main issues
from a fresh perspective. The narrative
pertaining to the effort to see the world
from a non-Euro-centric perspective
that Ahmet Davutoğlu fleshed out in
his work “Strategic Depth: Turkey’s
International Position” is becoming
commonplace, and is giving way to a
new set of conceptualizations.2 Far from
being just another version of “third-
worldism”, Turkey’s new intellectual
and political horizon, deserves serious
attention.
The changes taking place in Turkish
society and foreign policy are as much
triggered by ruptures in the regional
and global system as they are by those
taking place within Turkey itself.
Turkey, which has become one of the
important actors in the regional order
and the global system, is experiencing
this transformation in tandem with its
unique conditions. It is thus correct to
say a “new Turkish story” is emerging.
The changes born out of Turkey’s internal
dynamics, and its consequent effects on
foreign policy, are seen through a wide
swath from Europe to America, the
Middle East to Asia, and prompt a new
discussion about Turkey on different

--- Sayfa 4 ---
İbrahim Kalın
8
the creation of the Office of Public
Diplomacy:
Globalization
has
rendered
the
conduct of international relations more
complicated in today’s world, according
an increasingly important role to public
diplomacy in influencing and directing
the international community alongside
traditional diplomacy. In order for us to
achieve success in explaining Turkey’s
position in the face of accusations
and problems our country has long
endured in the international arena, it is
necessary to use public diplomacy tools
and methods to inform accurately the
international community.
As noted in the decree, certain public
institutions and foundations have been
assigned tasks to provide information
about Turkey abroad in such a way as
to increase Turkey’s respectability in the
international community. However,
in today’s world, where national and
regional problems can easily take on
a global dimension, a more efficient
coordination, cooperation, and decision
making mechanism is necessary among
public policy institutions in regard
to developments in the information
and
communication
technologies,
opportunities and threats emerging in
the international arena.
In light of these observations, the
foundation of an Office of Public
Diplomacy has been decided upon
under the supervision of a senior
advisor to the Prime Minister, charged
with conducting public diplomacy
activities and securing cooperation
and
coordination
between
public
institutions
and
non-governmental
organizations.6
Applied by many countries as an
active political communication tool,
public diplomacy is a country’s effort to
share a coherent and convincing account
of its own story with the rest of the
world. In the second part of the article,
we will provide a conceptual framework
for public diplomacy as well as brief
examples of other countries’ practices
and observations on Turkey’s concept of
public diplomacy.
Turkey’s Soft Power
The concept of “soft power”,
which Joseph Nye first began to use
in the 1980s, is rooted in the idea
that alternative power structures exist
in international relations alongside
economic and military power. According
to Nye, there are three ways to achieve
one’s goal: threatening the other party
and going to war if necessary; “buying
out” the other party; and persuading
the other party through the use of “soft
power.” Soft power is “the ability to
get what you want through attraction
rather than coercion or payments.” This
is possible through persuading the other
party through convincing arguments and
rational policies. Here, credibility and the
ability to persuade constitute the main
elements of soft power. These elements
also provide legitimacy to the use of
power.
A country’s soft power capacity
defines the success of its public
diplomacy as much as does the integrity
and efficacy of its policies. Soft power,
which is rooted in a “value-based”
definition of power, explains how much a

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
9
Various factors feed soft power: Culture,
education, arts, print and visual media,
film, poetry, literature, architecture,
higher education (universities, research
centres,
etc.),
non-governmental
organizations, science and technology,
the capacity for innovation, tourism,
platforms for economic cooperation
and diplomacy. Soft power emerges as a
combination of these elements and gives
us an idea about a country’s cultural
richness and social capital.
Another key factor that defines
a country’s soft power capacity is its
political system. The most important
among those elements which pave the
way for a country to achieve a soft power
status and make it a centre for attraction
is a political system which prioritizes
freedoms
and
liberties,
guarantees
fundamental
rights
and
freedoms,
and which is also just, transparent and
democratic. In this regard, one of the
main pillars of Turkey’s soft power
is its democratic experience. Despite
the ups and downs in its history, the
strengthening of Turkish democracy
and its gaining of legitimacy among the
public play a significant role in Turkey’s
position as a regional and global actor. For
instance, the “Arab Spring” which began
with popular uprisings in Tunisia and
Egypt in early 2011 highlighted Turkey’s
democratic experience in the Middle
East. Turkey’s democratization efforts
and success in economic development
have been an inspiration for the newly
country is deemed attractive and worthy
of being designated as an exemplar for
others. According to Nye, soft power
explains “the attractiveness of a country’s
culture, political notions and policies.”7
The acceptance of a country’s policies
as legitimate by others also defines that
country’s soft power capacity.
Nye contends that the United States
has lost its credibility, persuasion power
and attractiveness after September 11,
and that no economic indicator can
measure this cost. America’s ability
to continue the successful paradigm
it achieved during the Cold War era
depends not on invading countries
such as Afghanistan and Iraq, but on
regaining the soft power which it has
lost. In a world where anti-Americanism
has become a global phenomenon, it
is becoming increasingly difficult for
the United States to be a trustworthy
political power and a centre of attraction.
The election of Barack Hussein Obama
in 2008 brought about a significant
change in the global public perception
of America but fell short of eradicating
anti-Americanism.8
Unlike “hard power,” soft power
explains fields of influence and attraction
beyond military and economic indicators.
The acceptance of a country’s
policies as legitimate by others
also defines that country’s soft
power capacity.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
İbrahim Kalın
10
emerging social and political movements
in the Arab world.
Soft power refers to a country’s social-
human capital apart from its military and
economic power. There is no necessary
asymmetrical relationship between hard
and soft power. The existence of hard
power does not guarantee soft power.
Nye points to Canada, Holland and the
Scandinavian countries as examples of
countries that have soft power despite
their limited economic and military
capabilities.
Through
their
values,
organizational
capacities,
education,
innovation, international stance and
mediation efforts, these countries enjoy
a sphere of influence disproportionate to
their military and economic power.
Turkey’s soft power is different from
that of other countries in its form and
content. Turkey’s soft power potential,
which extends from the Balkans and the
Middle East to inner parts of Central
Asia, emerges from the cultural and
historical experience it has inherited.
The values Turkey represents, as well
as its history and cultural depth, have
mobilized
regional
dynamics
and
provided opportunities for the creation
of new spheres of influence. In the larger
Euro-Asian landmass, the common
denominator for Turks, Kurds, Bosnians,
Albanians,
Circassians,
Abkhazians,
Arabs, Azeris, Kazakhs, Kyrgyzs, Uzbeks,
Turkmens and other ethnic groups, as
well as Armenian, Greek, Jewish and
Assyrian communities is the Ottoman
experience they have shared and built
together. It is this Ottoman heritage
that brings together these diverse groups
and enables them to relate to a shared
experience in time and place. Today,
Turkey represents the pivotal point of
this heritage. This is not a new imperial
adventure, termed by some as “Neo-
Ottomanism.” Rather, this is a process
whereby Turkey’s
new
geopolitical
imagination and the new possibilities
in the global political system allow the
people of the region to reconcile with their
history and geography. Remembering
this experience plays an important role
in defining the spheres of soft power in
Turkey.9 Furthermore, Turkey’s regional
and global engagements are expanding
in other regions, such as Africa, Asia and
Latin America.
In addition, Turkish democracy
and its vibrant civil society form the
most important pillars of Turkey’s soft
power. Ever since the introduction of the
multi-party system in the 1950s, Turkey
has gone through different experiences.
The values Turkey represents,
as well as its history and
cultural depth, have mobilized
regional dynamics and provided
opportunities for the creation of
new spheres of influence.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
11
Public Diplomacy
As
a
strategic
communication
tool,
public
diplomacy
comprises
“understanding,
informing
and
influencing
the
public.”10
Political
communication, which constitutes an
important part of this process, is defined
as “the production, distribution, control,
use and processing of information by the
states, organizations, or individuals.”11
The purpose of public diplomacy is not
propaganda, but building a strategic
language of communication based on
objective facts and truth.
Public diplomacy activities are
conducted within two main frameworks:
“State-to-public,” and “public-to-public.”
State-to-public activities aim to explain
the state’s policies and activities through
the use of official tools and channels to
the public. In public-to-public activities,
however, civil elements such as NGOs,
research centres, public opinion polls,
media, opinion leaders, universities,
exchange programs, associations and
foundations are employed. In this
regard, public diplomacy goes beyond
official communication between officials,
Demands for fair sharing, participation,
representation,
transparency
and
accountability
by
various
groups
within Turkish society have nurtured
and encouraged the growth of Turkish
democracy. Turkey’s transformation into
a centre of attraction in its geographic
hinterland, such as the Balkans and the
Middle East, depends on its ability to
define the freedom-security balance in a
coherent manner, and on expanding its
spheres of democratic influence.
At this point, Turkey possesses
important resources and values unique
to itself. The concept of soft power
depends upon the “carrot and stick”
dialectic of American power. However, it
is not always possible or even desirable
to use the carrot-stick dialectic in the
geopolitical environment of a country
like Turkey. Rather, a new geopolitical
imagination and a notion of common
memory, conscience and cultural depth
shape soft-power relations.
Turkey’s achievement of an effective
soft power status depends on its ability
to mobilize these dynamics. As a result
of the changes it has been going through,
Turkey today has a ‘new story’ and a
‘new narrative’. As I shall discuss below,
this story is rich, multi-layered and
multidimensional. The purpose of public
diplomacy is to tell this story in the most
effective, credible and comprehensive
manner.
Public diplomacy activities are
conducted within two main
frameworks: “State-to-public,”
and “public-to-public.”

--- Sayfa 8 ---
İbrahim Kalın
12
diplomats and foreign communities.12
Public diplomacy encompasses a larger
field than “diplomatic communication.”
Public diplomacy envisages mutual
communication
and
interaction.
Listening to target groups and defining
their
priorities,
public
diplomacy
constitutes one of the core elements of this
multifaceted communication process. In
this sense, public diplomacy is a dynamic
and multidimensional communication
process. Its key elements are listening as
much as talking, understanding as much
as explaining, and communicating as
much as informing.
Soft power is one of the most
important
components
for
public
diplomacy. Another important element
is public opinion, which assumes an
increasingly central role in shaping
national and global policies. National
and international political processes
are closely watched and made available
to the world community through the
media. It is not possible to implement
a policy with regard to the economy,
foreign policy, energy or the environment
without the approval of the public. A
fundamental condition for successful
public diplomacy is to follow rational,
persuasive and defensible policies. It
is impossible to espouse or explain to
the world community policies that are
unjust, ignore universal rules of law, or
encourage illegitimate methods such as
threats, violence and occupation. For
instance, it is impossible for a country
that
systematically
violates
human
rights or keeps another country under
occupation to follow a successful public
policy. China’s policies in East Turkestan,
Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian
territories, the invasion of Afghanistan
and Iraq under George W. Bush and
scandals such as Guantanamo and Abu
Ghraib, make it impossible for these
countries, with different political and
geographical characteristics, to conduct
a successful public diplomacy.
As I shall briefly discuss below,
Turkey has acquired a negative image
due to past mistakes, and was prevented
from conducting an effective public
diplomacy because of those failed and
misguided government policies. Turkey’s
new narrative is more than creating a
new image. Rather, it reflects the new
identity which the country wants to
embrace to overcome its past mistakes
and chart a new course for its social and
political future.
Public Diplomacy Practices
From Around the World
Different countries around the
world have different styles of conducting
public diplomacy, and explain their
positions, policies and theses to national
and
international
communities
in
various ways. Every country uses a
unique language and tool set. Such
differences are due to the policies which

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
13
Director-General Press has developed
programs to eliminate EU-scepticism
in certain European countries. The EU
Director-General Press involves various
news organizations and communications
agencies in member and non-member
states, and benefits from their resources.14
The European Union allocates
considerable
resources
for
its
external communications and deems
communication
and
diplomacy
with non-EU states as a strategic
element of its foreign policy. Despite
difficulties encountered in formulating
a common EU foreign policy, the
European Commission and its affiliated
communication units work effectively to
explain EU foreign policy in Europe and
beyond. The EU has sped up its efforts
to formulate a common foreign policy
vision after the invasion of Iraq in 2003,
which deeply divided European public
opinion. This led to the implementation
of the “European Security Strategy” in
November 2003.
United Kingdom
Once known as “the empire on which
the sun never sets,” the United Kingdom
is actively pursuing a public diplomacy
and strategic communication, despite its
waning economic and political power.
British public diplomacy mixes elements
such as politics, foreign policy, trade,
culture, language, education, tourism
and “brand management” in a successful
a specific country follows as much as to
its historical and cultural heritage. As
the following examples demonstrate,
Europe’s public diplomacy is different
from that of China or Israel because of
its priorities and cultural/societal codes.
European Union
According to a report by the
German Foreign Ministry in 2002,
“public diplomacy is assigned utmost
priority alongside all other European
matters.”13 The European Union (EU),
which positions itself as an effective “soft
power”, focuses on European public
opinion as well as on those neighbouring
regions such as the Balkans, the Middle
East, the Caucasus and Africa. The EU
has developed an effective internal and
external communication policy as a
result of the new regulations of 1999.
This
communication
strategy
yielded its first fruit on January 1,
2002, when the new Euro currency was
launched. Founded in 1999, the EU
The European Union allocates
considerable resources for its
external communications and
deems
communication
and
diplomacy with non-EU states
as a strategic element of its
foreign policy

--- Sayfa 10 ---
İbrahim Kalın
14
and balanced manner. The fact that the
English language is the most popular
lingua franca in today’s world provides
a significant advantage to British public
diplomacy, and allows for cultural
diplomacy and social empathy through
language instruction.
Britain’s public diplomacy efforts
are carried out mainly through three
institutions: the British Foreign Ministry,
the British Council, and the BBC World
Service. The last two institutions, despite
their official status and use of public
resources, maintain an autonomous
character and are not subject to
government control. There is an effective
division of labour among them: The
Foreign Ministry is responsible for
diplomatic communication, whereas
the British Council handles cultural
communication, and the BBC is tasked
with worldwide media communication.
Aside from these three, there are several
other institutions that support British
public diplomacy efforts.15 Effective use
of these institutions plays an important
role in the success of British public
diplomacy.
The People’s Republic of
China
The People’s Republic of China seeks
to employ an effective public diplomacy.
Despite the fact that “public diplomacy”
as a concept is not widely used in the
Chinese political literature, the Chinese
government pays special attention to it.
China aims to present itself as “a country
that is peaceful, developing, reliable,
open to collaboration and able to serve
its massive population.” In order to
buttress this image, China increased its
activity in the biggest economic alliance,
ASEAN. It acted as a mediator in the
North Korean nuclear weapons crisis
and used it as a PR strategy in the 2008
World Olympics. Moreover, China has
efficiently used all possible diplomatic
tools in calming its neighbours that are
anxious about China’s fast economic
growth and political power.
Considering
the
single-party
communist rule in the country, the
difficulties of presenting a positive
image of China are obvious. Human
rights, freedom of the press, and the
issues around Tibet and the Uyghur
Autonomous
Region
demonstrate
how fragile modern China’s image can
be. Having placed economic growth
at the centre of its foreign policy and
public diplomacy, the Chinese officials
indirectly respond to the Western
criticism that, “economic growth is not
possible without internalizing liberal-
democratic values.”
China’s historical and cultural
richness is certainly one of the
most prominent elements of
Chinese public diplomacy.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
15
freedom and opportunities, is a leader
in the areas of science and technology,
appreciated for its flexible cultural and
immigration policies, whose educational
system is replicated and organizational
skills applied in various areas. On the
other hand, its crude individualism,
consumption and entertainment habits,
hegemonic foreign policy, military
bases, and its disproportionate use of
power in the international arena invite
harsh criticisms. The public diplomacy
activities aspire to encompass all these
areas in building the American image.
The U.S. carries out its public
diplomacy activities through five major
institutions: Broadcasting Board of
Governors (which produces all non-
military programs such as the Voice
of America), The State Department,
the White House, USAID, and the
Department of Defense. There is no
organization that liaises between these
institutions. However, all the activities
are coordinated collaboratively during
the
planning
and
implementation
processes.
The estimated amount of financial
resources the US Government allocated
for public diplomacy in 2008 was
1.6 billion USD. For the year 2003,
this amount was around 1.3 billion
USD.18 The estimated amount spent on
diplomatic activities focusing on Muslim
countries is about 400 million. This
budget does not include such programs
as the Fulbright university and research
Notwithstanding such criticisms,
China’s activities in the area of public
diplomacy and propaganda are effective
in the neighbouring territories. Despite
the communist regime, China focuses
on an image around economy, trade, and
diplomacy, drawing from its traditional
cultural resources. To this point, Chinese
artists, literary figures, and especially
Chinese cinema play a major role in
establishing and popularizing a new
image of China. Even before modern
times, China has used its rich historical
and cultural heritage to impress foreign
visitors.16 China’s historical and cultural
richness is certainly one of the most
prominent elements of Chinese public
diplomacy.
The United States
With a long experience and a wide
range of resources at its disposal for public
diplomacy, the United States has carried
out a comprehensive public diplomacy
program in order to make itself a centre
of attraction during and after the Cold
War era. Known as the only superpower
of the world, the U.S. has used countless
strategies from diplomacy to cultural and
artistic activities to display its diplomatic
power in various parts of the world. 17
From Europe to the Middle East,
Latin America to Asia and Africa, the
attitude towards the United States
fluctuates between love and hate. On the
one hand, the US is a country that offers

--- Sayfa 12 ---
İbrahim Kalın
16
scholarships, exchange programs and
media campaigns.
Although the United States carries
out the largest public diplomacy
activities in the world, the main issues
regarding its image and credibility
continue to persist in the post-9/11
world. The US Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Mike Mullen, underlined
the strong connection between policies
and public diplomacy when he said
that “unless we change our policies, no
communication will prove successful.”
This declaration conf irms that successful
public diplomacy is possible only
through following policies deemed fair
and acceptable by others.
Turkey, Identity and Public
Diplomacy
The processes of making foreign
policies in a globalised world undergo
restructuring and generate new dynamics
through public opinion, legitimacy, and
acceptance. Turkish foreign policy is
not exempt from these processes. Thus
Turkish public diplomacy must take
into consideration global factors as well
as particular realities born out of its own
story.
Turkish public diplomacy can be
discussed around three major questions.
Is public diplomacy a priority for Turkey?
What are the conceptual outlines,
content and priorities of the type of
public diplomacy Turkey should follow?
Finally, what are the tools of Turkish
public diplomacy?
Before answering these questions, a
couple of points about the perception
of Turkey must be stated. Negative
perceptions about Turkey have come
about not only due to propaganda
activities against Turkey but also because
of imprudent policies that Turkish
governments have followed in the
past. Extra-judicial killings, torture in
prisons, following ill-advised policies
on the Kurdish issue, human rights
abuses, religious minorities, freedom of
thought and belief and similar problems
have all reinforced a highly negative
image for Turkey both domestically
and internationally. In some circles
abroad, Turkey is presented as a country
invading Cyprus, murdering Armenians,
and executing military operations in
neighbouring territories in the name of
fighting against the PKK.
Turkey has come a long way in
changing these perceptions. Apart from
some diaspora communities, only a few
circles still label Turkey as an invader,
oppressor, denier, etc. From East to West,
the world focuses on the social change
and economic growth that Turkey is
undergoing and their impact on foreign
policy. In a world where the line between
national and international politics is
blurred, changing these misperceptions
to a success story depends on a well-

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
17
long
experience
of
modernization,
the new communication tools which
globalization provides, the presence
of almost five million Turks living in
Europe and all the efforts Turkey has
made to join the EU, and the images of
the Turk, Ottoman, Muslim and Middle
Easterners in many European countries
are still shaped by perceptions inherited
from the Middle Ages. As the German
philosopher Gadamer points out, history
lives in and through language, words,
symbols, imageries, and stories. These
factors continue to play a major role in
Europe’s perception
of Turkey.19
On this point, the
new dynamism and
growth of Turkey as
a regional power and
a global actor must
be
communicated
in
an
efficient
and realistic manner to national and
international audiences. Strategically,
this is as significant as following well-
advised policies. The way the world
reads and perceives these policies
often overshadows reality. No country,
regardless of its being small or big, open
or closed, democratic or autocratic,
eastern or western, can remain indifferent
to the force of public opinion. The
role of national and international
public
opinion
increases
everyday
in determining matters regarding a
large portion of world politics, their
advised domestic and foreign policy, and
on explaining it effectively.
We live in a day and age in which
image shapes reality. The image of a
country and its policies, the choice of
key words used in their analysis and the
framework in which it is placed is more
important than the objective reality
of that country. The phrase “image
is everything,” frequently used in the
fashion industry to attract individuals, is
indeed applicable to societies, territories
and countries as well.
However, what really matters is not
image but identity.
The determinant of
a community’s true
qualities is not its
appearance.
This
aspect undoubtedly
holds
considerable
significance
in
forming perceptions.
Nonetheless, in the final analysis, what
counts in the long term are the choices
of identity and the political stances and
policies that a nation develops through
its identity. In this regard, public
diplomacy is not a battle between images,
a propaganda tool or window dressing.
Changing deep-rooted perceptions
overnight is not possible. For instance,
reshaping the Turkish-Ottoman image,
or updating it in accordance with
today’s realities is a difficult task. Despite
the many efforts of the two-century
The new dynamism and growth
of Turkey as a regional power
and a global actor must be
communicated in an efficient
and realistic manner to national
and international audiences.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
İbrahim Kalın
18
implementation and positive or negative
results, from economic policies to the
use of energy resources, environmental
issues
to
migration
policies,
and
media to regional conflicts. Countries,
international
organizations,
NGOs
and other institutions that are aware of
the power of public opinion use public
diplomacy in an efficacious manner.
Turkey has been playing a major
role in such international platforms
as the G-20, the Organization of the
Islamic Coopertaion, the European
Council, NATO and OSCE, and has
been at the centre of decision making
processes regionally and internationally.
Recent developments regarding Turkey’s
domestic and foreign affairs point to the
birth of a unique “Turkish story” which
increasingly draws the world’s attention.
This story reflects the multi-layered
and dynamic qualities of the country.
It is not possible to dwell on a single
discourse or story to talk about Turkey’s
new identities, self image, vision,
horizon, internal struggles, problems
and
resolutions,
multi-dimensional
social and political transformations, and
successes and failures, joys and sorrows,
thrills and disappointments.
Turkey’s
new
identities
offer
multiplicity, diversity and distinctness
simultaneously
with
the
processes
of
multi-centred
globalization
and
multiple modernities. This increases
and diversifies the attention that Turkey
receives. In the past ten years, Turkey’s
increasingly
respected
profile
and
visibility in the international media,
the proliferation of resident foreign
journalists, multiplication of academic
studies on Turkey, high-level visits
and their impacts on the world public
opinion, and many similar aspects have
made the “story of Turkey” a significant
one from east to west.20 It is important
to convey this dynamic process in
national and international platforms.
As a rising power, Turkey’s success in
the areas of strategic communication
and public diplomacy is indispensable
for the sustainability of its national
interests, regional effectiveness, and
global responsibilities. Taking these
aspects into consideration, it is clear that
public diplomacy is a strategic priority
for Turkey.
The Instruments of Turkish
Public Diplomacy
As
mentioned
above,
public
diplomacy entails the comprehensive
communication of the new “Turkish
story” effectively to the world. What
determines the content of this activity
is the construction of a new political
and social imagination derived from
the country’s democratic background,
its history and geography. The depth
of Turkish foreign policy is in direct
correlation with the transformation
of this accumulation into a strategic
value.
Justice,
legitimacy,
equality

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
19
in
representation,
transparency,
accountability, respect for differences,
a virtuous society, moral and religious
freedom, the protection of dignity
and the reassurance of basic rights and
freedoms under the constitution are the
pillars of Turkey’s new social imagery.
These aspects not only make Turkey a
centre of attraction for both East and
West but also grant Turkish foreign policy
and public diplomacy a competitive edge
in international relations.
In
recent
years,
the
debate
concerning Turkey, which has been taken
up and expanded by the international
media, think tanks, economic platforms
and academic studies, has taken shape
around these values and extends beyond
Turkey’s borders, allowing for the
formation of a comprehensive and more
dynamic discourse on modernity and the
global order. For instance, in relation to
the tradition versus modernity debate,
Turkey is perceived as a country that
is able successfully to fuse traditional
Islamic-Ottoman culture with socio-
economic
modernization.
Turkish
modernization is taken up in debates
about classical modernity, multiple
modernities,
multiculturalism
and
globalism, and this carries the discussions
about Turkey beyond its borders. The
relationship between tradition and
modernity simultaneously includes the
ideal of a balance between conservative
values and modern means. Turkey is
perceived as a country that transforms
modernity through the preservation of
its conservative values.
Turkey entered the 21st century with
great dynamism; no longer finding the
role ascribed to it as a peripheral element
in the international system during
the Cold War era sufficient, Turkey
is gradually becoming a central force
in the region. Instead of determining
its national and regional priorities in
relation to the structural preferences or
tensions of a polarized world system,
Turkey adopts a point of view that
is based on its own geographical and
historical background.
This deep change at the centre of
Turkey’s public diplomacy takes place
within the internal dynamics and self-
image of the country. The Turkish public
no longer sees itself as a problematic
and small footnote in the Euro-centric
historical narrative. Like all societies
that are able to produce their own
values within history, Turkish society
desires to see itself as an active agent
in the formation of its own history.
We have before us a subject that is able
and courageous enough to intervene in
the flow of history, not a subject that
observes the course of history from a
distance with apprehension.
Turkey is perceived as a country
that is able successfully to fuse
traditional
Islamic-Ottoman
culture with socio-economic
modernization.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
İbrahim Kalın
20
The great transformation in the self-
image of Turkey also determines how
the internal problems of the country
are dealt with. Most problems that
were considered taboo or unresolvable
are no longer conundrums. Despite
the confusion that continues here and
there, the questions over identity that
are integral to Turkey are now being
discussed openly and freely. Concepts
such as religion, state, individual,
society, community, identity, politics,
culture, art, the Kurdish problem, the
Alevis, non-Muslim citizens, democracy,
human rights and transparency that
constitute the “big Turkey debate”
allow for an integration of local and
global, individual and community, self
and other, and provide space for new
opportunities.
This internal transformation and
process of normalization is also visible
in foreign policy. One of the milestones
of the new Turkish imagination is the
fact that Turkey is executing an effective
foreign policy based on its historical
background. Turkey’s descent from the
Ottoman experience results in genuine
familiarity with a large geographic area
extending from the Balkans to the Middle
East. Consequently, the emotional and
political distance between Turkey and
the Arab world is diminishing, and
those relations are normalizing after a
long hiatus. Considering the checkered
relationship between Turks and Arabs in
much of the 20th century, Turkey’s rise
to significance for the Arab world is a
fascinating development. This is noted
not only by Arabs, but also by Europeans,
Russians, Americans, Africans, Japanese
and other Asian nations.
Another important aspect of the
new image of Turkey is the relations
that surface along the axis of change and
continuity. In Turkey, the relationships
between the centre and the periphery
are being re-defined. New social classes
and elites are emerging, the gap between
different social classes is closing and a
multiplicity of experiences is beginning
to co-exist. Subjects that were once
considered taboo are now openly
discussed. This social and political
transformation does not completely
do away with traditional values and
relationships, but carries them to a new
level, rendering them the new pillars of
locally owned modernization. In this
sense, continuity and change have co-
existed within the course of Turkish
modernism over the past few years.
The new social capital and
mobility
in Turkey
rejects
models of globalization that deny
cultural values and identity, and
dismisses an identity formation
and sense of belonging closed to
the rest of the world.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
21
Finally, we have the new dynamic
relationship
between
locality
and
globalization. The new social capital
and mobility in Turkey rejects models
of globalization that deny cultural values
and identity, and dismisses an identity
formation and sense of belonging closed
to the rest of the world. In the last decade
under AK Party governments, actors
of modernization and globalization in
Turkey have diversified, and begun to
include very different social groups. These
actors are no longer drawn only from the
bureaucratic elite or the managerial class.
People from very different social networks
and identities are now extremely active
in this process. In terms of the debates
around globalization versus locality, this
is a unique condition.
This conceptual framework should be
considered as the backdrop for the public
diplomacy that Turkey is implementing
via its various institutions. Many public
institutions perform this role directly or
indirectly. TİKA (Turkish International
Cooperation
and
Development
Agency), Kızılay (The Turkish Red
Crescent), the Ministry of Tourism
and Culture, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, TRT (The Turkish National
TV), the Yunus Emre Foundation, the
Agency for Investment and Support,
the Press Information Office and other
institutions are all active in public
diplomacy through political, diplomatic,
economic and cultural activities. In
order to increase the effectiveness of
these efforts, these institutions need to
have a well-coordinated relationship
among themselves. This task is currently
undertaken by the Office of Public
Diplomacy under the Prime Minister’s
Office.
However, by definition, public
diplomacy should not be undertaken
solely
by
government
institutions.
NGOs, aid organizations, human rights
organizations, foundations, universities,
civilian platforms, media and other civil
society actors have become indispensable
to public diplomacy efforts. Parallel to
the growing proximity between public
institutions
and
non-governmental
organizations, public institutions and
NGOs should collaborate more in the
field of public diplomacy.
The issues that we discussed briefly
are the basis of the new concept of
public diplomacy in Turkey. The success
of Turkish foreign policy and public
diplomacy depends upon the effective
implementation of these goals, and on
continued public diplomacy centred on
future policies. The actors involved in
this process should range from public
institutions
to
non-governmental
organizations, from business to academia,
the arts, the media, the sciences,
humanitarian aid organizations and
human rights institutions. The effective
communication of the new “Turkish
story” as a rising power is only possible
through the participation of these actors
that function in the public, private and
non-governmental sectors.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
İbrahim Kalın
22
Endnotes
1
Bülent Aras and Hakan Fidan, “Turkey and Eurasia: Frontiers of a New Geographic Imagination”,
New Perspectives on Turkey, No. 40 (Fall 2009), pp. 195–217.
2
The Turkish academic community has yet to reach the much-desired level where it can build original
concepts and theories pertaining to history, politics, sociology, international relations, philosophy or
anthropology. Suffice it to say that this issue needs to be treated from an interdisciplinary perspective in
a separate work. The following references are cited as examples focusing on this issue: Ismail Kara, Bir
Felsefe Dili Kurmak: Modern Felsefe ve Bilim Terimlerinin Türkiye’ye Girişi, İstanbul, Dergah Yayınları,
2001; Cüneyt Kaya (ed.), Türkiye’de/Türkçede Felsefe Üzerine Konuşmalar, İstanbul, Küre Yayınları,
2009; and Ersel Aydınlı, Erol Kurubaş, and Haluk Özdemir (eds.), Yöntem, Kuram, Komplo: Türk
Uluslararası İlişkiler Disiplininde Vizyon Arayışları, Ankara, Asil Yayın Dağıtım, 2009.
3
İbrahim Kalın, “Debating Turkey in the Middle East: The Dawn of a New Geopolitical Imagination”,
Insight Turkey, Vol. 11, No. 1 (2009), pp. 83-96.
4
İbrahim Kalın, “US-Turkish Relations under Obama: Promise, Challenge and Opportunity in the 21st
Century”, Journal of Balkan and Near East Studies, Vol. 12, No. 1 (2010), pp.93-108.
5
İbrahim Kalın, “Turkey and the Middle East: Ideology or Geopolitics?” Private View, No.13 (Autumn
2008), pp.26-35.
6
For full text of the decree and more information about Institute of Public Diplomacy activities, visit
the official website of the Office of Public Diplomacy: http://kdk.gov.tr/.
7
Joseph S. Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Succeed in World Politics, New York, Public Affairs, 2004.
8
For Joseph Nye and Richard Armitage’s smart power project, available athttp://www.csis.org/
smartpower.
9
For the concept of soft power in international literature and its meaning for Turkey, see the essays by
Bilgin, Elis, Beng, Altunışık and Altınay in the special soft power issue of Insight Turkey, Vol. 10, No.
2 (April-June 2008).
10	 Peter Krause and Stephen Van Evera, Public Diplomacy: Ideas for the War of Ideas, Discussion Paper
09-10, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, 2009.
11	 Jarol B. Manheim, “The War of Images: Strategic Communication in the Gulf Conflict,” in Stanley
A. Renshon (ed.), The Political Psychology of the Gulf War. Leaders, Publics, and the Process of Conflict,
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1993, pp.155-171.
12	 Jan Melissen, “The New Public Diplomacy: Between Theory and Practice”, in Jan Melissen (ed.), The
New Public Diplomacy: Soft Power in International Relations, Basingstoke, Palgrave-Macmillan, 2005,
pp. 3-25.
13	 K.T. Paschke, K. T., Report on the Special Inspection of 14 German Embassies in the Countries of the
European Union, Berlin, Auswärtiges Amt, 2002.
14	 Anna Michalski, “The EU as a Soft Power: The Force of Persuasion”, in Jan Melissen (ed.), The New
Public Diplomacy: Soft Power in International Relations, Basingstoke, Palgrave-Macmillan, 2005, pp.
124-144.
15	 Ali Fisher, “Four Seasons in One Day: The Crowded House of Public Diplomacy in the UK”, in Nancy
Snow and Philip M. Taylor (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy, New York, Routledge,
2009, pp.251-261.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Soft Power and Public Diplomacy in Turkey
23
16	 Gary Rawnsley, “China Talks Back: Public Diplomacy and Soft Power for the Chinese Century”,
in Nancy Snow and Philip M. Taylor (eds.), Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy, New York,
Routledge, 2009, p.284.
17	 The U.S. has used numerous strategies for propaganda purposes during the Cold War. For a
comprehensive study of this matter, see Frances Stonor Saunders, Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the
World of Arts and Letters, New York, The New Press, 1999.
18	 Richard Armitage and Joseph Nye, “A Smart Funding Strategy?” 24 April 2009, available at www.csis.org.
19	 For more on this, see İbrahim Kalın, İslam ve Batı, İstanbul, İSAM Yayınları, 2007.
20	 For example, the number of registered journalists residing in Turkey in 2002 was 36, whereas this
number has increased to 265 by 2009. The diversity in foreign media agencies by region and nation
demonstrate the shared interest in various parts of the world. Moreover, the attention paid to national
and local elections taking place in Turkey since 2002 confirms the increasing political profile of Turkey.