--- Sayfa 2 ---
Strategy and Politics
Strategy and Politics: An Introduction to Game Theory is designed to introduce
students to the application of game theory for modeling political processes. This
accessible text examines the phenomena that power political machineries—
elections, legislative and committee processes, and international conflict—and
answers fundamental questions about their nature and function in a clear, acces-
sible manner.
Included at the end of each chapter is a set of exercises designed to allow
students to practice the construction and analysis of political models. Although
the text assumes only an elementary-level training in algebra, students who
complete a course around this text will be equipped to read nearly all of the
professional literature that makes use of game theoretic analysis.
Emerson M.S. Niou is Professor of Political Science at Duke University.
Peter C. Ordeshook is Professor of Political Science at California Institute of
Technology.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Strategy and Politics
An Introduction to Game Theory
Emerson M.S. Niou
Duke University
Peter C. Ordeshook
California Institute of Technology

--- Sayfa 5 ---
First published 2015
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Taylor & Francis
The right of Emerson M.S. Niou and Peter C. Ordeshook to be identified
as authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Niou, Emerson M. S.
  Strategy and politics : an introduction to game theory / Emerson Niou,
Peter C. Ordeshook.
    pages cm
  1.  Game theory.  2.  Political science—Mathematical
models.  3.  Political science—Methodology  I.  Ordeshook, Peter C.,
1942– II. Title.
  JA72.5.N56 2015
  320.01′5193—dc23      2014034874
ISBN: 978-1-138-01948-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-99542-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-73515-3 (ebk)
Typeset in Minion Pro
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Contents
1
Politics as a Game
1
1.1  Decision Versus Game Theoretic Decision Making  1
1.2  Preferences, Risk and Utility  13
1.3  Economics Versus Politics and Spatial Preferences  24
1.4  Collective Versus Individual Choice  36
1.5  Key Ideas and Concepts  42
Exercises for Chapter 1  42
2
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
44
2.1  Introduction  44
2.2  The Extensive Form  49
2.3  Voting Agendas  69
2.4  Games and Subgames  76
2.5  The Centipede Game: A Word of Caution  82
2.6  Key Ideas and Concepts  85
Exercises for Chapter 2  85
3
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
89
3.1  Introduction  89
3.2  Strategies and Simultaneous Choice  90
3.3  Nash Equilibria  96
3.4  Mixed Strategies  106
3.5  Mixed Strategies and Domination  115
3.6  Finding Mixed Strategy Equilibria  122
3.7  Manipulation and Incentive Compatibility  126
3.8  Key Ideas and Concepts  132
Exercises for Chapter 3  132

--- Sayfa 7 ---
vi  Contents
4
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
139
4.1  Introduction  139
4.2  Plott, McKelvey and the Core Results of Spatial Theory  145
4.3  Two-Candidate Elections and the Electoral College  153
4.4  Turnout and Responsible Political Parties  156
4.5  Multi-Candidate Elections  159
4.6  Candidate Objectives and Game-Theoretic Reasoning  163
4.7  The Strategy of Introducing New Issues  165
4.8  Elections with Uninformed Voters  168
4.9  Other Applications  174
4.10  Key Ideas and Concepts  175
Exercises for Chapter 4  176
5
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
180
5.1  The Prisoners’ Dilemma  180
5.2  Some Simple Dilemmas in Politics  183
5.3  Cooperation and the Problem of Collective Action  195
5.4  Escaping the Dilemma: Repetition and Reputation  200
5.5  Constitutional Design and A Recursive Game  211
5.6  Evolutionarily Stable Strategies and Corruption  219
5.7  Key Ideas and Concepts  229
Exercises for Chapter 5  229
6
Agendas and Voting Rules
233
6.1  Agendas and Voting  233
6.2  Two Special Voting Rules and Peculiar Results  239
6.3  Two Alternative Rules for Electing Presidents  251
6.4  Controlling the Issues Voted On  255
6.5  Referenda and Separability of Preferences  263
6.6  Key Ideas and Concepts  267
Exercises for Chapter 6  267
7
Games with Incomplete Information
271
7.1  Incomplete Information  271
7.2  A Simple Game of Incomplete Information  275
7.3  Bayes’s Law and Bayesian Equilibrium  281
7.4  A Game with Two-Sided Incomplete Information  289
7.5  Agendas Reconsidered  293
7.6  Reputation and the Chain-Store Paradox  300

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Contents  vii
7.7  Signaling, Deception and Mutually Assured Destruction  302
7.8  Economic Sanctions in International Affairs  310
7.9  Rationality Reconsidered  317
7.10  Key Ideas and Concepts  323
Exercises for Chapter 7  323
8
Cooperation and Coalitions
327
8.1  The Concept of a Coalition  327
8.2  Coalitions and Condorcet Winners  330
8.3  A Generalization—The Core  335
8.4  The Politics of Redistribution  340
8.5  The Core and Spatial Issues  342
8.6  Majority Rule Games Without Cores  344
8.7  Parliamentary Coalitions  354
8.8  Problems and Some Incomplete Ideas  358
8.9  The Balance of Power Versus Collective Security  361
8.10  Key Ideas and Concepts  371
Exercises for Chapter 8  371
Appendix
377
Index
413

--- Sayfa 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 10 ---
1
Politics as a Game
1.1  Decision Versus Game Theoretic Decision Making
Over twenty five hundred years ago, the Chinese scholar Sun Tzu, in The Art
of War, proposed a codification of the general strategic character of armed
conflict and, in the process, offered practical advice for securing military vic-
tory. His advice is credited, for example, with having greatly influenced Mao
Zedong’s approach to conflict and the subtle tactics of revolution and the ways
in which North Vietnam and the Viet Cong thwarted America’s military advan-
tages. The formulation of general strategic principles—whether applied to war,
parlor games such as Go, or politics—has long fascinated scholars. And regard-
less of context, the study of strategic principles is of interest because it grapples
with fundamental facts of human existence—first, people’s fates are interde-
pendent; second, this interdependence is characterized generally by conflicting
goals; and, finally, as a consequence of the first two facts, conflicts such as war
are not accidental but are the purposeful extension of a state’s or an individual’s
motives and actions and must be studied in a rational way.
The Art of War is, insofar as we know, our first written record of the attempt
to understand strategy and conflict in a coherent and general way. It is impor-
tant, moreover, to recall that it was written at a time of prolonged conflict
within an emerging China whereby the leaders of competing kingdoms pos-
sessed considerable experience not only in the explicit conduct of war, but also
in diplomacy and strategic maneuver. As such, then, we should presume that it
codifies the insights of an era skilled at strategy and tactics, including those of
planning, deception and maneuver. This assumption, though, occasions a ques-
tion: Although The Art of War was ostensibly written for the leader of a specific
kingdom, what if all sides to a conflict have a copy of the book (or, equivalently,
an advisor no less insightful than Sun Tzu)? How might our reading of Sun
Tzu change if it is common knowledge that everyone studied The Art of War or
its equivalent—where by “common knowledge” we mean that everyone knows
that everyone has a copy of the book, everyone knows that everyone knows that
everyone . . . and so on, ad infinitum. The assumption of common knowledge
presumes that not only is each decision maker aware of the situation, but each
is aware that the other is aware, each knows that the other knows, and so on
and so forth, and after being told by Sun Tzu himself that the great trap to be

--- Sayfa 11 ---
2  Politics as a Game
avoided is underestimating the capabilities of one’s opponents, it seems imper-
ative that the implementation of his advice proceed with the presumption that
common knowledge applies.
In the case of The Art of War, taking account of the possibility that both sides
of a conflict have a copy of the book differentiates the social from the natu-
ral sciences. In physics or chemistry, including their practical applications, one
does not assume that the scientist or engineer confronts a benevolent or malev-
olent nature that acts strategically to deliberately assist or thwart one’s research
or the application of natural laws as we understand them. Things might not
function as designed, but only because our understanding or application of
nature’s laws is imperfect. In the social sciences, on the other hand, especially
in the domain of politics, it is typically the case that individuals must choose
and act under the assumption that others are choosing and acting in reaction to
one’s decisions or in anticipation of them, where those reactions can be either
benevolent or malevolent.
Despite this fact, it is our experience that most readers of The Art of War
implicitly or unconsciously (at least initially) take the view that the reader is the
sole beneficiary of Sun Tzu’s advice—that one’s opponent is, much like nature,
a “fixed target.” This might have been a valid assumption in 225 bc China in
the absence of the internet, printing presses and Xerox machines, but it is no
longer valid given the worldwide distribution of the book, including having it
as required reading in business schools and military war colleges. So a more
sophisticated student of Sun Tzu’s writings might suppose that one’s opponents
have read the book as well, and might then reasonably assume that their oppo-
nents’ tactics and strategies conform to Sun Tzu’s guidance. But suppose we
take things a step further and try to interpret an opponent’s actions not simply
with the assumption that they’ve read the books with which we are familiar, but
also that they know we are familiar with those books and that we are not only
attempting to assess their tactics and strategies in light of the advice contained
in The Art of War, but also that we are attempting to take into account the fact
that they are attempting to take into account our familiarity with that advice.
If all of this sounds confusing, then referencing The Art of War as an intro-
duction to this volume has served its purpose. Specifically, there are two general
modes of decision making: Decision Making Under Risk and Game Theoretic
Decision Making. In decision making under risk, one assumes, in effect, that
although there may be inherent uncertainties associated with the consequences
of one’s actions due to chance events and the actions of others, probabilities
can be associated with those events and actions and the right choice is the one
that yields the greatest expected return, where that return can be expressed in
monetary terms, as psychological satisfaction or whatever. In this world, one
assumes that other decision makers, including those who might be opposed to
your goals, have, in effect, a limited view and do not respond to the assumption
of common knowledge. In other words, just as the engineer or natural scientist
does not assume that nature has the capacity for logical thought, the notion of
common knowledge plays little to no role in decision making under risk since

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Politics as a Game  3
here one sees opponents as non-strategic “fixed targets” whose likely actions
can be guessed at on the basis of, say, past patterns of behavior, bureaucratic
rigidities or simple stupidity.
In game theoretic decision making, in contrast, one assumes that one’s oppo-
nents and other decision makers, in pursuit of their goals, take into account
their knowledge of you, including the fact that you know that they know, etc.
Other decision makers are no longer fixed targets. Now you must be concerned
that, since they know you are aware of their past behaviors, they might try to
confound your calculations by defecting in some way from whatever patterns
their earlier decisions exhibit. And there is, moreover, an additional complica-
tion. Since in a game theoretic analysis we can also assume that they know you
know their past history, they also know you know they might have an incentive
to thwart your calculations by not changing past patterns of behavior at all. But,
since you also know that they know that you know they might consider sticking
to past patterns . . . and so on, ad infinitum once again.
Game theoretic decision making attempts to untangle such seemingly end-
less and convoluted thinking and in the process to define what it means to be
rational in interactive decision contexts. This volume, then, attempts to lay out
the rudiments of game theoretic analysis as it can be applied to situations we
label “political.” Our specific objective, however, is not to provide a text on the
mathematics of game theory. There are any number of excellent books available
for that purpose, and the subject itself can be as dense as any branch of math-
ematics. Rather, our goal is to show that a game theoretic approach to under-
standing individual action is an essential component not only of being skillful
at war, but also of understanding the less violent aspect of politics. However,
rather than try to argue this point here, let us consider a series of examples that
perhaps more clearly illustrate the difference between decision theoretic and
game theoretic reasoning.
The Atomic Bomb and Japan: On the morning of August 6, 1945, a single
plane (preceded by two weather reconnaissance aircraft), the Enola Gay,
flew to and dropped its bomb on the city of Hiroshima. Ignoring the
debate over whether this act was warranted or unwarranted with respect
to the goal of ending a war, the question that concerns us here is: Why
only one plane, which so easily could have been intercepted? The answer is
that America’s strategic planners assumed that if the Enola Gay had been
part of a fleet of bombers, the Japanese would have attempted to intercept
the raid with its ground based fighters. A single plane, on the other hand,
would be far less threatening and draw far less attention. That calculation
turned out to be correct—based on earlier bomb raids over its cities, stra-
tegic planners correctly assessed Japan’s approach to air defense, and when
the two scout planes turned back to the Pacific, city sirens sounded the “all
clear” on the ground. The logic behind sending a single plane, then, on its
deadly mission seems straightforward. But then, three days later, another
solitary plane, Bockscar, flew to Nagasaki and dropped America’s second

--- Sayfa 13 ---
4  Politics as a Game
atomic bomb, and the question for us is: Did the same strategic calculation
in choosing between a lone plane versus a plane imbedded in a fleet apply
to Bockscar?
We do not know precisely what calculations were made in deciding to
deliver the second bomb via another lone aircraft as opposed to a fleet. But
certainly the calculation this time had to be different from the one that sent
the Enola Gay on its way. In the case of the Enola Gay, America’s strategic
planners could reasonably assume that the Japanese had no idea as to the
destructiveness of its cargo and, thus, no reason to fear it any more than
any previous lone aircraft over Japan. The response of Japan’s air defense
command could be predicted with near certainty. But circumstances
changed markedly once the Enola Gay delivered its payload. Now, presum-
ably, there were those in Japan who knew the potential of a lone bomber,
and the American decision to proceed as before had to be justified by a
different calculation—one that took into account what the Japanese might
now assume about lone bombers and how they might weigh that danger
against the costs of scrambling interceptors against it. Might the Japanese
assume that the United States wouldn’t be bold enough to again send a
single bomber to drop any additional atomic bombs and instead would
now try to disguise any subsequent use of its atomic arsenal by imbed-
ding the plane carrying it in a fleet of bombers? In other words, America’s
strategic planners now had to concern themselves with the possibility that
Japan’s approach to air defense had changed in a complex way dictated by
its best guess as to America’s guess about Japan’s response to the first bomb.
The decision to send a single plane to Hiroshima, then, was decision
theoretic: Japan’s likely response to one plane versus many could be deter-
mined by its previous actions. All a strategic planner needs to do is to cal-
culate the probability that Japan would try to intercept a single plane versus
the likelihood that, if imbedded in a fleet, it would intercept the fleet and
successfully shoot down the specific plane carrying a bomb. The decision
to send only one plane to Nagasaki, in contrast, required an assessment
of what Japan might have learned about the potential lethality of a single
plane, whether Japan might assume the Americans would employ the same
tactic a second time, how that tentative assessment might impact Ameri-
ca’s tactical calculations, and how in turn Japan should respond to what it
thinks America’s response would be to Japan’s reassessment of things. The
decision to use a single bomber versus a fleet over Nagasaki, then, was a
game theoretic one.
The Boston Marathon 2013: For a more contemporary example of
decision versus game theoretic choice, consider the FBI’s move to release a
department store security camera video of the two brothers who planted
bombs at Boston’s 2013 marathon. As portrayed by the media, that deci-
sion was intended to elicit the public’s help in identifying the terrorists,
and indeed the video was soon plastered across the internet’s social media.
From this perspective, then, the FBI’s action appears to be a strictly deci-
sion theoretic move to increase the likelihood that their suspects would be

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Politics as a Game  5
recognized and identified. But suppose we give the FBI’s personnel more
credit in assessing motives. Suppose they anticipated the released video
going viral on the internet and knew the suspects would soon realize that
their identities could not be kept hidden. Thus, if they planned any addi-
tional terrorist acts, both men knew they had better act quickly with little
opportunity to plan carefully. In other words, suppose the FBI intended to
“smoke out” their Russian suspects and induce them to be less careful than
they might otherwise be if they assumed their identities could remain hid-
den for a time. It might have been the case, of course, that the two brothers
knew the FBI was trying to smoke them out, but as committed jihadists,
what choice did they have? Thus, by anticipating the terrorists’ response,
the FBI can be said to have acted with a game theoretic understanding of
things. And this is precisely what happened. A day or two after the bomb-
ing, at least one brother, seemingly oblivious to the fact that his identity
would soon be known, was seen partying at the college he’d been attend-
ing. But following the video’s release, the two brothers, with bomb parts
still unassembled in their apartment, tipped their hand by hijacking a car
that led to a shoot-out with the police wherein one brother was killed and
the other injured and captured soon thereafter.
Voters and Interest Groups in Three Candidate Elections: It isn’t
always easy to decide how to vote in a three-candidate plurality rule
(first-past-the-post) election. The problem here is the possibility of wast-
ing one’s vote by casting a ballot for a candidate, however strongly pre-
ferred, who stands no chance of winning. If the candidates’ chances are
unequal, it might be wise to vote for one’s second preference. In making
this decision, then, a voter might, after perhaps talking things over with
family and friends, consult the polls to determine whether his or her pre-
ferred candidate is competitive. But now suppose our voter is not an ordi-
nary citizen but heads some highly visible interest group—a labor union or
citizen action committee—and that he or she must decide who that group
should endorse. The endorsement decision is similar to that of an ordinary
voter in that the relative competitiveness of the candidates should be taken
into consideration, but it is different in that any decision should also take
into account the likelihood that the endorsement will not only influence
more than a mere handful of voters but also perhaps the actions of other
interest groups. If their endorsement carries some weight and impacts the
election’s competitiveness, then presumably it will impact the calculations
of others who might attempt to influence the election’s outcome. Some
of that influence might benefit the candidate in question if it leads other
groups to endorse the same candidate. But it might also work against that
group’s interests if it results in any increase in the endorsements received
by other candidates. Thus, your decision as a solitary voter, made under
the assumption of a “fixed electorate” as reflected in the polls, is deci-
sion theoretic because your decision hardly affects anyone. But leaders of
influential interest groups must not only concern themselves with their
immediate impact on the electorate, but also with the responses of other

--- Sayfa 15 ---
6  Politics as a Game
interest groups. The decisions of each such group, then, should be made
on the basis of a game theoretic analysis that attempts to take into account
the reactions and counter-reactions of other groups and, ultimately, of the
electorate as a whole.
The Electoral College and Bloc Voting: The U.S. Constitution leaves
the door open to any number of schemes for translating individual votes
into Electoral College votes and the ultimate determination of who wins a
presidential election. Presently, nearly all Electoral College votes are deter-
mined by a winner-take-all system wherein whoever receives a plurality
of popular votes in a state wins all of that state’s electors. That, however,
is not how it has always been. So suppose we step back in time to when
individual states, as in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, employed
a variety of schemes for allocating electoral votes among competing
candidates, including selecting them proportionally or electing them by
pre-defined districts. Suppose further that you are an advisor to some state
legislature and are trying to convince them that they ought to use today’s
winner-take-all scheme (perhaps the state in question is Virginia, perhaps
it is the election of 1800 and perhaps you are Thomas Jefferson). If, for
whatever reason, you assume that no other state is likely to change its sys-
tem for selecting electors, your argument is likely to be a simple one that
focuses on the added weight and attention your state might enjoy by not
splitting its vote among a multitude of candidates. It also seems an essential
step to forestall (again if you are Jefferson) the reelection of your rival, John
Adams, since otherwise some of Virginia’s vote will go, if not to Adams,
then perhaps to some third candidate. Suppose, on the other hand, that
you think it’s possible (as in fact happened), that one or more states will
respond to Virginia’s actions. No doubt, your calculations will differ since
now you must concern yourself with guessing which states are likely to
change their method of selecting electors and whom those changes will
benefit. Thus, if you take the myopic view of supposing that your advice
can treat the electoral schemes of all other states as fixed, your analysis is
a decision theoretic one. But if, as actually occurred, a state such as Mas-
sachusetts responds by altering its method of choosing electors in order
to aid its favorite son, John Adams, you’d best consider a game theoretic
analysis that takes into account the likely responses of all other states.
Crime Control, Police Patrols and Crime Voting: Although we may
not be experts, we all pretty much know the parameters with which a pro-
fessional burglar or car thief must deal when they set out to ply their craft
so as to minimize the likelihood of getting caught and convicted. Success-
fully implementing a crime may be difficult, especially if one is not a pro-
fessional, but the decisions one makes seem straightforward and include
such rules of thumb as “work fast, work at night, wear gloves, work quietly
and discreetly.” In this case, crime prevention requires an effective police
force, a competent staff of prosecutors and perhaps an education process
whereby ordinary law abiding citizens learn how not to make themselves a

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Politics as a Game  7
criminal’s easy target. Now consider a different system as practiced in feu-
dal Japanese villages. If the culprit of some crime could not be identified,
the villagers themselves voted on who they thought was guilty, and anyone
receiving more than some pre-established threshold of votes was summar-
ily banished without compensation or trial. For example, then, in Fuse
village (currently Chiba prefecture) in 1696, three bales of rice stored for
tribute were stolen. After 10 days of searching, the thief could not be identi-
fied with any certainty. The village chief, section leaders, and 131 peasants
thus agreed to hold an election to identify the thief. As a consequence, the
two highest vote-getters were banished from the village and three others
who received one or two votes each were sentenced to house arrest.
In predicting the actions of a potential criminal in the usual case, a
decision theoretic analysis would most likely suffice. Using experience and
common sense, we can suppose that all but the stupidest criminals can
calculate the approximate likelihood of detection and apprehension under
varied circumstances. This calculation, in combination with an assessment
of the value of the crime in the event one is not apprehended, should suf-
fice in providing a criminal with a good idea as to whether and/or where
to strike. Correspondingly, those who have no intention of being criminals
but who also do not wish to be victims can make the same calculations
and take some simple measures to protect themselves. Similar calculations
might apply to the example of Japan’s crime voting system, but here things
are more complicated. Not only must potential criminals be concerned
with the likelihood of being discovered, but people generally must worry
about what might happen to them if the culprit is not identified. A per-
son might be subjected to banishment simply because their neighbors
and acquaintances don’t like them or seek retribution for some otherwise
long forgotten slight. It seems only reasonable to suppose that hatreds and
grudges were often reflected in the ballots. One might anticipate, then, that
one’s general social behavior is likely to entail a good deal of concern about
how one is viewed by neighbors and acquaintances. Indeed, one can read-
ily imagine society evolving to exhibit a great deal of deferential and overly
courteous behaviors, including seeing those prone to commit crimes act-
ing with extreme deference in their everyday lives. In other words, this
somewhat strange judicial system will most likely induce a variety of stra-
tegic calculations of the sort “Do I appear too deferential? Am I deferential
enough?” To understand what, if any, equilibrium of social behaviors is
likely to emerge in this case requires something more than a simple deci-
sion theoretic analysis.
Anti-Missile Deployment: In the mid 1990s the United States set itself
upon a course of convincing Poland and the Czech Republic that it was in
their interest to allow the U.S. to install anti-ballistic missile (ABM) technol-
ogy on their territory. The argument offered by American strategists seemed
straightforward: There are those in the Middle East intent on developing
and deploying offensive missiles that could target Europe—Poland and the

--- Sayfa 17 ---
8  Politics as a Game
Czech Republic included. Armed with statistics on costs and the assessments
of the likelihood that states such as Iran were pursuing the development of
long range offensive systems, the argument for ABM seemed simple and
incontrovertible. What that initial argument lacked, however, was an assess-
ment of Russia’s response, not only to a blunting of the capabilities of its
client states, but also of its own missile system, since it seemed evident that
a European-based ABM system could be directed at them as well as Iran.
The Russians, unsurprisingly, were strongly opposed to the installation
of any ABM system close to their borders, especially one controlled by its
post-World War II foe, NATO. They thereafter initiated a contentious nego-
tiation with whoever occupied the White House that included the threat to
reignite the arms race if an ABM system were installed. Ultimately, the White
House capitulated, ostensibly because it was attempting to secure agreements
with Russia on other issues, while both Poland and the Czech Republic were
left in the lurch after having committed to supporting American policy.
American policy here, then, illustrates the consequences of making for-
eign policy decisions by ignoring or by not being fully cognizant of the
reactions of other relevant actors. We appreciate that a detailed historical
analysis might tell us that one Presidential administration was fully cogni-
zant of those reactions and preferred to ignore them while a subsequent
administration was naïve in placing a different value on the threat of Rus-
sian retaliation and/or cooperation on other issues. Nevertheless, this
example reveals how a decision theoretic approach can yield one policy
while an analysis that makes even a minimal attempt at anticipating the
responses of others might yield something wholly different.
Grading on a Curve: When administering a final exam, an instructor
generally has two choices: to grade in absolute terms (i.e, an A requires
a final grade of 90 to 100, a B requires 80 to 89, and so on) or on a curve
wherein the class average grade is set at, say, B, even if the class, in the
instructor’s judgment, does poorly. Suppose you are a student in some class
wherein everyone has, by some miracle, received an identical grade of B on
the midterm exam (or where, perhaps, the final grade is determined solely
by one’s performance on the final). If the instructor grades on an absolute
basis, how hard you study for the final will, we can assume, depend on the
things that might serve as distractions, on how well you think you’ve mas-
tered the subject and on your personal motivation to strive for an A versus
the possibility of your final grade slipping to a C. Alternatively, suppose
the instructor grades on a curve. If no one studies and everyone again does
equally well on the final, you and everyone else will maintain a grade of B.
But if a number of other students study and you do not, they will raise the
curve and some mid-term Bs, including yours, will become Cs (or worse).
Thus, how hard you choose to study for the final will depend not only on
personal motivation and distractions, but also on how hard you think your
classmates will study. But of course, how hard they study will depend on
how hard they think others will study, including you.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Politics as a Game  9
Thus, while decision theoretic reasoning is most likely sufficient to pre-
dict the study habits of a student when the instructor grades on a fixed
basis, a game theoretic analysis is required to account for behavior when
grades are curved on a relative basis. In the case of an instructor who grades
on an absolute basis, the study habits and performance of your classmates
is irrelevant to the ultimate determination of your grade. But in the case
of grading on a curve, not only is your final grade a function of the perfor-
mance of your classmates, but the effort you put into studying for the final
depends on your assessment of their actions, and by logical extension, your
assessment of their assessment of your actions, and so on. This is precisely
the sort of circumstance addressed by game theory.
Presidential Power: If we look at the formal, constitutionally pre-
scribed powers of the presidency in the United States, we see a position
with few powers that cannot be checked by other political actors. An
American president plays no formal role in amending the Constitution,
his veto over legislative acts can be over-ridden by the legislature, he
cannot make formal appointments without the approval of the legisla-
ture, he cannot implement treaties with foreign powers without Senate
approval, there is no constitutional provision that the legislature must
consider any legislative proposal he might offer, he has no authority over
state and local level offices, and he is now precluded from serving more
than two terms of office. Yet, the assertion that an American president
holds one of the most domestically powerful offices in the world would
seem self-evident. This view, though, appears to fly in the face of the fact
that presidents of countries elsewhere hold far greater formal consti-
tutional powers, including the authority to veto regional laws and to
appoint and discharge regional executives. The supposition, though,
that granting a chief executive strong constitutional powers necessarily
renders that office powerful commits the error of confusing decision
theoretic with game theoretic reasoning. We might conclude that wide
ranging constitutional authority renders that office powerful, but only if
we impose a strong ceteris paribus condition on the responses of all other
political actors. On the contrary, constitutionally strong powers might
merely energize opponents to resist those powers while at the same time
leading anyone who holds that office to rely solely on those powers and
nothing else. Weak constitutional authority, on the other hand, might
lessen the natural opposition of others while simultaneously inducing
those who hold that office to develop less formal avenues of authority.
In the case of the American presidency, for example, those weak pow-
ers have encouraged presidents to cultivate political parties and the
non-constitutionally prescribed ways in which they can exert power
through persuasion and the leadership of a party. Thus, to understand
the implications of alternative political institutional designs requires a
game theoretic treatment rather than a decision theoretic one—a treat-
ment that examines how individual motives and choices influence each

--- Sayfa 19 ---
10  Politics as a Game
other as opposed to one that assumes the motives and choices of people
are somehow fixed.
West Point Honor Code and Chinese Self-Reporting: The Honor
Code as it is practiced in America’s military academies, such as West Point,
requires that, among other things, students report any observed instances
of cheating. The code provides for consequences, moreover, in the event
that someone observes cheating but fails to report it. Thus, this implemen-
tation of the code parallels a Chinese version that dates back to the Zhou
dynasty (1088–221 bc), wherein a person failing to report a violation of the
code is punished more harshly than if he or she had themselves committed
the violation. In this scheme, we not only prosecute anyone who commits a
crime, but we prosecute in a doubly harsh way anyone who had knowledge
of the crime but fails to report it to the authorities. And to make this system
even more interesting (and akin to “turning state’s evidence”), suppose the
perpetrator of a crime, after being caught, identifies others who knew of
his illegal actions and, in so doing, either receives a more lenient sentence
or none at all.
With the distinction between decision and game theoretic reasoning in
mind, we can perhaps see more clearly the difference between an honor
code system that prosecutes only a person who commits a violation versus
one that also prosecutes a person who fails to report a violation. Aside from
the agony you might experience if a code’s violator were a close friend, in
the first case deciding whether to report a violation might hinge on your
assessment of the violation’s severity. But in the second case, you also have
to be concerned that the violator, in seeking to reduce his penalty, will
report things on his own—in which case, if you fail to report, you will be
punished . . . possibly even more heavily than if you had been the one who
originally violated the code. In the first case, then, your choice is a decision
theoretic one; in the second, it is game theoretic because you must antici-
pate the actions of another person who is, at the same time, attempting to
assess the likelihood that you will turn him in.
It is also interesting here to compare the Japanese system of crime vot-
ing with China’s self-reporting system. In the Japanese case, a person’s
probability of being ostracized by his neighbors as a criminal depends only
in part on whether or not she is guilty of the crime under investigation. It
is not unreasonable to suppose that a good many persons were “wrongly”
convicted merely because those around them deemed some aspect of their
personality distasteful or disreputable. In response, one can readily imagine
a system of social norms arising whereby acting in accordance with those
norms avoids having such descriptive words as “arrogant,” “unfriendly,”
“intemperate,” “mean,” “boisterous” and “combative” appended to one’s
character. However, the more fully those norms take hold, the more dif-
ficult it is to sort people by their degree of conformity to them, in which
case, signaling one’s conformity may require overt and accentuated actions
such as ritualized bowing as if one were being presented to a monarch. The

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Politics as a Game  11
important point here, however, is that the evolution of such norms and
their ultimate manifestation must be viewed as the consequences of peo-
ple’s strategic interactions. If, for instance, one bows not enough, then that
might be taken as a violation of the norm and a potential basis for people to
vote for you in some criminal investigation. On the other hand, bowing too
deeply might be viewed as a sign that one is indeed over-compensating for
some prior criminal actions. There follows, then, a complex evolutionary
process wherein people, across generations, learn and then codify “proper”
methods of social greeting. In the case of Maoist China, in contrast, a dif-
ferent pattern of social behavior is likely to emerge: Since the innocent
must be concerned that a criminal might attempt to implicate them when
caught, the best approach is to isolate oneself from society to minimize the
chance of being associated with anyone who might be accused of criminal
activity. Thus, in both Japan and China people must make game theoretic
decisions in assessing the reactions of their acquaintances to their everyday
actions: How much deferential behavior is too much because it raises sus-
picions versus how much is too little and marks me as an ungracious and
disliked member of the community? Or, do I dare make any friends at all
since almost anyone might be a reader of pornography or of banned litera-
ture and likely to try to save his own skin by fingering me as an accomplice
should they be discovered?
Fighting a War with Allies: It might seem that in confronting Japan
in WWII, America and Britain simply had to ensure the effective coor-
dination of their actions and the efficient allocation of their resources.
If so, then whatever was to be decided could be decided by the generals
(or admirals), with perhaps the assistance of a staff skilled in organiz-
ing each country’s industrial capacity. Aside from various inter-service
rivalries, a decision theoretic approach aided by such tools as operations
research would appear to be adequate to the task of directing the actions
of the two allies. Things, however, were a bit more complicated and only
partially influenced by the shared goal of Japan’s unconditional surrender.
Britain (or at least Churchill) was also concerned about maintaining (or
resurrecting) its empire and thus favored military actions and an alloca-
tion of resources that facilitated the recapture of Malaya and Singapore,
moving the Japanese out of Burma (Myanmar), and maintaining its con-
trol of India. The United States (or at least Roosevelt), in contrast, was
wholly unsympathetic with this goal, and simple logistics seemed to dictate
focusing its resources on a Pacific campaign. It was well understood, of
course, with Britain focused on the German threat to its homeland, that the
main burden of the war against Japan would be borne by the United States.
Nevertheless, cooperation was essential and to sustain it at an efficient level
often required negotiation and anticipating the likely responses of one’s
ally. Churchill, of course, had to make certain Britain pursued a strategy
that kept the U.S. committed to its “Germany first” policy and that it didn’t
pursue its Asian and Southeast Asian goals in a way that left the American

--- Sayfa 21 ---
12  Politics as a Game
public to view it as simply another imperialistic power. And as America’s
input into the overall war effort increased and then surpassed Britain’s,
Churchill sought a strategy whereby it would remain a great power after
the war. The U.S., for its part, needed whatever assistance Britain could
supply, especially in airlifting supplies to China, along with the unflagging
commitment of the other Commonwealth countries of Australia and New
Zealand. And it understood as well that the reconstruction of Asia after the
war would benefit from Britain’s input. Thus, Anglo-American relations
during the war could not be modeled in simple decision theoretic terms
but were more akin to the give and take that often describe legislative coali-
tions and the trading of votes across legislation—processes that coopera-
tive game theory seeks to address.
Although the political content of some of the preceding examples is minimal,
each suggests that if all of politics entailed simple decision theoretic reasoning,
politics most likely would be utterly boring. But politics and the processes that
characterize it entail, virtually by definition, the interactions of people wherein
the consequences of their choices depend on what others do, and what everyone
does depends on what everyone else does or is expected to do. Which candidate
wins an election depends on the character and actions of his or her opponents;
which bills pass a legislature depend on what vote trades individual legislators
might make across even disparate legislation; what international alliances form
depend, at least in part, on an assessment of what counter-coalitions are likely
to form and the actions of states absent from those alliances. In other words,
individual decisions we might label political do not arise in a vacuum and are
rarely predicated on the assumption that only one decision maker’s actions are
relevant. Politics, then, is inherently game theoretic and understanding political
processes either from the perspective of explaining what has happened or from
that of predicting what will happen necessarily requires understanding how
participants perceive (or misperceive) the game(s) they are playing. And to do
that requires that we understand how to represent and analyze those games, and
here our examples give us some idea as to the components of that representa-
tion. Specifically, a careful description of each of the above scenarios requires
at least the following:
1.
The identities of relevant decision makers;
2.
the choices confronting decision makers, including the order in which
decisions (choices) must be made;
3.
a specification of outcomes and the linkage between choices and outcomes;
4.
each decision maker’s preferences over the set of possible outcomes; and
5.
the perceptions of each decision maker about the components of the game
that concern him or her.
In the case of grading on a curve, for instance, the relevant decision makers are
the students, the choice confronting each is how much or how hard to study,
the outcomes are final grades, the linkage between choices and outcomes is

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Politics as a Game  13
dictated by the instructor’s grading scheme, and preferences are, presumably,
“a higher grade is preferred to a lower grade and, ceteris paribus, less effort
devoted to studying is preferred to more work studying.” And since we are
ostensibly speaking of students who are at least semi-conscious of their educa-
tional environment, we can assume that their perceptions of things correspond
to our description of them.
1.2  Preferences, Risk and Utility
In expanding on the preceding list of the things that comprise a potential game
theoretic representation, the easiest place to begin is with individual preferences.
So suppose we start with an abstract list of outcomes o = (o1, o2, o3, …., on). In
fact, to begin with the simplest quantifiable possibility, suppose the o’s corre-
spond to different amounts of money, where o1 denotes a greater amount than
o2, o2 corresponds to a greater amount than o3, and so on. It seems reasonable
to suppose now that a person, ceteris paribus, will prefer more money to less so
that o1 is preferred to o2, o2 is preferred to o3, etc. Moreover, given this preference,
we can also say that oi is preferred to oj provided only that j > i. In this instance,
then, a person’s preferences are complete (i.e., between any two outcomes, oi and
oj , oi is preferred to oj , oj is preferred to oi or indifference holds between them)
and transitive (i.e., if the person prefers oi to oj and prefers oj to ok, then he or she
prefers oi to ok).
To this point, nothing seems exceptional, and if there were nothing else
to consider when abstractly describing preferences, the reader could legiti-
mately claim we have introduced the idea of complete and transitive prefer-
ences merely to add some academic jargon to the discussion. Unfortunately (or
fortunately, depending on one’s perspective), things can quite readily become
more complicated. Consider, for example, what is likely to happen if one of the
authors of this book is taken to an art museum and asked to state a preference
between successive pairs of paintings. Given our somewhat pedestrian under-
standing of art, when shown paintings #1 and #2, we might say we prefer #1
because it has more blue in it. Then when shown paintings #2 and #3, we might
indicate a preference for #2 because, while the intent of each artist is unintel-
ligible to our eyes, we find #2’s frame more appealing. Finally, when asked to
choose between paintings #1 and #3, we cannot preclude the possibility that we
would state a preference for #3 because we have yet to be exposed to the cur-
rent self-proclaimed purveyors of fashion and lack an appreciation, as art, for a
painting of a blue soup can.
One could write this example off as aberrant and assert that our models and
theories of politics can be limited to those situations where people know their
preferences. Of course, excepting the tautological assertion that people are said
to know their preferences only when those preferences match our assumptions,
we are left with the question as to how and when we know what other people’s
preferences might be. Matters grow even more confusing, though, when we
try to be anthropomorphic about things and attribute preferences or goals to
groups, such as when we seek to explain a state’s foreign policies while treating

--- Sayfa 23 ---
14  Politics as a Game
a state as a unified entity. Consider, for instance, the problems one encoun-
ters with attempting to assess Britain’s goals prior to the outbreak of WWI. It
seems easy to focus on its treaty commitments with France, its commitment
to Belgian sovereignty and its longstanding policy of working against any one
country becoming predominant on the continent in explaining its commit-
ment of troops to the defense of France. But there were confounding matters.
First, an equally salient issue for Britain at the time was that of home rule for
Ireland and the conflict between Northern Ireland and the South. Policy mak-
ers in London could not discount the possibility that maintaining peace there
would require whatever military resources it might otherwise allocate to the
Continent. Second, there was a simmering diplomatic conflict with Russia over
Iran. Britain was converting its navy from coal to oil, which required Iran’s oil
resources. But Russia was also attempting to extend its influence there, and,
if one looked at its history with respect to the expansion of its territory, per-
haps its sovereignty as well. So why join in an alliance, via France, with Russia
against Germany? Indeed, Germany could be viewed as a counterweight to
Russia in the rapidly decaying Ottoman Empire and, in particular, in help-
ing forestall Russia’s longstanding designs on Constantinople. It was anything
but clear at the time, both to outside observers and to some within Britain’s
government, how these concerns would play out in dictating policy. At a mini-
mum, attributing coherent transitive preferences to Britain then was fraught
with difficulty.
We will, in fact, have other more theoretically exact reasons for questioning
the advisability of attributing goals to groups, but setting such things aside for
the moment, consider another problem with the preceding representation of
preference, which concerns the possibility that outcomes arise only up to some
probability. To see the problem here, suppose you are asked how much you are
willing to pay to play the following “game” denoted The St. Petersburg Paradox,
named after Daniel Bernoulli’s presentation of the problem and his solution in
1738 in The Commentaries of The Imperial Academy of Science of St. Petersburg
(although the problem was first stated by his cousin, Nicholas, in 1713): A fair
coin will be tossed and if it comes up heads, you will be paid $2, and the game
ends. But if it comes up tails, the coin will be tossed again, and if it comes up
heads on that second toss, you will be paid $4, and the game will then end. But
if it comes up tails twice in a row, the coin will be tossed yet a third time, and
so on, until a heads finally appears, so that if a heads first appears on the nth
toss, you will be paid 2n dollars. Usually, now, when people are asked how much
they are willing to pay to play this game, few give an answer in excess of $20.
Consider, though, the game’s expected dollar value. The probability of earning
only $2 is ½ (the probability that a heads appears on the first toss); the prob-
ability of earning $4 is ¼ (the probability of a tails on the first toss times the
probability of a heads on the second); . . . the probability of earning $2n is 1/2n
(the probability of n – 1 tails followed by a heads), and so on. Thus, the expected
dollar return is

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Politics as a Game  15
$2(1/2) + $4(1/4) + … + $2n(1/2n) + … = $1 + $1 + … + $1 + … = ∞
That is, the expected payoff from this game expressed in dollars is infinite—an
infinite summation of 1’s. We seriously doubt, however, that most people who
initially said they wouldn’t pay more than $20 to play this game would, after
shown this calculation, increase their willingness to pay by more than a few
dollars (if anything at all).
Now consider a second observation about human behavior: The vast major-
ity of homeowners buy insurance that protects them against the possibility of
their homes burning down or of someone tripping on their basement stairs
and suing for bodily injury. We also know that the big prize from state lotteries
commonly achieve a value of upwards of eight or nine digits and that hundreds
of thousands, if not millions, of people buy lottery tickets in the hopes of win-
ning that mega-prize. It seems safe to assume, then, that there are a consider-
able number of people who buy both insurance and lottery tickets. However,
in one instance (buying insurance) a person is exhibiting risk averse behavior
with respect to money, while in the second instance (buying a lottery ticket)
that same person is exhibiting risk acceptant behavior. In the case of insurance,
people are spending money to avoid risk; in the case of a state lottery, people are
spending money in pursuit of risk. And in both cases, the expected return on
their “investments” is negative because neither insurance companies nor state
lotteries are in the business of losing money. More formally, suppose a person
is presented with a lottery that affords them a probability p of receiving $X and
(1 – p) of $Y, where X < Y and where the expected dollar value of the lottery
is pX + (1 – p)Y = $Z. If given a choice, now, between $Z with certainty versus
playing the lottery, a risk acceptant person prefers the lottery while a risk averse
person prefers the certainty of $Z. Thus, if given a 50–50 chance of winning
$100 versus nothing, a risk acceptant person would choose the lottery to an
offer of being given $50 with certainty whereas a risk averse person would take
the $50.
It is important to note that nothing said here contradicts the reasonable
assumption that people prefer more money to less or negates the assumptions
of transitivity and completeness since our discussion merely introduces a new
consideration into people’s choices; their assessments of risk. In the case of the
coin toss, it is surely true that $2n is a considerable amount of money when n is
large, and it doubtlessly remains true that $2n is preferred to $2n-1. But it is also
true that the number paired with $2n, the probability of winning that amount
(1/2n), is quite small for large n—so small in fact that a person might reason-
ably choose to ignore the term entirely as a feasible possibility. Alternatively,
while buying insurance and lottery tickets may also entail small probabilities
and considerable sums of money, the choices here are qualitatively different. In
the case of insurance, one is trading the certainty of an insurance premium for
a guarantee against the threat of a disagreeable lifestyle-changing loss whereas
in the case of the lottery ticket, one is trading the certainty of a small loss (the

--- Sayfa 25 ---
16  Politics as a Game
cost of the ticket) for a potentially wondrously lifestyle changing gain. And we
should not be surprised that people will somehow treat risk differently, depend-
ing on whether we are speaking of significant gains versus significant losses.
What we require, then, is a way of representing preferences that parsimoni-
ously summarizes people’s attitudes toward risk. That thing is the concept of
utility. So suppose instead of our previous coin toss calculation we instead, for
the left hand side of the equation, write
U($2)(1/2) + U($4)(1/4) + U($8)(1/8) + … + U($2n)(1/2n) + …
with the assumption that U($2) < U($4) < U($8) < … < U($2n) … That is,
suppose we define the function U(x) such that it increases monotonically as x
increases and require that U(x) > U(y) if and only if the person prefers x to y.
Then surely we have not violated the assumption that a person prefers more
money to less. But we have instead substituted for that statement the require-
ment that “the greater the amount of money, the greater is that person’s utility.”
If one asks now about the form of the function U(.) it is here that we gain our
handle on representing preferences over choices that entail risk or uncertainty.
First, notice that there is no reason to suppose that U($) is a linear function of
money—that the utility of a $1 increase in wealth is invariant with the amount
of money a person currently has in their wallet. Indeed, speaking for ourselves,
we can honestly say that the utility of, say, ten million dollars, given our current
salaries, would surely outweigh the utility or pleasure we’d likely derive if we
were already in possession of a hundred million dollars. At least for the authors
of this volume, when speaking of substantial sums, money exhibits diminishing
marginal value (and we are open to anyone who might wish to test this hypoth-
esis). At the same time, differences in the value of various sums of money will
vary depending on the range over which those differences will apply. In the case
of insurance and lottery tickets, suppose the potential loss of one’s home from a
natural disaster or the amount we can be sued equals $X, and that an insurance
policy that protects us against such a possibility costs $Y << $X. Thus, if the
perceived probability of incurring that loss is p, we are then choosing U(–$Y)
over the lottery pU(–$X) + (1 – p)U(0). At the same time, suppose we are one of
those people who, when the potential winnings from a state run lottery reach,
say, $Z, run out and immediately spend $W on lottery tickets. If the probability
of winning the lottery is q, our actions reveal a preference qU($Z) + (1 – q)U(–
$W) over U(0). Regardless of how small p and q might be and regardless of how
large Y and W are, there is nothing in the definition of preferences or utility
that renders these two preferences necessarily inconsistent. Indeed, we would
be surprised to learn that the average person is anything but risk averse when
confronting lotteries that entail large potential losses and risk acceptant when
dealing with lotteries that open the door to large potential gains.
With respect to the St. Petersburg Paradox, to represent the idea that increas-
ing amounts of money exhibit diminishing marginal value, suppose for purposes
of a numerical example that U($X) = X/(X + 1). With this assumption, the value

--- Sayfa 26 ---
Politics as a Game  17
of tossing a fair coin becomes, in expected utility terms, the sum of the infinite
series
(2/3)(1/2) + (4/5)(1/4) + (8/9)(1/8) …
which sums to approximately 0.77. If we now set X/(X + 1) = 0.77, we find that
X ≈ 3.35. Thus, if a person’s utility for money abided by the admittedly ad hoc
function X/(X + 1), he or she should be willing to pay no more than $3.35 to
play our coin toss game (as opposed to infinity).
As a side note, we emphasize that no one has ever seen a utility function
(aside from those which academics postulate on paper). Utility is a contrived
concept developed for the purpose of representing people’s preferences over
risky alternatives. Thus, they serve much the same function as did the concept
of the electron in the 19th century. No one had ever seen or at the time hoped
to see an electron, but positing its existence (and here credit is due to Benjamin
Franklin) explained the observable phenomena associated with positive and
negative charge. This isn’t to say that someday we will not find a better and
more theoretically satisfying way to deal with the complexities of individual
choice. It may be that the concept of a utility function will have a half-life no
greater than that of the ether, which scientists once thought necessary to explain
the transmission of light.
So restating our assumptions about individual preferences, the requirement
that preference is a complete relation is akin to supposing that between any two
outcomes, o1 and o2, either U(o1) > U(o2) or U(o1) < U(o2) or U(o1) = U(o2). Tran-
sitivity, in turn, requires that if U(o1) > U(o2) and U(o2) > U(o3), then U(o1) >
U(o3). In other words, we require that U act much like the natural number
system. There is, though, one additional requirement. Suppose p = (p1, 0, 1 −
p1) is a lottery that assigns o1 the probability p1, o2 the probability 0, and o3 the
probability 1 − p1, suppose q = (0, 1, 0) is a “lottery” that assigns the probability
0 to both o1 and o3, and certainty to o2, and suppose U(o1) > U(o2) > U(o3).
Then a person is said to prefer p to q (or equivalently, U(p) > U(q)) if and only
if p1U(o1) + (1 − p1)U(o3) > U(o2). In other words, we assume that a person’s
utility function can be defined so that it not only represents a person’s ordinal
preferences over outcomes, but allows us to represent that person’s preferences
over risky prospects in terms of his or her preferences across the specific out-
comes over which the risk is spread.
Before we elaborate on the concept of a utility function and some problems
with it, let us first consider some examples to better appreciate the role risk
plays in individual decision making:
Risk, Traffic Control and China’s Media: People’s attitudes toward risk
can sometimes go a long way in explaining government policies or in
understanding how governments might manipulate individual choice
by manipulating risk. Consider, for example, China’s policy with respect
to its mass media. If one questions newspaper editors, columnists, and

--- Sayfa 27 ---
18  Politics as a Game
so on there, you will quickly learn that Beijing’s policy seems at times
mercurial—sometimes it is harsh and at other times lenient, with no
apparent pattern to its forbearance of criticism. It is, of course, entirely
possible that this ebb and flow merely reflects the shifting fortunes of
individuals in authority within the People’s Republic of China (PRC) hier-
archy. But consider the possibility that a mercurial policy is wholly inten-
tional and intended to keep publishers, commentators, newspaper editors
and the like in line. Here the argument would be that with no clearly
delineated and seemingly coherent policy, the PRC leadership is essentially
making the likelihood of punishment a lottery—and if, as is likely, those
publishers, etc., are risk averse with respect to their careers, they will adhere
to a more docile and constrained agenda than if the regime established a
hard and fast rule. Under a stable and well-defined rule, we can expect that
publishers will “walk up to the line” as closely as possible and even, in a few
cases, cross over it for short periods of time, knowing precisely when they
are in compliance with the government’s policy. But under an uncertain or
unclear rule, individuals will make risk-avoidant choices and adhere more
carefully to Beijing’s ultimate (but imperfectly publicly stated) goal. To see
what we mean here in a different context, consider normal behavior on
a Los Angeles freeway unencumbered by gridlock (yes, that happens on
occasion). With a posted speed limit of 65 mph and a general understand-
ing that the police rarely ticket anyone driving within 10 mph of that limit,
most traffic will move along at 75 mph and a few drivers will push the
envelope a bit. Suppose, instead, that the state highway patrol adopts the
publicly stated policy of choosing a number at random between 70 and 80
every day at midnight, and, without publicly revealing that number, tick-
ets everyone who exceeds it on that day. Now we would expect the same
average speed limit—75 mph—that was the de facto limit before, but the
question is: How might the behavior of drivers change? If drivers are risk
averse with respect to receiving speeding tickets and the time lost spent by
the side of the road while the officer writes the ticket, our answer should be
a decrease in average driving speeds to something below 75.
A Crime Control Proposal: In the attempt to insure that people—and
convicted criminals, in particular—are not unduly penalized merely because
of their race, ethnicity or economic status, state and local governments in
the U.S. have, over time, instituted an admittedly varied system of sen-
tencing guidelines for judges wherein two people convicted of a similar
offense receive the same or approximately equivalent sentences. Such
guidelines, then, like a posted speed limit, define one’s sentence for, say, a
first, second and third conviction of automobile theft or shoplifting. But
suppose instead of penalties being defined in terms of fines or length of
time incarcerated in a prison we instead formulate those guidelines as a
probability—a probability of being put to death. Thus, when convicted of
some minor offense (e.g., failing to stop at a stop sign) the assigned prob-
ability will be small (hopefully VERY VERY small). But when convicted
of murder, that probability will be significant, perhaps even 0.99 or 1.0.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Politics as a Game  19
Following conviction, a lottery will be conducted in accordance with the
assigned (sentencing) probabilities with the outcome of the lottery dictat-
ing whether that person will be immediately set free or put to death. We
don’t know about the readers of this volume, but we do know that in such
a system, the authors herein would most definitely be very careful about
stopping at every stop sign encountered when driving.
China, Taiwan, the United States and Strategic Deterrence Through
Risk: The case of the United States’ policy of strategic ambiguity toward the
dispute between China and Taiwan serves as an additional illustration of the
strategic manipulation of risk. China believes that Taiwan is but a renegade
province, that the island’s reunification with the Mainland is a domestic
issue, and that force may legitimately be used to compel reunification. There
is widespread agreement, however, that China at the present time prefers the
status quo to entering into a military conflict with the United States over Tai-
wan. Taiwan, on the other hand, refuses to acknowledge the People’s Repub-
lic of China as the legitimate representative government for all of China, and
seeks increased international autonomy. It is also commonly believed that
Taiwan ultimately wants to be de jure independent from the PRC regime,
but prefers its de facto political independent status to fighting China with-
out American assistance. Most strategic analysts agree that the U.S. prefers
the status quo to all other feasible outcomes. The U.S., then, faces a stan-
dard dual deterrence dilemma: Announcing a policy of under-commitment
to Taiwan raises the incentive for China to secure reunification by force
whereas a policy that over-commits to Taiwan’s defense risks emboldening
Taiwan to move recklessly toward independence, thereby compelling China
to upset the military status quo. Beginning with President Eisenhower in the
early 1950s, the U.S. policy response has, therefore, been to be strategically
ambiguous about the conditions under which it will defend Taiwan. Specifi-
cally, the policy of strategic ambiguity, which derives formally today from the
Taiwan Relations Act, acknowledges that there is only one China, that Taiwan
is part of China, that resolution of the Taiwan issue is a domestic matter, but
at the same time regards any security threat to Taiwan as a “grave concern” to
the U.S. This seemingly contradictory policy has the effect of signaling that
the U.S. has a definite stake in the outcome of the conflict but prefers to abdi-
cate any “first move” to China or Taiwan while leaving both sides uncertain
as to its ultimate response to any change in the status quo. Uncertain about
how the U.S. will respond, neither China nor Taiwan has chosen to take deci-
sive provocative action, and as long as the U.S. enjoys an asymmetrical power
advantage over both China and Taiwan, strategic ambiguity offers a better
shot at maintaining things as they are than does strategic clarity.
The preceding examples demonstrate that the sources of risk need not derive
from the things we don’t know or cannot predict about “nature,” such as the
weather, but also include those risks deliberately contrived as an element of
individual strategy. A good part of this volume, then, will consider the manipu-
lation of risk as a strategy in human interactions. But before we do so, we need

--- Sayfa 29 ---
20  Politics as a Game
to confront the fact that when it comes to the analysis of risk and our treatment
of preferences, neither life nor the study of politics is ever simple. To wit, con-
sider the following three outcomes:
o1 = $5 million
o2 = $1 million
o3 = $0
Now we would like the reader to carefully consider these two lotteries over the
outcomes:
p = (0.10, 0.89, 0.01) versus q = (0, 1, 0)
After making the bold attempt at putting yourself in a situation where you
might actually get to make such a choice, which would you choose? Done think-
ing? Now give some serious thought to the following two alternative lotteries:
p’ = (0.10, 0, 0.90) versus q’ = (0, 0.11, 0.89)
It has been our experience now that when students (and most everyone else,
including ourselves) are asked to choose between p and q, a good share chooses q
after reasoning that “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” Or, “a lot can be
done with one million dollars, and think of the regret if p were chosen instead and
I ended up with nothing.” Now, when asked to choose between p’ and q’, a reason-
able share of people who initially chose q would choose p’ over q’, with the ratio-
nalization that “there isn’t much difference between the likelihood of getting five
million with p’ as opposed to one million with q’ so why not go for the big bucks?”
We would hardly label these two choices—q over p and p’ over q’—as irratio-
nal or illogical; they might be the ones we ourselves would make. The problem
here, though, is that no utility function is consistent with them. By indicating a
preference for q over p, it must be that
0.10U($5 million) + 0.89U($1 million) + 0.01U(nothing) < U($1 million)
or equivalently,
0.10U($5 million) + 0.01U(nothing) < 0.11U($1 million)
However, the choice of p’ over q’ requires,
0.10U($5 million) + 0.90U(nothing) > 0.11U($1 million) +
0.89U(nothing)
or, after rearranging terms
0.10U($5 million) + 0.01U(nothing) > 0.11U($1 million),

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Politics as a Game  21
which directly contradicts the implication of a choice of q over p. What’s
going on here? There are, we suppose, any number of possible explanations
for such seemingly inconsistent choices, but the one that especially appeals
to us is that the 0.01 difference in the likelihood of getting nothing between
p and q is not being evaluated in the same way as is the difference in these
likelihoods between p’ and q’. In the first case, moving from q to p ren-
ders something that is impossible (getting nothing) possible whereas, in the
second case, moving from q’ to p’, something that is likely merely becomes
a bit more likely. In other words, the 0.01 difference between the pairs of
lotteries of coming away empty handed, while treated identically in an alge-
braic manipulation, has a different psychological impact in the two sets of
decisions.
It would seem, then, that not only is the value we place on objects wholly sub-
jective and dependent on context (e.g., how we value a million dollars depends
on whether or not we are already rich), but the probabilities we associate with
risky choices are subjective, as well, and dependent on context. Unsurpris-
ingly, this fact is widely recognized by decision theorists and considerable effort
has been given to seeing what generalizations can be devised about subjective
probability—probabilities that do not necessarily adhere to the rules we impose
on them in mathematics and statistics. In this volume, however, we will make
little use of that research because it only complicates our attempt to lay out the
fundamentals of game theory as applied to politics and because very little of
that research has yet been applied to the study of politics. Thus, throughout this
volume we will treat probabilities in much the same way a statistician might by
assuming that they obey the laws of algebra, that they do not fall outside of the
range [0, 1], and that when summed across all feasible outcomes for a particular
problem, that sum equals 1.0. Once again, though, we realize that individual
behavior will often violate this assumption and it is important that we keep
this fact in mind before we draw too strong a conclusion from any analytical
exercise.
Why Vote?: To perhaps better appreciate the role subjective probabilities
might play in politics, consider the simple act of voting in mass elections.
At least in a democracy there is perhaps no more fundamental act of citi-
zenship than that of casting one’s ballot for or against a candidate, a party
or some proposition on a referendum. But suppose we ask why people vote.
This might seem a question with a simple answer—people vote because
they want to increase the likelihood their preferred outcome prevails. Pre-
sumably, however, voting is a costly act. Even if one ignores the costs of
becoming informed about the alternatives on the ballot, it requires an allo-
cation of time to simply get to the polling station and in important elec-
tions people have been known to stand in line for hours waiting for their
turn to enter the voting booth. So, proceeding to some minimal formalism,
let P be the probability that your favored candidate in a two-candidate con-
test wins if you do not vote, P’ be that probability if you do vote, U be the
value you associate with seeing that candidate victorious, U’ be the value

--- Sayfa 31 ---
22  Politics as a Game
associated with that candidate losing, and C the cost of voting. Then ignor-
ing any algebraic complexities occasioned by the possibility of making or
breaking ties between the candidates, the expected utility of not voting and
not incurring the cost C is
E(NV) = PU + (1 − P)U’
while the expected utility of voting is
E(V) = P’U + (1 − P’)U’ − C.
Presumably, then, a person should vote if and only if E(V) > E(NV), or
equivalently,
(P’ − P)(U’ − U) − C > 0.
Admittedly, now, for people who intensely prefer a candidate, the differ-
ence U’ − U may be considerable. But consider P’ − P, which is the prob-
ability of being pivotal in the election in terms of making or breaking ties.
Such a probability might not be small if we are considering an election in
some village with 100 or so voters. But what of a national election with
millions of voters? Surely the probability of being pivotal then fades to
insignificance. Indeed, to say that your favored candidate is more likely to
win if you vote for him rather than abstain is akin to saying you are more
likely to hit your head on the moon by standing on a chair. But if (P’ − P)
is essentially zero, and if C is consequential, then few people should vote.
Since this prediction is clearly at odds with the data, we must ask again why
people take the time to cast ballots in mass elections.
There are, in fact, two alternative explanations for non-zero turnout in
mass elections (aside from those countries that fine people for not vot-
ing). The first hypothesis is that voting gives people a sense of fulfilled cit-
izen duty—a warm feeling in the tummy, you might say. That is, we might
suppose that people derive utility from the mere act of voting regardless
of what impact their vote has on the election outcome. Equivalently, we
might suppose that failing to vote is costly. Anyone living with a 12-year-
old daughter or granddaughter who, on the basis of what she has been
taught in school, regards her parents or grandparents as beneath con-
tempt if they do not vote understands this cost. An alternative hypoth-
esis (which does not preclude the first explanation from applying) is to
suppose that people, subjected with mass media reports of how close an
election might be, subjectively over-estimate (P’ − P). In fact, it is pos-
sible that people partake of a rather strange form of backwards causality,
reasoning that “there are millions of people like me, and if I decide not
to vote, they most likely would reach the same decision. But if I decide
to vote, they will as well because their thinking will be the same as mine.
Thus, my decision isn’t merely impacting one vote but millions.” Such
thinking, of course, inflates the probability that one’s vote is pivotal, and
far be it for us to say that such reasoning cannot describe the inner work-
ings of the mind.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Politics as a Game  23
Some academics object to the idea that people vote because of a sense of
citizen duty, arguing that such a supposition merely makes voting rational by
assumption and thus tautological. However, it is no more tautological to sup-
pose that people vote because they have been socialized to value the simple act
of voting for its own sake any more than to say a person buys a red as opposed
to blue car because he or she likes red. Similarly, to suppose that people partake
of a seemingly perverse view of causality when voting might seem strange, but
in modeling people we best be prepared to learn that the human brain can
entertain or seemingly employ forms of logic that defy logic. Be that as it may,
there is one final qualification we need to add to our presentation of the con-
cept of utility.
To this point we’ve made the assumption, when speaking of money, that
U($X) > U($Y) if and only if X > Y. However, suppose to the description of
outcomes we append the date at which the money is received. Specifically,
suppose $X is “One hundred dollars a month from today” and $Y is “$50
today.” In other words, even when speaking of a simple thing like money we
suppose outcomes are multidimensional and their descriptions include not
only the quantity of money but also when it is received. Here we know that
­people’s preferences vary. Some will prefer receiving the $50 immediately
whereas others will prefer to postpone things provided they are compensated
by a larger amount. In other words, people’s preferences are defined not only
over monetary amounts but also over time. Such possibilities require a rep-
resentation, and perhaps the simplest is to add a discount to the timing of an
outcome, where that discount is calibrated by the units of time under consider-
ation. For example, for $X received next month, we might write δX, where 0 <
δ < 1 since presumably people will prefer $X today to $X next month. And for
$X two months from now, we can doubly discount and write δ2X, and for three
months from now, δ3X, and so on.
Time discounting applies to things other than monetary outcomes. For
example, it is well known that the behavior of drug addicts is only imperfectly
impacted by a knowledge of the long term medical consequences of their addic-
tion. Attempting to cure addiction by educating the addict about the harmful
medical consequences of their problem will almost certainly fail. This is because
addicts, nearly by definition, have an overly strong preference for immediate
self-gratification as opposed to the long-term benefits of abstention and recov-
ery. Indeed, one might say that “getting hooked on drugs” is shorthand for say-
ing that the drug itself alters a person’s time discount. Time discounts can also
be impacted by one’s environment and the time discounts of others. Suppose
you are contemplating an investment in a society rife with political corruption
and where most persons, as a consequence (as is arguably the case, for example,
in many of the states of the former Soviet Union), act with very short-term
horizons. Those short horizons derive from the fact that, in a truly corrupt
state where there is no line between the criminal and the government, the gov-
ernment today might encourage your investments but tomorrow, after being
bribed by your competitors, act to confiscate everything. Confronted with such
a state, most people would naturally prefer, when making any investment, to

--- Sayfa 33 ---
24  Politics as a Game
“take what they can and run.” But this means people will have few incentives
to abide by long-term contractual agreements, in which case, anyone entering
that economy with a long-term planning horizon will be akin to a small fish in
a pool of sharks.
1.3  Economics Versus Politics and Spatial Preferences
The notion of time discounting will bear substantive fruit later when, in addi-
tion to the matter of political corruption, we consider such things as how politi-
cal constitutions survive or fail as well as how cooperation in any form emerges
in a society. But before we proceed to modeling specific political processes or
phenomena, we note that when attempting to theorize about politics or to
construct a model of some particular political process it behooves us to use
the weakest assumptions possible, if only to ensure the greatest generality of
whatever insights we might establish. But while generality has a self-evident
value, it is unfortunately also the case that the weaker our assumptions, the
less substantively precise are our insights. Thus, theorizing about anything, be
it physics, chemistry, biology, economics or politics, entails maintaining a bal-
ance between generality and substantive specificity. Political science, though,
is a discipline that stands relatively high on the food chain of our knowledge
of and theories about social processes. Indeed, one might even draw a paral-
lel between various fields of engineering and design versus the more funda-
mental fields of physics, chemistry and mathematics. Political science is (or at
least should be) an applied field that takes what we know from statistics, from
decision theory, from psychology and from game theory (as well as from the
other social sciences) and applies what is known to the social processes we label
political, ostensibly with the goal of improving the lot of our species. Thus,
while the political scientist is not required to be a game theorist per se who goes
about proving mathematical theorems about this or that, he or she is expected
to be able to say something about such things as constitutional design, coalition
formation in legislatures and parliaments, the imperatives of various forms of
democratic governance, the sources of international peace versus war and the
operation of alternative electoral processes.
The engineer who wishes to design a more efficient gas turbine or faster
aircraft illustrates the parallel in the physical sciences. While the engineer is
not expected to advance fundamental laws of physics and thermodynamics, he
must nevertheless make use of those laws (or at least not presume that a design
can violate them) in a creative way, filling in the blanks of abstract constructs
with specific measurements or assumptions while at the same time making
approximations that allow for the formulation of a substantively (physically)
meaningful design proposal. The same is true in economics wherein those
attempting to gauge trends in interest rates or the impact of some regulatory
edict on firm behavior know that the laws of supply and demand will constrain
events. And just as those elementary economic principles begin with highly
abstract formal representations of consumer preferences and firm objectives,

--- Sayfa 34 ---
Politics as a Game  25
the political scientist, when modeling political processes, must often begin with
abstract representations of preference and uninterpreted functions that denote
utility, supplying them later with specific substantive meaning.
The Grocery Store: To see what we mean by all of this, let us attempt to
gain a better understanding of the differences between economics and
political science (without presuming that these two disciplines are neces-
sarily disjoint) with a somewhat fanciful scenario. Consider the simple act
of purchasing groceries in a supermarket—but to make our life simple,
suppose there are but two distinct commodities in that store, X and Y. Your
decision, then, is to choose how many items of X to buy, denoted x, and
how many of Y to buy, denoted y, where your decision is subject to a budget
constraint, B. Thus, the most of X and Y you can purchase is xpX + ypY = B,
where pX and pY are the per unit prices of X and Y respectively. Assuming
that you prefer as much of X and of Y as possible (i.e., you don’t confront
a problem of storing either commodity and neither is perishable), we can
assume you’ll balance off your purchases of these two goods so as to maxi-
mize your overall utility.
This much, of course, is little more than the introductory chapter of
Elementary Economics 101 and corresponds to the economist’s classi-
cal representation of a trip to the grocery store. Now, however, imagine
a somewhat modified scenario. Rather than visit the store whenever you
feel the need to replenish your supply of X and Y, suppose you are assigned
a specific day and time to go to the store and that you are also required
to bring with you a certain amount of money. Upon arriving at the store
you find that 100 other people have been assigned the same time as you to
shop and have been told to bring the same amount of money with them.
However, upon entering the store the door is locked behind all of you, you
are all led into a back room and told, after your money has been collected,
that what you purchase today will be determined by a majority vote among
all 101 of you. More precisely, suppose two of you are chosen at random
and labeled “candidates.” Each candidate must then propose a package of
X and Y whose cost equals the sum of money collected from you with the
presumption that everyone’s budget will be spent in an identical way. The
99 of you who are now designated “voters” must then vote for one of the
two candidates, and the candidate receiving the most votes will be declared
the winner. Each voter and both candidates will then be given a shopping
bag that matches the proposal of that winner with the winning candidate
receiving an additional side payment of some sort so that both candidates
have an incentive to win (as opposed to merely proposing their ideal allo-
cation as their “campaign platform”).
This might seem a truly strange way of organizing grocery shopping,
but it does illustrate some of the differences between economics and poli-
tics, which in this case is simply the difference between two ways of allo-
cating the goods and services people value. Now, though, consider the full

--- Sayfa 35 ---
26  Politics as a Game
implications of this difference. In the more regular way of allocating gro-
ceries, each person is free to choose the combination of X and Y that best
serves their tastes whereas, in the second, each person is, in effect, a pris-
oner of the tastes of a majority or of the two competing proposals offered
by the candidates. In the economic realm, then, we might attempt to pre-
dict how many of X and Y will sell by a careful examination of individual
consumer tastes with the understanding that ultimate demand will equal
the sum of demands. In the more collective or political realm, on the other
hand, ultimate demand will depend on learning what proposals the candi-
dates are likely to make and how voters will vote when confronted by alter-
native proposals. In the economic realm we need only identify that specific
combination of X and Y that maximizes a consumer’s utility, given their
budget constraint. In the political realm, in order to learn how they might
vote between the proposals of the two competing candidates, we must also
be concerned with what their preferences look like over combinations they
might not choose were they dictator of their own budgets.
We warn that we should not draw too sharp a distinction between economics
and politics, since often politics entails deciding how to organize our “shop-
ping”—should, for example, the purchase of health care insurance be a private
or public matter, should people be free to discriminate against certain classes or
races when selling their own homes, and should even a long-established pub-
lic retirement program be made a partially private affair with both public and
private options? Surely, few would argue that the answers to these questions are
straightforward or without controversy. The same is true with our grocery store
example. Suppose X and Y correspond to beer and baby food, and suppose that
a clear majority of the 101 people sharing the back room of the supermarket are
mothers with babies. Then suppose that you are an unmarried male. I suspect
you would then hold a strong preference for the usual way of buying groceries
(unless you have a perverse taste for crushed peas and strained carrots). Con-
versely, your preferences for how grocery shopping might best be organized
could change if mothers with babies constituted only a minority of those pres-
ent. Absent a concern for mothers with hungry and crying babies, you might
see this as an opportunity to have parents subsidize your consumption of beer.
Politics is often a choice of how to allocate goods and resources—what to
relegate to the private sector and what to allocate by some collective process.
But in making that decision it is important to understand how different insti-
tutional forms—different methods for making social decisions—perform. For
example, in lieu of selecting two persons at random to play the role of can-
didates, suppose we simply let the 101 people in the room negotiate directly
among themselves until a majority reach an agreement and terminate further
discussion. Or suppose we divide them into three constituencies of 33, 34, and
34 people, let each of them in a manner of their own choosing select a repre-
sentative who will then negotiate with the two representatives from the other
constituencies until they reach an agreement? What difference, if any, will each
of these schemes imply in terms of the agreements reached?

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Politics as a Game  27
To answer such questions—to conduct a comparative analysis of institutional
forms—requires a common underlying structure for modeling the alternatives
and individual preferences over the outcomes with which they deal. Returning,
then, to our two commodities X and Y, and for a specific (albeit arbitrary) ana-
lytic example, let us suppose that the utility a person associates with a combina-
tion of X and Y is given by
U(x, y) = [5 – 5/(x + 1)] + [4 – 4/(y + 1)]
As complex as this expression might seem, it has a simple interpretation: If
x = y = 0, then U(0, 0) = 0, but as either x or y increase, the subtractions in the
expression decrease at a decreasing rate. Thus, as x or y increase, U(x, y) increases
(but at a decreasing rate) and approaches the upper bound of 9 as the amount
of both commodities approaches infinity. The two commodities, though, are
not perfect substitutes. For example, U(2,0) = 10/3 whereas U(0,2) = 8/3. In
other words, if you have two units of X, you would require more than two
units of Y to be compensated for the loss of your holdings of X. The relation-
ship between X and Y in a person’s preferences can be portrayed, then, as in
Figure 1.1. The horizontal axis denotes units of X while the vertical axis denotes
units of Y. The curves in turn correspond to indifference curves—combinations
of X and Y that yield the same value for U(x, y) and where combinations on
curves further from the origin are preferred to combinations that fall on curves
closer to the origin. Figure 1.1 also portrays a person’s decision when choosing
some combination of X and Y subject to a budget constraint. Here we assume
that the per unit cost of X exceeds that of Y, so if a person spends their entire
budget on one commodity, they can buy more units of Y than of X. Finally,
the indifference curve that is tangent to this line represents the highest level of
utility our decision maker can achieve, given their budget, so that x* and y* are
the combination of goods we can assume they will purchase if they are dictator
over their purchases.
Figure 1.1 is common to any introductory economics text and its discus-
sion of consumer behavior in markets. But now let us again shift back to our
peculiar (collective) method of grocery shopping. Here a person can no longer
ensure that (x*, y*) is chosen, since the outcome depends on the preferences
of other voters and the packages proposed by the candidates. In this instance,
any point along the budget constraint line is a possibility (recall our assump-
tion that each person brought the same sum of money to the store). But notice
that the shape of the indifference curves in Figure 1.1 tells us something about
the nature of this person’s preferences across that line. Specifically, if we label
the point o*, which corresponds to the combination (x*, y*), the person’s ideal
point, then as we move away from that point in either direction, we move to
lower and lower indifference curves. That is, the further we move from o*, the
less our abstract person/voter likes it.
If we now lay out the budget constraint line horizontally, we can draw a
preference or utility curve such as the one shown in Figure 1.2, which for obvi-
ous reasons we refer to as a single peaked preference curve. The horizontal axis

--- Sayfa 37 ---
28  Politics as a Game
now corresponds to different allocations of the person’s budget between X and
Y, while the vertical axis denotes the person’s preference or utility—which we
know decreases as we move away from o*, either to the left or right.
While Figure 1.2 might offer information about preferences that we need
not concern ourselves with when discussing choices in a supermarket when the
usual rules apply, it may be critical for determining how a person votes when
those store purchases are made using some collective mechanism. Suppose, for
example, that X = beer and Y = baby food. Then an unmarried male might have
the preferences denoted by the rightmost curve in Figure 1.3 (not setting that
person’s ideal point at Y = 0 allows for the possibility that he might be curious
as to what crushed peas or strained carrots taste like or that he feels some degree
of sympathy toward mothers with babies). In contrast, the left-most curve with
an ideal point at A might correspond to one of those women with babies who,
nevertheless, is willing to allocate a small part of the family budget to beer for
B
y
y*
x*
o´´´
o´
o*
o´´
u´
u´´
x
Figure 1.1  Consumer indifference curves with budget constraint
preference
o*
B
Figure 1.2  A single peaked preference

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Politics as a Game  29
her husband. Voter 2, with an ideal point at B, on the other hand, might cor-
respond to a husband who knows he’d be in serious trouble at home were he
to return from grocery shopping after spending the majority of the family’s
budget on beer.
We will make a good use of preference curves such as those in Figure 1.3.
But before we do so, let us consider some extensions of this representation of
preferences. Specifically, suppose there is a third commodity, Z, that can be pur-
chased only outside of the supermarket. If we were now to attempt to represent
a person’s preferences over X, Y and Z simultaneously in a three-dimensional
space by way of extending Figure 1.1, we’d most likely imagine something like a
set of nested mixing bowls with their bottoms aimed at the origin of the space,
and each smaller or more distant bowl corresponding to a higher level of util-
ity. We refrain from drawing such curves because doing so exceeds our graphic
skills. But now imagine a person’s budget constraint in this three dimensional
space. Rather than a line, that constraint would be a triangle (a budget simplex)
wherein each vertex of the triangle corresponds to all of the budget being spent
on X or Y or Z. Finally, try to imagine what the surface of that triangle might
look like as it cuts through various mixing bowls. Some of those bowls will
not, of course, touch the triangle because they represent combinations of the
three goods that cannot be achieved, given one’s budget. And some of them will
inscribe circles or some such curve on the triangle as the triangle cuts through
them, thereby denoting budget-consuming mixes of X, Y and Z over which the
person is indifferent. And unless the decision maker in question has prefer-
ences that yield a taste for spending their entire budget on only one of the three
goods, we will find that one of the bowls just touches (is tangent to) the triangle.
That point of tangency, then, corresponds to the person’s ideal allocation of his
preference
Voter 1
Voter 2
Voter 3
A
B
Figure 1.3  Three single peaked preferences for three grocery store “voters”

--- Sayfa 39 ---
30  Politics as a Game
or her budget and, as in Figures 1.2 and 1.3, the further from that point, the
less that person will like it. Figure 1.4, then, illustrates these indifference curves
on the budget simplex, assuming perfectly round bowls after we lay out that
simplex flat on the page.
The reader might ask why we’ve gone through so much trouble to extend our
2-goods model to 3 goods. Suppose, then, that instead of taking a fixed amount
of money from our grocery shoppers when they enter the supermarket, we
instead allow them to vote on how much of their budget will be spent on X and
Y (and, thereby, how much they can spend subsequently, once released from the
store, on Z)—or, more properly, we require that the two candidates take posi-
tions on how much will be spent in total on X and Y as well as on the allocation
of monies between X and Y. Suppose we also eliminate any reference to beer and
baby food and instead substitute such words as “social welfare” and “national
defense.” And instead of the abstract labeling of the third dimension as good
Z, we instead think of it as the negative of a tax rate. Thus, we have arrived at a
model—admittedly simple-minded—of an election in which voters must not
only choose between different types of public spending, but also on the over-
all size of the public sector. People with ideal point near the budget simplex’s
vertex on the Z dimension prefer a small, if not insignificant, state wherein all
consumption decisions are left to the private sector; people with ideal points
near or at the simplex’s vertex on the X dimension prefer massive government
spending, provided it is spent on national defense; and people with ideal point
at the third vertex prefer that most of society’s wealth be devoted to social wel-
fare programs.
Presumably, the majority of us prefer something closer to the middle or at
least away from such extremes. For that reason, when making use of such spatial
representations of preference, we forgo drawing triangles and, as we have done
in Figure 1.4, simply denote the axes of the coordinate system along with the
indifference curves and ideal points within it. The important thing, though, is
ideal point
issue 1
issue 2
Figure 1.4  Two-dimensional spatial indifference curves

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Politics as a Game  31
to understand how we can move from the economist’s usual representation of
consumer preferences to those of voters who must make decisions using a more
collective (political) institutional arrangement.
Before we sign off on this subject, it is useful to consider some of the forms
spatial preferences can take. Figure  1.4 represents those preferences with
some nondescript concentric circles, which suggests that the voter in question
weighs the two dimensions or issues equally. Circular indifference curves or
contours are especially useful for illustrating basic ideas, and are useful when
we take advantage of our natural intuitions about geometry and distance to
explore a new idea so that our intuition can lead our reasoning. However, con-
sider Figure 1.5a, which represents preferences as concentric ellipses. In this
instance, we can say that whoever holds such preferences is more sensitive to
changes on the first (horizontal) dimension than the second. And then there’s
Figure 1.5b, where the elliptical indifference curves are tilted relative to the axes.
First, notice that in both Figures 1.4 and 1.5a, a person’s preference on one
dimension does not depend on what choice is made on the other dimension.
So if we arbitrarily fix the value of one dimension, the most preferred value on
the second is unchanged (i.e., if, for instance, we draw a horizontal line in either
Figure 1.4 or 1.5a, the value of X that corresponds to the tangency of that line
to an indifference curve, x*, is invariant with the height of the line). In this case,
a person’s preferences are said to be separable and their utility can be expressed
as U(x, y) = f(x) + g(y). For the case of Figure 1.5b, in contrast, preference on
one dimension depends on the value assumed on the other. For this example,
the higher we draw a horizontal line across the figure, the higher is the value
of X that corresponds to the tangency of that line to an indifference curve (x**
versus x*). Thus, to represent preferences for overall combinations of X and Y
we must now write something like U(x, y) = f(x) + g(y) + h(x, y).
Re-Voting at the Philadelphia Convention of 1787: Absent an apprecia-
tion of the possibility of non-separable preferences, a naïve reader of James
Madison’s notes on America’s Constitutional Convention in 1787 might
occasion considerable confusion, or at least leave one with the impression
that the delegates there were indeed a confused lot. Specifically, consider
the following recorded votes on the character of the presidency:
June 1: agrees to a seven-year term, by a vote of 5–4–1
June 2: agrees to selection of the chief executive by the national legislature,
8–2 and reaffirms a seven-year term, 7–2–1
June 9: defeats selection of the president by state chief executives (gover-
nors), 10–1
June 17: agrees once again to selection of president by the national legisla-
ture, 10–0, but postpones decision on seven-year term
July 19: votes 10–0 to reconsider the executive branch; passes by a vote
of 6–3–1 selection by electors; defeats 8–2 a 1-term term limit, defeats
5–3–2 a seven-year term, and passes 9–1 a six-year term

--- Sayfa 41 ---
32  Politics as a Game
July 23: agrees by a vote of 7–3 to again reconsider the executive branch;
passes 7–4 selection of president by national legislature and passes 7–3
a seven-year term with a 1-term term limit.
Aug. 24: defeats 9–2 direct election of the president and defeats 6–5 elec-
tion by electors
Sept. 6: defeats 10–1 a 1-term term limit for the president, and agrees to
election of the president by electors via a series of votes refining the
Electoral College.
It might be true that the delegates were indeed at times indecisive and
uncertain as to the best arrangement when dealing with details. The pre-
ceding vote history reveals, though, that the delegates were in fact con-
sidering three inter-related issues: The method of selecting a president,
the president’s term of office, and whether there would be a limit to the
number of terms. In addition, decisions were being made on a great many
x
(a)
x*
Figure 1.5a  Elliptical 2-dimensional indifference curve
(b)
x
x* x**
Figure 1.5b  Elliptical 2-dimensional indifference curve

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Politics as a Game  33
other matters between June 1 and September 6, including the design of the
national legislature and the powers of the president. There is little reason to
suppose that the delegates, which hardly could be said to not have included
some of the greatest political thinkers and engineers at this or any other
time, deemed these decisions wholly separable. Thus, a decision on one
dimension (issue) might reasonably be expected to impact their prefer-
ences on others and, thereby, cause them to reconsider prior decisions.
Institutionally Induced Non-Separability: We might be tempted to
think that separable versus non-separable preferences are the product of
individual taste, but they can also be institutionally induced. Consider the
following clause from Article II, Section 1 of the United States Constitu-
tion: “The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by Ballot
for two Persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the
same State with themselves.” The Twelfth Amendment, of course, modified
this clause by deleting “for two Persons” and inserted instead “for President
and Vice-President” so as to avoid the issues that arose in the election of
1800 when both Aaron Burr and Thomas Jefferson received the same Elec-
toral vote total and it fell to Congress to decide which would be President
and which Vice President. For our purposes, though, notice that one’s pref-
erence for Vice Presidential candidate can be (and generally is) a function
of who is nominated for President because the political parties that nomi-
nate candidates will quite naturally seek some geographic spread to the two
nominees so as to appeal to the electorates’ varied sectional interests. The
U.S. Constitution sets that preference in stone and dictates that if X is our
choice for President, then we cannot choose Y if Y resides in the same state
as X. Or, for another example of non-separability induced in part by insti-
tutional arrangements, we note that in presidential (as opposed to parlia-
mentary) regimes, while some voters might prefer a unified government in
which the same party controls both the executive and legislative branches,
there are also those who prefer divided government wherein one party can
act as a brake on the actions of the other. One’s preference for president,
then, might readily depend on who we think will control the legislature
and, in the United States at least, whether the same party will control both
the Senate and the House.
There are surely other examples of non-separable preferences that are either
psychologically or institutionally induced. For example, suppose you must staff
a 2-member committee by choosing from a set of 4 candidates, A, B, C and D. It
might be that the person you most want to see on the committee is A, because
A’s preferences most closely match yours. But suppose A as a function of per-
sonalities cannot work with either B or C so that any committee that combines
A with either of these two people is likely to function poorly or not at all. Thus,
if C is chosen first, you most likely would prefer that either B or D be the second
serving member. However, if D is chosen to fill the first seat, your preference is
that D be joined by A.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
34  Politics as a Game
Separable versus non-separable preferences do not, though, exhaust the pos-
sibilities we might need to consider when describing forms of individual prefer-
ence. Consider the following example of preferences we call lexicographic:
Diamond Rings and the FDA: We’re not sure how many male readers
have had the opportunity to shop for an engagement ring, but those of
you who have should immediately understand the following preferences
among women (hope we’re not being too chauvinistic here). There are
several dimensions by which to evaluate such a ring—the size (weight) of
the stone, the stone’s clarity, its cut and the quality of the setting. But if
your experience matches ours, you will quickly learn that preferences here
can be lexicographic wherein the second, third and other dimensions do
not come into play in making choice unless the two top alternatives are
equivalent on the first dimension. Specifically, cut, clarity and setting are of
little note unless the main stone is “big enough.” Indeed, if given a choice
between a 2-karat stone of average clarity versus a 1-karat stone of superb
clarity, not a few women would choose the first stone. After all, how much
can clarity count if people don’t first at a distance say “wow”?
For another example, it is often argued that America’s Food and Drug
Administration is too conservative in its approval of new drugs—that
effective drugs are available elsewhere in the world long before they are
approved for distribution and sale in the United States. Now consider that
there are two basic dimensions with which to evaluate any new drug: Its
potential effectiveness in treating some disease versus the risks of its side
effects. Ideally, these two dimensions should be balanced against each other
with a willingness to assume risk a function of a drug’s ostensible effective-
ness. But consider the incentives of bureaucrats within the FDA. If they
disapprove of a drug that later proves to have few side effects, there are
unlikely to be any personal consequences—arguments can always be made
that further study was necessary before a definitive risk assessment could
be conclusively offered. Moreover, if they approve a drug that is effective
with no risk, they are unlikely to receive any credit since, after all, they have
merely “done what’s right.” On the other hand, if they certify a drug that
proves to have negative or even deadly consequences, there’s a good chance
that those responsible for the approval will have “hell to pay.” Thus, FDA’s
bureaucrats are likely to be risk averse in the extreme with respect to a
drug’s side effects to the point that only drugs with no apparent side effects
whatsoever are approved. If given the opportunity to certify two competing
drugs X and Y from two competing pharmaceutical firms, bureaucrats with
lexicographic preferences will consider the matter of relative effectiveness
ONLY if both offer equally low risk; otherwise, they will certify neither or
the one with no apparent side effects regardless of its relative effectiveness.
We draw attention to lexicographic preferences not because there are
advantages to playing analytically with them. Indeed, the opposite is true, but
our examples show that not only can such preferences arise “naturally” for

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Politics as a Game  35
psychological reasons, they can also be institutionally induced and, therefore,
they are preferences with which we must sometimes deal. Indeed, inducing lexi-
cographic preferences is not the only role institutions can play in determining
how to best model preferences in specific circumstances.
A Lesson from Tinseltown: For an example of how the choice of an
institution—in this case a voting method—can impact which dimension
of preference is most relevant to an individual decision maker’s calculus,
we note that if an idea is apparent even to those who populate the movie
studios of Hollywood—producers, directors, actors and actresses—then
the idea must indeed have an element of truth to it. We are reminded then
of the ending scene of the movie 1776, Hollywood’s not-altogether histori-
cally accurate version of events in Philadelphia at the drafting and signing
of the Declaration of Independence. In voting on the Declaration, the del-
egates abided by the rule of unanimity whereby votes are taken by state and
where a single Nay would send the document down to defeat. In the movie
version of events, the decision comes down to the Pennsylvania delega-
tion, which, with considerable liberties taken with historical fact, consists
of Benjamin Franklin, John Dickinson and Judge James Wilson. Through-
out the movie, Wilson is portrayed as a weak personality willing to do the
bidding of Dickinson, who is strongly opposed to declaring independence
and prefers instead that further efforts be made at seeking reconciliation
with England. Thus, with two votes against one for Pennsylvania and a rule
of unanimity in effect for the Congress as a whole, the Declaration seems
doomed to defeat. Franklin, however, makes the parliamentary maneuver
of calling for a roll call vote of his delegation. With Franklin voting Yea
and Dickinson Ney, Wilson becomes pivotal “for or against,” in Franklin’s
words, “American independence.” With Wilson wavering, Franklin drives
home the point of Wilson’s pivotal role by noting that “the map makers
of the world are awaiting your decision.” If preferences over choices are
invariant with context, Franklin’s parliamentary maneuver should be of
no consequence. But by being made pivotal, the basis of Wilson’s decision
changes. As Wilson himself states the matter, if the delegates were able to
vote anonymously within each state, it would be Pennsylvania that would
be credited or blamed for having defeated the Declaration; however, under
a roll call vote it would be Wilson specifically who did so. As Wilson goes
on to explain, if he votes Yea, he will merely be one among many whereas if
he votes Ney, he will be remembered as the man who sank American inde-
pendence. Since his strong preference for anonymity trumps his preference
for seeking accommodation with England, Franklin’s maneuver changes
the basis of Wilson’s decision—changes the value (utility) Wilson associ-
ates with the alternatives he confronts—and, thus, the final outcome.
This example is not intended to illustrate a situation in which Wilson’s core
values changed—that somehow Franklin’s strategy changed the judge’s pref-
erences over some multidimensional issue space, where those dimensions

--- Sayfa 45 ---
36  Politics as a Game
included perhaps one that represented America’s alternative relationships
with England and another his public visibility. But Franklin’s parliamentary
maneuver—his switch in voting schemes for Pennsylvania’s delegation—did
impact the dimensions Wilson deemed relevant to his decision. Only under a
voting scheme in which individual ballots are recorded does Wilson’s prefer-
ence for anonymity play a role since only under such a rule are the outcomes
“Declaration ratified” and “Declaration not ratified” elaborated to include a
specification of how individuals voted. We see here, in fact, yet another door
opening to the relevance of game theory—to that of the strategic choice of
institutional forms. Hollywood’s portrayal of Franklin’s genius might not have
been historically accurate, but the scene resonates because we know that if that
circumstance had in fact arisen, the real Franklin would have understood the
strategic possibilities as they were portrayed.
1.4  Collective Versus Individual Choice
To this point, we have focused exclusively on how to represent the preferences
of individual decision makers while admitting that our true concerns are col-
lective or political decisions. What, then, of collective or group preferences?
After all, everyday discourse about politics is laced with statements or assertions
that begin with “Society’s interests are __,” “The electorate prefers __,” “The
legislature wants __,” “The bureaucracy acted __,” “The interests of [country X]
lie in __” and so on, as if collective preferences are no less real or tangible than
individual ones. We are reminded here of Charles de Gaulle’s famous comment
that France has no friends, only interests. Here, though, we want to end this
chapter on a supremely important cautionary note about attributing prefer-
ences to collectivities.
The Condorcet Paradox: Suppose three people hold the following
preferences:
Person 1: A preferred to B preferred to C
Person 2: C preferred to A preferred to B
Person 3: B preferred to C preferred to A
The question, now, is how to define the social preference of these three
people as a group. There are, of course, innumerable ways to do so. We
could, for instance, simply choose one person at random and define his
or her preference as the social preference. Absent any bias in our random
selection, such a method seems fair because no person is more likely than
any other to represent the group. Alternatively, we could assign 2 points to
a first-place ranking, 1 point for a second place ranking and 0 points for
a last place ranking and construct the social preference by adding up the
scores of A, B and C. In this case, though, such a method is indeterminate,
or at least undiscriminating, because each alternative would be awarded a
sum of 3 points. Another and seemingly more “democratic” method is to
take a majority vote between the alternatives and if X beats Y in a majority

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Politics as a Game  37
vote, then we would say that X is socially preferred to Y or, equivalently,
that the group prefers X to Y. The preceding three preferences, though,
point to a general problem with this method. Specifically, note that while C
beats A in a majority vote, and B beats C, A beats B. Thus, the social prefer-
ence is intransitive!
The Grandfather, Granddaughter and the Horse: Walking through the
village, accompanying his granddaughter and leading the family’s horse,
the grandfather senses the villagers’ disapproval of not affording his grand-
daughter the pleasure of riding on the horse. So up she goes. But soon
thereafter there emerges another sense of disquiet among the villagers: Why
is it that such a young girl requires that her elderly grandfather walk while
she rides? Not wanting to appear a spoiled, ungrateful child, the girl insists
that her grandfather take her place. But nearly immediately the grandfa-
ther senses the villagers’ disapproval of him riding alone while his sweet
granddaughter walks alongside. So up she goes to join him, whereupon the
murmurs of disapproval from the village now focus on the horse’s burden
of having to bear the weight of two people.
The preceding example is but a folky illustration of the more abstract
3-alternative example that precedes it, wherein both illustrate a thing called the
Condorcet Paradox, named after the 18th-century French mathematician who
concerned himself with voting systems and finding a fair method for electing
members to the French Academy of Sciences. That our folky example illustrates
the same thing as our abstract one can be seen if we suppose that the villagers
are of three types:
Type 1: O1 > O2 > O3 > O4
Type 2: O4 > O1 > O2 > O3
Type 3: O3 > O4 > O1 > O2
Where O1  =  both ride the horse, O2  =  grandfather alone rides the horse,
O3 = granddaughter alone rides the horse and O4 = no one rides the horse. In
this case, if all three types are represented in the village in approximately equal
proportion, the social preference order under majority rule is O1 > O2 > O3 >
O4 > O1. The particular paradox here, of course, is that although the individual
preferences used to define the social preference in our examples are transitive
(and complete), the resulting social preference, at least under simple pair-wise
majority rule, is intransitive, in which case we cannot impute a utility function
to the group.
Condorcet’s Paradox gives rise to any number of important theoretical
issues. What, for instance, are the circumstances under which simple majority
rule might yield an unambiguous social preference? Are there other ways of
applying the idea of majority rule that might avoid the paradox? Do rules other
than majority rule also share the property of manufacturing intransitive social
preferences out of transitive individual ones? Are there any rules or procedures
that guarantee transitive social preferences and, if so, what do they look like?

--- Sayfa 47 ---
38  Politics as a Game
A Spatial Example of the Paradox: We cannot answer all such questions
in this chapter. Presently, then, the Paradox should be taken simply as a
cautionary note—a warning against becoming overly anthropomorphic
in our approach to politics by inferring or assigning motives, preferences
and the like to collectivities regardless of their identity. The reader, though,
should not suppose that the Paradox is a mere curiosity and the product
of some artfully created individual preference orders. Rather, it is a feature
of group preferences with which we must deal in nearly all applications of
game theory to social processes. To illustrate this fact, let us return once
again to the spatial preferences and the two-dimensional form illustrated
in Figure 1.4. This time, though, in Figure 1.6 we draw the indifference
contours for three people with ideal points at x1, x2 and x3. Now consider
the arbitrarily chosen alternative z1, through which we draw the indiffer-
ence curves of all three persons. Notice that the shaded areas bounded by
these indifference contours are all points that are closer to a pair of ideal
points than is z1. Alternative z2, for instance, is closer to the ideals of x1 and
x2 than is z1. Thus, under majority rule, z2 is preferred to z1. On the other
hand, now consider alternative z3. As placed, z3 is closer to the ideal points
x2 and x3 than is z2. Hence, z3 defeats z2 in a majority vote. But finally, notice
that z3 is not in any of the shaded areas corresponding to points that defeat
z1. In fact, z1 is closer to the ideals x1 and x3 than is z3. Hence, under majority
rule, we have the intransitive social order z1 > z3 > z2 > z1.
ssue 2
issue 1
x1
x2
x3
z3
z1
z2
Figure 1.6  Condorcet’s Paradox with spatial preferences

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Politics as a Game  39
This simple example—another manifestation of the Condorcet Paradox—
illustrates again the inadvisability of being anthropomorphic about things and,
without further analysis, attributing goals, motives or preferences to groups.
Barring further developments, we could, of course, assume that the paradox
is but an anomalous, albeit unanticipated, characteristic of majority rule. This
paradox might merely cause us to question the reverence sometimes associated
with outcomes chosen “democratically” by majority rule principles. However, a
profoundly important theorem, Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem, tells us that
this paradox is not anomalous or confined to majority rule procedures—it is
possible to observe “irrational” social preferences under almost any social pro-
cess. Arrow’s method of demonstrating this fact is to eschew examining each
and every rule we might imagine and instead to posit a set of properties or
axioms that we think any “reasonable” rule should follow. Without delving into
the finer details of things, the axioms Arrow sets forth are, roughly stated, these:
1.
The social ordering is complete and transitive;
2.
no individual preference order over the feasible outcomes is a priori
excluded as a possibility (unrestricted domain);
3.
the social preference between any two alternatives never depends on indi-
vidual preferences regarding other alternatives (pairwise independence of
irrelevant alternatives);
4.
alternative x is socially preferred to y whenever everyone prefers x to y (the
Pareto principle);
5.
no individual should be decisive for every pair of alternatives
(nondictatorship).
With respect to axiom 2, for instance, there commonly are preferences we prefer
to exclude from consideration when making social decisions, such as prohibi-
tions against anti-Semitic or pro-Nazi ideas. Society’s current over-indulgence
with political correctness is yet another attempt to exclude various preferences
from consideration in public discourse. But if we are to fully understand and
fully model social processes, then the method whereby certain preferences are
excluded ought to be a part of the general rule we are considering. Axiom 3
requires that we can infer the standing of some alternative relative to another
by merely looking at individual preferences over those two alternatives, while
axiom 4 in effect requires, among other things, that whatever stands highest in
the social preference order be Pareto optimal for the collectivity in question.
Despite the reasonableness of those axioms, Arrow’s theorem establishes that
they are inconsistent. Stated differently,
For decisions involving three or more alternatives with three or more individ-
uals, at least one of the axioms 1–5 must be violated. Any procedure consistent
with axioms 2–5 will allow for intransitive social orderings. Equivalently, the
only procedure consistent with axioms 1–4 must violate axiom 5.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
40  Politics as a Game
Later we will grapple with the full consequences of this theorem, which is one
of the most important in political theory. However, here we want to empha-
size the special role played by the transitivity and completeness assumptions
in modeling people and the fact that these assumptions cannot play an equiva-
lent role in our discussions of groups. Although it is often convenient to be
anthropomorphic and to attribute motives to groups in the same way that we
attribute motives to individuals, as our earlier brief discussion of Britain’s poli-
cies prior to the outbreak of WWI reveals, and as Arrow’s theorem precisely
formalizes, such linguistic shortcuts are simply that—shortcuts—and not sci-
entifically valid. Thus, although we may choose to use such shortcuts to convey
general meaning and although they may be approximately valid when indi-
vidual preferences are unanimous or at least nearly so, we must keep in mind
that any theoretically valid explanation for social processes and outcomes must
rest ultimately on an assessment of the preferences and actions of individuals
in combination with the institutions (broadly interpreted) within which those
individuals and preferences operate.
Arrow’s theorem and the associated Condorcet Paradox, though, are not the
only problems associated with attributing goals to collectivities. Another way
to bring that fact home graphically is to turn to an example wherein a group
appears to act utterly irrationally (i.e., in its own worst interest) but where it
seems reasonable to assume that the individuals within the group are acting in
pursuit of perhaps the most intense of all preferences, that of survival.
The Curious Behavior of Herring: Some time ago the Discovery Channel
released a video of a large school of herring swimming casually in beautiful
clear water when suddenly it was attacked by a number of blue fin tuna. It
seems that herring are deemed quite a delicacy by tuna, at least judging by
tunas’ enthusiasm for catching and eating as many as possible. The reaction
of the herring, though, is surprising. Instead of scattering in every conceiv-
able direction (and indeed there were far more potential directions than
there were tuna), the entire school began to swim in a tight swirling ball.
The ball, of course, provided a far more inviting target than some widely
dispersed cloud of fish, so slowly (or not slowly enough, from the perspec-
tive of the herring) the ball began to shrink. The ball itself, moreover, began
to appear wholly disoriented and slowly moved toward the surface, which
only made it vulnerable to the swooping pelicans above. The video ends
when the ball barely exists and the tuna are fully sated.
We are admittedly not in a position to fully account for this odd and seem-
ingly self-destructive behavior on the part of the herring, aside from noting
that it appears to contradict Darwin’s rules about species survival. In fact, we
will later refer to this example as a way to illustrate problems of collective action
and social coordination. Here, though, we can use it to illustrate the distinc-
tion between individual and collective preference. Were we, for example, to try

--- Sayfa 50 ---
Politics as a Game  41
to explain the behavior of herring with reference to collective preferences and
actions, the conclusion that schools of herring prefer suicide and extinction
seems inescapable. Surely, since every herring scattering to the wind (or, more
properly, ocean current) seems the best choice for all collectively, the school’s
behavior is consistent with the hypothesis of a group preference for suicide.
It seems safe to assume, on the other hand, that while any one herring could
give a twit about the concepts of extinction and group survival, each individual
fish does value its own skin (or scales) and, if it could, would act accordingly.
A careful look at the swirling ball confirms this supposition—specifically, the
ball swirls because each fish is doing its damndest to get into its interior. Each
herring has but two choices: To swim unilaterally away from the ball and, most
likely, into the waiting mouth of one of the surrounding tuna or to try to disap-
pear inside the ball in the hope that the tuna will satisfy themselves by eating
only those on the perimeter. Alas, their choice is a Hobbesian one—there is no
good choice for each herring, though getting into the interior of the swirling
ball would seem the best of two distinctly poor alternatives (since there are a
few herring left when the video ends). There is, of course, no issue of collec-
tive intransitivity here as in Condorcet’s Paradox. After all, there are only two
choices for the school—form the swirling ball or scatter and run (swim) like
hell. But now we have an example where the presumed unanimous preference
of individuals—to survive—is transformed by circumstances into the seem-
ingly irrational preference (if we are to judge by the “school’s choice”) of maxi-
mizing the ease with which it can be eaten.
More will be said of this example later, but note we have just used a word
that itself warrants comment—namely, irrational. Much has been made of this
word and its opposite, rational, and much has been said about whether these
words have any proper definition in the context of contemporary social science
theory. Some will assert that any behavior is rational if it can be conceptualized
to follow from some well-defined set of preferences over ultimate outcomes.
Rational action or rational behavior is simply any behavior that can be said
to follow from our theories and postulates about preference. This definition,
though, would seem to render the concept a worthless tautology since we can
always ascribe goals to whatever it is we observe. Even the school of herring,
for example, can be deemed collectively “rational” if we are willing to postulate
for it the goal of suicide. Others then ascribe rationality only to those actions
that can be justified by some “reasonable” set of goals or utility functions. But
this merely pushes the pebble of contention to a different place in the mud
puddle since we are then left with having to define “reasonable.” There is no
bar of metal sitting alongside the one in Paris that standardizes the measure-
ment of “meter” with which we can measure or distinguish between reasonable
and unreasonable. Our preference here, then, is to banish the words rational
and irrational altogether from our lexicon and to instead simply proceed to the
task of seeing if we can explain (and predict) social and collective actions with
concepts that do not require such words. That is the task to which we now turn.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
42  Politics as a Game
1.5  Key Ideas and Concepts
decision theoretic
game theoretic
common knowledge
preference
complete preferences
transitive vs. intransitive preferences
risk
utility
indifference curves
expected utility
nondictatorship
unrestricted domain
time discounting
rational
tautological
subjective probability
budget constraint
budget simplex
spatial preference
single peaked preference
separable vs. non-separable preferences
social preference
collective action
Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem
Condorcet Paradox
Condorcet winner
Exercises for Chapter 1
1.
Portray a utility function for money in which a person is risk averse for
small amounts and risk acceptant for large amounts.
2.
Portray a utility function for money that “explains” why a person might
buy a lottery ticket (and therefore appears risk acceptant) and also pur-
chase a homeowner’s insurance policy (appearing risk averse).
3.
Consider the following six strict preference orders over three alternatives:
Order 1
Order 2
Order 3
Order 4
Order 5
Order 6
A
A
B
B
C
C
B
C
A
C
A
B
C
B
C
A
B
A

If you are told that a group of people all simultaneously have single peaked
preferences over a single issue, can all six preference orders coexist simulta-
neously; and if not, what are the various subsets of preference orders that
can simultaneously describe individual preferences?

--- Sayfa 52 ---
Politics as a Game  43
4.
Assume 6 people have circular indifference contours in two dimensions.
Portray their ideal points in a two-dimensional drawing along with the
three alternatives A, B and C such that each person has one of the pref-
erence orders in problem #3 and no 2 people have the same preference
orders.
5.
Assume 7 people have circular indifference contours preference orders in
two dimensions and assume that for the three alternatives, A, B and C,
that B is a Condorcet winner. Locate 7 distinct ideal points consistent with
this fact.
6.
Suppose 3 people have the following preference orders:
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
B
C
A
A
B
D
D
A
C
C
D
B

Assume these people have circular indifference contours in two dimen-
sions. Locate 3 ideal points, x1, x2, and x3, consistent with these preferences.
7.
Can a person with a single peaked preference be risk acceptant between
two alternatives and at the same time risk averse with respect to two other
alternatives?

--- Sayfa 53 ---
2
Extensive Forms, Voting
Trees and Planning Ahead
2.1  Introduction
Pastor Martin Niemöller, imprisoned by the Nazis for seven years owing to his
opposition to Hitler, summarized the way in which a society can slide into an
evil authoritarianism with the insightful parable:
First they came for the Socialists, and I did not speak out, because I was not
a Socialist.
Then they came for the Trade Unionists, and I did not speak out, because I
was not a Trade Unionist.
Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out, because I was not a
Jew.
Then they came for me—and there was no one left to speak for me.
There are a great many moral lessons to be learned from this quote, but
we offer it simply as an example of the need to “look ahead” when making
decisions—to attempt to assess the full consequences of immediate actions. It
might seem natural, of course, for humans to look ahead, but it is surprising
how often, in critical circumstances, they fail to do so or do so only imperfectly.
The rise of Nazism aside, at the turn of the 20th century, for example, General
Alfred von Schlieffen laid out a plan (called, logically enough, the Schlieffen
Plan) for the invasion of France whereby Germany would arrange its armies
from North to South with the main thrust proceeding through Belgium and
pivoting at the southern tip of that country to catch the French in a grand
pincer move southeast of Paris. France’s Plan XVII, on the other hand, posi-
tioned its armies from South to North, from Alsace to the Belgian border, with
a British expeditionary force guarding their flanks to the north. Its plan was a
dual thrust through Alsace and Lorraine and a second to the north, possibly
through the south of Belgium and Luxemburg if and when Germany violated
Belgian neutrality. Various contingencies were allowed for in both plans, with
the Germans allowing their armies to sweep to the west of Paris if there was a
need to protect their flanks as well as provision for a reallocation of various

--- Sayfa 54 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   45
corps to forestall potential French breakthroughs. The French, somewhat more
optimistically, allowed for the possibility that both of their thrusts would be
successful. Both plans, however, suffered from two glaring weaknesses. The first
was the jointly held assumption that the modern technology of warfare guar-
anteed that any war would be brief. Thus, neither plan looked very far into the
future insofar as how conflict might unfold. And second, each plan assumed
that it would work. Thus, what neither plan offered was a specification of what
to do in case one or the other failed. And indeed, that is what happened: The
Germans suffered an historical defeat to the east of Paris at The Battle of the
Marne whereas no French thrust penetrated German resistance to a significant
degree. The end result was a four-year war of attrition and millions of battle-
field deaths. Perhaps more astonishing still is that Germany under Hitler made
an equivalent error in 1941. This time, after somewhat effortlessly defeating
France, Hitler turned on Russia, wherein the “plan,” Operation Barbarossa, was
little more than an all-out attack from the Baltic to the Black Sea under the
assumption that the Soviet Union would quickly collapse militarily and politi-
cally after experiencing Germany’s blitzkrieg tactics. Utterly absent from the
plan was any consideration of the possibility that the Soviets would not capitu-
late but would instead regroup sufficiently to extend the conflict into the harsh
Russian winter, whereby, in a replay of Napoleon’s disastrous venture, the effect
of sub-zero temperatures on unprepared men and material would wreak havoc
with any military scheme. Indeed, it seems that Europe’s political-military lead-
ers of the 20th century ignored the military maxim “no plan survives contact
with the enemy.”
The Domino Theory: It is also the case that looking ahead under the wrong
assumptions can lead to poor choices in the long run. Much was made,
for instance, of the “domino theory” in rationalizing the Vietnam War and
America’s intense and unsuccessful involvement there . . . the argument
being that “if South Vietnam fell, it would be followed by Communist take-
overs in the rest of Indochina, then Malaysia, then the Philippines, etc.,
etc., etc.” Events, of course, proved otherwise, since American strategists
failed to understand that North Vietnam saw the conflict more as a war of
national liberation and a redressing of the consequences of European (read:
French) colonialism. But the U.S. was not the first country to formulate and
misperceive this domino argument. Consider, for instance, King George
III’s assertion in 1779 that if the Americans were to succeed in their revolu-
tion, then “the West Indies must follow them . . . Ireland would soon follow
the same plan and be a separate state, then this island would be reduced
to itself, and soon would be a poor island indeed, for reduced in her trade
merchants would retire in their wealth to climates more to their advantage,
and shoals of manufacturers would leave this country for the New Empire.”
The King might have been right in the VERY long term, but his comments
came before the reign of Victoria and Britain’s century-long dominance.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
46  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
There are, of course, those events that are perhaps impossible to map out in
an extensive form so as to facilitate optimal choices, if only because they deal
with unique historical events. During World War I again, in 1917, Germany
sought a way to free itself from having to defend the Eastern front against Rus-
sia. It mattered little that Russia’s army was in disarray—resources that could
better be used against France and England were nevertheless needed in the East.
In response, Germany’s strategy seemed a clever one at the time. The Czar had
abdicated and a provisional government had taken his place while unrest con-
tinued to plague the country. So why not encourage that unrest and a thorough
disassembling of the Russian army by sponsoring the country’s most radical
element, which was itself committed to pulling Russia out of the war—the
Bolsheviks. And what better way to aid them than by shipping their leader in
exile to Petrograd who, in his Zurich apartment, could do little more than write
inflammatory pamphlets and plans—Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. So squirreled away
on a sealed train, Germany delivered Lenin to Russia. Little did German plan-
ners know, of course, that in 24 years, the cream of German youth would be
locked in deadly and, as things turned out, extinction-level combat with Lenin’s
ideological progeny.
The lesson of these somewhat dramatic examples is that to understand polit-
ical decision making generally it is essential that we attempt to learn whether
or not people look ahead and, if they do, what futures they think alternative
choices might yield. This much, of course, is only common sense. But to do
this in a theoretically satisfying way—in a way that allows us to generalize what
we learn from one situation and apply it to others—requires some structure,
and to that end let us consider a few less profound examples of a sort we might
address relatively easily:
Legislative Pay Raises: If we know one thing about elected representatives,
be they national or regional, American, European or Asian—they love pay
raises and having their positions accompanied by all manner of perks. Far
be it for members of the U.S. Congress, for example, to relinquish their free
parking spaces at Washington’s National (Reagan) Airport or to burden
themselves (or their staffs) by folding their medical insurance plans into
“Obamacare.” So suppose a legislature has decided to vote on a raise for
themselves (since no one else would do it). The question is, how to do it
aside from slipping it in as a part of some obscure bill that seemingly has
nothing to do with government salaries? Here we won’t worry about the
niceties of such things and will confine our example to two simple alterna-
tives: A roll call vote and a secret and simultaneous ballot. To model these
alternatives we can suppose there are but two outcomes: The raise passes
or it fails. But legislators, being what they are, are likely to see things differ-
ently, wherein each of them differentiates among four possible outcomes:
o1: the raise passes but I voted against it
o2: the raise passes and I voted for it

--- Sayfa 56 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   47
o3: the raise fails and I voted against it
o4: the raise fails but I voted for it
The reasons for this differentiation should be obvious: Each legislator
prefers the raise, but no one wants to vote for it if their vote isn’t necessary
for passage since doing so puts a target on their back in the next election.
Nevertheless, it is not unreasonable to assume that legislators are suffi-
ciently avaricious that the order of the outcomes given above corresponds
to their preferences—they prefer the raise, and all the more so if they can
secure it while voting against it and the worst possible outcome is voting
for a raise that fails to pass. Finally, suppose we want to know who is advan-
taged and who is disadvantaged by different voting schemes. For example,
if your last name is Aardvark, which would you prefer—a roll call vote in
which votes are taken alphabetically or a vote in which all choices are, in
effect, made simultaneously?
Presidential Vetoes: Suppose, as is commonly the case, that it takes only
a majority vote to pass legislation in a legislative assembly and that the
political system has a president who can veto any legislation the assem-
bly passes. Commonly, though, national constitutions afford the legisla-
ture the authority to over-ride executive vetoes, but different constitutions
require different votes for an over-ride to be effective. Some, such as the
U.S. Constitution, require that two-thirds of those voting vote to over-ride.
Various other constitutions require a three-fifths vote, so that, as in the
American case, a special or super majority is required to thwart the will of
the president. But there are those national constitutions that allow a simple
majority to over-ride a veto and it is widely assumed that since it takes the
same vote to approve of the legislation in the first place, allowing a major-
ity over-ride affords a president a toothless power. Our question is whether
this inference is necessarily correct.
Horse Racing Against the King: Sun Bin, a military strategist during
China’s Warring States Period (403–221 bc), was asked by General Tian
Ji to advise on how to win a horse race against the King of Qi. At the time
the contest consisted of three rounds of three different pairs of horses rac-
ing against each other, where the best two out of three was declared the
victor. Tian Ji always lost to the king. Sun, however, advised Tian to use
his worst horse to race against the king’s finest in the first round. In the
second round, Tian would use his finest to race against the king’s regular
horse and in the third round, Tian would use his regular to race against the
king’s worst. Tian won the horse racing bet that day and both the king and
Tian admired Sun Bin’s talents. However, as entertaining as this historical
account might be, it is incomplete and leaves the door open to a number of
possibilities, not all of which results in Tian being victorious over the king.
The Iroquois Confederation: Arguably, the world’s oldest extant
written constitution (if we allow wampum to be deemed writing) is the
one governing the Iroquois Confederation of North America (variously

--- Sayfa 57 ---
48  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
referred to as The Constitution of the Five Nations or The Iroquois Book
of the Great Law). Various dates have been ascribed to it, some as early as
1390. The confederation itself originally consisted of five tribes in pres-
ent day upstate New York—the Mohawk, Seneca, Onondaga, Oneida and
Cayuga—and offered this method whereby the five tribes considered any
legislation:
First the question shall be passed upon by the Mohawk and Seneca
Lords, then it shall be discussed and passed by the Oneida and Cayuga
Lords. Their decisions shall then be referred to the Onondaga Lords (Fire
Keepers) for final judgment . . . when the Mohawk and Seneca Lords have
unanimously agreed upon a question, they shall report their decision to
the Cayuga and Oneida Lords who shall deliberate upon the question and
report a unanimous decision to the Mohawk Lords. The Mohawk Lords
will then report the standing of the case to the Fire Keepers, who shall
render a decision as they see fit in case of a disagreement by the two bodies,
or confirm the decisions of the two bodies if they are identical . . . if through
any misunderstanding or obstinacy on the part of the Fire Keepers, they
render a decision at variance with that of the Two Sides, the Two Sides shall
reconsider the matter and if their decisions are jointly the same as before,
they shall report to the Fire Keepers, who are then compelled to confirm
their joint decision.
Thus, paralleling our previous example, the Onondaga have a veto that
can be over-ridden by the same vote as that which passed the proposal
in the first place. But in addition, the Onondaga, the smallest of the five
tribes, can cast a tiebreaking vote in the event that the Cayuga and Oneida
disagree with the vote taken by the Mohawk and Seneca. How might we
represent this situation in a way that allows us to analyze voting and the
relative voting power of the Onondaga relative to the other four tribes?
Crisis Escalation: One of the inherent dangers of international affairs is
the crisis that in a seemingly uncontrolled way escalates to a level of conflict
that both sides would have preferred to avoid. The Cuban Missile Crisis of
1962 seemed to be just such a situation, wherein the world was threat-
ened with an all-out nuclear conflict between the United States and the
Soviet Union. The conflict was avoided, which should lead us to ask why
this case was unlike the escalation leading, for example, to World War I.
However, rather than model such situations directly, consider the follow-
ing artificial scenario: Two persons, labeled 1 and 2, must bid on $100,
with person 1 afforded the opportunity to open the bidding at $10. If 1
passes, then 2 can buy the $100 for $10 and the auction ends. But once the
bidding begins, each person, in turn, can bid the price up in increments of
$10. Once one person refuses to bid further, the high bidder wins the $100.
However (and this is the interesting part), not only must the winner pay
the amount of his bid for the $100, but the loser must pay their last highest
bid. Thus, if, say, person 1, after a sequence of bids, drops out after person

--- Sayfa 58 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   49
2 bids, say, $60, then 2 wins the $100 and shows a net profit of $40 = $100
– 60 whereas person 1 wins nothing but must pay his or her last bid, $50.
To forestall the possibility of bankruptcy, suppose in addition that we put a
cap on the highest possible bid of, say, $200, which, of course, represents a
severe overpayment for the $100 prize. The question, then, is whether this
simple auction scenario models crisis escalation.
Timing Is Everything: America’s presidential election of 1896, held
during one of the worst depressions up to that point in the country’s eco-
nomic history, was known even beforehand to be a watershed in Ameri-
can politics. The Democratic incumbent, President Cleveland, was certain
not to run, thus leaving the field open for his party’s nomination. The
Republican’s most likely nominee would be William McKinley, a staunch
pro-business politician from Ohio and ardent champion of keeping Amer-
ica on the gold standard (i.e., a tight money supply favored by banking
and business—J.P. Morgan, in particular). The Democratic party was itself
split between proponents of the gold standard versus those who wanted
the currency backed as well by silver (i.e., labor, farmers, etc.). But in addi-
tion to these two parties, there was a third, the Populists, who also favored
moving off the gold standard and whose overall philosophy was far closer
to the Democrats than to the Republicans. The Populist party, however,
was barely viable, and some of its members believed its best chance of
survival lay with establishing an identity separate from the Democrats.
On this score, the question was when to hold their national convention:
before or after the Democrats? One faction argued that their platform
should not focus solely on the issue of free silver but should emphasize
its programs with respect to railroad regulation, imposition of an income
tax and various pro-labor measures. Their opposite number within the
party argued for an explicit focus on the issue of silver versus gold. The
first faction wanted the party’s convention held early to co-opt the Dem-
ocrats promulgation of a broad platform, while the “silver faction” pre-
ferred a late convention to take advantage of whatever discontent emerged
within the other two parties, and perhaps even, to make common cause
with “silver-Democrats.” As it turned out, the pro-silver faction won the
argument, but then confronted the fact that the Democrats nominated
William Jennings Bryan, who “stole” much of the pro-silver Populist thun-
der. Indeed, all that was left to the Populists, then, was to nominate Brian
as well and to ultimately disappear as an independent force in American
politics.
2.2  The Extensive Form
The common feature of the preceding examples is that each describes a sequence
or potential sequence of actions—voting alphabetically, vetoes and veto
over-rides, the ordering of horses for a sequence of races, a sequence of tribal
votes, and the order with which parties hold their conventions. Each scenario,
then, can be described by what we call an extensive form. Briefly, extensive form

--- Sayfa 59 ---
50  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
representations of situations attempt to describe in a semi-formal way the deci-
sions people confront when interacting with each other, including who knows
what when, whose turn it is to make a decision, and so forth. The components
of an extensive form are simple: decision nodes that tell us who is making the
choice, branches that correspond to specific decisions or choices and that lead
to subsequent nodes, chance nodes that model the uncertainty occasioned by
nature’s probabilistic moves, terminal nodes that specify when a “game” or deci-
sion scenario ends, and a specification of the outcome at each terminal node. To
this list we will also introduce the notion of an information set to describe what
a person knows about the prior choices of other decision makers (including the
chance moves of nature) when it is their turn to make a decision.
We can begin with our first example, the legislative pay raise, and with the
supposition that, initially at least, voting will be an alphabetical roll call vote.
Also, to simplify our presentation, assume that there are but three legislators,
A, B and C. Figure 2.1, then, portrays the extensive form of this scenario. Thus,
each node specifies whose turn it is to vote, each branch specifies the legislator’s
vote (for or against the raise), and when all voting is done, the terminal nodes
are denoted by the final outcome from the perspective of each legislator. Also, to
facilitate subsequent analysis, after assuming that a legislator’s most preferred
outcome is “worth” 2, and least preferred outcome “worth” –1, we also give the
utility equivalents of each outcome.
We can now answer the question as to whether you’d prefer that your last
name be Aardvark or Zzekial. Look at the problem from A’s perspective. If he
against
against
against
against
for
for
against
for
against
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
(–1,0,0)
against
for
for
for
for
C
C
C
C
B
B
A
Figure 2.1  Voting on a pay raise by roll call vote

--- Sayfa 60 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   51
or she votes for the raise, then either B or C can vote against it and still have the
raise pass. But if A votes against it, then both B and C must vote for it for the
raise to pass. Thus, it seems reasonable for A to speculate that by committing
to vote “against,” B and C can be forced to vote “for” because their preferences
match A’s (i.e., to pass the raise even if that means to vote for it). But A can
reason even more precisely; namely, A can look to what C might do at each of
C’s decision nodes. To wit, if C observes both A and B voting “for” or voting
“against,” then C would be a fool to vote “for”; however, if A and B split their
vote, then C is pivotal for the outcome and, given an avaricious preference
for more money, is sure to vote “for.” Legislator B, not being a dummy (or at
least not assumed to be one here), can make the same calculation and con-
clude that if A votes “for,” C can be induced to vote “for” if B votes “against”
(thereby securing the most preferred outcome) whereas if A votes “against,”
then B should vote “for” because C will join to pass the raise. So moving back
to A once again, A can reason “if I vote ‘for’, B will vote ‘against’ and C will
vote ‘for’; but if I vote ‘against,’ both B and C will deliver my most preferred
outcome by joining to get their second most preferred outcome by voting for
the raise.”
This might seem confusing at a first reading, but Figures 2.2a and 2.2b graph-
ically portray the preceding reasoning. Since it is already clear what legislator C
will do at each of its decision nodes, we can eliminate the choices that will not
be made and thereby produce the reduced extensive form in Figure 2.2a. But
now it’s clear what B will do at each of its decision nodes—if A votes “for,” B
will vote “against,” whereas if A votes “against,” B will vote “for.” So if we now
take Figure 2.2a and eliminate the choices B will not make, we are left with Fig-
ure 2.2b. And from here we see that A’s choice is unambiguous—vote “against.”
So, to answer our question, for this roll call vote at least, it’s best to vote first and,
thereby, force the other members of the legislature to swallow the bullet in their
own self-interest and deliver you your favored outcome.
against
against
against
for
against
against
for
for
for
for
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(2,1,1)
(0,0,0)
B
B
A
C
C
C
C
Figure 2.2a  First reduction

--- Sayfa 61 ---
52  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
For another example of how we approach the analysis of extensive forms,
consider this problem: Three committee members must pick one (and only
one) candidate from a list of four. The preferences of the committee for the
four candidates, A, B, C, and D, are given below, ranked from best to worst. The
committee uses a procedure whereby member 1 first vetoes a candidate, then
member 2 vetoes a candidate from the remaining three, then member 3 vetoes
one of the two remaining candidates. The candidate who is unvetoed is elected.
member 1:
C
B
D
A
member 2:
B
C
A
D
member 3:
A
B
C
D
It might seem reasonable, now, to suppose that a person should veto their
least preferred alternative, but to see if this supposition is correct, Figure 2.3a
portrays this situation’s full extensive form, where the branches label the alter-
native that the voter in question vetoes. Figure 2.3b shows the first reduction
after member 3’s optimal responses are determined and Figure 2.3c reduces this
form further by eliminating those branches that are not 2’s optimal responses,
in anticipation of what 3 will do. This last figure reveals that member 1 should
first veto alternative B, his second choice, so that C ultimately prevails.
The preceding examples illustrate the approach we ought to take when
beginning an analysis of an extensive form. Whenever possible, we should
prune that form by seeing if there are any choices we can infer directly. At this
point, however, the reader might object with the argument: What you have said
is common sense. However, people typically must act without the opportunity to sit
down and draw out extensive forms, in which case there is no guarantee that they
will act as you have just described. Indeed, if only a single decision maker fails to
act as assumed, your entire analysis is invalid. This objection is legitimate. But
once again, we must keep in mind what the assumption of common knowledge
implies—namely, that all persons are aware of the situation’s extensive form.
If for some reason a person’s analytic capabilities are limited—if, for example,
they cannot see the future, if they forget the past, or if they are uncertain about
various aspects of the situation—then these facts ought to be represented in
our extensive form description and be known to everyone involved. The reader
against
against
for
for
for
for
(1,2,1)
(2,1,1)
C
C
B
B
A
Figure 2.2b  Second reduction

--- Sayfa 62 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   53
is correct, of course, to believe that such common features of reality can make
it difficult to model and analyze a situation. However, before we assume, for
instance, that it’s a stretch to think that people “work backwards on an exten-
sive form” in the way just described, try playing tic-tac-toe with any average
12-year-old. Odds are, regardless of whether you go first or second, you won’t
win—especially if that 12-year-old has minimal experience with the game.
Why? After all, whoever is assigned X has 9 branches emanating from their first
decision node (actually, only 3 if we take account of the symmetry of the cells);
the player denoted O then has 8 branches from their first of 9 (or 3) nodes; X
then has 7 branches; and so on. Tic-tac-toe surely seems a lot more compli-
cated than our legislative scenario, and yet 12-year-olds with minimal experi-
ence seem perfectly able to look ahead to see what you might do in response
to whatever they do, and plan accordingly. Now it may indeed be a stretch to
suppose that the average member of a national legislator or parliament has the
same mental capacity as a 12-year-old, but it’s best, as an initial assumption at
least, to assume that they do.
B
C
D
A
B
B
D
D
B
C
B
D
C
D
A
C
A
D
B
D
A
B
A
C
B
C
A
B
A
C
C
3
2
1
D
C
D
D
A
A
B
C
A
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
Figure 2.3a  Sequential veto

--- Sayfa 63 ---
54  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
Continuing with our presentation of extensive forms, we note now that these
forms need not be limited to supposing that decision makers can act only once
in a situation. People can choose sequentially—first one, then another, then
the first again—and, indeed, who chooses and what alternatives they confront
can be made dependent on the actions others take. For example, suppose each
chamber (H and S) of a bicameral legislature consists of a single member (never
let it be said that theorists do not know how to simplify a problem) and that
both legislators must pass a bill (choices p and f) before it goes to the president
(P), who can approve (a) or veto (v) it. If the president vetoes, the two cham-
bers must vote to over-ride (o) or sustain (s) the veto. If we suppose further that
legislative chamber H moves before S, Figure 2.4 portrays the extensive form of
this situation. Notice that we allow chamber S to vote even though it knows that
chamber H has already killed the legislation. This assumption, of course, allows
us to accommodate the possibility that legislators treat the failure of outcomes
differently, depending on who can be held responsible for killing the measure.
Of course, if all of politics were as simple as the preceding examples or as
readily solvable as tic-tac-toe, there would be little need for game theory—and
B
C
D
A
B
B
B
A
A
B
A
A
C
A
A
C
B
B
C
2
2
2
1
2
D
C
D
D
A
A
B
C
A
Figure 2.3b  First reduction of sequential veto

--- Sayfa 64 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   55
perhaps even little need for political scientists. Fortunately, the world can be a
tad more complex. For example, suppose in the preceding example that both
legislative chambers act simultaneously. That is, suppose the Senate does not
know how the House has voted. In that case, we would draw the extensive form
as in Figure 2.5.
The dashed envelopes around the Senate’s decision nodes—called informa-
tion sets—indicate that when it is that body’s time to act, it doesn’t know which
node within the set it is at: in the first information set it doesn’t know whether
the House has passed or failed the bill in question and in the second dashed
envelope it doesn’t know whether the House has sustained or over-ridden the
President’s veto. Of course, assuming that one legislative chamber must act in
ignorance of how the other has voted might reasonably be deemed a far-fetched
example, so instead consider our pay raise example again, but this time assume
that voting is by secret ballot rather than by a roll call. In this case, it makes little
difference who actually casts their ballot first, since the votes and final outcome
are not revealed until all votes have been cast. Thus, without loss of generality
(be careful when you read those words, since they often disguise more than
they reveal) we can again assume in our example that legislator A votes first,
B second and C third. However, now we must indicate that B does not know
how A voted when it is B’s turn to cast a ballot. Thus, in Figure 2.6 we draw an
A
B
1
C
D
B
B
C
B
Figure 2.3c  Second reduction of sequential veto

--- Sayfa 65 ---
56  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
envelope around both of B’s decision nodes to indicate that although B knows
when it is time to vote, B does not know which of the two nodes he or she is at.
Similarly, when C votes, C does not know how A or B voted; thus, we draw an
envelope around all four of C’s decision nodes.
Information sets more often than not make things interesting. Specifi-
cally, notice that we can now no longer work backwards up the extensive
form in order to advise A how to vote. The envelope around all of C’s deci-
sion nodes means that C doesn’t know, when it is his turn to vote, which node
he is at. At some nodes C prefers to vote “for” and at others C prefers to vote
“against,” but there is no unambiguous choice, short of cheating and looking
at what A and B have done (and since the votes are simultaneous, A and B
f
f
v
s
Pass, o5
Fail, o1
Fail, o2
Fail, o3
Fail, o4
Fail, o6
Fail, o7
Fail, o8
s
s
a
o
o
o
f
p
p
p
P
S
S
H
S
S
H
Figure 2.4  Legislation in a 2-chamber legislature with sequential moves
f
f
v
s
Pass,o5
Fail, o1
Fail, o2
Fail, o3
Fail, o4
Fail, o6
Fail, o7
Fail, o8
s
s
a
o
o
o
f
p
p
p
P
S
S
H
S
S
H
Figure 2.5  Legislation in a 2-chamber legislature with simultaneous votes

--- Sayfa 66 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   57
might not yet have done anything). The same argument applies to B. Not only
doesn’t B know what A has done, B can’t unambiguously infer what C will do
since B knows that C will not know how other legislators have voted. We can,
moreover, complicate things further by, for instance, letting C spy on either A or B
and learn their choice before C votes. In this case, C is in effect choosing between
the extensive forms in Figures 2.7a and 2.7b. In Figure 2.7a, C’s information sets
are divided to indicate knowing whether he is in the upper half of the extensive
form (corresponding to A voting “for”) versus the lower half (corresponding to
A voting “against”). Figure 2.7b, on the other hand, models having C know B’s
vote beforehand but not A’s. It is still the case that we cannot work backwards
for
for
for
for
for
for
for
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(–1,0,0)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
against
against
against
against
against
against
against
C
C
C
B
A
C
B
Figure 2.6  Voting on a raise by secret ballot
for
for
for
for
for
for
for
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(–1,0,0)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
against
against
against
against
against
against
against
C
C
C
B
A
C
B
Figure 2.7a  C spying on A

--- Sayfa 67 ---
58  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
up either of these two extensive forms, but once we develop the tools for “solv-
ing” for the choices people are likely to make here, we can, for instance, deter-
mine whether C should have a preference for whom to spy on.
For a final play on this example, consider Figure 2.8, which assumes that B
can decide whether to spy on A or on C.
The reader is free at this point to construct other extensive forms using this
example, but as a final example of the use of information sets in extensive
forms, consider Figure 2.9. This form illustrates a situation in which persons 1
and 2 alternate in making binary choices, where each observes the choices of the
other, but person 1 can only recall the last decision and person 2 can recall only
the last two. Because 2 has the better memory, 2’s information sets are more
detailed and, thus, more numerous than are 1’s.
More generally, information sets allow us to distinguish between two classes of
interdependent choice situations—games with perfect versus imperfect information.
In a game with perfect information, each and every information set encom-
passes a single decision node. Such games correspond to situations in which
all decision makers know the choices that they and others made any time in
the past. In a game with imperfect information, at least two decision nodes
are in the same information set for at least one decision maker. Such games
correspond to situations in which at least one decision maker is unaware of a
prior choice made by another decision maker.
Although information sets increase the applicability of extensive forms, cer-
tain rules must be adhered to when we use them. Specifically,
1.
All decision nodes contained in an information set correspond to the same
decision maker. An information set describes what a decision maker knows
for
for
for
for
for
for
for
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(–1,0,0)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
against
against
against
against
against
against
against
C
C
C
B
A
C
B
Figure 2.7b  C spying on B

--- Sayfa 68 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   59
about earlier decisions when it is his or her turn to act and, thus, each
information set describes something about a specific person.
2.
Each node in an information set has the same number of branches ema-
nating from it; otherwise, the decision maker can identify which node he
or she is at by the number of alternative actions.
3.
For the same reason, the labels attached to the branches at each node must
be matched by the labeling of branches at any other node in the same
information set.
To this list we impose two additional but tentative restrictions on extensive
forms. First, we suppose that the branches connecting nodes cannot “double
for
for
for
for
for
for
for
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(–1,0,0)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
against
against
against
against
against
against
against
A
A
A
B
C
A
B
for
for
for
for
B
Spy on A
Spy on C
for
for
for
(1,1,1)
(1,1,2)
(1,2,1)
(–1,0,0)
(2,1,1)
(0,–1,0)
(0,0,–1)
(0,0,0)
against
against
against
against
against
against
against
C
C
C
B
A
C
B
Figure 2.8  B’s choice of who to spy on

--- Sayfa 69 ---
60  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
back” to some previous node. Later we accommodate the possibility that some
branches may require that the people replay all or part of the game, but for
now it is easier to consider situations in which such possibilities are excluded.
A second and related assumption is that all branches lead eventually to some
outcome. That is, we suppose that the time allowed to play a game is finite. As
with repetition, we later consider situations that, in principle, allow for the pos-
sibility of infinite play. Finally, we will suppose that the number of choices at
any node is finite. Again, this assumption is not essential, but it does simplify
exposition (to say nothing of the graphical portrayal of an extensive form).
With the lessons of our examples in mind, let us now return to the advice
offered by Sun Bin to General Tian Ji when formulating a strategy to defeat the
King of Qi in horse racing. To offer some notation, suppose the king’s horses
are labeled Q1, Q2 and Q3, where Q1 is known to be faster than Q2, which is
faster than Q3. Let Tian’s horses be labeled T1, T2 and T3, where T1 is faster
than T2, which is faster than T3, and where overall, the ranking of the horses
by speed is Q1 > T1 > Q2 > T2 > Q3 > T3. Sun Bin’s advice, now, is predicated
on the extensive form shown in Figure 2.10, where the outcome (1,0) means
that the king wins a majority of the races and (0,1) means that Tian’s horses
win a majority of times. That is, the implicit assumption in his advice is that
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
Figure 2.9  Imperfect recall

--- Sayfa 70 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   61
the king first chooses which horse to run in the first race and then which to
run in the second (with the third horse, by default, relegated to the last race).
If we work down this tree we see that regardless of the king’s choices, as long as
General Tian can assign his horses to the races knowing the king’s assignments,
Tian cannot lose. The darkened branches denote optimal choices for Tian, and
notice that regardless of how the king chooses, there is a branch for Tian that
leads to an (0,1) outcome. There are, of course, other choices, and the reader
should be able to draw the extensive form when Tian must move first, when
Tian and the king must make their choices simultaneously before each race,
and when the order with which each contestant will race their horses must be
T1
T1
T2
T2
T3
T3
T3
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(0,1)
(0,1)
(0,1)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(1,0)
(0,1)
(0,1)
(0,1)
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T1
T2
T2
T3
T3
T3
T2
T3
T2
T2
T1
T1
T3
T3
T3
T3
T2
T3
T3
T3
T2
T3
T2
T2
T2
T2
T2
T2
Q2
Q2
Q3
Q3
Q3
Q2
Q2
Q2
Q3
Q3
Q2
Q2
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q3
Q3
Q1
Figure 2.10  Horse racing with the king

--- Sayfa 71 ---
62  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
decided simultaneously before any race is run. The reader should also be able to
show that if Tian must move first, the king always wins. The tools for analyzing
the remaining two possibilities, though, will be presented later in this volume,
but this much is clear: A king intent on winning the contest, because he is king,
will most certainly require that Tian move first. Any monarch who fails to see
this beforehand will, most likely, not be king for very long.
If we turn now to our example of presidential vetoes, our intuition that
a majority over-ride negates a president’s power to veto legislation is essen-
tially correct. But it is correct ONLY if legislative agendas—the order in which
motions are considered and voted upon—abide by a certain form. To see what
we mean, for purposes of our example let us treat the legislature as a unified
entity. Nevertheless, because it is in reality a collection of individuals, it is sub-
ject to exhibiting intransitive preferences of the sort discussed in Chapter 1. So
suppose there are three possible outcomes, bills A and B plus the status quo
Q, and suppose a unicameral (one chamber) legislature holds the intransitive
preference A > B > Q > A whereas the president prefers Q to both A and B. Now
consider the “extensive form” in Figure 2.11a wherein there is no executive to
consider and the legislature votes as follows: First it decides whether to approve
of A. If it does, then A is the final outcome, but if it does not, it next considers B.
If B is approved, it is the final outcome; otherwise, the status Q prevails. Work-
ing backwards in the same way as in our previous example, we see that although
B defeats Q, A defeats B and thus A is the outcome. Now, however, consider the
agenda in Figure 2.11b, which allows for a presidential veto that the legislature
can over-ride if it so chooses. Working backwards up this tree reveals that if A is
approved in the first vote and if the president vetoes A, then the legislature will
not over-ride the veto since a majority within it prefer Q to A. But if A is rejected
in favor of B, then regardless of whether the president vetoes or not, the final
outcome is B. So by approving of A in the first vote, the outcome is Q whereas
by rejecting A in favor of B, the outcome is B. So now the legislature, which
prefers B to Q, should reject A in the first vote to get B.
What we see here, then, is that the insertion of a presidential veto with a
majority over-ride changes the outcome from A to B. And since we assume
only that the president prefers Q to both A and B, we have an example in which
a president might prefer not to have the authority to veto things (if he or she
A
B
Q
B
A
~A
~B
Figure 2.11a  Legislative agenda with no presidential veto

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   63
prefers A to B). There is, though, one other interesting feature of this example.
Notice that if we were to rely exclusively on observation and not the preced-
ing abstract analysis, we might conclude that vetoes that can be over-ridden by
a majority are toothless. Presumably, presidents prefer not to see their vetoes
over-ridden, if only because it gives the appearance of weakness and an inability
to control the legislative branch. If so, then because in our example the presi-
dent knows that a veto yields the same outcome as no veto, unless he or she
wishes to publicly state opposition to B, vetoes are never over-ridden because
they are never observed. And if never observed, we might incorrectly conclude
that a constitutional provision that allows a presidential veto to be over-ridden
by a majority affords the president no influence over outcomes.
Turning next to voting within the Iroquois Confederation, even if we again
treat the representatives from the individual tribes as unitary actors, the exten-
sive form representation of a simple vote as to whether to adopt A or maintain
the status quo Q can be complex. However, because the Mohawk and Seneca
lords (representatives) must be unanimous to proceed and because the Cayuga
and Oneida lords must also be unanimous, we will treat these pairs of tribes
as unitary actors—in which case, the voting tree looks as shown in Figure 2.12
(assuming that if the Mohawk-Seneca side and Cayuga-Oneida side propose
nothing, then there is nothing for the Onondaga to rule on).
As complex as Figure 2.12 might seem, the complexity of the situation that
results increases considerably if we choose to treat individuals within each
tribe as separate decision makers (and in fact, the Confederation Constitu-
tion defines subsets of actors within several of the tribes and assigns them spe-
cific responsibilities) or if we attempt to model the possibility that the Seneca
contemplated discussing matters with the Oneida before conferring with the
Mohawk. Minimally, though, Figure 2.12 makes clear that, contrary to what we
might come to believe by watching too many Hollywood cowboy movies, the
governing body of the Iroquois Confederation did not make decisions by danc-
ing around a campfire and letting the patterns of rocks or bones thrown in the
air or the pattern of the smoke arising from their fire dictate decisions. Instead,
Q
Q
Q
A
A
A
L
P
P
Veto
Veto
~Veto
~Veto
L
~Override
L
L
Override
Override
~Override
B
B
B
~B
~A
Figure 2.11b  Legislative agenda with presidential veto

--- Sayfa 73 ---
64  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
they proceeded very much like a contemporary legislature with a well defined,
constitutionally prescribed agenda.
Turning now to our discussion of crisis escalation, or rather an auction for
$100, in lieu of actually drawing out an extensive form let us simply examine
things logically; which is to say, let us reason back down the implicit extensive
form. Suppose the current bid by 1 is $70, which means that 2’s last bid is $60.
Should 2 bid $80? Person 2 knows that by withdrawing at that point from the
auction, he loses the $60 he last bid and 1 gets the $100 for $70. So 2 might
reasonably decide to up the ante by bidding $80 in the hope that 1 will instead
withdraw. But is this hope valid? Suppose, then, that we go to the end of that
branch of the extensive form where person 2 is the last to decide . . . in this case,
whether to pass or bid $200. If 2 passes, he foregoes the $100, but since his last
bid was $180, he must still pay this amount. On the other hand, if he bids $200,
he at least gets the $100, albeit at a cost of $200. So he bids. Now consider 1’s
prior move, which is either to pass and incur a cost of $170 (his last bid) or to
bid $190. But if he bids $190, he knows 2 will bid $200 and his cost is $190. So it
seems logical that 1 should pass and let 2 have the $100 at a cost of $180. Thus,
when 2 must decide whether to bid $180 or pass, he knows that if he bids the
$180, 1 will pass, so 2 does, in fact, bid. Stepping back once again to where 1
must decide whether to bid $170 or pass, 1 knows that 2 will bid $180 if he bids
and that he will then pass and let 2 have the $100. So seeking to avoid an unnec-
essary expense, 1 passes. Continuing back down the extensive form with this
reasoning, consider 1’s decision node when he must decide whether to bid $90
or to pass. Passing allows 2 to walk away with a bargain—$100 at a cost of $80
(2’s last bid). But if 1 bids $90, he knows that 2 will bid $100, and that if he keeps
on bidding, he will accomplish nothing other than to force 2 to over-pay for the
Q
Q
Q
A
A
A
A
~A
~A
~Veto
Veto
Mohawk-Seneca
Cayuga-Oneida
Onondaga
M-S
C-O
Override
Override
~Override
~Override
Q
Figure 2.12  Voting in the Iroquois Confederation

--- Sayfa 74 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   65
$100. So again, if his personal finances are all that matter to 1, he should forego
bidding. But this same argument applies to the choice between passing and
bidding $70, between passing and bidding $50, and so on. The net result is that
person 1 should refuse to bid $10 initially and to let 2 have the $100 for $10. We
note incidentally that a simple rule change ensures that no one wins the $100.
Specifically, if 1 is allowed to reenter the auction after passing and after 2 opens
the bidding at $10, then the situations of players 1 and 2 are now reversed, and
we can conclude that both persons will refuse to open the bidding.
Thus, our simple auction DOES NOT model crisis escalation, and so we
must conclude that when crises do escalate, they do so for reasons not captured
by our example. What might those reasons be? Here we can only speculate, but
one possibility is that our model misrepresents people’s preferences and that
those preferences exhibit a form of reverse altruism. Suppose that while our two
bidders might prefer to avoid net losses, ceteris paribus, they gain some satisfac-
tion from making their opponent incur losses. For example, suppose 1, looking
down the extensive form, knows he can force 2 to pay more than the objective
value of the auction’s prize by simply refusing to opt out of the bidding and
by bidding at least up to $110. If, for whatever reason, 1 discounts the costs to
himself and focuses instead on the costs incurred by the opponent, bidding will
proceed beyond the value of the prize. Indeed, if monetary value is not the sole
consideration and if the primary thing 1 wants to avoid is having 2 incur a net
gain from the auction (by having 1 drop out of the bidding early), then surely
1 will bid to $90 or even $110, if not higher. It would seem, then, that a crisis
can escalate when the predominant concern of one or both sides to a conflict is
that the opponent enjoys a relative gain or a gain at too low a cost. And crises
are averted when both sides understand the consequences of such preferences
and consciously act to suppress them even if that means one side or the other
enjoys an advantage.
An alternative explanation for crisis escalation—one that we are not pre-
pared to consider in this chapter—is that the players have incorrect or imper-
fect beliefs about each other’s preferences or attitudes towards risk. Postponing
consideration of such things, we can still exclude one potential explanation for
crisis escalation: the mistakes made by players at the early stages of the game.
Suppose, for example, that player 1 accidentally bids $10 and that player 2, fol-
lowing the logic of our analysis, bids $20. In effect, the game’s “first move” is
again player 1’s and the existence of 1’s initial $10 bid and 2’s $20 response
simply becomes a description of the situation’s status quo environment. Unless
player 1 errs again by bidding $30, which will be followed by 2’s response of a
$40 bid, player 1 should simply admit its error and drop out of the bidding. And,
if we sweep aside many of the complexities of the situation, this is perhaps what
occurred in the Cuban Missile Crisis when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev
ordered his ships to turn back and not run the American blockade (although
surely events during that crisis hardly matched such a simple scenario).
With respect to America’s 1896 Presidential election and the choice facing
the Populists with respect to the timing of their convention, we can ignore the
Republicans since they were certain to nominate a pro-gold candidate. Drawing

--- Sayfa 75 ---
66  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
a simplified extensive form is straightforward, then, if we take the bold step of
modeling the two parties as unitary actors and add the simplification of the
Democrats choosing between a unified versus a factious convention by draft-
ing a narrow versus a broadly based party platform. The bare outline of such a
form is portrayed in Figure 2.13. Keep in mind, however, that it is a bold step
to model ANY American political party as a unitary actor, and a more careful
and satisfactory model of the situation should, at a minimum, divide the parties
into their separate factions, which, in turn, makes it difficult to assign prefer-
ences to the specific outcomes. Can we, for example, say that the Democrats
preferred a unified to a factious convention in the fight over whether to issue a
broad platform versus one that focused specifically on the issue of backing the
dollar with silver? Or is it better to say that any such preference is the conse-
quence of a variety of sub-games played by the various factions at the conven-
tion itself ? Similarly, notice that we differentiate outcomes by whether or not
the Populists held their convention before or after the Democrats so as to open
the possibility that the public’s view of things would depend on whether the
party is viewed as leading or following the Democrats, which again complicates
any assignment of preferences. Thus, Figure 2.13 hardly ends our analysis of
this historical event, but any attempt at filling in its details illustrates the ana-
lytic decisions that must be made when modeling such real world processes.
For a final example, consider once again our brief discussion in Chapter 1 of
the decisions confronting Japan and the United States with respect to America’s
narrow
narrow
narrow
narrow
narrow
P
D
narrow
broad
before
after
Populists
D
D
P
P
broad
broad
broad
broad
broad
O1
O2
O3
O4
O´1
O´2
O´3
O´4
Figure 2.13  Populist Party timing decision

--- Sayfa 76 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   67
strategy of sending a single plane to drop a second atomic bomb in World War II.
Our earlier use of this example was intended to illustrate the difference between
decision theoretic and game theoretic reasoning. Here we can consider how to
model the situation more completely after adding the wrinkle of supposing that
the U.S. has to guess at the likelihood that Japan’s strategic command assumed
that the U.S. was capable of manufacturing a second bomb. Recall now that
in making the decision to fly a lone plane to Hiroshima, the United States was
most likely treating matters as a simple decision problem—betting that Japan
would treat that bomber as any other lone observation plane. After Hiroshima,
however, the United States had to guess as to whether Japan would assume that
the U.S. had additional atomic bombs and, if so, whether it would pursue the
same tactic as before or whether, in delivering the next bomb, it would shift
gears and imbed the plane carrying the next bomb in a bomber group. There
are, admittedly, a number of ways to model this situation, so here we take the
simplest path. First, we let nature decide whether or not the U.S. has a sec-
ond bomb. The U.S., of course, knows what “choice” nature has made here, but
Japan can only assign the probabilities p and 1 – p to the alternatives. And to
simplify matters more, suppose that if the U.S. has a second bomb, it will defi-
nitely use it. The choices for the U.S., then, are whether to send a single plane
(S) or fleet (F) over Japan’s cities the next day while Japan must choose between
intercepting (I) or not intercepting (not I) whatever appears in its skies. Finally,
let us assign the probabilities q to the chances that if the bomb is imbedded in a
fleet and if the fleet is intercepted by Japan’s air defenses, the bomber carrying
the deadly payload is destroyed. In extensive form, then, the situation looks,
perhaps, like the one shown in Figure 2.14 (we forgo attaching values to the
outcomes, several of which are decidedly negative for Japan).
Clearly, this representation greatly simplifies things. For example, we could
include additional intermediate moves on the part of the U.S., such as probing
Japan’s air defenses with additional (but unarmed) scout planes to test Japan’s
responses. Japan, in turn, if fully cognizant of the existence of a second bomb
and cognizant as well of the fact that the first was delivered by a single plane,
might then take into account the possibility that the U.S. would, after Hiro-
shima, test Japan’s air defense tactics by first sending in one or two additional
scout planes before deciding on a tactic for delivering the second bomb. Of
course, were Japan fully aware of its circumstances, it might attempt to lull the
U.S. into complacency by ignoring the first or second lone bomber over its ter-
ritory after Hiroshima so as to lead the U.S. to believe, falsely, that it was oblivi-
ous to circumstances, all with the idea of thereafter intercepting anything over
its territory. In other words, we can readily imagine a game where each side
attempts to deceive the other.
Manipulation of Beliefs: Lest the reader think we have made too much of
the strategic calculations involved with America’s use of its atomic arse-
nal in World War II, consider Zhang Xun, a general of the Chinese Tang
Dynasty. Known for successfully defending Yongqiu and Suiyang during
the Anshi Rebellion against the rebel armies of Yan, he is credited with

--- Sayfa 77 ---
68  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
having blocked Yan forces from attacking and capturing the fertile Tang
territory south of the Huai River. More precisely, in defending the city of
Yongqiu in 756 ad, Zhang’s troops had run low on arrows. He ordered his
troops to make about 1,000 scarecrows and had his soldiers dress them
in their own armor. At night, the soldiers hung the scarecrows from the
fortress wall so as to be easily seen, whereupon the rebel commander, see-
ing the armored black figures at a distance, ordered his archers to shoot
and stop a potential ambush. When the scarecrows were pulled back over
the wall with about two hundred thousand arrows, the enemy commander
realized he’d been duped into resupplying his enemy and ordered his
troops not to waste arrows by shooting at black figures coming off the wall.
So when Zhang rehung the scarecrows the next night, no arrows were fired
at them. On the third night, black figures were again hung from the wall
and were again ignored. But these figures were not scarecrows. They were,
instead, five hundred of Zhang’s best men who proceeded, in a murderous
ambush, to inflict heavy casualties on the rebels as they slept.
This classic tale serves as a warning about how to treat uncertainty in situa-
tions involving interactive decision making. Zhang’s opponent made the fatal
error of not fully appreciating Zhang’s incentives to strategically manipulate
perceived probabilities—in this case, the probability that the “scarecrows” were
precisely that. Indeed, a careful reading of Sun Tzu’s The Art of War would reveal
innumerable examples of advice that consists primarily of manipulating the
F
U.S.
U.S. has
bomb
U.S. doesn’t
have
bomb
U.S.
U.S.
J
J
J
F
P
S
N
I
N
I
1
q
q
1
1-q
1-q
1-P
not I
not I
not I
not I
N
N
0
0
N
I
I
J
Figure 2.14  Atomic bomb decision

--- Sayfa 78 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   69
beliefs of one’s opponents. But what’s interesting from the perspective of this
volume is what happens when your opponent knows you are trying to deceive.
Consider the rebel commander in Zhang’s case. Suppose he knew that there was
a chance on any given night that the scarecrows would be real soldiers. What
strategy should he follow then, short of quickly exhausting all his resources by
firing as many arrows as possible at the hung figures on every occasion? And
how might Zhang have acted if he had a higher opinion of the rebel command-
er’s ability to recognize the game they were playing against each other? Could
Zhang then exclude the possibility that his opponent was merely “playing pos-
sum” the second night by refusing to shoot at the scarecrows and was, in fact,
attempting to lure Zhang into a false sense of security when he lowered his best
men over the wall the third night? Can one, in other words, deceive someone
who knows you are trying to deceive them and can one deceive a deceiver?
Further discussion of situations of this sort and answers to our questions
must await the introduction of additional game theoretic concepts and tools
as well as a discussion of how we might model beliefs that depend on prior
observations when it is known to all decision makers that some or all of them
might seek to manipulate beliefs. For the present, we will assume that all deci-
sion makers know the game they are playing. Thus, if each decision maker were
asked to draw out the extensive form of the situation that confronts them, each
would draw the same form. In one interpretation of our example of Zhang Xun,
we could say that this assumption is violated because Zhang’s opponent failed
to include in his mapping of the extensive form any branches in which Zhang
chose to hang scarecrows from the fortress walls. Alternatively, we might model
the situation in accordance with our assumptions by saying that Zhang’s oppo-
nent simply put too low a probability on the likelihood of using scarecrows to
replenish Zhang’s supply of arrows.
2.3  Voting Agendas
As we’ve already seen in several examples, it is sometimes convenient when deal-
ing with groups of people to collapse their decision nodes into a single node,
especially when analyzing formally prescribed parliamentary voting scenarios.
Imagine, for example, attempting to represent a vote in the U.S. Congress with
435 members by a fully drawn out extensive form. There may not be an available
sheet of paper large enough to do this. At times, of course, exploring such exten-
sive forms in detail may be unavoidable as when individual legislators possess
choices unavailable to others or when the distribution of information is not sym-
metric. But often such detail is superfluous and, as with our example of presiden-
tial vetoes (and as long as we keep in mind that collectivities can hold intransitive
preferences), it is sufficient to consider only an abbreviated version of the exten-
sive form termed a voting tree, such as the ones in Figures 2.4 and 2.5. Voting trees,
in turn, can be analyzed in much the same way as a fully drawn extensive form.
To illustrate this along with the impact agendas can have on outcomes, con-
sider a legislature with the intransitive preference A > B > C > A and where
all three alternatives are preferred to the status quo Q. In this instance, we can

--- Sayfa 79 ---
70  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
ignore any final votes for passage because the legislature will approve anything
that reaches a final vote. Commonly now, Western legislatures will, when con-
fronted with three alternatives, employ an amendment agenda whereby two
alternatives, say A and B, are first paired against each other and then the winner
of that first vote paired against C. Denoting this agenda by {A,B,C}, there are,
then, five other possible agendas with these three alternatives: {A,C,B}, {B,C,A},
{B,A,C}, {C,A,B} and {C,B,A}, though of course the agenda {A,B,C} is equiva-
lent to {B,A,C}, {B,C,A} is equivalent to {C,B,A} and {A,C,B} is equivalent to
{C,A,B}.
To see, then, how setting the agenda can influence outcomes, consider first
{A,B,C}. Assuming again that our legislators look ahead before voting on A ver-
sus B, they know that if A passes, it will be paired against C and C will prevail.
Thus, the strategic equivalent of voting for A is C. On the other hand, if B wins
the first vote, it will be paired against C and will again prevail. So the strategic
equivalent of voting for B is B itself. Our legislators, then, know that their initial
vote is not really between A and B but between C and B, in which case, because
a majority prefer B to C, B prevails as the final outcome. More interestingly,
however, notice that if we reproduce this analysis with the agenda {A,C,B}, the
final outcome is A whereas if we use the agenda {B,C,A}, the final outcome is C.
This simple example not only illustrates how voting trees are analyzed, it
also illustrates the power an agenda setter can have on outcomes. Indeed, in
this example at least, the agenda setter is a virtual dictator of the outcome. For
another example that illustrates the power of an agenda setter as well as the
difference between voting strategically (i.e., looking ahead to see what happens
at different branches of a tree) versus voting naïvely, consider the example we
have just considered in which we assumed—implicitly, by presuming that our
voters look ahead—that everyone is strategic, and suppose instead that they are
naïve. In this case, the agenda {A,B,C} yields the outcome C rather than B—the
initial vote yields A, in which case the final vote, which pits A against C, yields
C. Similarly, the agenda {A,C,B} yields B rather than A and the agenda {B,C,A}
yields A rather than C.
Lest the reader remain unconvinced that setting agendas is perceived by
those who do so as an important element of political strategy, we note that
perhaps the classic instance of agenda setting in American history, albeit in a
less formal context than a rigorously defined legislative agenda, occurred in the
framing of the U.S. Constitution in 1787. Preparing for the Constitutional Con-
vention weeks, even months, prior to its opening, James Madison arrived at the
convention several days early and, in consultation with other members of his
state’s delegation, drafted his Virginia Plan, which outlined his ideal constitu-
tional form. In the end, Madison did not get all that he wanted, but because the
Virginia plan was the sole well-defined proposal presented to the Convention
when it opened, it largely determined the course of the Convention’s delibera-
tions. “By preparing a plan for discussion that was neither too elaborate nor
too vague, and that was an open challenge to the Articles of Confederation,
he seized the initiative in behalf of the reform minded nationalists that was

--- Sayfa 80 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   71
never relinquished from the first day to the last” (Clinton Rossiter, 1787: The
Grand Convention, NY: Macmillan, 1966: 171). However, the other members
of the convention, which included the likes of Benjamin Franklin, James Wil-
son, Gouvernor Morris, Roger Sherman and Alexander Hamilton, were neither
fools nor naïve. So while they largely allowed the Virginia plan to guide their
discussions, they not only made provision in their procedural rules for a recon-
sideration of prior votes, as we noted in the previous chapter with respect to
the particulars of presidential selection and terms of office, they did revote on
things that appeared to have been resolved earlier. The potential utility of being
flexible in this way is perhaps best illustrated by these three preference orders
over four alternatives, A, B, C and D.
voter 1
voter 2
voter 3
B
C
A
A
B
D
D
A
C
C
D
B
The social preference order under majority rule for these four alternatives is
the intransitive relation A > C > B > A > D > C and B > D. Now consider the
amendment agenda {A,B,C,D} with naïve voting. In this case B defeats A, C
defeats B and D defeats C. However, notice that A, which is where we began in
the voting, is unanimously preferred to D, which is where we ended. It would
surely be foolish, then, if a committee such as the Philadelphia delegates, realiz-
ing that such possibilities existed, did not make provision for a reconsideration
of prior votes.
The preceding two examples also illustrate why it is sometimes advisable to
set one’s procedures in stone, including the order in which motions are voted
upon (e.g., in the order in which they are introduced), so that voters can plan
their strategies beforehand and not cycle endlessly over the choice of rules and
procedures or the choice of rules for choosing rules, and so on. Regardless of
whether voting is strategic or naïve, in our 3-alternative example, the choice
of agenda inherits the intransitivity of the alternatives themselves. Specifically,
with strategic voting, because A > B > C > A, then {A,C,B} > {A,B,C} > {B,C,A}
> {A,C,B} whereas with naïve voting, {B,C,A} > {A,C,B} > {A,B,C} > {B,C,A}.
Thus, our example reveals why it is important to have constitutions wherein
rules and institutional forms are set somehow in stone before it is known to
what alternatives they will be applied. If, in our example, the committee must
first vote on an agenda or an agenda setter, then the committee might never
reach a decision.
Our examples, though, should not be taken to mean that all voting decisions
are susceptible to agenda manipulation. Specifically, suppose the legislature’s
preferences are not wholly intransitive and that there exists a motion to be
voted on at some point in the process that is a Condorcet winner—an alterna-
tive that defeats all others in a pair-wise majority vote. It is straightforward to
see now that if all legislators are strategic and if they employ any form of a binary

--- Sayfa 81 ---
72  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
agenda (an agenda that only pits pairs of alternatives against each other at each
decision node), then the Condorcet winner will necessarily prevail regardless of
how the alternatives are ordered or organized in the agenda. To see why this is
true, suppose C is a Condorcet winner. Then there must be somewhere on the
agenda a final decision node that pits C against some other alternative that C
defeats. Thus C is the strategic equivalent at that node. But then C will be the
strategic equivalent of the node that precedes that one, and so on and so forth.
In other words, C will “bubble up” to become the strategic equivalent of at
least one of the branches of the first node and, thereby, the branch chosen by a
majority of the legislature. It might seem, then, that any legislative choice that
entails a Condorcet winner will be uninteresting and not worth analyzing. This
is not necessarily true, though, if the legislature employs an agenda other than
an amendment agenda and if some legislators for various reasons are unable to
vote strategically.
Pliny the Younger and Puerto Rican Independence: For an example of
this possibility, we can turn to a classic example of agenda manipulation
offered by antiquity in the records of the Pliny the Younger (ad 61–112).
As recounted by him, several servants had been accused of murdering their
master and the question was how to vote on their guilt and punishment.
One option was to put the three alternatives up for a simultaneous plurality
vote wherein the alternative receiving the most votes dictates the outcome:
A: innocent and set free
B: guilty and banished
C: guilty and put to death
A majority of those voting felt that the servants were guilty, but of those
a minority believed there were extenuating circumstances and that at worst
the servants should be banished. However, since the number believing they
were guilty and that extenuating circumstances were of no consequence
outnumbered all others that believed in their guilt, Pliny presumed that
C would prevail in a plurality vote. Pliny, however, also believed the ser-
vants innocent and wished, at a minimum, to avert a death penalty. He
understood, moreover, that those who believed the servants guilty and
fully appreciated the extenuating circumstances had as their second choice
setting the servants free. Thus, he foresaw that there were but three prefer-
ence orders approximately evenly represented among those voting:
A > B > C
B > A > C
C > B > A
With each group approximately evenly matched in numbers, the major-
ity preference is transitive, with B the Condorcet winner. So Pliny pro-
posed a binary agenda in which they first voted on the guilt or innocence
of the servants and then, if they were convicted, on their punishment. The

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   73
outcome thus was changed to B—a not inconsiderable change from the
perspective of the servants. We should note here that Pliny’s analysis is
incomplete and, in the process, raises an interesting question. Specifically,
his analysis ostensibly assumed that voters were naïve under the plurality
rule and, in particular, that those who most preferred B did not see the
potential value in voting for A instead of their first choice. The question
then becomes whether plurality rule is guaranteed to yield a Condorcet
winner if one exists when voters are strategic. Answering that question,
though, is one we must postpone until we develop some additional ana-
lytic tools in subsequent chapters.
However, lest the reader think we must revert to examples from antiq-
uity to illustrate the potential role of agendas, consider the status of Puerto
Rico. Without delving into complexities, Puerto Rico is classified as a com-
monwealth of the U.S. whereby it is neither a state nor an independent
country. There are those who favor statehood as well as those who favor
independence, and in a recent poll (The Daily Koss poll of November /
December 2011), 41% of respondents preferred statehood, 35% preferred
the status quo and 4% preferred independence, with 20% undecided. On
numerous occasions, the U.S. Congress has authorized the residents of the
island to vote on their status, but here the question is how should a popular
referendum be organized. One alternative is to have all three alternatives
on the ballot simultaneously and the outcome decided by plurality rule.
The alternative, and the one suggested by the Congress and approved by
Puerto Rico itself, is to have a two-stage referendum: In the first stage, the
vote will be between maintaining the status quo versus making a change in
Puerto Rico’s status. If making a change wins, voters will choose between
independence and statehood. It seems evident that if a vote were taken sim-
ply between the status quo and statehood, the outcome would be close,
although most observers agree that the preference for statehood has been
gaining strength. Those in favor of statehood, then, should most likely pre-
fer a simple three-way plurality format. In contrast, opponents of statehood,
and notably those who prefer the status quo, should prefer the two-stage
format. Because those favoring independence are strongly opposed to
statehood and because statehood is virtually certain to win if paired against
independence, pro-independence voters can forestall statehood and live to
fight another day by voting against change in the initial balloting. In fact,
in the November 2012 vote, 52.4% voted as being dissatisfied with Puerto
Rico’s current status, while 44.7% were satisfied with the status quo. How-
ever, on a separate question, only 44.9% registered a preference for state-
hood, with 26% not registering any preference. If one assumes, then, that
those who strongly prefer statehood indicated that preference, then clearly
the two-stage procedure ensures maintenance of the status quo because the
pro-independence voters would not vote for making a change.
Agenda Manipulation with a Few Unsophisticated Voters: Far be it
for us to suggest that our elected representatives are unsophisticated when

--- Sayfa 83 ---
74  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
voting on legislation. However, there may be times when they are unable
to vote strategically for fear their constituents would not understand their
vote, especially if their vote can be misrepresented by their opponents in the
next election. For example, consider the following three preference orders
and suppose each group holding these preferences is sufficiently numerous
so that the social preference is the intransitive order A > Q > B > A,
A > Q > B
B > A > Q
Q > B > A
Suppose B is not initially on the agenda so that A  wins in a simple
majority vote over Q, but that you are intent on defeating A and having
the status quo prevail. One tactic, then, is to introduce B so that A and
B are first paired, with the winner set against Q. Given the above prefer-
ences, though, this tactic will not work if everyone is strategic: If A prevails
against B, it will defeat Q, ultimately, whereas if B wins in the first vote, it
will lose to Q. So if everyone is strategic, they will see that the first vote is
really between A and Q, and A will again prevail. However, suppose for
some reason that those who hold the preference B > A > Q are unable to
vote strategically. In this case, they will join with those who hold the prefer-
ence Q > B > A to defeat A in the first vote, after which B loses to the status
quo Q. Thus, those who prefer the status quo can get their way if they can
find an alternative to A—or, more precisely, an amendment to A—that
forces some legislators to vote sincerely.
The 17th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution: Can such a thing hap-
pen in a legislature of otherwise sophisticated members? In fact it has, and
in quite dramatic fashion. For years, opponents of direct election of U.S.
Senators thwarted Senate approval of the 17th Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution by precisely this tactic. Keep in mind that up to the passage
and ratification of this amendment, the Constitution allowed individual
state legislatures to decide how Senators were chosen, and a good share of
states, though not a majority, still appointed their Senatorial representation
by the legislature without reference to a popular vote. In the attempt, then,
to expand the domain of direct election and make the Senate “democratic,”
an amendment, A, was introduced that proposed simply that all members
of the Senate be subject to direct election. It would seem that A was sure
to pass because a significant majority of states already directly elected their
representatives. After all, if you have to take your chances before an elector-
ate that can fire you at the next election, then why shouldn’t everyone have
to endure the same threat? Of course, there were those Senators appointed
by their state legislatures who liked things as they were and so, to defeat A,
they proposed an amendment to the amendment designed to put an end to
things. Specifically, they proposed the seemingly reasonable requirement
that the federal government oversee all elections to federal office. How-
ever, as progressive as this requirement might seem as a means of guarding

--- Sayfa 84 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   75
against electoral fraud, it was anathema to the South, which had used state
and local control of elections to exclude blacks from voting. Thus, while
Southern Senators—the product of states controlled by one party—had
no objection to direct election, their worst nightmare was federal supervi-
sion of their Jim Crow electoral systems. We might suppose that all others
favoring direct election could see the tactic of the amendment for what it
was and vote strategically to defeat it. But if there is one thing an incum-
bent politician fears, it is the possibility that voters will fail to see the virtue
of their voting record. Thus, a good enough share of pro-17th Amend-
ment Senators felt boxed in by a concern that their constituents would
not understand a vote against a provision that seemed pro-reform and
strengthened the teeth of the proposed constitutional Amendment.
The tactic of thus amending the 17th Amendment postponed its ulti-
mate approval for upwards of ten years, but such a tactic is not always
guaranteed to work. In the 1970s the U.S. Congress debated a piece of
legislation—The Common Sites Picketing Bill—that organized labor
strongly supported. The tactic employed in this instance by opponents of
the bill was to propose an amendment that actually strengthened it. Their
calculation was that the pro-labor members of Congress would feel com-
pelled to vote for the amendment, but that it would so radicalize the bill
that the more conservative supporters of the original bill would vote against
the amended version when considering it for final passage. The tactic,
though, failed. Aware of the consequences of passing the strengthened bill,
organized labor set about to inform their membership of the threat while
simultaneously coordinating with their supporters in Congress, thus free-
ing those supporters to vote strategically for the weaker version of the bill.
Amendment agendas and plurality voting agendas are not, however, the only
possibilities. Indeed, unless there are but two or three proposals on the floor of
the U.S. Congress, amendment agendas are NOT used, despite the academic
literature’s nearly exclusive focus on them. For example, suppose the Congress
must consider a bill, B, as originally reported out of committee, an amended
version of that bill, BA, a substitute bill, S, an amended version of that substitute,
SA, and the status quo Q. Then the rules of the U.S. Senate and House of Rep-
resentatives dictate that first the substitute bill should be refined—a vote must
first be taken on S versus SA. Then, rather than take the winner of that vote and
pair it against the next alternative, the bill reported out of committee must be
refined with B pitted against BA. The winners of the first two votes are then pit-
ted against each other, and the winner of that third vote then pitted against Q
in a vote for final passage. Alternatively, consider voting on U.S. Supreme Court
appointments. The first vote, then, would be to approve or disapprove of the
President’s nominee. If that person is approved, the voting ends whereas, if dis-
approved, the Congress takes up consideration of the President’s next nominee,
and so on until someone is approved. Agendas of this type are referred to as
sequential elimination agendas.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
76  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
The potential complexity of U.S. Congressional agendas suggests that they
leave room for considerable strategic manipulation, both in terms of the label-
ing of motions and in the actual voting. They also suggest that there is a consid-
erable premium put on parliamentary expertise and skill. It would be foolhardy,
though, to suppose that such skills are limited in their application to this spe-
cific legislative body and that they do not apply broadly to legislative bodies
elsewhere. Indeed, it would be foolhardy to suppose the expertise and skill do
not apply to virtually any voting body wherein decisions of some consequence
are made.
2.4  Games and Subgames
Agendas represent only one class of games relevant to the study of politics, but
the conclusions we arrive at with them using backward reduction suggests that
we should try to generalize this process so that we can apply our method of
analysis more broadly. To this end, we introduce the concept of a subgame.
Beginning at a decision node, a subgame is a part of an extensive form that is
itself an extensive form and that, when detached from the original form, does
not divide any information set.
A subgame, then, begins at a particular node and includes all branches and
nodes that follow it in the original extensive form and that by some path are
connected to that node. For example, the legislative voting form shown in
Figure 2.5 has three subgames: The “game” beginning at the node denoted HO,
the “game” beginning at the node P, and the full extensive form itself. The ver-
sion of this scenario shown in Figure 2.4, in contrast, has seven subgames—the
three just noted in Figure 2.5 as well as the four “games” beginning at the four
S nodes. These additional subgames are not subgames in Figure 2.5 because
separating them breaks information sets.
Next, we introduce the notion of a strategy for extensive forms:
A strategy is a rule that tells a decision maker what choice to make at each of
his or her information sets.
The concept of a strategy is critically important in the development of
game-theoretic reasoning and analysis, and we will have reason to elaborate
on its definition with a number of examples in subsequent chapters. For pres-
ent purposes, we can think of a player’s strategy informally as a “plan for how
to play the game”—a specification, laid out beforehand, for what choices will
be made under every possible contingency (information set). A typical strat-
egy, then, might read as follows: “If I arrive at information set I1 because my
opponent(s) [or nature] chose y1, then choose x1, but if instead I find myself at
information set I2 because my opponent(s) [or nature] chose y2, then choose
x2.” Moreover, if the game continues beyond these choices, then the strategy
under consideration, if it is to be complete, would also specify choices at any

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   77
subsequent information sets that might be encountered. For example, then,
when playing poker a player might decide to “play conservatively,” which might
entail such choices as not bluffing and folding whenever a hand appears weak.
Alternatively, a player might choose an aggressive strategy of bluffing on occa-
sion and never folding unless confronted by an opponent who appears to be
acting overly aggressive. And a more complex strategy might allow for switch-
ing between conservative and aggressive play, depending on one’s success (e.g.,
how much money they’ve won or lost to that point)
With the notion of strategy, or at least its rough outlines in mind, we can then
move next to the idea of an equilibrium. In later chapters we will expand on this
definition, but for now the following is sufficient:
An equilibrium is a vector of strategies, one for each decision maker involved
in the extensive form, such that no person has a positive incentive to switch
unilaterally to some other strategy.
Continuing with our poker example, suppose each player around the table
has, for whatever reason, chosen a strategy for how to play cards that night,
where one of them decides to be aggressive in a wholly naïve (stupid) way and
commits to bluffing at every opportunity. Unless his opponents are comatose,
such a strategy is unlikely to be successful for very long because it will soon
become evident to everyone that he is raising the pot regardless of whether his
hand is weak or strong. Bluffs will begin to be called every time, and most likely
the value of the chips before our player will soon approach zero. Clearly, then,
such a strategy cannot be part of an equilibrium since there is a clear incentive
to abide by a different and more sophisticated scheme.
Once again we will revisit these definitions, but we are now in a position
to define a subgame perfect equilibrium, which formalizes the essential ideas
behind working backward up an extensive form.
A subgame perfect equilibrium is a vector of strategies, one for each person,
such that, when we look at any subgame, that vector implies an equilibrium
in that subgame.
Continuing with our poker scenario, we can, if we want, view every hand of
poker and all that follows as a subgame—once the winner of the previous hand
is determined and the chips reallocated accordingly, the next hand might be
said to begin the evening anew (aside from the fact that some people may have
more chips and others less than they did earlier). The all-out naïve strategy of
being aggressive, then, dictates that our player in question bluffs in the next
hand and all that follow. Suppose, though, that our player has come to under-
stand that always bluffing is just plain dumb. Thus, being aggressive cannot be
part of any equilibrium in what follows—in the subgame that consists of all
subsequent hands.
As noted above, we will have reason to return to the notion of strategy and
the representation of strategic situations in greater detail, but for the present

--- Sayfa 87 ---
78  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
it is useful to see the distinction here between an equilibrium and a subgame
perfect one. Consider, then, the following simple scenario: If person 1 (who
moves first) chooses L, the outcome (2,2) prevails and the game ends. But if
he chooses R, then person 2 gets to choose between L and R. If 2 chooses L,
the outcome (3,1) prevails whereas if he chooses R, the outcome (0,0) prevails.
Working backwards up the implied extensive form yields (L, L) and the out-
come (3,1) as the unique subgame perfect equilibrium. However, the strategy
pair (L, R) and the corresponding outcome (2,2) also satisfy our definition
of an equilibrium. Thus, the notion of a subgame perfect equilibrium can be
viewed as a refinement of the notion of an equilibrium.
We appreciate, of course, that terms such as subgame and a subgame per-
fect equilibrium might seem as far removed from politics as any mathemati-
cal jargon. However, the preceding two sections are concerned with precisely
these topics—pruning a voting tree from its end to its beginning is equivalent to
finding a subgame perfect equilibrium. To see more precisely what we mean by
this, notice that we have quite briefly introduced several new terms here—the
notions of a strategy and of an equilibrium. We will, in fact, have reason to
elaborate on the meaning of these words throughout this volume, but for the
time being, let us simply define an equilibrium in the context of extensive form
games that points the way to generalizing the ideas implicit in the method of
working backward up such a form. Specifically, if, in addition to identifying
the strategic equivalents of nodes, we also keep a careful record of the implied
choices of each decision maker, we could then describe strategies for action at
each node that are in equilibrium in the following sense:
No person, after learning what any other person intends to choose, has any
incentive to make a different choice at any decision node.
That the sequence of choices arrived at by working backward up an extensive
form are in equilibrium follows from the fact that we have constructed the path
from the first node to the predicted outcome by looking at each person individ-
ually when it is that person’s turn to act and by retaining only those choices that
are not inferior. Thus, the choices of all persons, taken together, are in equilib-
rium in the sense that no single decision maker has a positive incentive to make
a different choice when we hold constant everyone else’s choices (strategies).
For yet another way to illustrate these ideas, let us consider another card
game—blackjack—played against a Las Vegas casino. Of course, this isn’t
strictly a “game” in the game theoretic sense since a casino dealer’s choices are
predetermined and publicly stated: If the dealer’s cards sum to anything less
than 17, draw another card and continue to draw until a sum of 17 or greater
is realized. The only free choices, then, are yours, and here we can outline some
of the components of an equilibrium strategy. Ignoring the possibility of card
counting and finite decks, if the dealer’s up (face) card is 5 or less, we know that
it plus the down card cannot exceed 16, so the dealer must draw one or more
cards before he or she reaches 17. There is, then, a good chance the dealer will
go over 21 and bust. So even if your two initial cards sum to, say, 14, its best

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   79
to hold pat and not ask for another card—only drawing a 3, 4 5, 6 or 7 will
improve your hand, which, ceteris paribus, has a less than even chance of hap-
pening (5 card types out of 13 possibilities). On the other hand, suppose the
dealer’s up card is a king, queen, jack or ten. There’s now a better than even
chance the dealer’s down card is a seven or greater, in which case staying pat
with two cards totaling 14 or 15 will, on average, lose so you might now want to
consider drawing another card and hoping it takes you above 16 but not over
21. A strategy, then, will, among other things, tell you what do to when holding
cards of certain values while confronting a specific up card on the part of the
dealer. Indeed, if you ask, Las Vegas casinos will either give you or direct you
to where you can buy a little card that tells you what the odds favor doing for
all possible contingencies. That card, then, describes a strategy. And unless the
casino is using a single deck (they now generally use six) so that each hand is
essentially independent of whatever happened before—i.e., there is little chance
of you gaining an edge by card counting—every new hand begins a new sub-
game consisting of that hand plus all that follow. Since you are not likely to be
able to improve on the probabilistic calculations summarized by that little card,
committing to abiding by its advice for the rest of your Las Vegas experience
constitutes a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Turning from cards to the specifics of voting agendas, notice that a node cor-
responding to any final vote in a binary agenda tree that is not connected to any
other node by an information set is a subgame since we can “split it off” with-
out splitting any information sets. Although nodes in a voting tree may merely
be shorthand in large committees for the simultaneous choice of a great many
persons, as long as we don’t break any information sets, we have not violated the
definition of a subgame. And second, since everyone possesses a well-defined
best choice at each final decision node of a voting tree, the only choice that can
be part of a subgame perfect equilibrium is voting for one’s preferred outcome
or alternative from the alternative outcomes offered at that node (ignoring the
modest complication that voters might be indifferent between alternatives).
Since a subgame perfect equilibrium must have voters voting optimally in every
subgame, we can replace all final nodes with their strategic equivalents. But this
same argument now applies to any node that precedes any final nodes. Hence,
a subgame perfect equilibrium requires that voters choose optimally between
strategic equivalents at such nodes, in which case pruning a voting tree back
and substituting strategic equivalents for voting nodes determines that equi-
librium. Stated differently, a subgame perfect equilibrium requires that all voters
vote for the strategic equivalent ranking highest in their preference order, and this
is precisely what we assume when we suppose voters are strategic and we prune
a voting tree from bottom to top, substituting strategic equivalents for eventual
outcomes.
Figures 2.1, 2.2a and 2.2b illustrate this process of finding subgame perfect
equilibria for our roll call vote on a legislative pay raise, while Figures 2.3a,
2.3b and 2.3c illustrate the same thing for a committee that uses a sequential
veto. In the case of the roll call vote, Figure 2.1 is the entire extensive form
(which is itself a subgame, albeit an all inclusive one). The four individual nodes

--- Sayfa 89 ---
80  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
corresponding to C’s choice points with their two possible decisions to vote
for or against constitute four subgames which, after eliminating C’s dominated
choices to find the strategic equivalents of those nodes, yields the subgame in
Figure 2.2a. And that subgame, after we eliminate B’s dominated choices and
substitute instead the strategic equivalents for B’s choices, yields a subgame in
Figure 2.2b in which only legislator A has choices. Similarly, Figure 2.3a gives
the extensive form of our sequential veto example, and here again each of leg-
islator 3’s twelve decision nodes plus their associated branches correspond to
twelve subgames. After eliminating 3’s dominated choices and substituting the
choices he or she would make at each node for the nodes themselves, we arrive
at Figure 2.3b, wherein the extensive forms beginning at each of 2’s four deci-
sion nodes are now subgames. Doing the same thing with legislator 2 as we did
with 3 by substituting strategic equivalents for those four subgames, we arrive
at the subgame in Figure 2.3c that corresponds to legislator 1’s decision node.
Identifying 1’s optimal choice solves for the subgame perfect equilibrium.
The reader should be able to see now with these examples how the notion of
subgame perfect equilibria applied to voting trees applies equally well to any
extensive form that models a game of perfect information—a game in which no
two decision nodes share the same information set. It is at this point, though,
that we begin to run into problems. Instead of a roll call vote, suppose leg-
islators must decide whether or not to implement a pay raise for themselves
by a secret ballot. We have already seen, however, what happens then to the
situation’s extensive form; namely both of B’s two decision nodes are within
the same information set and all four of C’s decision nodes are contained in
a single information set. There is, then, but one subgame here and no oppor-
tunity to work backwards from final outcomes to individual choices unless, in
violation of the definition of a subgame, we break information sets. In other
words, we cannot, as we already know, work backwards on such an extensive
form to deduce optimal choices. Thus, we require something in addition to the
notion of subgame perfection to prune non-binary voting trees or to prune
any extensive form for which we cannot identify uniformly best choices at each
person’s information sets. The development of such an idea is the focus of our
next chapter.
This is not to say, however, that as soon as we see information sets in an exten-
sive form we must abandon any application of subgame perfection. Indeed,
precisely the opposite is true because it may still be possible to eliminate some
branches and nodes so as to simplify the analysis. To see what we mean, con-
sider the following example:
Example: Suppose three voters (1, 2, and 3) use a single secret ballot vote
and plurality rule to choose a final outcome from the set {A, B, C}. Sup-
pose, however, that voter 1 can break ties if each of the three alternatives
receives one vote. If, then, voter 1’s preferences are A > B > C, then Fig-
ure 2.15 describes the extensive form after we have eliminated 1’s choices
in the event of a tie and substituted instead the strategic equivalent of A for

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   81
the outcome (since 1 would always break the 3-way tie in favor of his most
preferred alternative).
In addition, we can see from this extensive form that voter 1 should, in
the initial secret ballot, always choose A, since doing so ensures the selec-
tion of A if voter 2 votes for A or if 2 and 3 disagree. In other words, voter
1 has a strategy—voting for A—that is best regardless of what the others
do. Thus, while doing so breaks voter 2 and 3’s information sets, we can
nevertheless focus our analysis on the bottom third of the extensive form
in Figure 2.15 because only the branch corresponding to voter 1 voting for
A is relevant. Beyond this we cannot go. Suppose preferences now are the
usual ones that give rise to the Condorcet Paradox; that is, voter 2 prefers
C to A to B and 3 prefers B to C to A. Because 1 is decisive if all three voters
choose differently, and because voter 3 wants to avoid allowing voter 1 to
dictate the selection of alternative A, voter 3 does not have a strategy that
C
A
A
1
2
3
B
C
A
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
B
A
C
A
A
C
B
A
B
B
B
A
B
A
C
A
A
A
B
A
A
A
A
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
C
B
A
A
B
Figure 2.15  Secret ballot with tiebreaking by voter 1

--- Sayfa 91 ---
82  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
is best under all circumstances. In particular, if 2 votes for B, then 3 should
vote for B, but if 2 votes for C, then 3 should vote for C. For the same
reason, voter 2 does not have a uniformly best choice. Nevertheless, the
preceding reasoning has simplified our analytic task in the event we wish
to pursue an analysis of this voting situation (which we do in Chapter 6).
2.5  The Centipede Game: A Word of Caution
To this point everything might seem routine and unexceptional. However, con-
sider the following scenario introduced by Robert Rosenthal in 1981 (“Games
of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and the Chain Store,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 25,1: 92–100): In a classroom experiment, two piles of money are
set on the table in front of two students now labeled players 1 and 2 (but don’t
hold your breath to be offered the chance to play this game anytime soon).
One pile contains $40, the other $10. Player 1 has the first move and can take
the larger of the two piles, in which case player 2 takes the smaller pile and the
game ends. But if 1 “passes,” the piles are switched and doubled! Player 2 can
then take the larger pile ($80), whereupon 1 gets the smaller pile ($20) and the
game ends. But, once again, if 2 passes, the piles are switched and doubled yet
again and it is now player 1’s choice of taking the larger pile ($160), giving 2 the
smaller one ($40) and ending the game—or passing. Suppose this situation is
allowed to proceed until player 2 must choose between taking and getting $320
with 1 getting $80 or “passing” and getting $160 and player 1 getting $640. This
circumstance is portrayed in extensive form in Figure 2.16.
If we now work backwards up this extensive form, beginning with player 2’s
last choice in order to compute the subgame perfect equilibrium, it is evident
that 2 should take the $320 rather than pass and receive $160. Thus, player 1
knows if he reaches the third decision node (his second) and if he passes, 2
will take and 1 will get $80. On the other hand, if 1 takes, then he gets $160. So
player 1 should take. Working backwards and repeating this argument for each
of the nodes leads to the seemingly incontrovertible conclusion that each player
should take at each node and, therefore, that 1 should take at the first node, thus
saving the experimenter a considerable amount of money.
But now consider the following problem: We’ve concluded that 2 should take
at his first decision node because player 1, preferring, as he does, more money to
pass
pass
pass
pass
take
take
take
take
40,10
20,80
160,40
80,320
640,160
1
2
1
2
Figure 2.16  The centipede game

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   83
less, will take at his second node, and so on. But shouldn’t player 2 ask himself,
“If 1 is reasoning as I am, then how did I ever get to choose anything—shouldn’t
1 have taken his money off the table at the very first opportunity?” We can, of
course, only speculate as to what 2 might think at this point. Player 2 could,
for instance, hypothesize that 1 simply made a mistake that is unlikely to be
repeated and that it’s best to grab the money now and run. Alternatively, he
could speculate that 1 has a broken arm and can’t pick up the money or even
that 1 is supremely irrational and has no appreciation for money whatsoever.
The most interesting possibility, though, is that 1 is trying to signal a willingness
to let things slide for a bit so that both players can maximize their take from the
experimenter. It wouldn’t be the first time the subjects of a classroom experi-
ment turned things into a game against their professor as opposed to against
each other. But notice now that each of these possibilities leads to a different
decision as to what to do if player 2 ever gets to choose anything. If 1 merely
made a mistake, 2’s best choice is probably to assume that it won’t happen again
and that he best take the $20 now. But if 1 has a broken hand and can’t some-
how pick up the money, then 2 should pass at all times until the final node.
Finally, if 1 is trying to signal something, then 2 has a harder decision to make;
namely, at what point does he think 1 will decide the time for cooperation is
over and will take the money? To make things more complicated still, suppose
we run this experiment out to n nodes, where player 2 gets to choose between
taking and passing on the even numbered nodes. Since the maximum payoff is
increasing to 40(2n-1) and the minimum to 10(2n-1), allowing n to equal 12 gives
2 the opportunity to end the game with a considerable amount of money for
each player ($163,840 for 2 and $40,960 for 1). Surely, if both subjects are of a
mind to try to signal cooperation early in the experiment, their willingness to
do so will depend on n, the size of the carrot not only at the end of the stick but
also on the carrots along the stick.
The critical thing to notice now is that none of these alternative thought
processes is represented in our extensive form. Nor does our extensive form
at this time tell us or allow us to deduce how n might impact behavior if the
experimental subjects contemplated signaling to each other. In other words,
Figure 2.16 leaves something out of the description of things and is not truly
representing the complexity of the decisions confronting our two players.
Needless to say, we would not have so explicitly offered this example so early in
this book if we did not have some idea as to how to treat such circumstances.
We aren’t fools who would reveal this quickly the likelihood that there are fun-
damental social processes about which we have no idea how to model. Selling a
book, or at least inducing those who read it to continue reading, is as much of
a game as any other.
Lest we end this chapter on a seemingly inconclusive note, let us return to
where this chapter began and to the observation that it seems counterintuitive
at times to suppose that even in historically critical times, people act in accor-
dance with any well thought out extensive form in mind. And here let us con-
sider one other historical event in which the chief protagonists almost certainly

--- Sayfa 93 ---
84  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
failed to lay out the extensive form of the situation that confronted them, with
dire consequences for those persons. We refer here to the August 1991 coup
against Mikhail Gorbachev, wherein a group of Communist Party hardlin-
ers sought to thwart the seemingly inevitable disintegration of the USSR or
at least to usurp Gorbachev’s reconstruction of the Soviet system. As part of
their strategy, several leaders of the coup—notably Oleg Baklanov (head of the
Soviet military-industrial complex), Valery Boldin (Gorbachev’s chief of staff),
Oleg Shenin (Central Committee Secretary of the Communist Party), General
Valentin Varenniko (commander of Soviet land forces)—flew from Moscow to
Gorbachev’s Black Sea vacation villa, intending to isolate and then intimidate
Gorbachev into signing a decree declaring a state of emergency and authoriz-
ing the arrest of Russian President Boris Yeltsin. What appears to have been
the case, however, is that none of the coup plotters, including its leaders back
in Moscow (notably KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov, Interior Minister Boris
Pugo, Soviet Vice-President Gennady Yanayev, and Defense Minister Dimitry
Yazov), had developed contingency plans in the event that Gorbachev would
refuse to cave in and that Yeltsin would act to oppose the coup. Nor, of course,
had the coup plotters foreseen the refusal of a number of critical Soviet military
units to participate in their plans. The coup, thereafter, disintegrated and, as we
now know, three months later the Soviet Union itself passed into history. It is
evident, then, that Kryuchkov et al. had at best an incomplete, if not an utterly
naïve and stupid, extensive form in mind when implementing their scheme.
This, however, should not be taken to mean that drawing out an extensive form
in the attempt to understand these events is a fruitless or meaningless activity.
Indeed, exactly the opposite is true. In hindsight and with further reflection
it is almost always easier to imagine branches to a situation’s extensive form
description that were either ignored or unrecognized by decision makers at
the time. Monday morning quarterbacking isn’t reserved for football fans; it is
perhaps no more extensively engaged in than by historians. But what drawing
out an extensive form with hindsight does in this case is provide the histo-
rian with a research agenda—an agenda that includes attempting to answer
questions such as: Did decision makers perceive the choice of ____, and if not,
why not? And if they did perceive those choices, what consequences did they
foresee from them that they wished to avoid? What actions did they imagine
as being available to __ and what was the extensive form they believed others
perceived? In the case of Moscow’s coup plotters, what did they think would
happen and what choices would be left to them if, as happened, Gorbachev
refused to capitulate? And if Gorbachev had done what they demanded, how
might Yeltsin and the Soviet military have responded? That is, understanding
the whys and wherefores of that coup requires that, in the context of laying out
a more encompassing extensive form than might have been in anyone’s head
at the time, we explore choices not made and perceptions not revealed by the
actual unfolding of events. It is only by knowing what choices were not made,
and why, that we can begin to explain the choices that were made.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   85
2.6  Key Ideas and Concepts
extensive form
decision nodes
terminal nodes
information sets
imperfect recall
roll call voting
backwards reduction
perfect vs. imperfect information
voting agendas
voting tree
agenda setter
amendment agendas
sequential veto
agenda manipulation
sophisticated vs. unsophisticated voting
strategic voting
centipede game
subgame
strategy
equilibrium
subgame perfect equilibria
Exercises for Chapter 2
1.
Suppose persons 1 and 2 make a sequence of binary decisions, first 1, then
2, then 1, then 2, and so forth, and suppose that all decisions are observed
by both persons. Portray an extensive form to represent a situation in
which 1 has perfect memory but 2 can only recall the last move of 1.
2.
Assume there are three states (1, 2, and 3) of equal size, that the polls close
first in state 1, then in 2, and then in 3, and that the election winner must
capture a majority (two) of the states. Draw an extensive form representing
the decision of a single citizen in state 3 who must decide whether to vote
and for whom to vote in a two-candidate election. Assume that this person
treats the decisions of all other voters and the outcomes of the balloting
in other states as probabilistic choices by nature. (Assume that ties within
states never occur.)
3.
Draw the extensive form of the agenda “A versus B, the winner against C”
for a three-person legislature in which legislator 3 observes 1’s choice, but
in which no other legislator observes any other choices.
4.
A defense department bureaucrat oversees two related programs: X and Y.
Recent cost overruns force him to “bury” these costs in the accounting of
one of these programs. An agent from the government accounting office

--- Sayfa 95 ---
86  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
that you oversee will, at the end of the year, review the bureaucrat’s records.
You can assign the agent to one of the following activities: (A) audit the
personnel records of both programs; (B) audit the inventory of both pro-
grams; (C) audit the expenses of parts suppliers for both programs. If your
agent detects the overrun, you earn +10; otherwise, you earn −10 whereas
the respective payoffs for the bureaucrat are −10 and +10. The probability
that the auditor detects the overrun given the focus of the audit and given
the program in which the overrun is buried is as follows:
X
Y
A
.5
.2
B
.3
.6
C
.1
.8

Portray this situation in extensive form.
5.
Referring to problem 4, suppose you must make your decision before the
bureaucrat chooses the program in which to bury the cost overrun and that
the bureaucrat can pay you two units to learn beforehand how you intend
to assign your auditors. Describe the extensive form for this situation.
6.
Assume three people (1, 2, and 3) must choose one candidate from the list
of A, B, C, and D. Assuming that all persons observe all prior choices, draw
the extensive form of a procedure in which first 1 deletes a candidate, then
2, and then 3, and in which the candidate that remains is elected.
7.
If free competition reigns in an industry with two firms, each firm sells
20 million units of that industry’s products at a net profit of $1/item. But if
they collude to set a higher price, each sells 15 million units at a net profit
of $2 each. If one firm defects to the lower competitive price, its sales soar
to 35 million units while the other firm sells nothing. Before each firm
sets its price (which they do simultaneously) Senator Billie Bob proposes
a licensing agreement whereby each pays a tax of $.20/item to produce
the product at the fixed cartel price—ostensibly to insure that “destructive
competition” does not “leave hard-working Americans unemployed.” Con-
struct this situation’s extensive form, where each firm must first approve
or disapprove of the licensing arrangement, which goes into effect only if
both firms agree to it.
8.
You are a contestant on a game show. There are three doors, labeled A, B,
and C. Behind two of the doors are prizes worth nothing, and behind the
third door is a prize worth $10,000. The game show host knows which
door contains the valued prize, but you don’t. You get first move, at which
time you must choose one of the three doors. The game show host gets the
second move, at which time he must open one of the doors that you didn’t
select, revealing the contents behind that door and leaving the other two
doors unopened. You get the third move, at which time you can choose
to stay with your initial choice or switch your choice to the remaining
unopened door. After you make your final choice, the door you selected in
move 3 is opened, and you win the prize behind that door. Your preferences
are to maximize your expected dollar payoff whereas the preference of the

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead   87
game show host is to keep the suspense going as long as possible. Under
what circumstances, if ever, should you switch doors after the game show
host opens a door?
  9.	 Assume the following preferences by a five-member committee, all of
whom are sophisticated voters.
1
2
3
4
5
A
B
C
C
B
B
C
A
A
C
C
A
B
B
A

You are voter 1. Each voter receives a payoff of $100 from his or her first
choice, $50 from a second choice, and $0 from a last choice. You and voter
2 are competing to set the agenda, but who will do the setting depends on
who can “buy” voter 4. You and voter 2 must announce how much of your
winnings you will pay, after which voter 4 will choose between you and 2 to
be the setter. Because of your sterling character, an indifferent voter 4 will
choose you. To simplify matters, suppose that you and 2 must each bid $75,
$25, or $0.
a.
Assuming that money and utility are equivalent, what is your bid, and
what is the final outcome?
b.
How does your answer to part (a) change if 4 chooses 2 when indifferent?
10.	 Suppose the value of some object is x1 + x2, where both x1 and x2 are random
variables that can each take on a value of 0 or 1. Suppose person 1 observes
x1 but not x2 whereas person 2 observes x2, but not x1. Portray in extensive
form an auction in which 1 and 2, after observing x1 and x2, respectively,
bid .5 or 1.5 for the object by submitting their bids in sealed envelopes.
Assume that the person submitting the highest bid wins the object, but
must pay whatever he or she bid, and assume also that, in the event of a tie,
a coin toss determines the winner.
11.	 Portray a congressional voting tree in which, with the alternatives B (bill), A
(amended bill) and Q (status quo) already on the agenda, a predesignated
legislator must decide before the actual balloting whether to introduce a
substitute bill S. Assume that, regardless of whether or not the substitute
is introduced, Congress must first decide whether to amend the original
bill B.
12.	 You, player 1, and your opponent, player 2, each have three horses. Let
your horses’ speeds be denoted by a1, a2, and a3, and let your opponent’s
horses’ speeds be b1, b2, and b3. Suppose their speeds are as follows: b1 > a1 >
b2 > a2 > b3 > a3. Suppose three races are to be run in sequence and that
each of you must decide which horse to enter in each race (no horse can
race twice). You are allowed to decide, though, which horse to enter after
the previous race is run. You and player 1 must choose a horse simultane-
ously for the first race, but your opponent chooses first (and you observe
this choice) for the second race. The person who wins two or more races

--- Sayfa 97 ---
88  Extensive Forms, Voting Trees and Planning Ahead
wins the stake of $1,000. However, since your horses are known beforehand
to be slower on average, you are paid $250 to participate. Portray the situa-
tion’s extensive form and deduce equilibrium strategies. Is there a determi-
nate final outcome?
13.	 Suppose two countries, 1 and 2, each have second-strike nuclear capabili-
ties in that they can retaliate after suffering a first strike or they can launch
a second strike after sustaining a retaliation. Nature picks a country at ran-
dom, whereupon it, say 1, can launch a preemptive attack (p) against the
other’s military capabilities. If 1 attacks, 2 can retaliate (r) or capitulate
(c). But if 2 retaliates, 1 can choose between launching (l) its second-strike
(which 2 no longer has) that moves 2 back to the stone age or it can do
nothing (~l). On the other hand, if 1 does not launch a preemptive attack
(~p), then the first move is 2’s, with 1 and 2’s roles reversed. The game ends
if neither country attacks, after one country capitulates, or after one coun-
try launches its second strike following a retaliation. Assign some “reason-
able” payoffs to the outcomes and determine the eventual outcome. What
are the preferences that make a preemptive attack inevitable?

--- Sayfa 98 ---
3
The Strategic Form and Nash
Equilibria
3.1  Introduction
In their entertaining and informative book The Art of Strategy, Avinash Dixit
and Barry Nalebuff (New York: W.W. Norton, 2009) recount a contest between
two competing teams, euphemistically labeled Red and Blue here, on the TV
series Survivor in which 21 flags are planted in the sand. Each team, beginning
with Red, must in sequence, take 1, 2 or 3 flags (a team cannot choose to take
no flags, nor can it take 4 or more), and the team taking the last flag, whether
it be alone or in combination with one or two others, is declared the winner.
We leave it for the reader to consult Dixit and Nalebuff for the details on how
this contest actually unfolded in the TV series; here we note simply that if one
considers this contest an extensive form game, team Red should, if possible,
maneuver things so that Blue is confronted with 4 flags on its last move. In this
case, regardless of whether Blue chooses 1, 2 or 3 flags, Red will win by taking
the remaining 3, 2 or 1 flags. But that means Red should maneuver to leave Blue
with 8 flags on its move before that, since with 8 flags, regardless of Blue’s subse-
quent choice, Red can ensure that Blue confronts 4 flags on its last move. Mov-
ing further back on the extensive form, this implies that Red should maneuver
to have Blue confront 12 flags before that, 16 before that and 20 before that. In
other words, Red should choose 1 flag on the first move and counter any selec-
tion by Blue thereafter so that the number of flags chosen by Blue + Red on each
successive pair of moves sums to 4.
To this point, then, the example once again illustrates the value of backward
reasoning—of looking ahead and setting one’s plans accordingly. However,
suppose we change the scenario slightly so that each team, after discussing the
situation, must select one member to implement whatever plan or scheme is
decided upon. The question then is: Is there a reason for the other members of
each team to be physically present while their scheme is implemented by the
selected member? That we’ve asked this question suggests the answer is No.
Indeed, suppose the Red team agrees upon the following instructions for its
representative:
Initially choose 1 flag. Thereafter, if Blue chooses x flags (x = 1, 2 or 3), then
choose y = 4 – x flags.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
90  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
For Blue, the problem seems hopeless. As long as Red abides by the above rule,
there is little Blue can do to win the contest. Nevertheless, it would be prudent
to prepare for the possibility that Red makes a mistake (which it did in the
actual play of the game); in which case, its representative should abide by the
following rule:
If confronted by 20, 16, 12, 8 or 4 flags, it matters little what you choose.
But if confronted by any other number of flags, choose enough flags to set
the resulting number for Red at 16, 12, 8 or 4.
With this rule, if Red errs, Blue’s representative can turn the tables and ensure
a victory for itself. The critical lesson to be drawn from this discussion, then,
is that once the game is analyzed and a correct rule identified for each team, it
matters little whether the entire team or merely each team’s representative is
there to play. Each team, in fact, could replace its representative with a robot,
programmed to implement the agreed upon plan. We call that plan a strategy,
and this chapter examines how situations described as games of strategy might
be formulated and analyzed.
3.2  Strategies and Simultaneous Choice
The reader might recall that we introduced the notion of a strategy in the pre-
vious chapter when defining subgame perfect equilibria, and our notion of
a strategy here is identical to the one we discussed earlier. Presently, though,
we want to focus on the fact that in addition to underscoring the importance
of thinking ahead and affording us the opportunity to introduce the notion
of a strategy for playing a game, the preceding example from Survivor also
suggests an alternative representation of strategic situations that often is an
especially convenient way to think about, model and analyze strategic choice.
Consider again the situation that confronts our three legislators voting on
a pay raise from the previous chapter, but where their votes must be cast
simultaneously. It is true that an extensive form with appropriately drawn
information sets can represent this circumstance, but since legislators cannot
then condition votes on how others vote, let us instead represent this situation
as in Figure 3.1.
Legislator C
For
Against
Legislator B
Legislator B
For
Against
For
Against
Legislator A
For
3,3,3
3,4,3
3,3,4
1,2,2
Against
4,3,3
2,2,1
2,1,2
2,2,2
Figure 3.1  Voting on a pay raise with simultaneous balloting

--- Sayfa 100 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  91
Notice that this figure conveys all the information contained in our earlier
extensive form, provided we keep in mind that each legislator must choose
whether to vote for or against in ignorance of what other legislators choose (or,
equivalently, that they all choose simultaneously). In such instances, a tabular
form seems unexceptional. But now, let us return to the original scenario in
which legislators cast their ballots sequentially (alphabetically) in a roll call vote
and see if we can’t do the same there—namely, represent the roll call scenario
in tabular form. To see that we can, suppose we take the following somewhat
odd perspective: Each legislator must hire an agent who will vote for them, con-
ditional on what those agents observe before acting. Moreover, suppose those
agents act precisely as instructed. In this case, legislator A, who votes first, can-
not condition any decisions on what B and C do, and thus can tell an agent only
one of two things:
sA
1: Vote for (the raise)
sA
2: Vote against
Legislator B’s agent, in turn, will observe A’s vote and thus can be given one of
four instructions:
sB
1: Vote for regardless of how A votes
sB
2: If A votes for, vote against, but if A votes against, vote for (vote opposite
of A)
sB
3: If A votes for, vote for, but if A votes against, vote against (vote the same
as A)
sB
4: Vote against regardless of how A votes
In other words, legislator B’s agent will confront one of two circumstances:
either legislator A will have voted for or against the raise. For each of these
circumstances B has two choices—to vote for or against. In effect, then, the
instructions B can give an agent take the form:
sB
i: If A votes for, then vote ____; but if A votes against, then vote ____.
Since there are two ways to fill in the first blank, and two ways to fill in the sec-
ond, there are 4 distinct alternative instructions for B to choose from. Finally,
consider legislator C. A generic instruction that C can give an agent takes the
following form:
sC
i: If A votes for and B votes for, then vote ____; but
if A votes for and B votes against, then vote ____; but
if A votes against and B votes for, then vote ____; but
if A votes against and B votes against, then vote ____.
Legislator C’s instructions to an agent, then, must anticipate four possible
contingencies corresponding to its four decision nodes and their associated

--- Sayfa 101 ---
92  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
information sets, and since there are two ways to fill in each blank at each con-
tingency, there are 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 16 possible instructions. Finally, notice that
if we take any triple of instructions—one for A’s agent, one for B’s and one for
C’s—we can specify which outcome results and what payoffs the individual leg-
islators realize. That is, we can calculate the vector
U(sA
i , sB
j , sC
k) = (uA(sA
i , sB
j , sC
k), uB(sA
i , sB
j , sC
k), uC(sA
i , sB
j , sC
k))
where uA(sA
i , sB
j , sC
k) denotes the payoff to legislator A and is stated as a function
of the instruction given to each legislator’s agent, and so on. Indeed, we can now
write down a 2 × 4 × 16 = 128 cell table that tells us what payoffs prevail for each
combination of instructions. This table is what we show in Figure 3.2 (recall
that we assign a payoff of 2 if the raise passes and the legislator in question votes
against, a payoff of 1 if the raise passes and he votes for, a payoff of 0 if he votes
against and the raise fails, and a payoff of –1 if the raise fails but he votes for it).
Several questions should concern the reader at this point. The first is: What
did we gain in this instance from going through the effort of constructing such
a table when we can decide what each legislator should or would do using
the original extensive form? Admittedly, the answer in this case is “nothing.”
In other words, sometimes it’s silly to go through the exercise of rewriting an
extensive form in tabular form. The second and perhaps more important ques-
tion, though, is: Aren’t the legislators giving something up in terms of their
Legislator A votes for
Legislator B chooses:
Legislator A votes against
Legislator B chooses:
C:
f,f
f,a
a,f
a,a
f,f
f,a
a,f
a,a
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 1
1, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
1, 2, 1
1, 2, 1
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
−1, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
0, 0, 0
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
−1, 0, 0
f, f, f, f
f, f, f, a
f, f, a, f
f, f, a, a
f, a, f, f
f, a, f, a
f, a, a, f
f, a, a, a
a, f, f, f
a, f, f, a
a, f, a, f
a, f, a, a
a, a, f, f
a, a, f, a
a, a, a, f
a, a, a, a
2, 1, 1
2, 1, 1
0, 0, −1
0, 0, −1
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
0, −1, 0
0, 0, 0
Figure 3.2  Legislative pay raise in strategic form

--- Sayfa 102 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  93
strategic options by handing things over to an agent? The answer to this ques-
tion is No—at least not if we’ve laid out the instructions to the agents prop-
erly. Specifically, if we ask what is it that a legislator might learn by foregoing
the use of an agent and being physically present to cast his or her ballot, the
answer, of course, is: The choices of those legislators who voted before them.
But the instructions given to agents already take this information into account
by conditioning an agent’s choice on what the agent observes. Thus, there is
nothing a legislator can observe to condition a choice on that an agent cannot
also observe. It may be that a legislator might want to postpone making any
decisions in order to think about the problem longer. But what is there to think
about? Presumably we have drawn our extensive form to represent all possible
contingencies, and unless a legislator is a slow thinker (which is hardly out of
the question), nothing is lost by passing off to an agent the mechanical task of
casting one’s vote.
Representations of strategic environments as in Figures  3.1 and 3.2 are
termed strategic forms and the instructions that might be given to an agent are
called strategies, where, once again, a strategy is a specification of how to play
the game—of what choice to make at each and every information set a player
might encounter in the situation’s extensive form. To this conceptualization,
however, we can add one additional wrinkle. Specifically, under the assump-
tion that the explicit extensive form underlying a situation’s strategic form is
complete—that all moves by opponents and by nature are fully represented by
the form’s decision nodes, branches and information sets—then when analyz-
ing a strategic form we can assume that each player chooses their strategy in
ignorance of what strategies all other players have or will choose—or equiva-
lently, that all players choose their strategies simultaneously.
This formulation might seem a counterintuitive way to analyze or predict
what people do, especially when accompanied by our assertion that a game in
strategic form should be analyzed under the assumption that the players choose
their strategies simultaneously. Consider, though, the game of tic-tac-toe. Once
again, if one is playing against a 12-year-old with some minimal experience,
more than likely you will be unable to do better than guarantee yourself a draw.
In other words, its seems safe to assume that both you and your pre-teen oppo-
nent are playing the game “optimally.” Yet, just as it is unreasonable to suppose
that either of you have explicitly mapped out this game’s extensive form with
its hundreds of decision nodes and branches, it is also unreasonable to suppose
that either of you have written down its strategic form, since tic-tac-toe has
literally billions of strategies (most of them quite horrible). Yet even 12-year-
olds are easily bored with this game. The reason, of course, is that the human
brain is marvelously complex. We are only now beginning to understand its
capacity, but one thing is clear: The human brain has little difficulty looking
ahead two or three moves in a relatively simple game and deducing what paths
lead to bad outcomes and which lead to better ones. It is also quite capable of
recalling patterns of play so as to avoid bad patterns in the future and to pursue
good ones instead. Nevertheless, suppose you are told that you have no choice:

--- Sayfa 103 ---
94  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
Absent the opportunity to play tic-tac-toe endlessly, the 12-year-old in your
company will reveal himself to be a spoiled crying brat. You know beforehand
how boring that task will be and doubtlessly you’d love to find a way out of
it. So suppose you can hire your own 12-year-old to take your place and play
against your 12-year-old opponent—someone you haven’t been able to beat at
this game—and suppose the cost of hiring this “agent” is a trip to the ice cream
store. Surely this would be more enjoyable than experiencing an endless series
of draws against your youthful opponent. Moreover, because you have not been
able to defeat her, you know your “agent” will employ the same strategy you
would choose, thereby keeping your 12-year-old opponent no less entertained
than he would be if playing against you. So why not let her take your place while
you go off and do something more productive? The only problem you might
confront here is establishing the right incentives so that your “agent” plays in
your self-interest (i.e., she doesn’t become so bored herself that she loses, owing
to inattention)—but that is a problem we can address later in this volume.
In the case of tic-tac-toe, then, the idea of hiring an agent is utterly reason-
able provided you have some confidence she will employ whatever strategy you’d
have chosen had you been forced to be there. Moreover, from your perspective,
the hiring of this youthful stand-in is equivalent to choosing your strategy simul-
taneously with your opponent or at least in ignorance of precisely the strategy
your opponent will pursue. But now consider the game of chess or Go. Chess
and Go, of course, are far more complex and are not ones that any existing com-
puter has yet mapped out fully in extensive form. We know, though, that even
here we see the ability of the brain to learn and store some good, albeit incom-
plete, strategies. It may be that masters of either game can look further ahead
than the rest of us, but even masters are aided by complex classifications and cat-
egorizations of moves drawn from the experiences of others. With the advantage
of a “library” of moves stored away in the neurons and synapses of their brains,
they can, in effect, look ahead dozens of moves. That the full extensive form
for either game has not (yet) been constructed and stored in some computer
capable of deducing optimal strategies depending on whether one moves first
or second explains, in fact, why they remain a test of skill. But we can be certain
that as soon as that extensive form is mapped out for either game and it is no
longer theoretically possible to defeat a computer, then the sales of chess sets or
Go boards will plummet. The question here, though, is whether you’d be willing
to hire an agent to play such a game for you. The answer depends, we suppose,
on the pleasure you derive from simply testing your skill against an opponent
(who presumably doesn’t have a computer immediately at his or her disposal).
But suppose all you care about is winning and that you somehow can hire some-
one who plays at least as well as you do, and perhaps better. Again, then, it seems
that hiring such a person as one’s agent is not a bad idea. It is equivalent, in fact,
to choosing a strategy before your opponent even makes a move and, indeed,
perhaps even before you know which side of the board you’ll be playing.
Of course, we hire agents of various types all the time to make choices for
us. When confronted with a lawsuit, for instance, we hire a lawyer under the
assumption that whoever we hire has a better understanding of the law than we

--- Sayfa 104 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  95
do and will be able not only to counter the unfolding strategy of any opposing
lawyer better than we can but also may be able to devise a strategy that is more
sophisticated than anyone else’s. If we hire a plumber to fix a leak or a doctor to
cure an illness we are in effect hiring an agent to “play a game against nature”
under the assumption that our agent will play with better skill than we can. The
notion of hiring an agent to play a game for us here, though, is of a slightly dif-
ferent sort. Saying that once we have chosen a strategy we could employ anyone
or anything to implement the actual choices is not quite the same as telling our
spouse, “Honey, why don’t you do the grocery shopping today, but just make
sure you get that snack I like.” Your instructions to your spouse do not corre-
spond to a strategy because they are incomplete. They do not say what to do if
the store is out of your favorite snack. Instead, a strategy in the game theoretic
sense is akin to saying something like “Honey, when you do the grocery shop-
ping today, get me a box of ____, but if they are out of that, get me ____ instead,
and if they are out of that then get whatever you might like.” In other words, to
repeat what we’ve said before about the strategic form, a strategy is a complete
plan, and once we have selected one, there is no need to afford our “agent” any
flexibility in making decisions and there is nothing to be gained by doing the
shopping ourselves.
Speaking of grocery stores, let’s return to our earlier example of buying gro-
ceries in the peculiar fashion of voting on the proposals offered by two compet-
ing candidates. Here one’s strategies as a voter are simple: Vote for candidate 1
or for candidate 2, where presumably you prefer to vote for the candidate who
proposes a basket of goods closest to your ideal—closest to what you’d purchase
if allowed to shop in the usual way. Actually, a fully specified strategy here is:
“If candidate 1 proposes a basket of groceries that is closer to your ideal than
is the basket proposed by candidate 2, then vote for 1; otherwise, vote for 2.”
The outcome is then the proposal of the winning candidate. But here you also
have to plan for the possibility of being one of the candidates. Your strategies
now are more numerous and consist of all possible allocations of the budget
among the goods on the store’s shelves. Indeed, even if we simplify things and
assume there are but two distinct goods for sale, the positions along the budget
constraint are most likely easier modeled as infinite in number—a segment of
the real line. There is, then, no practical way to portray all choices you might
make as a candidate in a finite table, so instead the strategic form must take a
more abstract algebraic form. Thus, if we normalize the budget constraint to be
on the line between 0 and 1, a strategy would look as follows:
If chosen to be a voter, then vote for the candidate whose ‘platform’ is clos-
est to your ideal; and if chosen to be a candidate, then adopt the policy
position __ ∈ [0,1] as your platform.
In this strategy, the unspecified position, denoted __, is yet to be determined.
The strategic form is then defined by a function that, in effect, tells us how
each voter votes for every pair of platforms, that adds up those votes to deter-
mine which policy position wins (or ties) within each pair, and that identifies

--- Sayfa 105 ---
96  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
the winning candidate based on their chosen positions. But as with tic-tac-toe,
once given all this information, there is no reason why you cannot hire an agent
to implement the strategy you set out for yourself.
If the reader is still confused by or uncomfortable with the idea of analyz-
ing strategic form games with the presumption that players choose strategies
simultaneously or in ignorance of each other’s choices, then perhaps it is use-
ful to differentiate between “choices” and “moves.” When playing chess, Go or
tic-tac-toe, one moves sequentially. The moves in such games, then, are contin-
gent on what one observes and individual players may not be able to predict
with certainty an opponent’s moves beforehand. But none of this precludes a
player from choosing a strategy on how to play the game beforehand—a specifi-
cation of what moves to make as the game unfolds. Thus, in our legislative pay
raise example, legislators move (vote) sequentially, but for the analyst nothing is
lost by assuming that legislators choose a strategy beforehand.
3.3  Nash Equilibria
Suppose, now, that we have a game in strategic form and wish to predict what
choices the players will make. Before doing so, however, we should first review
some of the assumptions we’ve explicitly or implicitly made about the situation
when laying out a strategic form.
Our first assumption is that our strategic form is complete. There is no
possibility of unforeseen circumstances, including one or more players
actually changing the game before we act. All possible circumstances must
already be represented either as choices and choice nodes available to the
players or to nature. And if there is the chance that one or more players can
change the game, that possibility as well must be represented.
Second, we assume that all players are completely informed about the
game—about the strategic form. Any uncertainty must also be repre-
sented in what we assume about the players, their preferences, choices and
information sets.
Third, in the actual play of the game, we assume that the players choose
their strategies simultaneously or in ignorance of what others have cho-
sen (which is not to say that a player cannot make good and even precise
guesses about one’s opponents).
Finally (and here’s the biggie), we assume that everything stated above is
common knowledge, where here common knowledge is not some imprecise
use of language but a specific assumption about what people know. Spe-
cifically, people know not only the game others perceive they are playing,
but they know that everyone else knows what they know, that you know
that they know what you know, and so on and so forth.
Clearly, these are heroic assumptions, but they are perhaps not quite as heroic
as they might seem. So lest the reader tune out, thinking, “The theory I am
about to be taught cannot be about anything real,” we ask that you postpone

--- Sayfa 106 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  97
definitive judgments to see if we can sustain these assumptions while modeling
things of interest.
We begin, then, by noting that if a person’s information is not perfect in the
sense that his or her information sets encompass two or more decision nodes,
then backward reduction solves the extensive form only if that (and every other)
player has an unambiguous best choice at each such set. But if this requirement
is not satisfied—as in the example of voting on a pay raise by secret ballot—the
“he-thinks-that-I-think” regress reappears and confounds any attempt to reduce
an extensive form by backward reduction. This does not mean, however, that
the notion of rational or self-interested choice is undefined. Consider again our
earlier discussion of plurality rule from the previous chapter with three alterna-
tives and three voters and the dilemma the voters might encounter with decid-
ing whether to vote for their most preferred alternative or to vote strategically
for a second ranked alternative (see Figure 2.15). Recall that in that example,
voter 1’s preference is A > B > C, 2’s is C > B > A and 3’s preference is B > C > A.
Also, recall that because voter 1 is empowered to break ties, he or she should
always vote for A: If 2 and 3 fail to vote for the same candidate, A wins whereas,
if 2 and 3 make the same choice, it is irrelevant how 1 votes. And because both
2 and 3 rank A last, they do in fact have an incentive to avoid voting differently.
Of course, absent some mechanism for coordinating their actions, there is no
guarantee that 2 and 3 will vote identically, but suppose that voter 2 believes,
for whatever reason, that 3 will vote for his or her most preferred alternative, B,
whereas 3 believes that 2 is risk averse and, preferring to avoid a three-way tie
between A, B, and C, will vote for B also. Thus, B prevails as the final outcome.
Notice, moreover, that given these beliefs, neither voter 2 nor 3 has an incentive
to unilaterally change his or her vote, since a unilateral switch to C yields A via
a 3-way tie that voter 1 breaks in favor of A. Put differently, voting for B on the
part of voters 2 and 3 terminates the “he-thinks” regress. For example, if 2 rea-
sons that he should vote for B because 3 will vote for B, and if he believes that 3
can anticipate his reasoning, then he should conclude that 3 will, in fact, vote for
B as originally conjectured. Of course, we could have just as easily set beliefs so
as to have voters 2 and 3 choose C, in which case C terminates the regress. But
more later on the possibility of multiple termination points.
The preceding discussion illustrates one of the most important concepts in
game theory—that of a Nash equilibrium—conjunctions of strategies that ter-
minate “he-thinks …” regresses. To illustrate this idea with another example,
consider the following fanciful two-person scenario: Two people must each, in
secret, choose an integer number between 1 and 10. If the sum of the numbers
chosen equals 10, each player wins an amount equal to the number they chose;
otherwise, they win nothing. With the assumption that this game is played
only once, each player then has ten strategies, one of the integers in the inter-
val [1,10]. There are, then, ten possible combinations of numbers that yield
both players a positive payoff, such as (1,9), (2,8) and so on. So suppose one
person, for whatever reason, chooses 7 while the other chooses 3. Then clearly,
once these numbers are revealed, neither has a unilateral incentive to switch
to a different number. Thus, the strategy pair (7,3) as well as (3,7) are Nash

--- Sayfa 107 ---
98  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
equilibria. On the other hand, if one chooses 7 and the other chooses, say, 4,
then clearly their strategies are not in equilibrium—at least one player (and in
this case, both) has an incentive to choose a different number. And insofar as
any he-thinks-that-I-think regress is concerned, if I intend to choose 7 because
I think you will choose 3 and if you plan to choose 3 because you think I plan
to choose 7, etc., then we in fact choose 7 and 3 respectively, and the he-thinks
regress ends.
Before formalizing this idea, we want to give special emphasis to the word
“unilateral” in our discussion. Suppose we change the preceding game so that if
the numbers chosen sum to 10, each player wins the sum of squared numbers
chosen. Thus if (1,9) or (9,1) prevails, each player wins 12 + 92 = 82 whereas if,
say, (3,7) or (7,3) prevails, their mutual payoffs are 32 + 72 = 58. Clearly, both
players now prefer that a combination of 1 and 9 prevail to any other com-
bination that sums to 10. Nevertheless, strategic choices such as (3,7) remain
equilibria because neither player has an incentive to switch unilaterally to any
other number since doing so lowers that person’s payoff (in this case to zero).
To define the idea of a Nash equilibrium more formally now so we can apply
it generally, recall that a strategic form consists of a set of decision makers, N, a
set of strategies for each decision maker, S1, S2,…, Sn, and a set of functions, u1,
u2,…, un, which takes any combination of strategies by all n persons and maps
each combination to utility payoffs. Letting si be a generic strategy for person
i, and letting ui(s1,…, si,…, sn) denote i’s payoff from the outcome that results
from the joint strategic choice of s1,…, si,…, sn, then,
Nash equilibrium: A particular n-tuple of strategies, say (s1*,…, si*,…, sn*),
is a Nash equilibrium if the following is true for every person i in N and for
every si in Si:
ui(s1*,…, si*,…, sn*) ≥ ui(s1*,…, si,…,sn*)
(2.1)
Thus, the n-tuple of strategies s* = (s1*,…, si*,…, sn*) is a Nash equilibrium if,
once at s*, no person has an incentive to shift unilaterally to some other strategy.
Although our verbal definition conveys the general meaning of this idea, the
formal definition of a Nash equilibrium shows that each individual strategy
that is part of such an equilibrium is a best response to the equilibrium strate-
gies of the remaining relevant decision makers—it is a strategy that leads to
the most preferred outcome from among those outcomes made feasible by the
strategies of the remaining decision makers. That is, if a person can infer the
equilibrium strategies of these other persons, then the person’s choice problem
reduces to an elementary decision problem of choosing the best response. A
Nash equilibrium, then, is a set of strategies—one for each player—such that each
strategy in the set is a best response to all the others. Resurrecting the notion of
utility maximization, a Nash equilibrium strategy maximizes each person’s utility
or expected utility, given that every other person is choosing a Nash equilibrium
strategy.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  99
The particular virtue of a Nash equilibrium, of course, is that it terminates
“he-thinks-that-I-think” regresses. If (a*, b*) is such an equilibrium, and if I
(person 1) think that my opponent will choose b*, then I should choose a*
because it is my best response; and if my opponent believes that I will choose
a*, then he should in fact choose b* because it is his best response. However,
despite the fact that it is designed to resolve “he-thinks” regresses, we should be
careful before we assert that a Nash equilibrium “solves” all of our problems,
since this idea does in fact sweep a great many problems under the rug. Specifi-
cally, we should ask:
1.
What of the possibility of multiple Nash equilibria? And if there is more
than one equilibrium in a game, will we have difficulty deciding which
equilibrium offers the most reasonable prediction about choices?
2.
What guarantees the existence of a Nash equilibrium? Is it possible that we
will need to broaden its definition in order to ensure universal existence?
3.
Is the argument for focusing on such equilibria suggested by the preced-
ing discussion—namely that they terminate “he-thinks-that-I-think”
regresses—compelling?
4.
Throughout this discussion we have assumed that all persons share the
same information about the situation. What is the relevance of the notion
of a Nash equilibrium when this condition is not satisfied?
Recall, moreover, that we already introduced an equilibrium notion in the
last chapter, that of a subgame perfect equilibrium, and thus we should also
ask about the relationship of this notion to that of a Nash equilibrium. We
can, in fact, address this issue immediately to show that although these two
ideas are necessarily closely related in that any subgame perfect equilibrium
is also a Nash equilibrium, it is not the case that every Nash equilibrium is
subgame perfect. Suppose, for a truly simple example, that two players must
sequentially choose A or B and where the person choosing second observes
the other player’s choice. If they both choose A, they both receive a payoff of
1; otherwise they both get 0. The sole subgame perfect equilibrium, then, is,
unsurprisingly, for both to choose A. In strategic form, though, the game looks
as in Figure 3.3 (note that because column chooser acts after row chooser, col-
umn chooser has four strategies, contingent on what he observes. The strategy
AB, for example, denotes, “If row chooser picks A, then choose A, but if row
chooser picks B, choose B”).
Thus, while (A, AA) is clearly a Nash equilibrium, it is also the case that (B,
BB), for example, satisfies this concept’s definition. In this case, of course, we
AB
AA
BA
BB
A
1, 1
1,1
0,0
0,0
B
0, 0
0, 0
0,0
0,0
Figure 3.3  Nash equilibria that are not subgame perfect

--- Sayfa 109 ---
100  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
can readily preclude (B, BB) as a reasonable prediction about choices by merely
eliminating (weakly) dominated strategies—strategies that are never better
than some other strategy and that are sometimes worse. But the fact remains
that (B, BB) satisfies the definition of a Nash equilibrium, and so we need to be
concerned that there are other games, not as simple as this one, that yield Nash
equilibria that are not subgame perfect but that are also not quite so easy to dis-
miss. However, before we address this issue as well as the questions posed above,
let us first consider a few examples that illustrate some possibilities:
A 2-candidate, 3-voter, 1-issue Election: Earlier in Chapter 1 we intro-
duced the concept of single peaked preference when discussing, in the
context of shopping in a grocery store, the distinction between modeling
markets and modeling political decisions. So suppose we consider a situ-
ation in which there are only three shoppers acting as voters, two candi-
dates (who do not vote or who simply vote for themselves and cancel each
other out) and one “issue” that can be framed as “X units of good 1 and Y
units of good 2” where each voter holds a different preference on their ideal
mix between the two goods. This situation, now, is portrayed in Figure 3.4,
which merely reproduces Figure 1.3. Suppose finally that each candidate
must announce a policy—a value for X and Y—that, perhaps somewhat
unrealistically, requires a level of expenditure that precisely matches the
revenues collected from the three voters. Notice now that if any one of the
candidates chooses the median ideal point (voter #2’s ideal in this case), that
candidate cannot be defeated in a majority vote. If that candidate’s oppo-
nent chooses a policy to the left [or right] of 2’s ideal, then 2 along with
the voter to the right [or left] will prefer the candidate advocating 2’s ideal.
The best an opponent can do is also advocate 2’s ideal, in which case the
election will be a tie and determined perhaps by a coin toss. Moreover, once
preference
Voter 1
Voter 2
Voter 3
A
B
Figure 3.4  A 3-voter electorate with single peaked preferences

--- Sayfa 110 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  101
both candidates are ‘at’ this median preference, neither has an incentive to
defect unilaterally since to do so is to throw the election to the opponent.
It should be evident at this point how readily the preceding example can
be formulated to correspond to a simple 2-person game. The strategies of the
players—the two candidates—can be identified as a point on, say, a [0,1] inter-
val where the different points on that interval correspond to alternative choices
of X and Y, where the payoffs to the candidates are +1, 0 and –1, depending on
whether the candidate in question wins, ties or loses the election. And finally
and most critically, the joint choice of the median voter’s preference is the
game’s Nash equilibrium. This example gains special importance, though, if we
note that there is nothing special about three versus n (odd) voters, provided
that all preferences are single-peaked. From the definition of a median, at least
half of the electorate most prefers it or positions to the right, so if one candidate
is at the median and the other is to the left of the median, the candidate at the
median wins. Since this argument is symmetric with respect to positions to
the right of the median, and since the election is a tie if both candidates adopt
the median, the median is the unique equilibrium platform in a two-candidate
election. We have, then, the following result about one form of majority rule:
The Median Voter Theorem: In two-candidate elections that concern a single
issue, if both candidates know the distribution of citizen preferences on the issue,
if each candidate’s strategy consists of a position on the issue, if citizens know
the candidates’ strategies, if all citizens have single-peaked preferences on the
issue, and if no constraints are placed on the candidates’ strategies with respect
to the issue, then the electorate’s median preference is both a Condorcet winner
and the Nash equilibrium to the corresponding two-candidate election game.
The Median Voter Theorem is important because it reveals the strong central-
izing tendency of simple two-candidate plurality-rule elections. It suggests, for
example, that people who complain about the fact that political parties in the
United States often fail to offer the electorate meaningful choices on important
issues misconstrue the purpose of those elections. To the extent that the median
voter result models real two-candidate or two-party elections, that purpose is
not necessarily to provide meaningful choices; rather, it is to select public policy
in accordance with majority rule principles and to assure the rejection of radi-
cal candidates. Thus, those who prefer elections in which the main competitors
offer distinct platforms other than the median preference must give good rea-
sons for rejecting the median preference as a reasonable policy outcome.
Admittedly, it requires a considerable stretch of the imagination to argue that
the Median Voter Theorem constitutes a model of any real election. We will
in this volume, then, return to this theorem and assess its generality when we
begin to impose less severe assumptions about such things as voter informa-
tion and the nature of the issues relevant to the choices voters make. But first
let us consider some additional examples that illustrate the character of a Nash
equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
102  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
Somewhat arbitrarily here we denote the payoffs to both friends as 0 if
no one confesses and no one reports on the violation. Thus, all remaining
payoffs are relative to this outcome. Turning then to the unassigned pay-
offs, we can reasonably assume that all lettered amounts for Friend 1 are
positive so that the minus signs denote a negative payoff. Thus, all payoffs
to the primary culprit are negative and most likely satisfy Y > Z > X. Thus,
the worst outcome for this person is to not confess but to have his “friend”
report him. And if he confesses, he prefers that his friend not report him, in
which case the onus of his violation falls at least as much on his friend as on
him (hence the negative sign in front of B). His friend, in turn, least prefers
not reporting an offense that is ultimately confessed to. And presumably,
the most preferred outcome is to report an offense that is confessed to. The
final character of this scenario, then, depends on the payoff C—in effect,
whether one feels guilt when ratting on a friend. If one feels guilt and C is
correspondingly negative, there are two equilibria: (Confess, Report) and
(Not Confess, Not Report), in which case without further considerations,
we cannot say which equilibrium will prevail. But suppose this system was
implemented to forestall violations of the code or to uncover those vio-
lations when they in fact occur. One solution is to somehow attempt to
remove the psychological onus of ratting on a friend, perhaps with appeals
to one’s loyalty to the institution of which you are a part in lieu of any loy-
alty to individuals. And indeed, by rendering C positive, one makes Report
a dominant choice—one that’s better for the person involved regardless of
whether the other confesses or not. Thus, (Confess, Report) becomes the
unique equilibrium.
Report
Not Report
–Z, A
–X, –B
Confess
Not Confess
–Y, C
0,
0
Figure 3.5  Honor code strategic form
A Game with an Undesirable Equilibrium: In Chapter  1 we briefly
described the notion of an honor code as it is employed in China as well
as in America’s military academies. Our purpose then was merely to illus-
trate a situation in which people’s fates are interdependent, but now we can
examine such codes in greater detail in order to understand more precisely
the individual incentives they establish and why regimes might employ
them. So consider a scenario in which one of two friends has committed
a violation of the code. Suppose Friend 1 is the initial culprit and thus
has the options of Confessing outright to the violation or Not Confessing.
His counterpart, Friend 2, who (we assume) knows of the violation, can
either Report or Not Report the violation to the appropriate authorities.
Figure 3.5 portrays this situation as a simple 2 × 2 game.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  103
Now suppose both persons are guilty of a violation of the code. Perhaps
Friend 1 brought to the apartment some forbidden reading material (e.g.,
pornography) and both of them read it. Both are then equally guilty, and it
might seem in this case that an honor code system might not work. To see
if this is true, consider the situation portrayed in Figure 3.6.
Owing to their symmetric situation, the payoffs here are themselves
wholly symmetric (assuming it is no less of an offense to read pornography
than it is to purchase or own it). But the question here is what value should
be placed on the payoff A. If there is a sense of guilt at ratting on one’s
roommate as well as oneself (if A < 0), there are the same two equilibria as
before (even though only one of them, (0,0) is Pareto optimal now). How-
ever, suppose the powers-that-be confer a positive reward on anyone who
confesses to a jointly committed violation of the code when the “partner in
crime” remains silent. In this instance, confessing becomes the dominant
choice for both persons and the outcome (Confess, Confess) prevails.
The interesting feature of this scenario is that both persons have an unambig-
uous incentive to confess so that their interests and (simultaneous) joint actions
lead to an outcome both prefer to avoid. In fact, this game has a name—the Pris-
oners’ Dilemma—and its applications to the study of politics and economics
are extensive. It can be used to understand market failures, the logic of govern-
ment with its coercive powers, as well as a variety of social processes from group
formation to revolution to why voters in a democracy might prefer to tie their
own hands and require term limits of the politicians whom they elect. Those
applications, though, must come later in this volume. Here we are interested
solely in using the Dilemma to illustrate the fact that although an outcome can
correspond to a unique Nash equilibrium—in this case one supported even by
dominant strategies—there is no reason to assume that the players will prefer
that equilibrium to some other outcome. It also suggests that it may be fool-
hardy to suppose that once the players of a game understand the situation that
confronts them, they will not attempt to change the game in some fashion so as
to ensure against the selection of undesirable outcomes—the game itself may
be unstable. Indeed, in Chapter 5 this is precisely what we suggest as the moti-
vation for establishing governments and writing national constitutions.
If games with undesirable equilibria might cause us anxiety, games with mul-
tiple equilibria can be even more perplexing in terms of what to predict about
people’s choices. Consider the decidedly draconian example in Figure 3.7.
Confess
Not Confess
–5, –5
A, –10
Confess
Not Confess
–10, A
0, 0
Figure 3.6  Honor code with two culprits

--- Sayfa 113 ---
104  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
Presumably the utility of death is some significant negative number (we
demur from suggesting a specific value here), but it is evident that this
game has two equilibria. Unfortunately for the participants, they can guar-
antee realizing one of these equilibria only if they violate the rules of play-
ing a strategic form game—only if they somehow find a way to coordinate
without the opportunity to communicate in any way. Indeed, here the exis-
tence of Nash equilibria only seems to make the he-thinks regress especially
aggravating. Imagine you are row chooser, in which case you might reason
“Even though it doesn’t preclude the possibility of my demise, I  might
as well choose my first strategy since it promises me the greatest payoff.”
But, thinking further, you can reason “… but if my opponent thinks the
same, we both die. So perhaps I best settle for $100 and let him have the
$100,000.” Unfortunately, thinking further, you must consider the possibil-
ity that your opponent is thinking in precisely the same terms, in which
case if he chooses to forego the big payoff, you once again find yourself at
an outcome you clearly prefer to avoid. Indeed, absent the opportunity to
communicate and coordinate in some way, this is clearly a game you prefer
not to play and if forced to play, you are hardly likely to take solace in being
told that the game has two quite reasonable Nash equilibria.
Chile in 1970, Korea in 1987 and Taiwan in 2000: To see that the prob-
lem of coordination can impact both political elites as well as ordinary
citizens, we note that in the 1964 Chilean presidential election, Liberals
and Conservatives, thinking they were unlikely to find a viable candi-
date to compete against Salvador Allende of a united Left (Socialists
and Communists), endorsed the centrist candidate, Eduardo Frei. Frei
won the election by a comfortable margin of 56.1% of the vote against
38.9% for Allende. In the 1970 Chilean presidential election, however,
Salvador Allende won the plurality rule election with fewer votes than
he received in 1964—36.2%—whereas the centrist Radomiro Tomic
received 27.8% and right of center Jorge Alessandri received 34.9%
of the vote. It is not unreasonable to suppose, though, that had ei-
ther of Allende’s competitors dropped out of the race, Allende would
not have secured a majority. A  similar outcome occurred in South
Korea in 1987. Although there is no reliable polling information to
precisely place the candidates on any left/right ideological space, it is
commonly believed that the presidential winner, T. W. Roh, was actu-
ally the Condorcet loser. If either Y. S. Kim or D. J. Kim had dropped
$100,000, $100
Death to both players
Death to both players
$100, $100,000
Figure 3.7  A serious coordination problem

--- Sayfa 114 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  105
out of the race, Roh could not have won. Finally, in 2000 in Taiwan,
according to a survey conducted by the Election Study Center of the
National Chengchi University, the plurality winner, Chen Shui-Bian,
with 39.3% of the vote, was the Condorcet loser by a slim margin.
Based on the revealed preferences of respondents, the plurality loser,
Lian Chan, with 23.1% of the vote, was actually the Condorcet winner.
And although many attempts were made between Lian and the runner
up to Chen Shui-Bian, James Soong, to avoid a three-way race, they
failed to reach a compromise.
Doubtlessly many similar examples can be found of plurality losing candidates
who could have won an election if one or more of the other unsuccessful com-
petitors had dropped out of the race or if the supporters of such candidates had
coordinated their vote. To illustrate matters without supposing that our exam-
ple here matches the above cited circumstances in detail, suppose an electorate
consists of voters with the three types of preference orders among candidates
A, B and C that we discussed earlier when introducing the notion of a Nash
equilibrium; namely:
type 1
type 2
type 3
A
B
C
B
C
B
C
A
A
Suppose further that 40% of the electorate holds preferences of the first type,
and 30% holds preferences of the second and third types. Thus, if everyone
votes sincerely, A is the plurality winner. Notice, though, that B is the Condorcet
winner—B defeats A in a head to head contest 60% to 40%, and defeats C head
to head 70% to 30%. The problem confronting supporters of B and C, then, can
be portrayed as a simple 2 × 2 game as in Figure 3.8 (the reader should confirm
once again that regardless of how voters of second and third types vote, voters
who most prefer A should always vote for A).
Vote for B
Vote for C
Vote for B
B wins
A wins
Vote for C
A wins
C wins
Figure 3.8  Coordinating in a plurality rule election
From the perspective of supporters of B and C, then, there are two equilib-
rium outcomes to this game: B wins or C wins. However, to achieve either of
these outcomes, those supporters must coordinate their actions at the voting
booth. This coordination is secured by default if either B or C declines to run, as
occurred in Chile in 1964. But absent that action—absent a coalition between B
and C and their supporters—voters are themselves confronted with the difficult

--- Sayfa 115 ---
106  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
task, without the benefit of any roundtable negotiations, of deciding who will
unilaterally pull out of the contest.
One of the more interesting aspects of politics is learning how people coor-
dinate (or fail to do so) in choosing one equilibrium over another. Indeed, as
our example suggests, the failure to coordinate can yield an outcome that does
not correspond to an equilibrium so that once that outcome is revealed, some
subset of decision makers would, if given the opportunity to do so, prefer to
unilaterally change their strategies. And again, although we will pay consider-
able attention in subsequent chapters to learning how coordination might be
achieved, our objective here is to simply note that even if a game has Nash equi-
libria, we cannot assume, a priori, that any one of them will ultimately prevail.
3.4  Mixed Strategies
One need not conjure complex games to illustrate circumstances in which
Nash equilibria are not unique or where players, in violation of a game’s rules,
might prefer to coordinate their choices. However, before we look further into
the matter of how players might coordinate in a game when equilibria are not
unique, we should first contend with the opposite problem—that of the poten-
tial non-existence of equilibria.
Penalty Shots in Soccer and the Normandy Invasion: In one of his less
memorable movies, Escape to Victory, the actor Sylvester Stallone is cast in
the role of the World War II reserve goalie of an Allied prisoner of war soc-
cer team formed by the Nazis to compete against a German national team
in a game set up to serve as entertainment and propaganda for the Nazis.
The game ends, though, with the Germans being awarded a dubious pen-
alty kick that Stallone must defend against. The agonizing decision he must
make as his German opponent lines up to kick the ball, all highlighted by
Hollywood’s flair for dramatizing things, is whether to dive right, dive left
or remain in the center of the net. Of course, as is always the case with the
heroes of Tinseltown, Stallone guesses correctly, blocks the shot and, in the
melee of the celebration of their on-field victory, the prisoners/Allied soc-
cer players escape among the crowd.
Of course, soccer fans need not subject themselves to some grade-B
movie to know the uncertainties associated with penalty kicks. For either
player—goalie or shooter—to guess “wrong” results in a bad outcome.
Clearly, even if we form an overly simplified model of such situations and
allow a goalie to only guard “left,” “right” or “center” and the shooter to
aim only “left,” “right” or “center,” the corresponding game cannot have a
Nash equilibrium as we have thus far conceptualized the idea. If the goalie
chooses “left,” the shooter should choose “left” or “center” (since his or her
“left” is the goalie’s “right”) whereas if the goalie comes to believe that the
shooter will thereby choose “left,” he should alter his choice of the side of
the goal to defend to “right.” Things grow even more interesting, moreover,
if we try to imagine what might be in the mind of, say, a goalie in such

--- Sayfa 116 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  107
a situation. A goalie knows that the penalty shooter has an incentive, via
various feints and facial moves, to try to deceive him. Suppose the shooter
quite explicitly indicates a shot to the left. This might seem to call for an
automatic response of moving to guard the net’s right (again, since his
right is the shooter’s left). But now the goalie might reason further, “Is he
merely trying to deceive me? Is the shooter indicating a shot to the left so
that I will guard the right, in which case he will actually shoot to my left?”
Of course, the shooter has an equivalent problem since the goalie is free to
also attempt to deceive. The result is that an infinite he-thinks-that-I-think
regress emerges for both players and the ultimate outcome may be more
a function of pure chance than any brilliance on the part of either player
(unless, of course, one is a script writer for Hollywood).
One needn’t be a soccer fan to appreciate the situation confronting a
goalie or penalty shooter in such situations. Anyone familiar with the Allied
invasion at Normandy in WWII knows of a similar strategic dilemma
confronting both the Allies and Germans. For the Allies, the task was to
convince the Germans, and Hitler in particular, that the actual invasion
would occur at Calais rather than Normandy and that any troop landing
at Normandy was merely a feint. For the Nazis, the choices were whether
to defend at Normandy, at Calais or, spreading their resources thin, at both
places simultaneously. The history of the invasion entailed an extensive
and complex series of actions designed to deceive the Nazis, including put-
ting the general the Germans thought most likely to lead the invasion, Gen.
George Patton, in charge of several divisions spread out across the English
countryside that consisted primarily of rubber tanks and cardboard trucks.
Apparently several of Hitler’s generals were well aware of the Allies’ incen-
tives to deceive, but Hitler, while vacillating in his beliefs, seemed less able
to handle such strategic complexity. It is also interesting to note, however,
that even one of Germany’s most renowned generals, Erwin Rommel, in
charge of coastline defenses, visited his family on June 6th in the belief
that the weather would cause the Allies to postpone the invasion—which,
of course, meant that a less-than-perfect weather forecast made it a per-
fect day to invade. Had Rommel immersed himself in the self-evident “he
thinks that I think” regress, he might at least have exhibited more anxiety
about blowing out his wife’s birthday cake candles. So while the relevant
actions on both sides occurred over a period of time as distinct from the
few seconds in which shooter and goalie confront each other in a soccer
penalty shot, the strategic issues here are nearly identical and one can read-
ily imagine he-thinks-that-I-think regresses preoccupying the minds of
strategic planners at least on the English side of the English Channel in the
days leading up to “The Longest Day” of June 6th.
To grapple with the issues occasioned by the ostensible absence of a Nash
equilibrium, consider the simple 2 × 2 game in Figure 3.9 and notice that regard-
less of which cell we consider, one player or the other has an incentive to change
their strategy. In response to this fact, suppose person 2 (column chooser)

--- Sayfa 117 ---
108  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
reasons that since the “he-thinks” regress cannot be resolved, he might as well
let a coin toss choose his strategy. But before doing so, suppose he reasons fur-
ther and realizes that person 1 (row chooser) can anticipate this maneuver, in
which case 1 would conclude that he or she can maximize their expected utility
by choosing a1 (E(a1) = 4(1/2) + 2(1/2) = 3 whereas E(a2) = 1(1/2) + 3(1/2) = 2).
But if 1 chooses a1, then 2 should rethink the idea of tossing a coin and choose
b2 instead. But if 1 concludes that 2 will choose . . . and so on. In other words,
tentatively deciding to toss a coin fails to resolve 2’s dilemma because it fails to
terminate the he-thinks regress.
Despite the fact that tossing a coin fails to resolve matters, notice the concep-
tual innovation here. To this point we’ve focused on choices that specify the selec-
tion of one strategy or another with certainty. However, such choices are merely
special cases of a more general type of strategy called a mixed strategy. First,
if s is a strategy for a player that specifies a specific action at each of that
player’s information sets, then s is a pure strategy.
Thus, aside from the random moves of nature, a determinate outcome prevails
if all players choose pure strategies. A mixed strategy, on the other hand, is
defined thus:
If the set of strategies available to a player is S = {s1, s2,…, sm}, then a mixed
strategy for that player is a lottery over S, p = (p1, p2,…, pm). The player is said
to choose the strategy p if he uses this lottery to determine which pure strategy
he will implement in the actual play of the game.
A mixed strategy, then, chooses a particular pure strategy by some random
device. And although the toss of a fair coin does not terminate the “he-thinks”
regress in our example, we want to ask whether it is possible that some other
lottery might do so. That is, is it possible that there exists a mixed strategy equi-
librium in which each person chooses a pure strategy in accordance with some
lottery in such a way that if these lotteries are common knowledge, no one has
any incentive to use a different lottery?
That the answer to this question is “Yes” is an important result in game the-
ory. To see this in the context of the previous 2 × 2 example, consider this rea-
soning: Persons 1 and 2 begin with the supposition that 1 (row chooser) will
choose a1 with probability p and a2 with probability 1 − p, and that 2 (column
chooser) will choose b1 with probability q and b2 with probability 1 − q. For
b1
b2
a1
a2
4, 0
2, 5
1, 4
3, 2
Figure 3.9  A game with no pure strategy Nash equilibrium

--- Sayfa 118 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  109
these probabilities to terminate the “he-thinks” regress, notice that, from 1’s
perspective, the choice between a1 and a2 is effectively a choice between two
lotteries defined by the probabilities with which 2 chooses b1 and b2 (the chance
q of 4 and the chance 1 − q of 2 versus the chance q of 1 and the chance 1 − q
of 3). However, if 1 uses the lottery (p, 1 − p) to choose between a1 and a2 and
if there is some chance of choosing a1 as well as a2 (if 0 < p < 1), then the lot-
teries offered by a1 and a2 should yield the same expected utility. Otherwise, if
u1(a1) ≠ u1(a2), where we now let the u’s denote expected utility, then person 1
can improve his expected payoff by switching from (p, 1 − p) to choosing with
certainty the strategy that yields the greater expected return—(p, 1 − p) can not
be an equilibrium strategy. That is, the expected payoff from using (p, 1 − p)
is pu1(a1) + (1 − p)u1(a2), and unless u1(a1) = u1(a2), this expected return is
increased by increasing or decreasing p. Thus, in our example we must have
u1(a1) = 4q + 2(1 − q) = 1q + 3(1 − q) = u1(a2)
which solves to yield q = 1/4. Similarly, if 2 has no incentive to shift from
(q, 1 − q), where 0 < q < 1, it must be that
u2(b1) = 0p + 4(1 − p) = 5p + 2(1 − p) = u2(b2)
which requires that p = 2/7. Hence, we have established that the pair of lotteries
((2/7, 5/7), (1/4, 3/4)) constitute a Nash equilibrium.
American Football: It is not difficult to contrive examples in which the
chair of a committee prefers to have ties broken in an agenda by lottery
rather than be empowered to break ties because fellow committee members
will, if he is empowered to break a tie, act to avoid such a possibility. This
fact seems paradoxical, but only if we ignore the interdependent nature of
choice and the fact that others will respond in their own self-interest to any
alteration in someone’s voting power. A similar paradox often materializes
in the American game of football. Those who follow such games closely
at the professional level will be familiar with the following seemingly
paradoxical event: A team’s star but somewhat aged quarterback, whose
record over the years of passing the ball marks him as a future member of
the Hall of Fame, is suddenly injured and replaced by a recently recruited
fresh-out-of-college backup whose professional experience is essentially
non-existent. Suddenly, rather than see the team rely on running plays,
the frequency with which the backup quarterback passes increases. Average
yards gained from a completed pass may drop, but to everyone’s surprise,
the new wet-behind-the-ears quarterback’s completed pass percentage
increases above that of the aged veteran. Thereafter sports commentators
begin speculating on whether the team confronts a “quarterback contro-
versy,” whether the star ought to be permanently retired or whether the
team’s coach is failing to do his job by not forcing that retirement.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
110  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
If we make calculations of the same sort as before, we find that the
mixed strategy equilibrium is for both candidates to campaign in A with
probability 3/7 and in B with probability 4/7. Now suppose that prior to
implementing these strategies, a new poll reveals that if candidate 1 (row
chooser) alone goes to state B, his probability of winning is actually 0.7 and
not 0.9, as originally thought. It might seem that this reassessment should
cause 1 to increase the likelihood of visiting A. However, the equilibrium
strategy for 1 now is to go to A with probability 1/5 and to increase the
likelihood of visiting B from 4/7 to 4/5. So the inference that a decrease in
the value of visiting state B should lead to a lower likelihood of visiting B
is erroneous, because it neglects the fact that 2 (column chooser) will also
adjust to this change (2 should now increase his likelihood of campaigning
in state A from 3/7 to 3/5).
Returning to American football, what sports commentators are unlikely
to consider is that the teams opposing the backup have adjusted their strat-
egies by relaxing somewhat on their passing defense. Football is a game
where it is reasonable to suppose that coaches and quarterbacks employ
mixed strategies—when confronted with equivalent circumstances, they
will “mix their plays” so that it is impossible for the opposition to guess
with certainty which play will be run at any specific instance. Sometimes
the quarterback will attempt a pass; in other, seemingly identical, circum-
stances, he will call for a run. At the same time, defenses will also be mixing
since otherwise the offense can take full advantage of any regularized pat-
tern in the defense. And once mixed strategies enter the domain of strategic
choices, we can witness things that seem paradoxical.
For purposes of a numerical example, consider Figure 3.11, in which
payoffs are stated in terms of yards gained (a positive gain for the offense
is a negative “gain” for the defense). Presumably, if the defense incorrectly
guesses what type of play the offense will choose, the play will be successful
for the offense; otherwise, the offense’s gain is at best small. The mixed strat-
egy equilibrium for the payoffs in Figure 3.11, now, is ((4/5, 1/5), (2/5, 3/5)).
Now, however, suppose the payoffs for the rookie replacement are
changed as in Figure 3.12 so that the yards gained from a pass against a run
A
B
0.5, 0.5
0.9, 0.1
0.9, 0.1
0.6, 0.4
A
B
Figure 3.10  Probabilities of winning the election
Before we jump to conclusions as sports commentators often do, con-
sider this example: Suppose two candidates, 1 and 2, must decide whether
to allocate the final few days of the campaign in either state A or B, since
the polls tell them that these two states are pivotal. Suppose the candidates’
respective probabilities of winning the election are as shown in Figure 3.10.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  111
defense drops from 20 to 10. Now the mixed strategy equilibrium is ((2/3,
1/3), (2/3, 1/3)). Thus, the rookie now calls a pass play more frequently
than does the veteran (1/3 versus 1/5) despite his lower efficiency. Such
a result is paradoxical only if we ignore the fact that the defense is also
responding to the lower efficiency of the rookie. Specifically, notice that
the frequency with which the defense now guards against a pass drops from
3/5 to 1/3, thereby accounting, in part for the increased use of the pass
on offense (and accounting as well for any “quarterback controversy” that
sports writers might invent since our rookie is successful with his passes
two thirds of the time as against two fifths for the veteran—two thirds of
the time the rookie passes, he does so against a run defense whereas the
veteran does so two fifths of the time).
Aside from offering seemingly paradoxical results, the introduction of mixed
strategies raises a new set of questions, chief among them being whether they
resolve the issue that occasioned their introduction in the first place. That is, do
mixed strategies necessarily resolve the issue of existence? The answer is pro-
vided by von Neumann and Morgenstern in 1947 and subsequently generalized
by John Nash in 1950:
Every strategic form game in which all persons must choose from finite sets
of pure strategies has at least one Nash equilibrium in either pure or mixed
strategies.
Requiring a finite number of pure strategies is important (although not for all
games). For a game without an equilibrium, consider this example: Choose an
integer, and whoever chooses the largest integer wins. Since there is no integer
greater than all others, there is no equilibrium. Or suppose two people must
each choose a number in the interval [0, 1]. If they choose the same number,
they tie. Whoever chooses the larger number wins, with the exception that if
one person chooses 1 and the other chooses a lower number, the second person
5, –5
10, –10
20, –20
0, 0
Run
Run defense
Pass
Pass defense
Figure 3.11  Yards gained with the star quarterback
5, –5
10, –10
10, –10
0, 0
Run
Run defense
Pass
Pass defense
Figure 3.12  Yards gained with the rookie backup quarterback

--- Sayfa 121 ---
112  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
wins. This game also has no equilibrium, pure or mixed, since for any mixed
strategy (i.e., probability density function) over the interval (0,1) the opponent
can find another mixed strategy that pushes everything closer to 1 without put-
ting any weight on 1. The problem here is akin to walking half the distance to a
wall, then walking half the distance of the remaining distance, then walking half
the distance of the remaining distance (one quarter of the original distance),
and so on. No matter how many such increasingly small steps one takes here,
you never reach the wall, and someone else, in principle, can walk half of what-
ever distance remains and get still closer to the wall than you are.
Ignoring these anomalous cases, the curious reader might ask how it is that
mixed strategies solve, at least mathematically, the issue of existence of equi-
libria. We will not offer here a formal mathematical proof, but we can convey
the general idea that underlies that proof. To begin, consider a function f(x)
that maps values of x in the interval (0,1) to values in that same interval. In
fact, imagine a two dimensional coordinate system limited to the interval (0,1)
on both the horizontal (x) axis and vertical (f(x)) axes. Now put your pencil
somewhere on the vertical axis at x = 0 (i.e., pick a value for f(0) in the interval
[0,1]) and, without lifting your pencil from the paper, draw a line, curved or
otherwise, across to x = 1 and where that line never goes above f(x) = 1 or below
f(x) = 0. What has to be the case now is that your line will cross the diagonal
line running from (0,0) to (1,1) at least once—the only way to avoid that line
is to do what we just told you not to do, namely lift your pencil from the paper
or let the function you’ve drawn take on values outside the interval (0,1). Thus,
for at least one value of x, say x*, it must be the case that f(x*) = x*. The value
x* is called a fixed point of the function f(x)—a value of x that f maps onto itself.
There are, as one might suspect, a number of theorems in mathematics called
fixed point theorems which establish conditions on f and on a function’s domain
and range such that fixed points necessarily exist. Our little exercise with pencil
and paper merely illustrates the simplest of those theorems and one set of con-
ditions to which those theorems apply (in this case that f be continuous and that
its domain and range be both identical and closed convex sets). The proof that a
Nash equilibrium necessarily exists then proceeds as follows (after simplifying
notation by limiting discussion to a two-person game): Let the function g1(q)
define person 1’s best response to 2’s choice of the strategy q, where q can be
any mixed strategy, including one that puts all weight on a single pure strategy.
Similarly, let g2(p) denote person 2’s best response to 1’s choice of p. Thus, we
can define the function h(p,q) = (g1(q), g2(p)), which maps the strategy pair
(p, q) to a new pair in accordance with the preferences of the individual players
and the game’s structure. Notice now, though, that the domain and range of h
are identical, and that by allowing for mixed strategies, we have rendered h’s
domain and range closed convex sets (i.e., if a player has, say, m pure strategies,
then the set of all possible pure and mixed strategies is an m dimensional sim-
plex or, in the case of m = 2, the interval [0,1]). All that remains, then, is to show
that h is a continuous function, in which case the existence of a fixed point, as
in our paper and pencil exercise, is assured. We skip this last step, but since it is

--- Sayfa 122 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  113
true, there must exist a (p*, q*) such that h(p*, q*) = (p*, q*). Such a strategy
pair is, by definition, an equilibrium. Hopefully, then, the reader can see not
only the underlying logic of the proof of the existence of Nash equilibria when
we allow mixed strategies, but also the role mixed strategies play in allowing us
to apply an otherwise seemingly unrelated theorem in mathematics to establish
something that might be relevant to the study of politics.
However, as elegant in its simplicity this proof might be, we are nevertheless
left with a second question: Why should a person use a mixed strategy when,
as our analysis of the example of Figure 3.12 shows, any lottery over the pure
strategies yields the same expected payoff provided the opponent chooses in
accordance with his equilibrium strategy? The answer is provided in the last
clause of the question. If for the game in Figure 3.12 person 2 (column chooser)
switches to a pass or run defense with certainty, or to any lottery other than
(2/3, 1/3), and if, as we have assumed, row chooser (player 1) can “get into 2’s
head” because he knows as much about the game as does 2, then 1 can take
advantage of 2’s decision, which in this case at least, reduces 2’s expected payoff.
Thus, not only does 2 have no positive incentive to switch from (2/3, 1/3), but
switching can even be dangerous.
This defense of mixed strategies as a solution to strategic form games should
not be taken to mean that we deem them a universal solution to the treat-
ment of games without pure strategy equilibria. There are times when they
make sense (e.g., football and perhaps even in the selection of military tactics)
but there are other times when relying on them to solve a game is unbeliev-
able. Consider again the three-voter, two-dimensional spatial example we’ve
used to illustrate a majority rule spatial game without a Condorcet winner (see
Figure 1.6). Because that winner does not exist—indeed, because there is no
alternative that is not beaten in a majority vote by something else—there can-
not be, as we note earlier, a pure strategy Nash equilibrium to the two-candidate
election game. Our difficulty now lies in the fact that if we take such spatial
examples as preliminary models of electoral competition in plurality rule sys-
tems, we have a rather difficult time bending our brains around the hypothesis
that candidates abide by mixed strategies. Even if we could compute such a
strategy for a specific election (and indeed, such a calculation is at best truly
complex), we suspect that if we had the audacity to show up at a candidate’s
campaign headquarters, computer in hand, and attempted to show them the
mixed strategy they should use in preparing a candidate’s campaign policy pro-
posals, we’d quickly and justifiably be shown the door. Campaigns are dynamic
events wherein our representation of candidate strategies as points in some
multidimensional issue space can be too much of an abstraction. The Median
Voter Theorem bypasses this problem because it identifies a circumstance in
which there is a pure strategy equilibrium and thus some reason for supposing
that campaign dynamics would not upset that equilibrium. This isn’t to say
that other features of real elections will not intervene to forestall convergence
to the median, only that the median as a Nash equilibrium will remain a point
of attraction just as gravity exerts its influence on an airplane in the air. But if

--- Sayfa 123 ---
114  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
no such winner exists, then these dynamics, including the maneuvering that
occurs within parties between campaigns, appear more critical and the simple
static view of the Median Voter Theorem is most likely out of place.
In discerning what role mixed strategies can play in our analysis of things,
we should keep in mind that as with almost any modeling enterprise, whether
it be in the natural or social sciences, the efforts of the researcher are as much
an art as a science. There are no hard and fast rules for when mixed strategies
make sense and when they don’t, and part of the “art” is knowing when to state
that a problem has an indeterminate solution, or a solution that can be identi-
fied only after we have specified other aspects of the situation under investiga-
tion. For an example of what we mean here, consider another game without a
pure strategy equilibrium, The Colonel Blotto Game. In this game we have two
equally sized and equipped armies that must be allocated over three battlefields.
Whoever allocates the most armies to a battlefield wins that battlefield, and
whoever wins two battlefields wins the war. The strategy space of both players
is, then, equivalent to a three-dimensional budget simplex, with each dimen-
sion measuring the share of one’s army allocated to a particular battlefield. As it
turns out, this game has a mixed strategy solution—indeed, it has several—and
one such solution can be described as follows: Take the simplex and lay it flat
on the table; inscribe a circle inside the simplex that touches all three sides and
erect a cylinder up from that circle; drop a cone into the cylinder so that its tip
touches the simplex and its sides fit snugly around the rim of the cylinder. The
final step is to normalize the volume of space bordered by the cylinder and cone
to 1.0 and interpret that volume as a probability density function. That func-
tion is a mixed strategy equilibrium strategy. Pretty horrific, huh? But notice
this: An American Presidential election can, if we so choose, be conceptualized
as a 50-battlefield (state) Colonel Blotto Game in which the different battle-
fields have different weights (Electoral College votes). The simplest model now
is to suppose that whoever allocates the most resource (e.g., time, money, etc.)
to a state wins that state. We shudder, of course, at trying to imagine what the
mixed strategy equilibrium looks like for such a game. But we shudder doubly
so if, after computing such a strategy, we imagine how we would be greeted at
a candidate’s headquarters if we were to try to convince them that they need
to “spin the big spinner” and choose an overall allocation in accordance with
our computations. And if an appeal to America’s Electoral College seems too
country-specific, suppose the candidates are debating policies that, one way or
another, redistribute wealth—a tax reform, a government subsidy to some class
of industries, a new or revised social welfare program. In doing so, perhaps
they’ve conceptualized the problem by dividing society into clusters that seem
to make substantive sense (e.g., those living in poverty, those who are ‘merely’
poor, the lower middle class, the upper middle class, the rich, and the super
rich). If this allocation is part of an election campaign, what they have here is
but another version of a Colonel Blotto Game—in this case, perhaps even with
3, 4 or more “armies” in contention. For the present, then, we will simply regard

--- Sayfa 124 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  115
mixed strategies as a potential solution to the task of predicting people’s choices
in strategic environments, and leave any final determination as to whether such
a solution makes substantive sense to the problem at hand or whether it is a
mere mathematical trick and that some other more substantively meaningful
approach needs to be considered.
3.5  Mixed Strategies and Domination
The analytic value of the concept of a mixed strategy depends, then, on the care
we exercise in modeling a situation and whether or not we think it reasonable
to suppose that players might actually contemplate allowing chance to dictate
their actions. If the strategic form accurately reflects the strategic environment,
then mixed strategies are merely a mechanism for choosing a pure strategy in
such a way that opponents cannot take advantage of their knowledge. On the
other hand, if our strategic form is but a crude approximation to reality, then
the notion of mixed strategy may make little or no sense. However, even if we
believe that dynamics are relevant, it may still be the case that a more limited
static analysis can assist us in understanding strategic imperatives. To see what
we mean by this, it is first useful to introduce the notion of domination. Briefly,
The strategy s' weakly dominates another, s", if s' does at least as well as s" in
all contingencies (against all possible strategies by other decision makers), and
if it sometimes does better. And if all these conditions hold strictly (i.e., if s'
is strictly better than s" in all circumstances, then s' [strictly] dominates s".
In a simple one-vote agenda, voting for one’s preferred alternative dominates a
contrary vote. If one’s vote is not decisive, then it does not matter what choice
is made so we cannot say voting sincerely here strictly dominates voting in any
other way, but in the event that one’s vote is decisive, then it is always best
to vote for the preferred alternative (assuming that one’s vote does not count
negatively). For the simple 2 × 4 game in Figure 3.3, A dominates B, but not
strictly, whereas if the payoffs in the lower right cells corresponding to (B,BB)
and (B,BA) were less than 0, then A would strictly dominate B.
With respect now to election models, it is fortunately the case that the sort of
election scenarios that Figure 1.6 models, multi-dimensional spatial elections,
have strategies that dominate others. For example, if candidates are concerned
solely with whether or not they win the election, then for two-candidate elec-
tions, platforms located far from all ideal points are dominated by ones that are
closer to those points. And since it seems unreasonable to suppose that anyone
would choose a dominated strategy, it seems unreasonable to suppose that a
candidate, regardless of the election campaign’s dynamics, would act differently.
The difficulty here, however, is that multi-issue election models of this type
fail to have a strategy that dominates all others (since those examples have no
Condorcet winner), and thus, the elimination of strategies that are dominated

--- Sayfa 125 ---
116  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
will not present the candidates with unique choices. Nevertheless, our argu-
ment, if formalized, establishes something of substantive significance. With
respect to our spatial conceptualization, candidates will not choose platforms
far from the “main body” of voter preferences—indeed, as we argue more fully
in the next chapter, unless voter preferences are skewed in strange asymmetric
ways, they will not choose platforms far from the median preference on each
issue (assuming, of course, that the relevant assumptions of the Median Voter
Theorem about perceptions and candidate mobility are satisfied, as well as the
assumption that voter preferences correspond to distance from some ideal in
the issue space). Thus, despite the fact that our representation of an election is
too abstract to allow us to assert the relevance of mixed strategies, the simple
idea of dominance offers us the beginnings of an insight into the general form
of the strategies candidates are likely to limit their attention to.
In the next chapter, we give greater structure to the idea of “not far” and
apply the notion of domination to say something more specific about spatial
elections by way of putting strict bounds on the strategies candidates are likely
to consider. At this point, we simply want to emphasize that the notion of dom-
ination is a general one and its application is hardly confined to election mod-
els. Pruning voting trees also illustrates the elimination of dominated strategies
because, in the case of voting in agendas, for instance, a strategy that specifies
voting for something other than the alternative one prefers at the final nodes
of any binary voting tree is dominated by a strategy that specifies voting the
other way. The elimination of dominated strategies, moreover, can simplify an
analysis considerably. Earlier we noted that the strategic form of our legislative
pay raise example yields a 2 × 4 × 16 strategic form. However, since legislator
C’s choice is evident when it comes time for him to vote, any strategy that has
him voting for the raise when A and B have already voted to pass it, or vot-
ing against the raise when either A or B have voted against it, is dominated by
strategies that have C voting the opposite. Pruning the extensive form back at
C’s decision nodes eliminates precisely these strategies. However, eliminating
dominated strategies is a process we can repeat as many times as possible, so if,
after eliminating C’s dominated choices in the strategic form in Figure 3.2, we
then turn to legislator B and eliminate dominated strategies for him as well in
the reduced form of Figure 3.2, we will learn that legislator A’s dominant strat-
egy is to vote against.
Thus, whenever we confront a game in strategic form, the first thing to be
done is to check whether it has dominated strategies. If any player has such a
strategy, then, after its elimination, we should check to see if other players now
have dominated strategies.
Example: Consider the two-person strategic form in Figure  3.13a, and
notice that person 2 (column chooser) does not have a dominated strategy.
However, 1 has such a strategy, a2 (dominated by a1). After eliminating a2
to get the form in Figure 3.13b, b2 is now dominated by b1. Eliminating
b2 to get the form in Figure 3.13c, a3 and b3 are dominated by a4 and b4,

--- Sayfa 126 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  117
respectively. But now, as Figure 3.13d shows after the elimination of a3 and
b3, the strategy a4 dominates a1, so b1 subsequently dominates b4, leaving
us with a unique Nash equilibrium and a unique prediction about choice.
The argument that legitimizes this sequential elimination of dominated
strategies appeals once again to the assumption of common knowledge. If, in
our example, 2 knows that a2 is dominated, then both 1 and 2 know this strat-
egy can be ignored, and both persons can focus on the strategic form in Fig-
ure 3.13b. This same argument, repeated, eventually eliminates all but (a4, b1).
b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
3, 3
2, 2
4, 3
3, 4
a2
2, 0
1, 3
0, 2
2, 0
a3
3, 4
4, 2
2, 2
0, 3
a4
4, 3
2, 1
3, 1
4, 2
Figure 3.13a  A 4 × 4 game with dominated strategies
b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
3, 3
2, 2
4, 3
3, 4
a3
3, 4
4, 2
2, 2
0, 3
a4
4, 3
2, 1
3, 1
4, 2
Figure 3.13b  First reduction of Figure 3.13a
b1
b3
b4
a1
3, 3
4, 3
3, 4
a3
3, 4
2, 2
0, 3
a4
4, 3
3, 1
4, 2
Figure 3.13c  Second reduction of Figure 3.13a
b1
b4
a1
3, 3
3, 4
a4
4, 3
4, 2
Figure 3.13d  Third reduction of Figure 3.13a

--- Sayfa 127 ---
118  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
The Paradox of Power: For another example of the application of Nash
equilibria to politics as well as the method of the sequential elimination of
dominated strategies, consider this proposition: Any increase in the num-
ber of seats that a party controls in a legislature or parliament is advanta-
geous to the party, and thus the number of seats it controls is a measure of
its “power.” We should, of course, refine this proposition to exclude pos-
sibilities in which one party gains control of seats while some other party
secures a majority, because it is then obvious that the party’s gain is offset
by what happened elsewhere. Let us then consider an example in which
one party gains seats at the expense of other parties, but no other party
gains seats. Specifically, suppose the distribution of seats in a 100-member,
three-party parliament is (32, 33, 35) and that this distribution changes to
(35, 32, 33). Once again, intuition suggests that party 1 would be delighted
with this turn of events. However, intuition here once again commits the
error of confusing decision theoretic with game theoretic reasoning.
To see what we mean we must first specify a voting rule for the parlia-
ment, so suppose all decisions are made by a plurality vote. This means
that, in a three-party parliament, any two parties can dictate the outcome,
but if the parties vote differently, the largest party predominates. Now sup-
pose the parliament is considering three alternatives, A, B, and C, and that
preferences are those occasioning the usual illustration of the Condorcet
Paradox; namely:
Party 1:
A
B
C
Party 2:
C
A
B
Party 3:
B
C
A
Consider a secret ballot in which each party has three strategies: vote
for A, for B, or for C. If seats are distributed (35, 32, 33), then the game’s
strategic form is as shown in Figure 3.14a (for example, if party 1 chooses
A, if 2 chooses C, and if 3 chooses B, then A prevails because party 1 has
more votes than either 3 or 2; however, if 2 and 3 both vote for C, C pre-
vails regardless of what party 1 chooses). Notice that for party 1 (row
chooser), voting for A (weakly) dominates voting for B or C. However, as
things stand in Figure 3.14a from party 2’s perspective, while voting for
C (weakly) dominates voting for B, we cannot eliminate voting for A via
domination. Similarly for party 3, while voting for A is dominated, we can-
not yet eliminate voting for B or C. However, once we eliminate party 1’s
choice of B and C as well as 2’s choice of B and 3’s choice of A, we get the
reduced game in Figure 3.14b, and here we see that voting for C is a domi-
nant choice for parties 2 and 3. Hence, alternative C prevails as the final
outcome. Thus, the “strongest” party realizes its least preferred alternative,
and the “weakest” party successfully secures its ideal preference.
Clearly, then, party 1 in our example should prefer a reversal of roles,
so that some other party (notably 3) controls a plurality of seats. Quite
directly, then, our example demonstrates that “power” is not a simple vari-
able measured by the accumulation of some commodity—in this instance,

--- Sayfa 128 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  119
parliamentary seats. Instead, our example shows that the empirical deter-
minants and measures of power—conceptualized as the ability to secure
favorable outcomes—can be defined only in the context of the strategic
environment of those who wish to exercise it.
As simple as this example is, it illustrates something of profound impor-
tance in politics; namely, power is not always what it seems to be. While having
the authority to break ties, to issue vetoes over legislation, to dismiss vari-
ous government officials, and perhaps even to set the agenda might all seem
dimensions of power, if by “power” we mean the ability to secure outcomes one
cannot secure without the instruments of power, then the paradoxical nature
of our example suggests that we ought to be careful when measuring power
or when implementing or amending, say, a political constitution in order to
make some office more or less powerful. The preceding example is not, in fact,
a mere anomaly. Recall the seemingly paradoxical character of our example of
American football. Once again, we need to emphasize that such examples seem
paradoxical only because we are too easily seduced by simple decision theoretic
thinking. We too easily forget sometimes that other players in the game of poli-
tics adapt and react to any change in the status of one of the players and that
deducing the ultimate consequences of any change requires a game theoretic
analysis in which we attempt to assess the ultimate equilibrium of all adjust-
ments. As we argue in future chapters, this is a lesson that must be learned
when, in particular, national political constitutions are being drafted, lest they
yield unanticipated and even undesirable consequences.
The Relevance of Irrelevant Things: Before proceeding to explicitly political
matters, we want to offer a note of caution about what we observe and don’t
Party 3
A
B
C
Party 2
Party 2
Party 2
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
A
A
A
A
B
A
A
A
C
B
A
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
C
C
A
C
C
C
B
C
C
C
C
Figure 3.14a  A 3-Party legislator with the seat distribution (35, 32, 33)
B
C
A
C
A
C
A
A
A
A
C
Figure 3.14b  Reduced form of Figure 3.14a

--- Sayfa 129 ---
120  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
observe in the real world. Consider the 2 × 2 game in Figure 3.15, with payoffs
in dollars. This game has two pure strategy Nash equilibria, (a, A) and (b, B) as
well as a mixed strategy equilibrium. But notice that there is no guarantee that
non-cooperative play results in any of these equilibria—the players confront a
problem of coordination because in fact Figure 3.15 mimics the game in Fig-
ure 3.8, though perhaps not in such a dramatic fashion. If row chooser reasons
that a is the best choice because it yields the greatest potential payoff, he must
worry that column chooser thinks the same way, in which case he best settle for
a payoff of 1 by choosing b. But if he reasons further that column chooser might
mimic his thoughts, he is led back to choosing a, in which case the he-thinks
regress begins anew. However, prior to playing this game, suppose player 1 (row
chooser) is given the option of throwing (T) or not throwing (NT) away a dol-
lar and that player 2 observes this decision prior to choosing a strategy.
Our instinct most likely is to assume that since 1’s decision to throw away a
dollar is made before the play of the game and since it only affects 1’s welfare,
we can ignore it. In modeling the full situation, though, notice that player 1 now
has four strategies—(T, a), (T, b), (NT, a), and (NT, b) and player 2 has four
strategies—(A, A), (A, B), (B, A), and (B, B)—which specify 2’s choice, contin-
gent on 1’s prior selection of T or NT, respectively (for example, (A, B) reads “if
1 chooses T, then choose A; but if 1 chooses NT, then choose B”). Figure 3.16
shows this extended situation’s strategic form.
Now consider what happens when the (weakly) dominated strategies are
sequentially eliminated:
1.
Delete (T, b) because it is dominated by (NT, a).
2.
With (T, b) deleted, eliminate (B, A) and (B, B) because they are dominated
by (A, A) and (A, B) respectively.
A
B
a
3, 1
0, 0
b
0, 0
1, 3
Figure 3.15  A simple coordination game
A, A
A, B
B, A
B, B
2, 1
2, 1
−1, 0
−1, 0
−1, 0
−1, 0
0, 3
0, 3
3, 1
0, 0
3, 1
0, 0
T, a
T, b
NT, a
NT, b
0, 0
1, 3
0, 0
1, 3
Figure 3.16  Extended version of Figure 3.15

--- Sayfa 130 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  121
3.
With (T, b), (B, A), and (B, B) eliminated, (T, a) then dominates (NT, b).
4.
With (T, b), (B, A), (B, B), and (NT, b) eliminated, (A, A) dominates (A, B).
5.
With all of 2’s strategies but (A, A) eliminated, (NT, a) dominates (T, a),
which yields the unique prediction (3, 1).
That 1’s ability to throw away money affects our prediction might seem para-
doxical, especially since player 1 does not choose T in the equilibrium arrived
at by sequential elimination. However, the relevance of a seemingly irrelevant
choice can be rationalized thus: Player 2 can reason that if 1 were to choose T,
then it must be that player 1 intends to play a, since only the outcome generated
by (a, A)—namely, (2, 1)—is preferred to the worst outcome that prevails if 1
chooses NT. And since 2 can assume that 1 can anticipate this reasoning, 2 must
believe that 1 can anticipate 2’s choice of the best response to a, A, in the event
that 1 chooses T. So 2 concludes that it is common knowledge that T leads to
the outcome (2, 1). But if 1 chooses NT instead, it must be that 1 intends to get
a higher payoff. Since only the choice pair (a, A) yields 1 a more preferred out-
come than (2, 1), the choice of NT must mean that 1 plans to choose a. Thus,
2 should choose A.
There is a theoretical note of caution that needs to be applied here. Notice
that after (T, b) is eliminated, we eliminate (B, A) and (B, B) because (A, A) and
(A, B) are superior in the event that player 1 chooses (T, a). But later we con-
clude that 1 will not choose (T, a), which appears to negate our original reason
for eliminating (B, A) and (B, B). It is this type of contradiction that can arise
with sequential elimination of weakly dominated strategies. This is not to say
that such sequential elimination ought to be avoided, or even that it is incor-
rect in the present example. Rather, we are merely suggesting that it, as well
as any other solution hypothesis, ought to be applied carefully, with an eye to
possible problems and conceptual traps. Our example, however, is profoundly
important, though, for a more substantive reason. If we accept the reasoning
behind the conclusion that the outcome (3,1) will ultimately prevail we must
also conclude that we are likely to overlook the potential relevance of seem-
ingly irrelevant choices in other contexts, especially those in which coordination
is required to achieve some equilibrium outcome. For example, consider the
relationship that existed between President Reagan and Premier Gorbachev in
the 1980s. Following the retirement of both from public office, any number of
writers familiar with one or the other of these world leaders reported that both
men questioned whether they’d be able to “push the big red button” in the event
they were attacked by the other side. Suppose we assume that each of them, via
perhaps their spy networks, understood that the other could not bring himself
to order a retaliatory nuclear strike against the other. Under a naïve model of
nuclear deterrence, deterrence should not then have worked. Yet it did and led
even to a variety of substantial disarmament agreements that required long-term
cooperative and coordinative actions to implement. Usually, of course, those
agreements are credited to the relationship that developed between Reagan
and Gorbachev and their mutual abhorrence of nuclear weapons. We are not

--- Sayfa 131 ---
122  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
ones to dispute this view, but our example opens the door to another possibil-
ity; namely, both sides were coordinated to a mutually agreeable outcome not
because there was a chance the other might, with some small probability, use
their “big red button” but rather simply because each side knew the other had
such a button but with no intention of using it. Admittedly, such an interpreta-
tion of things might be a stretch, but the preceding example (and game theory
generally) should make us aware of the possibility that our conclusions about
political processes are sensitive to the finer details of how we conceptualize those
processes, including the availability of actions no one would choose.
3.6  Finding Mixed Strategy Equilibria
By way now of illustrating further the character of mixed strategies and mixed
strategy equilibria, we note that it is one thing to assert the existence of such a
thing, but quite another to assert it can be readily computed or that people act in
accordance with it. One issue that persists with respect to equilibria, regardless
of type, concerns the hypothesis that they necessarily provide reasonable pre-
dictions about choice. We have already seen, for example, how non-uniqueness
occasions problems, which is an issue we must address throughout the remain-
der of this volume. However, now is as good a time as any to pause, reflect on
what we have discussed thus far, and see in particular whether we can avoid
such problems for any special class of situations.
Let us begin with a simple scheme for calculating mixed strategy equilibria. Our
first step in approaching any strategic form game of more than trivial complex-
ity should be to eliminate all dominated strategies, iterating the process as many
times as is possible. If we are lucky and are left with a 2 × 2 game, then we can
solve for the mixed strategy equilibrium by repeating the steps we took to analyze
the game in Figure 3.9. Specifically, after writing the expressions for the expected
values of a1 and a2 in terms of q (2’s mixed strategy), we solve for q by equat-
ing these two values. Similarly, we solve for 1’s mixed strategy by equating the
expected values of b1 and b2. But suppose we are left with an m × 2 game, where m
> 2. Fortunately, the same principles apply as before. Letting the player with two
strategies, 2, use the mixture (q, 1 − q), letting u1(ai) denote the expected value to
player 1 of strategy ai, u1(ai) = qu1(ai, b1) + (1 − q) u1(ai, b2), and letting (p1, p2, …,
pm) be 1’s mixed equilibrium strategy, then if pi and pj are both greater than zero,
it must be the case that u1(ai) = u1(aj). And if pk = 0, then it must be the case that
u1(ak) < u1(ai). Of course, if 0 < q < 1, it must also be the case that u2(b1) = u2(b2).
Example: Consider the 4 × 2 game in Figure 3.17. Assuming that person
2 abides by the mixed strategy (q, 1 − q), and writing the expressions for
u1(a1) through u1(a4), we get
u1(a1) = 12q + 2,
u1(a2) = 2q + 9,
u1(a3) = 11 − 6q,
u1(a4) = 13 − 11q.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  123
Plotting u1(ai) against q (see Figure  3.18) shows that there are sev-
eral instances in which two of these values are equal. However, there are
only two instances in which equality applies and where player 1 would
not, for the associated value of q, have an incentive to shift to some pure
strategy—specifically, where u1(a1) = u1(a2) and where u1(a2) = u1(a4).
There are, of course, other pairs of lines that intersect, but to see that they
cannot correspond to an equilibrium, consider the intersection of lines a3
and a4. The value of q for which this occurs is 2/5 (as computed by solving
5q + 11(1 – q) = 2q + 13(1 – q)). Such a value, though, cannot be part of
any equilibrium because, if column chooser abides by this probability, row
chooser can increase his expected payoff from 8 3/5 to 9 4/5 by adopting a2
with certainty, in which case column chooser would then shift from q = 2/5
to choosing b1 with certainty (thus increasing its expected payoff from
7 3/5 to 10), and so on. Thus, a mixture between a1 and a2 and between a2
and a4 are the sole candidates for a mixed strategy equilibrium. Focusing
on the first of these possibilities, we can eliminate all strategies but a1 and
a2 and solve for 1’s mixed strategy—in this case we get ((2/3, 1/3, 0, 0),
(7/10, 3/10)). There is, though, a second solution when the lines for a2 and
a4 intersect, so equilibria are not unique but this second equilibrium can be
solved for in an identical fashion.
a1
b1
b2
a2
a3
a4
14, 3
2, 5
11, 10
9, 6
5, 2
11, 8
2, 1
13, 0
Figure 3.17  A 4 × 2 game
16
1’s expected payoff
a1
a2
a3
a4
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
q
1
Figure 3.18  Finding the mixed strategy equilibrium

--- Sayfa 133 ---
124  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
Solving larger games, including those with more than two decision makers, is
more complicated. We may have to guess about which strategies have nonzero
probabilities associated with them, and the equations we must solve will involve
many more probabilities. But without minimizing the computation complexity
involved, the procedures for solving larger games are essentially refinements
and generalizations of the method we have just illustrated—they make use of
the fact that any two strategies, say a and a', with nonzero probability associated
with them must yield equal expected returns against the opponents’ strategies.
And if a" is any strategy with zero probability assigned to it, then its expected
return against the opponent cannot be greater than what a and a' yield. Some
games can be solved, moreover, using various tricks. For instance, suppose a
two-person game is symmetric in the following way:
Symmetric two-person game: A two-person game in strategic form is sym-
metric if both persons have identical feasible strategy sets, and if, when they
switch strategies, they switch payoffs.
Our previous examples of two-candidate elections illustrate symmetric games,
because we did not suppose that either candidate held any advantage over the
other and because both candidates could choose from an identical set of strate-
gies. Suppose then that the players in a two-person game are indistinguishable
in the way implied by symmetry. In this instance, if (a*, b*) is an equilibrium,
then (b*, a*) must be an equilibrium as well, because the labeling of one player
as 1 and the other as 2 is arbitrary.
This fact can frequently be used to facilitate a game’s analysis, especially if it
applies to constant-sum games. Briefly,
Constant-sum game: A game is constant sum if the sum of the payoffs across
players is a constant, regardless of the strategies chosen by the players. A game
is zero sum if this constant is zero.
If candidates maximize plurality, then the corresponding election game is zero
sum since the sum of pluralities is necessarily zero. Alternatively, if candi-
dates maximize their probabilities of winning, then the game is constant sum
because probabilities must sum to a constant, 1. Of course, any constant-sum
game is equivalent to a zero-sum game, because we can always subtract this
constant from one player’s utility function without affecting the information
that this function conveys about a person’s ordinal preferences or attitudes
toward risk.
The reason we isolate zero- and constant-sum games from the rest is that
their two-person counterparts (but not such games with more than two play-
ers) have special properties that make them especially interesting and amenable
to analysis. Consider the game in Figure 3.19, in which only the payoff in the
(a1, b1) cell is specified. Suppose we are also told that both (a1, b1) and (a3, b3)
are equilibrium strategy pairs. What we want to show now is that (a1, b3) and
(a3, b1) are equilibria as well and that neither player cares which equilibrium

--- Sayfa 134 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  125
prevails. We begin by observing that since (a1, b1) is an equilibrium, it must be
true that neither row or column chooser has a positive incentive to switch to a3
and b3 unilaterally, in which case
1 ≥ y and −1 ≥ −x.
And since (a3, b3) is an equilibrium, we must have
z ≥ x and −z ≥ −y.
Eliminating minus signs and putting all inequalities together yields
1 ≥ y ≥ z ≥ x ≥ 1,
which is satisfied only if strict equality holds here and, thus, if the entries in
all four corner cells are (1, −1). This fact, in turn, implies that all four cor-
ner cells are equilibria. For example, since (a1, b1) is an equilibrium, player 1
(row chooser) has no positive incentive to switch unilaterally to a2 from a1 if 2
chooses b1. But then it must be the case that 1 would not switch from a3 to a2
either. Repetition of this argument proves our assertion.
b1
b2
b3
a1
1, −1
x, −x
a2
a3
y, −y
z, −z
Figure 3.19  Interchangeability and equivalence in two-person zero-sum games
That (a1, b1) and (a3, b3) being equilibria implies that (a1, b3) and (a3, b1) are
equilibria as well is a property we call interchangeability, and if people are indif-
ferent as to which equilibrium ultimately prevails, we say that the equilibria are
equivalent. That all equilibria for two-person constant-sum games satisfy these
two properties tells us that coordination problems cannot arise in two-person
constant-sum games. If each player chooses a strategy that is involved in some
equilibrium, then the players necessarily arrive at an equilibrium. Moreover, they
have no preference as to which equilibrium ultimately prevails.
If we combine this fact with what we already know about symmetric,
two-person games, we can conclude that for any two-person, constant-sum
game, if (a*, b*) is an equilibrium, then symmetry implies that (b*, a*) is an
equilibrium and, invoking interchangeability, that (a*, a*) and (b*, b*) are equi-
libria as well. Symmetry, however, also requires that both persons receive the same
payoff at (a*, a*), so if the game is zero sum, then each must receive an expected
payoff of zero in equilibrium. Hence, equivalence implies that both persons in a

--- Sayfa 135 ---
126  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
symmetric two-person zero-sum game must receive an expected payoff of zero from
any Nash equilibrium. Thus, if the candidates in a two-candidate election have
wholly symmetric opportunities, then regardless of what we assume about the
electorate or procedures, if Nash equilibria exist, there is one such equilibrium
in which the two candidates adopt identical strategies. Moreover, regardless of
which equilibrium prevails, the expected outcome is a tie. This fact may appear
obvious, and it may hardly qualify as one that would be debated extensively by
those who are concerned primarily with the substantive domain of politics.
Nevertheless, it is comforting to know we can set this fact aside as an established
rule about an ideal form of two-candidate, democratic elections.
We offer this discussion of symmetric, two-person, zero-sum games not
merely because they model an interesting class of situations (those in which
two persons are locked in a wholly conflictual situation), but also to show the
kinds of abstract conclusions our approach sometimes allows. Our conclusion
about equilibria in two-candidate elections employs a laundry list of assump-
tions that are almost certainly not satisfied in reality (notably, the assumption
that citizens do not begin the campaign with inherent biases toward one can-
didate or the other, as well as the assumption that the candidates are afforded
equal access to all strategies, which almost certainly is violated if one candidate
is an incumbent). Nevertheless, once we accept those assumptions as a starting
point for modeling elections, we reach a conclusion that allows considerable
freedom in accommodating other aspects of an election. This is an enterprise
we address in the next chapter.
3.7  Manipulation and Incentive Compatibility
It is tempting to suppose, owing to the use of mathematical notation and the
presentation of theoretically derived results, that game theory and its applica-
tions are something new to the social sciences. It may be true that a math-
ematical formalization of ideas is new (at least if we label as “new” ideas that are
50 years old or less). It’s far less clear, though, that explicit game theoretic rea-
soning is a 20th-century invention. Recall that our brief discussion of agendas
(which we will elaborate on in subsequent chapters) shows that revealed pref-
erences do not always correspond to sincere preferences—to the preferences
people actually hold. Of course, the possibility that one might have an incentive
to misrepresent one’s true preferences hardly comes as a great surprise. Never-
theless, such examples reveal an important avenue of research—studying how
political institutions affect people’s incentives to reveal one type of preference
as against another. Assessing the incentives for the strategic misrepresentation
of preferences as revealed by the choices people make is in fact a part of a more
general enterprise, that of institutional design, wherein we attempt to channel
the revelation of preferences in ways that yield desirable social outcomes. And
to underscore the fact that at least the informal components of game theoretic
reasoning are not something new under the sun, we can say that the Framers
of the U.S. Constitution understood the nature of the problem we are about to

--- Sayfa 136 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  127
address in immediate practical terms. For example, in his notes on the Consti-
tutional Convention, James Madison offers this summary of Benjamin Frank-
lin’s comments during the debate on how to best select federal judges (E. H.
Scott, ed., Journal of the Federal Convention, Chicago: Scott, Foresman and Co.,
1989: 108–9):
Doctor Franklin observed, that the two modes of choosing the Judges had been
mentioned, to wit, by the Legislature, and by the Executive. He wished such
other modes to be suggested as might occur to other gentlemen; it being a
point of great moment. He would mention one which he had understood was
practised in Scotland. He then, in a brief and entertaining manner, related
a Scotch mode, in which the nomination proceeded from the lawyers, who
always selected the ablest of the profession, in order to get rid of him, and share
his practice among themselves. It was here, he said, the interest of the electors
to make the best choice, which should always be made the case if possible.
At first glance, it might seem that Franklin was merely inserting a bit of levity
into a weighty debate, perhaps to take the edge off a number of sharp per-
sonal conflicts. But Franklin was no stand up comedian, and he said little that
was without pointed purpose. In this instance, he was reminding the delegates
of the theoretical underpinnings of their enterprise. Though directed at the
specific issue of finding a way to select able judges, the general task of the del-
egates was the construction of an institution that was incentive compatible in
the sense that equilibrium behavior—behavior directed by narrow, myopic and
even supremely selfish motives—would nevertheless yield the desired social
outcome as a (perhaps unintended) consequence.
In more contemporary terms, the problem of institutional design and incen-
tive compatibility confronts legislators when empowering an executive agency
to act. Will the interests of decision makers within the agency lead them to act
so as to achieve the outcomes the legislature desires, and how can the legisla-
ture design an agency and mechanisms for monitoring agency performance so
as to shape those interests in a particular way? To render such questions a tad
more manageable, suppose our interest is merely finding a way to get people to
reveal their preferences truthfully. Suppose, for instance, we want to tax prop-
erty at its “true” value. The standard method, of course, is to develop a cadre of
professional assessors who, on the basis of a property’s general characteristics
(i.e., location, size, etc.) form an estimate by comparing it to other recently sold
properties. But assessors can make mistakes and even be corrupted, so suppose
we want the owners of the property themselves to tell us what they think it’s
worth. The problem here is that since owners know the property will be taxed
on the basis of what they report, it’s in their interest to report as low a valuation
as possible. But here, the Chinese leader Sun Yet-Sen suggested an interesting
twist on self-reporting; namely, the owners must also be willing to sell the prop-
erty at the price they reveal (see Niou and G. Tan’s 1994 article, “An Analysis of
Dr. Sun Yet-Sen’s Self-Assessment Scheme for Land Policy,” Public Choice 78,1,

--- Sayfa 137 ---
128  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
for a description of this scheme). Clearly this is much more likely to engender
an evaluation closer to what owners truly believe their property is worth. Alter-
natively, consider a country club with a golf course where its members must
choose a fee to charge themselves for the course’s use. The club could take all
suggestions and average them to set a fee, but then those who have golf as a pas-
sion have an interest in suggesting a lower fee whereas those who infrequently
or even never golf would suggest higher numbers. So suppose instead that the
club takes the median proposal. While perhaps not a perfect mechanism, this
method might be more likely to induce the truthful revelation of what its mem-
bers think is a fair fee.
To see how the requisite analysis might proceed, let us turn to a simple yet
illuminating example of the opportunities for invention in this area. Suppose
a social planner is interested in determining whether some costly public works
project (such as increased expenditures on education or highways) is in “the
public interest.” Realizing the difficulty in defining this interest, suppose the
planner settles on a simple scheme: People will be asked how much they value
the expenditure in monetary terms, and if the total reported value exceeds
the project’s cost, then it will be deemed worthwhile and people will be taxed
accordingly. The difficulty here is that those who anticipate paying little in taxes
or who highly value the project will have an incentive to overstate their evalua-
tions whereas this value will be understated by those who sincerely believe that
the project’s cost to them exceeds its benefits. This problem is commonly mani-
fested, for example, in the public utterances regarding the benefits to be associ-
ated with local public works projects, such as the construction of highways, the
development of sports complexes, and the building of mass transit systems.
Contractors who might profit from being involved in the design and construc-
tion of highways would, quite naturally, want to overstate value, sports enthu-
siasts would love to have others pay for the facilities only they might enjoy,
and local businesses who might benefit from any increased economic activity
resulting from mass transit systems would most likely ignore the downside of
proposals to invest public monies in such things. And since large-scale public
works projects are typically funded by bond issues whereby costs are passed on
to future generations, nearly everyone involved with making an assessment of
things here has an interest to downplay those costs.
The specification of a system that elicits such preferences is, then, an example
of the more general problem of institutional design, and to illustrate some pos-
sibilities, consider the following scenario.
Example: Suppose five people must choose between two projects, A and B,
and suppose the respective benefits and costs of these projects are as shown
in Table 3.1. With respect to these preferences, notice that in a majority vote,
project A defeats B four to one whereas project B produces the greater net
benefit. The greater efficiency of B (as measured by summed valuations),
then, might lead these voters to hope that their elected representatives and
government planners will ignore the majority preference and choose B. But
suppose that the information in Table 3.1 is not common knowledge. Thus,

--- Sayfa 138 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  129
if asked to state their valuations, persons 1, 2, 3, and 5 have an incentive to
overstate the value of A to them whereas 4 has an incentive to overstate
the value of B. Rather than abide by the results of a simple poll of vot-
ers in this example, suppose as an alternative we implement the following
taxation scheme: (1) Each person reports a net valuation for each project;
(2) the reported net valuations are summed, and the project with the high-
est sum is chosen; (3) each voter’s evaluations are deleted and replaced, one
at a time, to ascertain if that person’s report materially affects the group’s
decision; and (4) if a different project would be chosen had that person
been absent from the poll, then that person pays an incremental tax equal
to the difference in valuations between the two projects without that per-
son’s preferences being taken into account. With respect to our example, if
everyone tells the truth, the numbers in Table 3.2 summarize the total valu-
ations for the two projects after we exclude one voter’s report. Notice that
only voter 4 is decisive for project B, so in the event of sincere revelation of
preferences, only voter 4 pays an incremental tax, which in this case equals
$45 (i.e., (90 – 35) – (100 – 90) = 45).
Table 3.1  Evaluations for Two Projects
Voter
Project A
Project B
benefit
tax cost
net value
benefit
tax cost
net value
1
  60
  40
  20
  65
  50
  15
2
  40
  40
  0
  30
  50
−20
3
  25
  40
−15
  25
  50
−25
4
  75
  40
  35
140
  50
  90
5
  90
  40
  50
  90
  50
  40
sum
290
200
  90
350
250
100
Table 3.2  Computation of Incremental Tax
Excluded voter
Summed net
valuations
Incremental tax
A
B
1
  70
  85
  0
2
  90
120
  0
3
105
125
  0
4
  55
  10
45
5
  40
  60
  0
The remarkable feature of the tax scheme just outlined is that telling the
truth is not only an equilibrium strategy, it is dominant as well. To see that tell-
ing the truth is dominant in general under the proposed tax scheme, suppose

--- Sayfa 139 ---
130  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
that, excluding the voter in question, the summed valuations for A and B are
uA and uB (which may or may not be based on sincere preferences); suppose
that uA > uB (so A is chosen if the voter in question is ignored); and suppose
that the voter’s actual net utilities from A and B are u*A and u*B. What we want
to establish is that telling the truth is dominant regardless of the valuations
that others report. An appeal to symmetry then establishes that truth-telling
corresponds to the unique Nash equilibrium. To see this, notice that we have
two possible contingencies: Telling the truth renders the person in question
decisive; and telling the truth does not render that person decisive. With respect
to the first possibility, if telling the truth changes the outcome, the truth costs
our voter uA − uB in additional taxes. However, since the truth is decisive, it
must be the case that when we add this voter’s valuations, B is chosen. Hence,
uA + u*A < uB + u*B. But this inequality implies that uA − uB < u*B − u*A, which
is to say that the tax, uA − uB, is less than the difference in value between the
projects, so our voter prefers to pay the tax rather than have the less preferred
project chosen. Now suppose that telling the truth does not render the voter
decisive, in which case uA + u*A > uB + u*B, and telling the truth entails no addi-
tional tax. But if our voter misleadingly inflates the reported value of B so as to
reverse this inequality in order to secure the more preferred project, then the
voter must pay a tax of uA − uB, which exceeds u*B − u*A. Hence, the incremental
tax exceeds whatever benefit the voter associates with project B as against A.
We can imagine applying such a scheme to a variety of decisions in addition
to those pertaining to public policy and public works projects, such as when
university faculty must choose between candidates for some vacancy. Although
debating the issue may make people aware of the advantages and disadvantages
of alternative candidates, it has been our experience that colleagues typically
overstate the qualifications and research potential of those they sincerely wish
to hire (typically those who fit their private research agendas) while understat-
ing the character of competitors. So rather than choose whom to hire with a
majority vote, faculty could be asked how much they are willing to pay for each
candidate as a way to reveal more honest valuations and judgments.
There are, nevertheless, some practical difficulties with this scheme, regard-
less of the context to which it is applied. First, although we have shown that
telling the truth is a dominant strategy, we have not shown what might happen
if people collude to form coalitions. Second, there is the issue of what to do with
the incremental taxes that are collected. Unfortunately, we cannot redistribute
the money among the participants without, in theory at least, destroying the
incentives for truth-telling. In particular, if people know that part of their incre-
mental tax will be returned to them, they may have incentives to “shade” the
truth. To maintain incentives the money must be destroyed. Destroying money,
though, is not Pareto efficient and we might hope that the amount burned is
less than the gains associated with choosing the correct project or candidate.
Alternatively, we might try to design a mechanism with different properties.
Indeed, several tax schemes have been devised that eliminate this type of ineffi-
ciency. Unfortunately, they require abandoning the possibility that truth-telling
is dominant and settle instead on establishing that truth-telling is merely a

--- Sayfa 140 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  131
Nash equilibrium. The disadvantage here, of course, is that in practice we may
require several iterations before responses converge to an equilibrium. Finally,
there is the possibility of “income effects” wherein some people are unable to
pay an incremental tax and are thereby forced to understate their preferences or
to not participate in the decision at all.
There is, in fact, one additional problem with this scheme that is more evident
if we suppose that more than two projects are under consideration. Specifically,
by representing the value of each project in terms of dollars, and by letting
people be compensated for the selection of one project as against another by a
monetary transfer, we have assumed that utility and money are equivalent and
that a person’s utility for money does not change as a function of the project
selected. Indeed, this assumption permits us to circumvent the consequences
of a profoundly important theorem about social decision processes. Known as
Gibbard and Satterthwaite’s Manipulability Result, the theorem states that
If social processes concern more than two alternatives and if they satisfy all
of Arrow’s axioms except the requirement of transitive social orders (includ-
ing the axiom that all preferences over the alternatives are feasible, which is
invalidated by the assumption that utility and money are equivalent—the
assumption that we can write u(x) = ax + b for any person’s utility for the
amount of money x, where a and b are constants), then we cannot preclude
the possibility that, regardless of what others do, one or more persons will have
a strategic incentive to disguise their true preferences.
In particular, we cannot preclude the possibility that for any social decision
process, preferences will be configured in such a way that “telling the truth” is
not a Nash equilibrium—indeed, that there will be no equilibrium, truthful or
otherwise.
We have, of course, already seen the incentives for strategic maneuver in
agendas and thus we are able to identify those circumstances in which the votes
of legislators on bills and amendments may not correspond to their sincere
preferences. Gibbard and Satterthwaite’s result tells us that for any agenda with
more than two alternatives and two voters, there exists at least one set of prefer-
ences such that one or more voters will strategically cast a ballot that does not
correspond to their sincere preference. We can also conclude that under plural-
ity voting, if there are three or more candidates, then there are voter preferences
such that some subset of the electorate will vote for their second choice.
To illustrate matters in a different context, suppose Congress is designing a
bill and that we can represent the relevant alternative policies as positions on
a line. Suppose the status quo is the point 0, with the president, who must sign
the bill, preferring the position P > 0 while the majority of the legislature pre-
fers policies greater than P. Assuming that everyone prefers policies as close as
possible to their ideal, the question is whether members of the legislature will
reveal their preferences sincerely. Suppose the legislature’s median preference is
Lm > P. If the median prevails under majority rule and if Lm is closer to P than
is the status quo, 0, the president will, of course, sign the bill. In this event, the

--- Sayfa 141 ---
132  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
decisive median legislator has no incentive to report anything other than his
sincere preference. On the other hand, suppose Lm is further from P than P is
from 0, in which case, if Lm prevails in the legislature, the president will veto the
measure in favor of the status quo since it is closer to the president’s ideal than
is Lm. In this event, then, at least a majority of the legislature (all those with
preferences at and to the right of Lm) have an incentive to report a bill closer to
P than is Lm in order to avoid the veto. This legislative outcome is little more
than the implicit bargaining that frequently occurs between executive and leg-
islative branches. Our example also hints at the incentives a president possesses
for trying to convince the public and the legislature beforehand that he prefers
policies closer to the status quo than is in fact the case. Hence, although our
scenario is simple, it nevertheless reveals how strategic maneuver is an inherent
part of politics.
This result is important in the study of politics, then, because it reveals that
strategy is a pervasive feature of our subject and that we can never be certain
(barring some strong assumptions about preference) that revealed preferences
are sincere. Our only hope for understanding the relation between preferences
and choice, then, is to model social processes carefully so as to learn the incen-
tives for strategic maneuver and deception.
3.8  Key Ideas and Concepts
simultaneous choice
Nash equilibrium
unilateral moves
Median Voter Theorem
coordination
dominant choice
pure strategy
he-thinks regress
mixed strategy
Colonel Blotto game
fixed point
paradox of power
incentive compatibility
constant sum
zero sum
symmetric game
equivalent strategies
interchangeable strategies
Exercises for Chapter 3
1.
Going into the home stretch of a research and development project, you are
six months ahead of the competition. To bring the project to completion

--- Sayfa 142 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  133
requires finishing the development stage, and you have two strategies:
Risky and Safe. Safe takes two years but is guaranteed to work. Risky takes
only a year, but there is a 50% chance it will get you nowhere, in which
case you will have to return to the safe strategy and take an additional two
years. In six months, your competitor (who cannot observe your decision)
will confront an identical choice between Safe and Risky strategies with
the same properties as your alternatives, and they too must switch to Safe
if their Risky choice fails. Only the first to complete is awarded the patent,
and due to limited resources it is not possible to pursue both strategies
simultaneously.
a.
Which strategy should you pursue to maximize your chance of
winning?
b.
Do you want to keep your move hidden?
2.
Draw the extensive form corresponding to the following description and
solve for equilibrium strategies: “There are two dark boxes. Player 1 hides
a pearl in one of them; then player 2, not knowing which box contains the
pearl, peeks into one of them. If the pearl is in box 1 and she looks there, she
sees it with a one-half probability. If it is in box 2 and she looks there, she sees
it with a one-half probability. If she looks into the wrong box, she sees noth-
ing (and is not even told that the box is empty).” The payoff is 5 to player 2
and –5 to player 1 if player 2 finds the pearl; otherwise, there is no payment.
3.
Consider the following scenario: With one opportunity to bet remaining in
the game show, player A has $7,200, player B has $5,000, and player C has
$3,601. Assume that there is no benefit to being second versus third, and
that the player with the most money wins that amount of money in cash.
Each player must decide whether to bet All or Nothing. Prior to betting
(which they must do simultaneously), nature tosses a fair coin to deter-
mine which “state of the world” will pertain: in State 1, players A and B win
their bets, but C loses; in State 2, players A and B lose their bets, but C wins.
Assume that if a player bets “all” and wins, his wealth is doubled. If he loses,
his wealth is zero. If a player bets nothing, his wealth does not change. The
player with the most money at the end of the game wins. Draw this situa-
tion’s extensive form and show what each player does in equilibrium.
4.
“Cat” and “mouse” each start at opposite corners of the simple maze shown
below. It takes five seconds for both animals to traverse one segment, but
the passages are sufficiently narrow that neither animal can turn about in
the maze. If the cat eats the mouse, its payoff is +1 and the mouse’s is −1;
otherwise, these payoffs are reversed. After twenty seconds, the mouse, if
available, will be rescued from the maze.
a.
Letting a strategy be a complete plan as to which way to turn (left,
right, straight ahead) at each juncture in the maze, does this game
possess an equilibrium in pure strategies, assuming that neither the
cat nor the mouse can observe the other as it traverses the maze (until
of course, it is “too late”)?

--- Sayfa 143 ---
134  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
b.
Does your answer change if the mouse is rescued only after thirty
seconds?
5.
Prior to playing a game, a fair coin is tossed to determine which of the fol-
lowing two 2 × 2 games will actually be played (the first number in each cell
denotes your payoff—row chooser—whereas the second number denotes
your opponent’s):
b1
b2
b1
b2
a1
9, 5
  1, −3
3, 0
  9, −2
a2
3, 7
4, 6
9, 9
3, 8
a.
Assuming that neither person observes the outcome of the coin toss
and that both of you must choose simultaneously, portray the situa-
tion’s extensive form.
b.
Portray the extensive form, assuming that you can secretly pay $3 to
learn the outcome of the coin toss.
c.
If neither player observes the outcome of the coin toss, how much
would you pay to learn the outcome of the toss (assume that all payoffs
are in terms of dollars and that utility and money are equivalent) and
for what information cost is 2 indifferent between learning and not
learning the outcome of the coin toss?
6.
You are a member of a committee that must decide between A and B. As
things stand now, B defeats A, but you hate B, so you’ve introduced alternative
C, which will be put to a vote against B; then the winner will be pitted against
A. You are hoping that C will beat B, but lose to A. The outcome, though,
depends on your argument for C and the argument of your opponent. The
social ordering will be determined by those arguments. Your preferences are
A > C > B, and your opponent’s preferences are B > C > A. You (row chooser)
and your opponent (column chooser) each have two alternative arguments,
and they yield the following social preference orders under majority rule:
Cat
Segment
Mouse
Figure 3.20  Cat and mouse maze

--- Sayfa 144 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  135
Argument 1
Argument 2
Argument 1
B > C > A
(transitive)
C > A > B > C
(a cycle)
Argument 2
C > B > A > C
(a cycle)
C > B > A
(transitive)

If you must each choose an argument without knowing your opponent’s
choice, and if everyone is sophisticated, what outcome prevails?
7.
Let two political candidates each have two strategies, as indicated in the
table below, and let the probability that candidate 1 receives specific plu-
ralities from the four possible joint strategy choices also be as indicated. If
the objective of both candidates is to maximize their probability of win-
ning the election, what, if any, is the equilibrium to this game? How does
this equilibrium change if both candidates seek to maximize their expected
plurality? Note that p(x) is the probability of winning a plurality of x votes.
b1
b2
p(0) = 5/8
p(8) = 1/2
a1
p(400) = 1/8
p(0) = 1/8
p(800) = 2/8
p(−80) = 3/8
p(−400) = 1/2
p(0) = 3/4
a2
p(400) = 1/2
p(−75) = 1/8
p(−125) = 1/8
8.
Players 1 and 2, acting simultaneously, must each first choose whether to
play L or R. If they both play L, they then play game A below (all pay-
offs are in dollars); otherwise, the toss of a fair coin determines whether
game B or C is played. (The outcome of the toss is revealed immediately.)
Prior to their initial choices, though, player 1 (row chooser) can offer 2 any
amount of money for the right to make 2’s choice of R or L. Determine
what amount, if any, player 1 ought to offer 2, as well as the value of the
scenario to players 1 and 2.
X
Y
X
Y
X
Y
X
0, 4
0, 2
1, 3
2, 1
1, 4
6, 1
Y
4, 2
1,1
4, 3
3, 2
5, 1
0, 4
A
B
C
9.
Recall the game from elementary school called “one, two, three, shoot!”
One of the players chooses “even,” and the other player gets “odd.” On the
count of three, each of the two players simultaneously casts out either one
or two fingers. If the total number of fingers is even, then the “even” player
wins, while if the sum is odd, then the “odd” player wins. Suppose the pay-
off is 1 for the winner and –1 for the loser.
a.
Show the extensive form for this game.
b.
Show that this game has no pure strategy equilibria.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
136  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
c.
Prove that “acting randomly” is the only equilibrium.
d.
Suppose the rules of the game are changed so that at the count of
three a person can hesitate. If both hesitate, each receives a payoff of 2
whereas if only one hesitates, that player loses 1 and the opponent gets
0. What is the outcome now?
10.	 Consider the following two games:
Player 2
Player 2
A
B
A
B
Player 1
A
10, 4
4, 0
14, 14
4, 16
B
8, 2
8, 6
10, 2
0, 20
Game 1
Game 2
a.
If a coin is flipped to determine which game will be played, what is
the Nash equilibrium of the situation in which neither player knows
the outcome of the coin flip and the players choose their strategies
simultaneously?
b.
Model part (a) in extensive form.
c.
If, in part (a), one of the players can pay the coin flipper, who is not
one of the players, to reveal the outcome of the coin toss to both play-
ers before they choose their strategies, which player (row or column)
would be willing to pay more for this information?
11.	 In a two-player game, the following pairs of actions lead to the following
outcomes:
(Player 1’s Action, Player 2’s Action) → (1’s Utility, 2’s Utility)
(L, L)
(3, 6)
(R, R)
(1, 5)
(C, C)
(6, 8)
(L, R)
(9, 6)
(R, L)
(9, 9)
(L, C)
(6, 1)
(C, L)
(2, 2)
(R, C)
(4, 4)
(C, R)
(4, 3)
a.
What is the outcome of this game if 1 goes first and 2 observes 1’s
action and then chooses his own action?
b.
What is the outcome if 2 goes first and 1 observes 2’s action and then
chooses her own action?
c.
What is the outcome if each player has to choose an action before he
or she knows the other player’s action?
d.
A third player enters the game. If the third player chooses L, he gets the
average of the payoff to players 1 and 2 for any given outcome. If the
third player chooses R, he gets a payoff equal to whichever of player

--- Sayfa 146 ---
The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria  137
1’s payoff or player 2’s payoff is higher. What is the outcome of the
game where 1 goes first, 2 observes 1’s action and chooses, and then 3
observes 1 and 2’s actions and chooses?
e.
What is the outcome of the three-player game if all players must
choose their actions at the same time?
Player 3 chooses L
Player 3 chooses R
Player 2
Player 2
L
C
R
L
C
R
Player 1
L
(3, 6, 4.5) (6, 1, 3.5) (9, 6, 7.5)
(3, 6, 6) (6, 1, 6)
(9, 6, 9)
C
(2, 2, 2)
(6, 8, 7)
(4, 3, 3.5)
(2, 2, 2) (6, 8, 8)
(4, 3, 4)
R
(9, 9, 9)
(4, 4, 4)
(1, 5, 3)
(9, 9, 9) (4, 4, 4)
(1, 5, 5)
12.	 Persons 1, 2, and 3 each have a budget of B dollars, which must be allocated
between goods x and y at unit prices (i.e., px, py = 1). Person i’s utility is
ui = xaiy, where a1 > a2 > a3. There are the following ways of making final
decisions about how much of x and y each person will consume:
a.
People independently make decisions in the open market.
b.
With the government expropriating all wealth, two candidates for
“dictator” each announce an election platform that corresponds to an
identical (and feasible) commodity bundle for each person; the three
persons then vote for one candidate or the other, and the victorious
candidate implements his or her platform.
c.
A “dictator” is selected thus: Person 1 vetoes one person from this set,
and person 2 vetoes one of the remaining two persons. The survivor,
using the government’s budget, then selects a representative feasible
commodity bundle that each person must consume.
i.
Describe each person’s preferences over his or her budget constraint.
ii.
Describe the outcomes achieved under each method.
13.	 Let four individuals have the following net valuations over the three alter-
natives, A, B, and C:
Person
A
B
C
1
30
0
50
2
45
65
0
3
10
20
45
4
50
35
0

Assume that each person must report a valuation for each alternative and
that the alternative chosen is the one with highest summed valuation.
Assume also that taxes are collected as described in Section 3.7.
a.
How much incremental tax will be paid by each person?

--- Sayfa 147 ---
138  The Strategic Form and Nash Equilibria
b.
Suppose persons 2 and 3 can hire an agent who will coordinate their
responses (reported evaluations), including lies. Should they hire such
a person if the fee is not too great?
14.	 Congressman Pork represents a district with a significant electronics
industry that is in an economic slump because of foreign competition.
Accordingly, he introduces a bill for a $100 billion federal subsidy for con-
sumer electronics, but he knows that several committee members led by
Congresswoman Pam Sonic are opposed to his bill. The bill will be debated
next week and Pork can offer one of two arguments on behalf of it: (1) The
United States needs the technology of consumer electronics for possible
conversion to military use, in which case $50 billion would be appropri-
ated. However, if Sonic anticipates this argument she can seek out expert
witnesses to testify that such technology is irrelevant to defense needs,
destroying Pork’s argument and defeating the bill. (2) Pork could empha-
size the jobs that the federal subsidy would provide for constituents of the
majority of the committee members. In this case, he could get $40 billion.
Sonic’s counterargument mentioned above would have no effect on this
approach, but Sonic could organize a letter-writing campaign of con-
sumers against the bill. In this case, the committee would compromise at
$25 billion. However, the letter-writing approach would have no effect if
Pork’s military security argument goes uncontested, since the committee
feels that money is no object when it comes to national security. Portray
this situation in strategic form by using a reasonable attribution of utility
to the outcomes for both Pork and Sonic.
person
A
B
C
Summed net
valuations
1
  30
    0
50
Excluded
voter
A
B
C
Incremental
tax
2
  45
  65
  0
1
105
120
45
15
3
  10
  20
45
2
  90
  55
95
  5
4
  50
  35
  0
3
125
100
50
  0
Total
135
120
95
4
  85
  85
95
10

--- Sayfa 148 ---
4
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial
Preferences
4.1  Introduction
The quest for the American Presidency within the Republican party in 2012
began with Mitt Romney as only one of a multitude of suitors. Romney’s can-
didacy, moreover, was met with anything but enthusiasm among Republican
activists. Eschewing much of the far right rhetoric that appealed to the more
conservative wing of the party, he simply seemed “not conservative enough”
and, as a consequence, his candidacy, rather than being embraced, was met by
a long series of fiery challengers that yielded names like Santorum, Gingrich,
Paul, Perry, Bachman and Cain. Yet each in turn, while winning a statewide pri-
mary here or there, fell by the wayside until Romney clinched the nomination.
This, of course, is not how it has to be. In 1964 the Republicans nominated the
conservative Barry Goldwater to run against Lyndon Johnson and in 1972 the
Democrats swung to the far left with the nomination of George McGovern as
its Presidential candidate against Richard Nixon. The fact that both Goldwater
and McGovern suffered, by American standards, defeats of historic proportions
(61% of the vote vs. 38.5% and 60.7% vs. 37.5%, respectively) seemed not to
bother the supporters of Romney’s intra-party challengers. It was almost as
if the Republican party, against its wishes and after having tried all the alter-
natives, was being dragged, kicking and screaming, in 2012 to the ideological
center of the American electorate. And while Romney lost the election, he did
so by a far smaller margin than did either Goldwater or McGovern (51.1%
vs. 47.2% so that while Johnson won 486 electoral votes and Nixon won 520,
Obama won but 332).
Those familiar with two-person, zero-sum games, their application to the
study of elections and the Median Voter Theorem are unsurprised at this result.
It is, in fact, the elections of 1964 and 1972 that are deemed anomalous. Anom-
alies, however, require explanation for it is there that we learn where our theo-
ries and models require elaboration and further development. Before we do
so, however, we should first look more closely at the class of games with which
we ended the previous chapter—zero- or constant-sum games, especially their
two-person variant—and which, in fact, form the basis for much of the subse-
quent theorizing about elections.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
140  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
Briefly, we already know that in the two-player case, if the game is zero or
constant sum, there is no need for coordination in order to assure that an equi-
librium is achieved. Such games, moreover, share a property that, although it
does not necessarily rationalize mixed strategy equilibria, gives us some con-
fidence that a pure strategy equilibrium prevails as the final outcome when-
ever such a thing exists and also gives us an easy way to identify games of that
type that do not have such equilibria. Keep in mind that two-person, zero-sum
games are games of pure conflict—whatever one player gains, the other loses.
Thus, it is not unreasonable to suppose that people engage in such games with
a degree of pessimism—that their opponent can anticipate whatever strategic
ploy they might attempt. So suppose each person evaluates each of his or her
strategies on the basis of the worst outcome that can prevail if it is chosen.
That is, suppose each person reasons as follows: “Regardless of what I decide
to do, my opponent can anticipate my thoughts and select a best response,
which, owing to the zero-sum character of the situation, does me the greatest
harm. Thus, I should choose a strategy that maximizes my minimum payoff
(or equivalently, minimizes my maximum loss).” We would not want to extend
this reasoning to other types of games, especially if there are mutual gains to be
realized from coordination, but it is useful to know that
If a two-person, zero-sum game has a pure strategy Nash equilibrium, and if
both persons choose strategies that maximize their minimum payoff (a max-
min strategy), a Nash equilibrium is realized.
Because the proof of this proposition is simple and illustrates one property of
equilibria for this special class of games, we review it here. Briefly, if (a*, b*) is
an equilibrium that yields the utility outcome (c, −c), then c is the minimum
payoff that player 1 should associate with a*—if there was some payoff lower
than c associated with a*, the corresponding outcome must give 2 more than −c,
in which case player 2 would unilaterally switch from the presumed equilib-
rium strategy of b* in order to receive that payoff. Similarly, since a* is an equi-
librium strategy for 1, it must be that a unilateral move cannot raise 1’s payoff
and may even decrease it. Hence, the minimum payoff 1 associates with any
other strategy cannot exceed c. So a* is player 1’s maxmin strategy, and a paral-
lel argument establishes the same thing for player 2. And although this argu-
ment is made with reference only to pure strategies, we can readily give a* and
b* a broader interpretation to see that it applies to mixed strategies as well.
We might question whether such pessimism is warranted in all
circumstances—even zero-sum ones. But if we believe that a zero-sum game
models a situation with “sufficient” accuracy, choosing maxmin strategies seems
only reasonable. Moreover, the notion of maxmin and the preceding analysis
provides a convenient way for determining whether a two-person, zero-sum
game has an equilibrium in pure strategies or whether we must resort to mixed
strategies in order to ascertain a game’s equilibria. Specifically, if a game is zero
sum, it must be the case in any equilibrium that the payoff to one person is the

--- Sayfa 150 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  141
negative of the payoff to the other. If, then, c is the maxmin value to player 1,
then – c must be the maxmin value to player 2. It follows from this fact that:
If player 1’s maxmin value in a two-person game, computed on the basis of
looking only at pure strategies, is not the negative of player 2’s maxmin value,
then the game has a solution only in mixed strategies.
Of course, such properties are hardly a compelling theoretical reason
for giving the quite special case of zero sum, especially those limited to two
players, much attention or prominence over other classes of games. There is,
though, a good substantive reason for focusing on this limited class. Specifi-
cally, they model a great many political situations, where the most evident is a
two-candidate competitive election wherein the Median Voter Theorem estab-
lishes the ideal preference of the median voter in a one-issue election as the
Nash equilibrium to the game “played” by the two competing candidates. As
a model of actual political processes, however, that theorem leaves a lot to be
desired, since the assumptions employed by it are indeed heroic. For example:
Election Rules: In the 2000 U.S. Presidential contest, George Bush defeated
Al Gore despite the fact that nationally, Gore won a positive plurality of
the popular vote. Intervening between that vote and the determination of
a winner is a peculiar American institution, the Electoral College, wherein
the winner is determined only indirectly by the popular vote. A reversal
of this type, however, was not unique to the 2000 contest—reversals also
occurred in 1960, 1888, 1876 and, arguably, 1824 as well. Thus, the Median
Voter Theorem seems irrelevant to one of the most important democrati-
cally filled posts in the world. The Electoral College, however, is only one of
a wide range of institutional devices employed to muddle the relationship
between votes cast and the determination of winners. What, for example,
of such things as proportional representation, elections with runoff pro-
visions, elections that are deemed valid only if a certain level of turnout
prevails, and so on? Indeed, it seems at times as if the imagination and
inventiveness of the human species is never so clearly displayed as when an
electoral system is being designed.
Third Parties: The 2000 U.S. Presidential contest was also character-
ized by a considerable dispute over the counting of votes in the state of
Florida—a dispute that concerned a margin of victory for Bush there of
under 1000 votes out of over six million cast. Florida’s vote was pivotal,
and if the state had been declared for Gore, Gore would have won the presi-
dency. However, there would arguably have been no dispute at all had a
third candidate, Ralph Nader, not been on the ballot. Most pundits agree
that the majority of Nader’s 97,000 + votes would have gone to Gore had
Nader not been on the ballot, thereby giving Gore an indisputable plural-
ity in the state. Indeed, the Gore campaign knew beforehand the problems
a Nader candidacy would cause them, and they surely encouraged Nader

--- Sayfa 151 ---
142  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
to forgo the ego trip of running for the presidency. Once again, then, the
Median Voter Theorem, which is limited to two-candidate contests, seems
irrelevant.
Voter Ignorance: The Median Voter Theorem also makes heroic
assumptions about the information of both voters and the candidates,
along with the nature of the candidate’s strategies. First, those strategies
are presumed to be precisely defined points within the issue space, with no
room for ambiguity or uncertainty. It appears, therefore, difficult to apply
the theorem to, say, the 1968 U.S. Presidential contest whereby Nixon’s
asserted policy with respect to American’s involvement in Viet Nam was
little more than “I have a plan” or Eisenhower’s campaign promise in 1952
in the context of the Korean War that “I’ll go to Korea.” No more precise
was Obama’s 2008 campaign slogan “Hope and Change” or his campaign
theme in 2012 of “Forward” wherein Obama gave little indication of his
plans for a second term and instead directed his campaign principally at
simply denigrating his opponent. Indeed, with the microphone acciden-
tally on, his whispered comment to the then-President of Russia, Dimitry
Medvedev, that he’d have more flexibility after the election surely suggested
that he was being less than forthright with the American electorate, at least
in the realm of foreign policy. Nixon, Eisenhower and Obama, however,
were hardly the first presidential candidates to obscure positions on salient
campaign issues—witness Lincoln’s somewhat vague stand on slavery in
the 1860 contest. But the Median Voter Theorem’s informational assump-
tions go far beyond any assumption about the nature of strategies. Those
assumptions also require that the candidates know with certainty the dis-
tribution of the electorate’s preferences on the issue in question, that voters
know their own preferences on the issue, and, perhaps most daunting of
all, that each and every voter knows precisely what the policy positions of
the two candidates are. It is this last assumption, of course, that defies the
findings of essentially every public opinion poll in existence that attempts
to tap an electorate’s knowledge of a campaign.
Turnout: One of the cardinal rules of campaigning for virtually every
office filled by direct election anywhere, is that candidates or parties must
make every effort at getting out the vote of their base supporters. The pre-
sumption here is that a candidate’s ideological predisposition, sex, ethnic-
ity, tribe, religion, residence and so on prejudices members of the electorate
so that for at least a subset of the eligible electorate, specific issue positions
on the salient policy issues of the day are either unimportant or have, as
best, a marginal impact. This rule of thumb, though, merely corresponds
to the obvious fact that only in the corrupt “elections” of the former Soviet
Union or in today’s Russia does turnout even approach 100% and that
unless one maximizes the turnout of one’s “natural” vote, it generally mat-
ters little what influence a campaign might have on those voters who are
attuned solely to salient policy issues. Nevertheless, the Median Voter The-
orem assumes that all voters vote.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  143
Candidate Objectives: The assumption of 100% turnout in com-
bination with the absence of any accommodation of uncertainty and
flawed or imperfect information closes the door on another possibility
ignored by the Median Voter Theorem: Alternative formulations of each
candidate’s objective function. In the 1964 U.S. Presidential contest, for
example, it seems that Lyndon Johnson’s objective was not simply to
win, but to do so with the largest plurality possible. Appreciating the
fact that he did not have his predecessor’s media-cultivated charisma,
Johnson believed that to be effective and to keep Kennedy’s retinue
from abandoning or attempting to undermine his administration, he
needed an overwhelming electoral mandate. In 2000, in contrast, it is
almost certainly the case that, knowing the contest would be close, both
Bush and Gore were satisfied with adopting strategies that gave them
the greatest likelihood of a positive plurality (or plurality in the Elec-
toral College). For the imposed assumptions of the Median Voter Theo-
rem, however, all objectives such as maximizing one’s vote, one’s share
of the vote, and one’s probability of winning are wholly equivalent. But
if there is some uncertainty about things, we must then ask whether it
is better to assume that candidates maximize, say, their expected plural-
ity or their probability of winning—or, to state things differently, does
the nature of equilibria depend on what assumption we impose about
objectives?
Multiple Issues: Chapter 3 also underscored another critical assump-
tion of the Median Voter Theorem; namely, that the election concerns
but a single issue. It may be that a considerable share of electoral contests
around the world are disputes over ideology, which can be represented
by a single dimension from Left to Right, from Liberal to Conservative,
from pro-Business to pro-Labor, and so on. But a more realistic and gen-
eral analysis allows for subsets of the electorate to care about different
things—for farmers to care about farm subsidies, the elderly to care about
retirement programs, women to care about policies on abortion, environ-
mentalists to care about government regulation of various industries, stu-
dents and parents to care about government funding of higher education,
motorists to care about gasoline prices, newlyweds to care about housing
prices, racial or ethnic minorities to care about civil rights, and so on and
so forth. But now notice that people can be members of several such cat-
egories simultaneously—one can be a woman, a newlywed and a motorist
just as one can also be a farmer, an environmentalist and an ethnic minor-
ity simultaneously. It may be, of course, that preferences on the various
things that concern people correlate and thereby yield what we take to
be ideology, but there is no reason to suppose that this is necessarily the
case. To do so, moreover, precludes consideration of an important strat-
egy candidates often employ in a campaign, challengers to an incumbent
especially. Specifically, suppose an electorate is initially concerned with a
single issue and that the incumbent, having read Chapter 3 of this book,

--- Sayfa 153 ---
144  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
has skillfully used his or her term of office to position themselves at the
electorate’s median preference on that issue. The challenger, then, is con-
fronted with a dilemma: If he adopts a different position, he loses; but if he
matches the incumbent’s position, the electorate can simply reason, “Why
change and take a chance that the challenger is being untruthful in what
he or she is saying?”
This, of course, is the problem that confronts any new political party
attempting to form and enter the electoral game, and here we have in
mind America’s Republican party of the late 1850s that was soon to
nominate Abraham Lincoln as its standard bearer. The potential solu-
tion to this problem is suggested by our analysis of spatial games in
­Chapter 3—make the election multi-dimensional. In the case of Repub-
licans in the 1850s, the strategy was to put emphasis on an issue that the
two established parties, Whigs and Democrats, had thus far attempted
to finesse via a series of compromises: slavery. Despite the fact that those
favoring or arguing for the universal abolition of slavery were a decided
minority both in the North and South, the two established parties knew
this issue would splinter each if its salience were to increase, with Demo-
crats in particular split between Northern and Southern wings of the
party. Thus, both parties attempted every compromise to keep the issue
from bubbling up to disrupt both the country and their political sur-
vival. Lincoln’s Republicans, however, had little incentive to keep either
established party from splintering and, unable to secure any advantage
on the traditional economic issues that divided Whigs and Democrats,
every incentive to add this new dimension as a criterion of choice for
voters in the election of 1860.
Redistributive Politics: In addition to all of the other limiting assump-
tions made in establishing the Median Voter Theorem, there is one
more—the presumption of spatial preferences themselves. There is, as a
consequence, one class of election games not covered—or rather, covered
to little effect—by a spatial representation: Redistributive elections wherein
the election concerns only the redistribution of wealth and candidate strat-
egies are proposals to distribute some fixed amount, W, of wealth among
the electorate. This is not to say that we cannot represent preferences and
the policy space spatially. For instance, if we assume again that there are
three voters, we can represent the issue space—all possible three-way divi-
sions of W—as a triangle where vertex i represents the outcome “voter i
gets W and the remaining two voters get nothing,” where the midpoint of
the opposite side of the triangle represents “voter i gets nothing and the
remaining two voters evenly divide W,” and where i’s indifference contours
are straight lines parallel to the side of the triangle’s opposite vertex i such
that i’s utility declines as we move away from this vertex. The reader, in
fact, should draw this figure to convince themselves of two things about
redistributive politics: First, regardless of the point we choose, the sum of

--- Sayfa 154 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  145
the payoffs to all three voters is W, and any point in or on the triangle can
be defeated in a majority vote by any number of other points. In this case,
however, a spatial representation gains us little over simple intuition or
common sense. For example, suppose the candidates must propose alter-
native divisions of $90 among our three voters. If one candidate proposes
($45, $45, $0), the second can win with ($0, $50, $40), which is in turn
defeated by ($45, $0, $45), which is defeated by ($60, $30, $0), and so on.
Thus, even without the spatial representation of preferences required by
a redistributive electoral conflict, we see quite directly that the candidates
can cycle endlessly through alternative distributions. Or, to state matters
differently, if an incumbent must choose a specific redistribution during
his or her tenure in office, a challenger in the next election should be able
to propose an alternative that defeats the incumbent. Thus, the second
thing we learn here about redistributive politics is that candidates, and
incumbents especially, will prefer to speak in generalities when address-
ing policies that specifically refer to the redistribution of wealth. Thus, in
American politics at least, instead of explicitly identifying who will and
who will not benefit from one’s proposed policies, politicians instead make
reference instead to such vague promises as “making sure everyone pays
their fair share” or labeling their policies as beneficial to “the middle class,”
whomever that might include.
4.2  Plott, McKelvey and the Core Results of Spatial Theory
At best, then, the Median Voter Theorem is but a first step in the application
of zero-sum games to the study of elections. But before we see what next steps
might be taken, we need to consider several more fundamental theoretical
results. The first, which we can attribute to Charles Plott (see the 1967 article,
“A Notion of Equilibrium and its Possibility Under Majority Rule,” American
Economic Review 57), directly confronts the issue of the existence of equilibria
in multidimensional choice spaces. To introduce the results of research here, let
us look back to the example in Chapter 1 of the 3-voter spatial scenario por-
trayed in Figure 1.6 with two dimensions or issues. There is little need to repro-
duce that figure, which we introduced earlier to illustrate a situation in which
there is no Condorcet winner. But what needs to be noted is that the lines con-
necting pairs of voters have a specific property; namely, because indifference
contours are represented as concentric circles about each voter’s ideal, the line
between any pair of ideals describes the outcomes that are Pareto Optimal for
the two voters in question. Specifically, when at a policy on such a line—which
is called a contract curve in economics and corresponds to the tangencies of
both voters’ indifference curves—we cannot move along or off it without mov-
ing to outcomes that are less preferred by one or both persons. And from any
point off that line, we can drop a perpendicular to the line (or its extension past
either ideal point) and move along the perpendicular to make both persons

--- Sayfa 155 ---
146  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
better off. Thus, if an outcome is a Condorcet winner in this three voter game
and, thus, a Nash equilibrium to the corresponding two-person, majority rule
election game, it must lie simultaneously on the lines connecting each pair
of voters. Stated differently, if a candidate’s campaign policy (position) is not
Pareto optimal for each pair of voters (for each majority coalition), the oppo-
nent can defeat the candidate in a majority vote with a different policy that
will be preferred by two voters. But in our example, there is no simultaneous
intersection of all three lines connecting ideal points. Thus, regardless of the
position a candidate adopts, the challenger can drop a perpendicular to the line
connecting some pair of voters and find a position that is preferred by a major-
ity. It follows that, as we already know, there cannot be a pure strategy Nash
equilibrium to the two-candidate election game of our 3-voter example.
There is, though, nothing special about our example aside from the fact that
a majority consists of but two voters and that the Pareto optimal policies for a
winning coalition consist simply of a straight line. If, instead, we expand the
electorate to consist of n (odd) voters, all with circular indifference curves,
the reader should be able to verify that the set of Pareto optimal policies for
any majority of (n + 1)/2 or more voters is described by the convex hull that
encompasses or is bounded by the ideals of that majority. That is, if we con-
nect the ideal points of the members of that majority much like a child might
draw a “connect the dots” picture with straight lines in such a way that all ideal
points lie on or inside the figure formed by those lines, the policies on or inside
that figure are Pareto optimal for that set of voters taken as a whole. A Con-
dorcet winner and thus a pure strategy Nash equilibrium to the corresponding
two-candidate, n-voter game will exist if and only if the Pareto optimal sets for
ALL majority coalitions have a common intersection.
It might seem, of course, that this construction lends itself to no immediate
application or geometric intuition as to what might be required for such an
equilibrium to exist, but Plott observed that if, for example, we limit things to
two dimensions and circular indifference contours and if at most a single voter
occupies the presumed Nash equilibrium (Condorcet winning) policy, then this
requirement about intersecting Pareto optimal sets is satisfied if and only if we
can pair the remaining n – 1 voters in such a way that the lines connecting their
ideals all intersect at the ideal of the nth voter. Put differently, if there is a voter
at the point x, then a Condorcet winner exists only if we can draw a line from
x to and through the ideal of the nth voter (whose ideal is presumed to be the
Condorcet winner) and find a second voter whose ideal lies on that line to the
opposite side of the nth voter’s ideal.
Plott, of course, understood that two dimensions and circular indifference
contours were special. But he was able to extend this result to establish that if
indifference contours merely satisfied some rather weak and seemingly reason-
able conditions (e.g., that they formed convex sets and are continuous), his
result could be restated to require roughly the following: If x* is the presumed
Condorcet winner and if at most one voter holds x* as their ideal preference, then

--- Sayfa 156 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  147
x* is a Condorcet winner if and only if we can pair all remaining voters such that
the contract curve (the curve describing the tangencies of the indifference curves of
the two voters in question) for each pair passes through x*.
Clearly, this is a strong condition, and is especially problematical when one
considers the fact that subject to the condition that at most one person prefers
the presumed Condorcet point, it is both necessary and sufficient. Moreover, if
we extend things, as we sometimes must do in the world of statistical uncer-
tainty, and speak of continuous probability distributions of ideal points, then
as long as there are no point masses to that distribution (which is essentially the
requirement that it be continuous and that masses of voters do not have their
ideal points piled up at specific points), then Plott’s condition is necessary and
sufficient without further qualification. (To see that Plott’s result establishes a
general sufficient but not necessary condition for there to exist a Condorcet
winner, suppose the idea points of three voters form a triangle and that two
voters share the same ideal in the interior of that triangle. That shared ideal,
then, is a Condorcet winner, but ideals cannot be paired so as to yield a com-
mon intersection of all contract curves.) Geometrically, of course, Plott’s condi-
tion requires a degree of symmetry (termed radial symmetry in mathematics)
to distributions of preference where that symmetry must be precise for Con-
dorcet winners to exist. Plott’s result, then, establishes that Condorcet winners
are, mathematically at least, unlikely to exist when the domain of outcomes is
multi-dimensional.
Things would seem to grow even worse, moreover, from the perspective of
making predictions about the strategies of candidates to two-candidate spatial
election games when we consider the next result under the assumption of spa-
tial preferences. Richard McKelvey asked how serious the intransitivity might
be when Condorcet winners are absent in a spatial context (in the 1976 article,
“Intransitivities in Multidimensional Voting Models and Some Implications for
Agenda Control,” Journal of Economic Theory 12). After all, what if, for instance,
three alternatives were ordered intransitively but all three defeated the thou-
sands of substantively practical alternatives? Might not being able to limit our
predictions to these three alternatives (called a top cycle set) be good enough?
McKelvey, however, crushed this possibility. Under assumptions about prefer-
ences essentially equivalent to those imposed by Plott, he showed that if there
is no Condorcet winner and if x and y are ANY two policies in a multidimen-
sional space where x defeats y in a majority vote, one can find a sequence of
policies (z1, z2, …, zm) such that z1 defeats x, z2 defeats z1, …, zm defeats zm-1 and y
defeats zm. Thus, in the usual spatial context, if there is no Condorcet winner, then
the majority preference relation is intransitive over the entire policy space.
Initially, academics who had not read his writing on the subject carefully
interpreted McKelvey’s result to imply that the simple democratic system of
two-candidate majority rule elections was necessarily chaotic—that any-
thing was possible. Some even took to calling the result McKelvey’s “Chaos
Theorem.” But there were also those, McKelvey included, who deemed chaos

--- Sayfa 157 ---
148  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
counterintuitive. Specifically, consider the following circumstance: Imagine
seven concentric circles (not indifference contours, but simply circles) and sup-
pose one million voters have their ideal points uniformly distributed on each
circle and that the ideal point of the 7,000,001th voter, x*, is at the precise center
of these seven circles. Given, then, the perfect symmetry of ideals, it follows that
x* is the Condorcet winner and corresponds to the Nash equilibrium of the
corresponding two-candidate election game. Now, however, suppose we take
one voter’s ideal on any of the circles and move it ever so slightly to one side or
the other. The distribution of ideals is no longer perfectly symmetric and the
contract lines between pairs of voters will not all intersect at x*. Mathematically,
then, there is no Condorcet winner, and McKelvey’s result kicks in to estab-
lish that the majority preference relation over the entire policy space is wholly
intransitive. Such is the sensitivity of Plott’s necessary and sufficient condition.
However, imagine that we have made this situation a parlor game in which,
prior to moving anyone’s ideal, we ask participants to pick a policy after tell-
ing each of them that if anyone chooses a policy that defeats them, they lose
the game and must pay some manner of fine. In this instance, we suspect that
most if not all players would choose x* (especially after reading this book). Now
suppose we repeat the game after moving that one ideal slightly on a circle. Sup-
pose, in fact, that we’ve drawn our circles on a standard 11 × 8 sheet of paper
and that we move that one ideal 0.00000001 inches to the side. Knowing that
there is no longer a Condorcet winner, players might no longer choose x* as
their strategy. But we suspect they will not choose a point very far from it. They
might shift their choice ever so slightly one way or another in the direction of
the sole perturbed ideal, but we doubt whether they would take McKelvey’s
“Chaos Theorem,” even if they had absorbed the dense mathematics within it,
to mean they should choose something radically different from x*.
The question now, however, is whether we can formalize this intuition in a
way that lends itself to a precise, general and intuitively meaningful specification.
And this is precisely what McKelvey did (in the 1979 article, “General Condi-
tions for Global Intransitivities in Formal Voting Models,” Econometrica 47 and
in the 1986 article, “Covering, Dominance and the Institution Free Properties
of Social Choice,” American Journal of Political Science 30,2). Admittedly, his
result, fully presented, requires mathematics far beyond what we can or should
offer in this volume; we should also emphasize that his analysis and conclu-
sions are not limited to the special case discussed here of two issues and circular
indifference curves. But for ease of presentation, we return again to that special
case and suppose that with n (odd) voters, we draw all median lines on the
page—all lines such that half or more voter ideal points lie on or to one side
of the line and half or more ideal points lie on or to the other side of the line.
Necessarily, if Plott’s condition is satisfied, all such lines (of which there are an
uncountable infinity) will intersect at the presumed Condorcet winner. How-
ever, if that condition is not satisfied, then there is no common intersection. But
now comes the interesting and unanticipated result: Suppose, after drawing all

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  149
such lines (impractical since there are an infinity of them), we draw the smallest
circle possible such that every median line touches or passes through that circle,
and suppose that circle has a radius of r. Now draw a larger circle of radius 4r
with the same center as the first circle. McKelvey’s result is that for any point x
outside of the 4r ball, there exists at least one point inside of it that defeats x in
a majority vote. In fact, we can even say something stronger: Not only is there
a point inside of the 4r ball that defeats x, but at least one such point defeats
everything that x defeats. In other words, all points outside of the 4r ball are
dominated by something inside the ball.
There is no reason to suppose that this result is intuitive in any way to any
person, and indeed its mathematical proof is beyond the limits of formalism
we have set for this volume. We can, though, give some intuition behind it.
Suppose the point z lies outside of the ball of radius r. Now draw a line l from
z into the ball. From the definition of the ball, there must exist a median line
perpendicular to l that intersects the ball (and in general cuts through it). Pick
a point x, now, that lies on l and either on or arbitrarily close to that median.
Since x is closer to the median line than is z, it follows that x necessarily beats z
in a majority vote. This doesn’t necessarily mean, of course, that x dominates z,
but the deeper mathematics of McKelvey’s proof is to show that if z is at least 4r
from the center of the ball, then x will dominate z. It might seem, now, that such
a result cannot tell us much about politics. But here at least first impressions are
deceiving, especially if we allow ourselves qualitative as opposed to quantitative
conclusions. First, let us return to the example of seven concentric circles and
7,000,001 voters. Prior to perturbing anyone’s ideal preference, all median lines
will pass through the center of those circles, x*, and thus McKelvey’s minimal
ball will have a radius of 0. And four times zero is still zero, which is what must
be the case with a Condorcet winner. Referring now to Figure 4.1a, suppose
we perturb the ideal point xi to xi'. Now not all median lines will intersect at a
common point, but those that are perturbed will only be perturbed slightly, in
which case a ball that touches all medians will be quite small and McKelvey’s
4r ball will still be confined to the near center of the distribution. In this way,
then, we can rationalize the choice of positions close to x* with the admonition
“choose a position that is not dominated.” In other words, if the distribution of
the electorate’s preferences is nearly symmetric, we can infer that the candidates
of a two-candidate election will not choose a policy that is far from the “near
center” of the preference distribution.
We can say something even more meaningful to the study of politics. In addi-
tion to maintaining the assumption of circular indifference contours, suppose
the coordinates of the issue space have substantive meaning—that they corre-
spond to specific identifiable issues under debate during an election campaign.
If the overall distribution of preferences is not symmetric, then we know that
the combination of the median preference on each issue cannot correspond
to a Condorcet winner for the simple reason that there is no Condorcet win-
ner and, thus, no pure strategy Nash equilibrium to the two-candidate election

--- Sayfa 159 ---
150  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
game. However—and here the reader should refer to Figure 4.1b—since indif-
ference contours are by assumption circles, if we project ideal points onto, say,
the horizontal axis, identify the median ideal there and perpendicularly proj-
ect a median line up from that issue-specific median preference, that median
line must by definition pass through McKelvey’s 4r ball. It follows that if 4r is
“small,” then even in the absence of a Condorcet winner, candidates that seek
to avoid dominated policy positions will not adopt a position on that issue far
from the preference of the median voter. In other words, despite the absence
of a pure strategy equilibrium, McKelvey’s analysis gives us a reason to reassert
something like the Median Voter Theorem in multi-dimensional contexts.
For this assertion to be meaningful requires that our 4r ball not be “too big,”
and we do not want to leave the impression that r is always necessarily small.
Consider, then, our original 3-voter example whereby the ideal points of those
voters form a triangle. A simple paper-and-pencil exercise should convince the
reader that McKelvey’s initial circle of radius r will be the circle inscribed inside
the triangle formed by the ideal points and that touches all three sides of the tri-
angle. McKelvey’s 4r ball, then, will wholly dwarf that triangle and, thereby, tell
us very little about the policies two candidates might choose as their election
strategies. Notice, moreover, that it matters not at all whether there is but one
voter at each identified ideal point or one million, or two million, or whatever.
And indeed, if there are several million at each vertex, then we might say we
are modeling a sharply divided electorate wherein preferences cluster at one of
4r ball
Appx.
domain of new
median lines
1r ball
xi
x′i
x*
Figure 4.1a  McKelvey’s 4r ball with a small perturbation in one preference

--- Sayfa 160 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  151
three alternative programs. And in this case, all we can predict is the possibility
of wide swings in policy as the candidates jockey for position.
Substantively, then, McKelvey’s result tells us that absent any divisive polar-
ization of the electorate that might render the distribution of electoral pref-
erences highly asymmetric as in Figure  1.6, the policy differences between
candidates will be relatively minor and that the candidates themselves might
focus more on personalities than on policy disputes. On the other hand, with
a polarization that divides the electorate into multiple and sharply conflicting
interests, it will be conflict over the issues themselves that is likely to take center
stage and that regardless of the outcome, a significant share of the electorate is
likely to be dissatisfied with the outcome.
Of course, at this point the reader might wonder why, in the absence of a
Condorcet winner and a pure strategy Nash equilibrium, we have not reverted
to the “solution” offered in the previous chapter of mixed strategies. There are
three reasons for this, two technical and one substantive. One technical reason
is that we are uncertain as to whether a mixed strategy equilibrium exists. The
existence theorem for Nash equilibria offered in the previous chapter assumes
that the number of pure strategies available to the players is finite, whereas here,
if we conceptualize the policy space as a coordinate system, those strategies are
infinite and uncountable. It is true that existence theorems exist for games with
a continuum of strategies, but the most general impose a variety of assump-
tions on payoff functions, the most common being that those functions be
continuous. Once again, absent introducing such things as probabilistic voting,
the spatial election models discussed here have discontinuous payoffs (i.e., if
one candidate passes the other on an issue, their payoffs exhibit a discontinuity
range of undominated
policies on issue 1
issue 1
4r
x*
x1*
x2*
issue 2
range of undominated policies
on issue 2
Figure 4.1b  Domain of undominated policies with 4r ball projection

--- Sayfa 161 ---
152  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
whereby the candidates switch payoffs). We suspect, nevertheless, that equilib-
rium mixed strategies do exist for the most common spatial election games, but
then we encounter a second technical matter, that of calculating those strategies.
Earlier, in Chapter 3, we discussed a zero-sum game of pure distribution
or redistribution called the Colonel Blotto Game, noting that the allocation
of time and resources in an American Presidential election can be thought of
as such a game but with 50 unequally weighted battlefields. And in discussing
that interpretation of Colonel Blotto, we noted that it is simply unbelievable
to suppose that candidates in a real presidential election would or even should
abide by some mixed strategy based on a static model of an election campaign.
That same argument applies here. Our models here take an incredibly complex
dynamic process and reduce it to a snapshot. Campaigns do not unfold in a day
or even a month. They are typically ongoing events whereby the candidates try
out different appeals to see which ones resonate best with the electorate, which
tactics best facilitate securing campaign contributions, and what compromises
have to be reached so as to mollify whatever disputes might have arisen within a
candidate’s party. Candidates are also busy adjusting their tactics to the actions
of their opponents—deciding what to say and where to say it based on their
opponent’s tactics. Thus, reducing an election to a simple choice of policy in
some n-dimensional policy space is a heroic simplification. We make such sim-
plifications, though, in the hopes of eventually building better models as some
fundamental processes and forces that we believe operate universally are uncov-
ered. A spatial model of an election is no more a model of a real election than
is the kinetic theory of gasses a model of what occurs inside of a balloon as it
is blown up. All we do know is that as the balloon expands with each breath,
whatever occurs within it is doing so in accordance with that theory and, hope-
fully, what we are discovering with our spatial models is uncovering some fun-
damental forces that operate in all elections and that minimally put boundaries
on what can actually happen.
But there is also a substantive reason for supposing that the candidates need
not compute mixed strategy solutions even if a spatial model does describe
any real ongoing election campaign. Specifically, one feature of a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium is that each of the mixed strategies involved in an equilibrium
will give zero weight to any dominated pure strategy. Were a mixed strategy to
give positive weight to a dominated pure strategy, then the mixed strategy could
be improved by shifting that weight to some undominated strategy. Thus, were
a candidate, for some unknown reason, determined to abide by a mixed strat-
egy, the first step should be to identify all undominated pure strategies. But this
means that a candidate should limit the range of choices to those within McK-
elvey’s 4r ball, since if a pure spatial strategy is undominated, it will lie inside
that ball. Correspondingly, from the perspective of the analyst attempting to
offer a prediction about a candidate’s strategy, then that analysis can begin by
predicting that the candidate in question—regardless of whether he is employ-
ing a mixed strategy or some other algorithm—will choose a policy inside of

--- Sayfa 162 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  153
the 4r ball. And unless the electorate is sharply divided into virtually warring
camps, that may be good enough.
4.3  Two-Candidate Elections and the Electoral College
Our focus on elections in the context of zero-sum games derives in part from
the fact that no class of strategic environments lies more at the heart of political
process in a democratic state than that of elections. Indeed, it seems that today
even authoritarian states prefer to at least give the impression that their leaders
are chosen by popular vote even if electoral fraud is self-evident, as is the case
in places such as Russia, the Asiatic former components of the USSR and any
number of African countries. The legitimacy of regimes today no longer resides
in the divine right of kings, but in “the voice of the people,” however imper-
fectly that voice is allowed to be expressed. The contribution of game theory to
all of this lies, in part, with results such as the Median Voter Theorem, which,
while dealing with a highly abstract representation of elections, moves us in
the general direction of a theoretical understanding of things. That it does not
accurately model any real election with which we are familiar is evident, but it
can be used to address some of the questions that arise with respect to real elec-
tions. And here we can look again at the United States and its peculiar method
of electing Presidents.
As previously noted, election to the presidency of the United States is
complicated by the existence of a peculiar institution, the Electoral College.
Implemented at a time (1787) when political parties as we know them were
unknown, when the geographic expanse of the new nation exceeded that of
most countries and, in particular, of Europe itself, and when the technologies of
communication were at best rudimentary, the Framers of the U.S. Constitution
assumed that voters would know little about politics and politicians except for
what occurred immediately around them. It was not assumed that voters in, say,
Massachusetts would know much if anything about the interests and politicians
of far-away states such as South Carolina or even Pennsylvania. In addition, the
Framers themselves, distrustful of voters and the passions that might control
them and seeking various ways to blunt the powers of the national govern-
ment in favor of those of the individual states, implemented America’s pecu-
liar institution whereby each state would be given a voting weight equal to the
number of its representatives in the new national Congress plus two. The states,
in turn, would, in accordance with rules established by their individual legisla-
tures, choose how its electors to the Electoral College would be selected, where
it would be those electors and not any mass electorate who would vote to fill the
offices of President and Vice President.
Needless to say, the door was open to a great many ways to choose elec-
tors. One possibility was having state legislatures themselves make the choice,
in which case when voting for state representatives, voters would in effect be
voting for President. Another possibility was to allow electors to be voted on

--- Sayfa 163 ---
154  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
directly by the electorate (which back then meant white propertied males). But
even in this case, there were several possibilities: Electors could be chosen by
district, they could be allocated in proportion to the votes cast for the individ-
ual candidates, or they could be awarded as a block to the candidate (or, once
political parties appeared on the scene, to the party) receiving the most votes.
Individual states experimented with all of these alternatives during the early
years of the republic wherein the method chosen typically was the one that best
served the interests of the majority party of the state in question. For example,
in the strongly contested election between Adams and Jefferson in 1800, Madi-
son and Jefferson feared that some of Virginia’s vote, if allocated by district,
would go to the Federalist Adams. They thus succeeded in having Virginia’s
legislature implement the unit rule whereby all of that state’s electoral votes
would be cast for whoever secured a majority of the vote in that state, which
they knew would be Jefferson. Massachusetts, in turn, dominated by Adams’s
party, the Federalists, wasn’t about to leave its favored candidate in the lurch,
whereupon its legislature, the General Court, also implemented the block vote
scheme. In fact, by 1836 all states with but one exception had converted to this
winner-take-all method whereby the Electoral College, in combination with the
12th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution that required electors to cast their
votes for a slate pledged to a candidate for President and one for Vice President,
took the form we see today.
A variety of issues arose with these changes that remain with us today, includ-
ing (1) the possibility that someone can win the presidency with a negative
popular vote plurality; (2) an assessment of the extent to which the Electoral
College, as compared to a national direct popular vote, discourages the forma-
tion of third parties; (3) a measure of the advantage given to small versus large
states; and (4) an assessment of the policy biases inherent in the Electoral Col-
lege. Today, of course, with memories of the 2000 and 1960 contests still alive
in some people’s memories, it is the first issue that seems most salient. In the
early years of the Republic, however, it was perhaps the fourth issue that was
the greatest concern. Here we need to remember the Constitution’s peculiar
and unsavory compromise with slavery whereby in allocating representatives
to the national Congress on the basis of population, a slave was counted as
three-fifths of a person. Thus, while disallowed from voting in the South and
treated essentially as property, the South held an advantage over those states
with few slaves or states that had banned slavery from their territory. And since
a state’s Electoral College weight was dictated by the number of representatives
it sent to Congress, the South and its policy interests gained an advantage in the
selection of president.
We cannot address all of these issues, but we can begin to see some of the
Electoral College’s influences by, believe it or not, returning to the Median Voter
Theorem. Actually, it is not that theorem specifically we will use here but a
subsidiary result that holds true when the conditions of the theorem apply. So
suppose two candidates must compete on a single policy dimension on which
all voters have well defined (single-peaked) preferences. The Median Voter The-
orem tells us, of course, that if the election were held by direct vote, without the

--- Sayfa 164 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  155
intervention of the College, both candidates should converge to the electorate’s
median preference. But notice that if we apply this result to individual states,
we see that there is an equilibrium policy position within each state—if prefer-
ences are single-peaked overall, then they are single-peaked among any subset
of citizens. However, here the formal proof of the Median Voter Theorem can
be extended to imply something stronger:
If preferences are single-peaked, not only does the median preference stand
highest on the social preference order under majority rule (because it is the
Condorcet winner), but the order is wholly transitive—if x, y and z are any
three alternatives, if x is majority preferred to y and y majority preferred to z,
then x is majority preferred to z.
To see that this is true, consider three alternatives Z, Y and W that lie on the
issue from left to right in that order, and suppose that W defeats Y and Y defeats
Z. What remains to be shown is that W necessarily defeats Z. If preferences are
single peaked, then any voter who prefers W to Y will prefer W to Z. But since
Y is closer to W than is Z, there will be some voters who most prefer Y who will
also prefer W to Z. Thus, if W defeats Y in a majority vote it must defeat Z in
such a vote as well (and by even a greater plurality). This result suggests that
if individual states employ a winner-take-all voting scheme, we can represent
states as individual voters with transitive single peaked preferences wherein
the peak preference is the ideal of the median voter within it. Thus, in those
instances in which a single dominant issue occupies the stage, we can be anthro-
pomorphic in our thinking and speak of a state as a voter with an ideal point
at the median ideal point of the voters in that state, with a utility function that
declines monotonically as we move away from the median in either direction,
and with a voting weight equal to its vote in the Electoral College.
Using this argument to analyze the potential policy biases of the Electoral
College, consider the following simple example:
Example: Suppose there are three states with 7, 5, and 3 voters and three
alternative policy platforms. Figure 4.2 gives a possible preference distribu-
tion in these states and shows that, although more than half of the voters
most prefer policy 1 (eight voters versus five preferring policy 2 and two
preferring policy 3), which is thereby the equilibrium in a two-candidate
direct vote election, policy 2 is the median preference in states 2 and 3. So,
regardless of whether electoral votes are awarded to states on the basis of
their population, or whether each state receives two extra electoral votes,
the electoral votes of states 2 and 3 are sufficient to ensure that policy 2 is
the equilibrium platform under the Electoral College.
Our example shows, then, that the Electoral College can occasion a policy dis-
tortion whenever there is a strong asymmetry in the distribution of preferences
within states. One might ask, then, as to the biases that exist today or existed in
the past, and here research suggests that whatever biases existed in the past have

--- Sayfa 165 ---
156  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
largely disappeared owing to the increasing homogeneity of the United States.
Blacks, for example, are no longer concentrated in the South, nor is industry
concentrated in the Northeast or in such states as Ohio and Pennsylvania. This
isn’t to say that bias has been wholly eliminated—only that it is likely to be
less than what it had been in, say, the 19th century. There has emerged of late
a sharp ideological divide, some say, between the East and West coasts versus
the rest of the country—of “blue” states versus “red”—but demographically
at least (and in the core economic interests that correlate with such variables)
the country seems far more homogeneous and the opportunities for Electoral
College bias far less pronounced today. The important lesson here, however, is
not contained in any substantive conclusions we might draw about America’s
peculiar method of electing presidents, but rather in how we can use an abstract
result, the Median Voter Theorem, to study in a theoretically meaningful way
an electoral system that doesn’t quite seem to match the assumptions imposed
by that theorem.
4.4  Turnout and Responsible Political Parties
Among the other implications of the Median Voter Theorem is that in equi-
librium, voters are not presented with meaningful choices—both candidates
advocate the same policy. That theorem tells us, then, that under its admit-
tedly severe assumptions, majority rule elections establish a strong incentive
for the two major parties or their candidates to move their election platforms
to the “center” of the electorate’s preference distribution. This implication,
though, flies in the face of those who prefer that the major parties offer distinct
choices so as to give the electorate an opportunity to choose between, say, a
liberal versus conservative policy. Thus, commentators on American politics
bemoan the empirical manifestations of convergence to the median wherein
10
State 3
State 2
State 1
8
6
4
2
0
1
2
3
Figure 4.2  The potential for Electoral College bias

--- Sayfa 166 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  157
Democrats and Republicans often seem to not be worth “a dime’s worth of
difference” and where election campaigns for national office devolve into slick
advertising and the denigration of an opponent’s character or personality. At
the same time, however, these same commentators lament the low voter turn-
out rates that characterize U.S. elections—generally, for Presidential contests,
in the vicinity of 55%—as compared to the rates of other democracies where
turnout commonly exceeds 70%. Some persons blame these rates on the indis-
tinguishability of the candidates while others blame the indistinguishability on
these rates—implying that, whatever the relationship, there is something amiss
in American democracy.
To explore the issue of whether low turnout and candidates who fail to be
distinct are symptomatic of “something wrong” with the way majority rule
functions, suppose, contrary to the assumptions of the Median Voter Theorem,
that not only are citizens willing to abstain from voting, but that their likeli-
hood of voting is a function of the utility difference they perceive between the
candidates. Thus, let us formulate a model in which citizens punish candidates
(by staying home on election day) for failing to provide a distinct choice. For
purposes of a numerical example, assume that if the two candidates converge
identically to the median, then, regardless of policy preference, each citizen’s
probability of voting is some small number 0 < po << 1. Assume further that the
feasible policy space that serves as the candidates’ alternative election strategies
is represented by the interval [0, 1] and that each person’s utility for the policy
x is given by the function
ui(x) = 1 − |(xi − x)|
where xi denotes the citizen’s ideal position on the issue and where |.| denotes
absolute value. Thus, utility declines linearly as we move away in either direc-
tion from a person’s ideal. Finally, to model abstention, suppose person i’s
probability of voting is given by the function
pi(xA, xB) = po + a|ui(xA) − ui(xB)|,
where a is some number that ensures that pi doesn’t exceed 1, and where xA
and xB are the positions adopted by candidates A and B respectively. Thus, in
accordance with the idea that voters ought to punish candidates for appear-
ing similar and that they should reward a preferred candidate for offering a
choice that is distinct from the opponent, the probability of voting increases as
the utility difference between the candidates increases. With respect to specific
probabilities of voting as a function of a voter’s ideal,
1.
A voter whose ideal lies precisely midway between xA and xB is indifferent
between the candidates’ policy positions. Thus, such a person votes with
the minimum probability, po.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
158  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
2.
Assuming, without loss of generality, that xA < xB, a voter to the left of xA
votes with a probability
po + a|ui(xA) − ui(xB)| =
po + a|1 + (xi − xA) – 1 − (xi − xB)| =
po + a|xA − xB|,

which is a constant since this probability does not depend on xi. Similarly,
everyone with ideal points to the right of xB votes with the same constant
probability.
3.
As we move from xA to (xA + xB)/2, the probability of voting declines from
po + a|xA − xB| to po, and as we move from (xA + xB)/2 to xB, it increases from po
to po + a|xA − xB|. The dark line in Figure 4.3 illustrates this function for po = 0.
Now consider the remaining part of Figure 4.3, which, by way of a numerical
example, shows a symmetric and bimodal distribution of preferences for an
electorate of 67 voters. It might seem now that with this distribution of ideal
preferences, we’ve given the candidates a strong incentive to adopt policies away
from the median and that our assumptions about the likelihood of voting rein-
forces this incentive. However, to see that this is not the case—to see that the
median remains the unique Nash equilibrium to the associated two-candidate
majority rule game—suppose candidate B is at the median preference, policy
7, and that candidate A is at one of the two modes of the distribution, policy 3.
Notice first that, because the probability of voting is a constant (0) through the
electorate if A and B both choose the median, such convergence yields a tie in
which neither candidate receives any votes. Candidate A’s shift from the median
increases turnout, but the question is whether this shift produces a relative gain
for A. To see that the answer is “No,” notice that by moving to 3, A increases the
preference distribution
probability of voting
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Figure 4.3  Abstention from indifference

--- Sayfa 168 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  159
probability of voting to 1 for all voters at and to the right of the median, and
these voters prefer B. In addition, B gets additional expected votes from those
with ideal points at 6, and thereby is the expected victor. In fact, this move by
A yields B an expected vote of 36 and yields A an expected vote of 21, so A’s
expected plurality declines from zero to −12 if he shifts from the median to 3.
We appreciate the simplicity of this example, and a more realistic one should
consider more general utility functions in multidimensional issue spaces, as
well as other relationships between utility and probabilities of voting. One
alternative, for example, is to assume that rather than be concerned with
differences between the candidates, a potential voter’s decision as to whether or
not to vote depends on how satisfied they are with their most preferred candi-
date (such a model, assuming what we might call abstention from alienation, has
been examined and the conclusion is the same as what we offer here provided,
though, that the distribution of preferences is unimodal). Nevertheless, the
implications of this example are clear. First, a low turnout rate does not indicate
necessarily that there is something amiss in democracy. Indeed, it may indicate
that democratic institutions are working as intended and that low turnout is
the result of there not being rigidities in the system precluding one party or
the other from nominating an effective moderate candidate. High turnout,
on the other hand, might indicate that extremist activists have gained control
of a party and secured the nomination of candidates that are removed from the
mainstream of public opinion. We are reminded here of the fact that the elec-
tion in Germany that resulted in Hitler being appointed Chancellor was, in fact,
the highest turnout election of the Weimar regime. Minimally, our example
suggests that the failure of the two parties in a two-party system to nominate
candidates who offer distinct choices may be merely the logical consequence of
majority rule electoral institutions, and that it is incumbent upon those who
bemoan this fact to propose different institutions as well as good arguments
why median policies, in the abstract, are inferior to policies that lie nearer one
extreme or the other.
4.5  Multi-Candidate Elections
Perhaps the most glaring assumption in our discussion of elections that would
seem to make our analyses of marginal interest to people living in countries
other than the United States is that there are only two candidates or parties.
This assumption makes our analysis especially simple for two reasons: (1) We
can rely on the specialized results about two-person, zero-sum games as well as
about symmetric versions of those games; and (2) citizens are presented with a
relatively simple task of abstaining or voting for the candidate they most prefer
without having to concern themselves with voting strategically for second or
third choices. Once we admit the possibility of more than two candidates, how-
ever, a number of new questions arise:
1.
If parties or candidates are free to enter an election, what is the equilibrium
number of parties?

--- Sayfa 169 ---
160  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
2.
If parties or candidates are free to enter an otherwise two-party system,
what strategies will the two established parties adopt in anticipation of new
entrants or in the attempt to forestall entry?
3.
If the number of candidates exceeds two, what spatial positions if any are
in equilibrium?
4.
If voters must choose among more than two candidates, how can we
accommodate the fact that some voters may choose to vote for their
second-ranked candidate whenever their most-preferred candidate has
little chance of winning?
5.
If, to accommodate the possibility that with more than two candidates,
no candidate will secure an absolute majority of the vote, constitutional
designers implement a system wherein a runoff election is held between
the top two vote-getters if no one in fact wins a majority in the first bal-
loting, what impact will such a constitutional provision have on party or
candidate spatial positions?
Each of these questions is related to the others, and any general analysis must
answer the fourth question, for example, before it can satisfactorily answer the
first or the second. And at this point we must admit that we do not have gen-
eral answers to all of these questions. Instead, we can answer some by assum-
ing answers to the others. The opportunities for future research are made even
more apparent, moreover, if we realize that winner-take-all plurality rule is but
one voting procedure out of a vast array of possibilities. There are, of course,
the various forms of proportional representation where it isn’t candidates per
se who compete, but rather the parties themselves. Plurality rule itself is but
a special case of systems in which several candidates can be elected simulta-
neously from the same electorate. Even this system has multiple variants that
include allowing voters a single vote that they can cast for one candidate versus
allowing them to vote for more than one candidate. And in the event that elec-
tions are merely a preliminary step to the selection of a chief executive in the
context of a parliamentary system, voters must be concerned as well with how
their votes affect the subsequent process of coalition formation in parliament.
We cannot begin to address the vast array of possibilities here, nor can we
survey the research, however limited, that already exists about such matters.
Instead, by way of the more limited objective of illustrating the application of
zero-sum game theory and the notion of a Nash equilibrium, let us focus in a
simple way on the second question we list above—the strategies that two estab-
lished candidates take in anticipation of the entry of a third opponent.
Third Candidate Entry Under Plurality Rule: Assume that an election
concerns a single issue represented by the interval [0, 1], that all voters
vote sincerely for the candidate closest to their ideal, and that voter ideal
points are distributed uniformly on the interval [0, 1]. Even limiting our-
selves to plurality rule, we now have two possibilities. Either a third can-
didate is already in the race or such a candidate is merely threatening to
enter. Suppose first that there already are three candidates. In this case

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  161
it’s straightforward to see that there is no Nash equilibrium. If the can-
didates are positioned from left to right at A, B and C, then clearly both
A and C have an incentive to squeeze B between them. But at some point in
this process, the candidate at B will have an incentive to “jump out” from
between its opponents and render either A or C the squeezed competitor.
So let us now consider the situation where a third candidate is merely
threatening to enter and will do so only if it can win the election. If we stay
with the assumption of a uniform distribution of preferences and if indi-
vidual preferences are themselves symmetric in form, it is useful to note
that if x and y (x < y) are any two positions in the interval [0,1], then the
share of the vote between x and y is simply y – x. The first thing to ask now
is what positions for the existing two candidates guarantees that a third
entrant cannot win and thus will not enter. Let those positions be A and
B again with A < B and to simplify things here we will short-circuit some
algebra and simply assume that A and B are symmetric about the median,
1/2. Clearly, if entry is to occur it would not be to the left of A or right of B
since that would only throw the election to B or A respectively as it would
leave one of them with 1/2 the vote. So suppose that a third candidate, if it
enters, would do so by choosing a position between A and B. If it does, the
voters who would most prefer it lie in the interval [(A + C)/2, (B + C)/2]
so that its vote share equals (B + C)/2 – (A + C)/2 = (B – A)/2. However, if
this third candidate enters only if it can win, its best strategy is to enter pre-
cisely at 1/2, since entering to the right or left of the median leaves one of
its opponents with a positive plurality. Thus, the voters who prefer A with a
competitor at C = 1/2 all lie in the interval [0, (A + 1/2)/2], thereby giving
A’s share of the vote as (A + 1/2)/2 – 0 = A/2 + 1/4. The third candidate will
not enter then as long as A/2 + 1/4 > (B – A)/2. But we already know that
B is symmetrically opposite A relative to 1/2, or simply B = 1 – A. Thus,
some simple algebra gives us A > 1/6. That is, if A locates at 1/6 or greater
and B locates at 5/6 or less, a third candidate cannot win by entering the
competition.
Notice, though, that A > 1/6 is merely a sufficient condition for keeping
a third-party candidate from entering, which is not to say that (1/6, 5/6)
is a Nash equilibrium since there is nothing to keep either of the competi-
tors from moving toward the center. A strategy pair such as (0.25, 0.75) for
example, also keeps a third competitor out of the contest, as does the policy
pair (1/2 – δ, 1/2 + δ) for any arbitrarily small δ. Thus, as long as A and B
stay away from the extremes, a third-party candidate will not enter, but
there is no Nash equilibrium for the two original candidates.
Third Candidate Entry Under Majority Rule with a Runoff: Almost
certainly the most popular method for electing a chief executive by direct
vote is not simple plurality rule but rather majority rule with a runoff
whereby if no candidate receives 50% or more of the vote in the first round
of balloting, then a runoff is conducted between the two top vote-getters.
So consider this possibility and suppose a third party will not enter unless it
can secure at least a second place finish so that it can compete in the second

--- Sayfa 171 ---
162  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
round. Here, however, we will simplify our example by not considering the
possibility that voters vote strategically and will assume instead that they
simply vote for the candidate whose spatial position they most prefer. In
this case it is evident that the strategy pair (1/6, 5/6) won’t keep a third
competitor out of the race. All such a competitor need do is locate a bit
to the right of 1/6 or to the left of 5/6 and it is guaranteed a second-place
finish with one third of the vote while holding the top vote-getter to under
50%. Between the first and second rounds, it might then attempt a coali-
tion with the eliminated candidate in order to secure a majority in the
runoff.
To preclude this possibility we will continue to assume as before that
A and B are symmetric with respect to 1/2. If the third candidate enters, say,
to the immediate left of A, its vote share will be approximately A whereas if
it enters between A and B, its vote share will be (B – A)/2 as before. But now
we want to see if the two initial competitors can position themselves so
that a third entrant cannot come in second in the final vote count. First, to
see what value A should be set at to keep the potential entrant from enter-
ing to the immediate left of A, notice that if it does so, it wins slightly less
than the share A of the vote (A – 0 = A), whereas the candidate at A wins
slightly more than 1/2 – A of the vote. Thus, if we set A equal to 1/2 – A,
or simply A = 1/4, the third-party entrant cannot outpoll the candidate at
A and surely doesn’t outpoll the “unmolested” candidate at B. So instead
suppose the entrant tries to locate between A and B so as to win the vote
share (B – A)/2. Since this share is constant for any position between A and
B, its best chance of knocking off, say, A in the first round is to position its
platform as close to the right of A as possible without identically match-
ing A’s position. But this won’t work as long as A > (B – A)/2 or A > B/3.
But B = 1 – A, which means that if A = 1/4, B = 3/4 then a third candidate
cannot knock off either competitor and be a distinct choice. Thus, (0.25,
0.75) is a Nash equilibrium since any deviation from it results in the entry
of a third-party candidate and the elimination of one of the two original
candidates from a runoff.
Clearly the preceding analyses of three-candidate elections treat some quite
special cases: Preference distributions are uniform, the election concerns a
single issue and voters are precluded from voting strategically. Nor have we
considered elections with more than three candidates, and there is no reason
to assume that conclusions reached when the number of candidates equals
three carry over to when that number increases to four. If, for instance, there
are four candidates in our plurality rule case, the reader should confirm that,
although there is no Nash equilibrium with three candidates, there is an equi-
librium with four (with two candidates at ¼ and two at ¾). We have, never-
theless, learned something despite the limitations of our examples. It is often
argued, for example, that runoff elections encourage the formation of third
parties if only so that those parties can forestall a winner on the first ballot and

--- Sayfa 172 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  163
then subsequently trade its support for policy concessions. This may be true,
but our analysis reveals that it is not the whole story: If the two preexisting par-
ties show some strategic sophistication, and if third parties form in the hopes of
actually winning the election, then they can at least minimize the incentives for
third-party entry even if they cannot altogether eliminate those incentives. Our
analysis also suggests that while the threat of third-party entry need not keep
candidates in a plurality system from converging toward the electorate’s median
preference, a majoritarian system with a runoff might be more attuned with
those who prefer that parties and their candidates offer the electorate distinct
choices. Our examples, of course, only hint at such conclusions, but they once
again illustrate the utility of game theory for uncovering the forces that operate
in alternative electoral systems.
4.6  Candidate Objectives and Game-Theoretic Reasoning
In the 1960s and 1970s when various American industries were under assault
by Japanese firms, most notably in the automotive and electronics industries,
the charge was leveled by those experiencing an erosion of their market posi-
tions that the Japanese were “playing unfairly.” By ignoring their shareholders
and employing a longer-term strategy than the heads of American firms could
adopt, given their dependence on Wall Street’s quarterly evaluation of their
corporations (which, so the argument went, depended on immediate profits),
Japanese firms were afforded the opportunity to maximize short-term market
share with an eye to long-term profits. The fear was that if one’s competitors
could “unfairly” focus on market share, they could forgo short-term consider-
ations of profit in anticipation of ultimately monopolizing the market. This,
in turn, brought into question those textbook economic market models that
presumed profit maximization.
A similar issue arises in the modeling of elections with respect to assign-
ing objectives to candidates and parties. Earlier we note that absent any uncer-
tainty, and given the assumption of two candidates and an electorate in which
everyone votes, a variety of alternative assumptions about objectives are neces-
sarily equivalent. Under the stated conditions of the Median Voter Theorem,
maximizing votes, probability of winning, plurality and expected plurality are
all equivalent. That things might change, however, if we were to incorporate
uncertainty or non-voting into our models are suggested by Figure 4.4. This
figure offers two probability density functions, f1 and f2, defined over the range
of pluralities enjoyed by, say, candidate 1, where, holding constant the strategy
of the opponent, we suppose f1 prevails if candidate 1 chooses the strategy x1
and f2 prevails if he instead chooses x2. Since f1 and f2 are both drawn as sym­
metric densities, x1 yields a higher expected plurality, but x2, owing to the smaller
variance of f2, yields the greater probability of winning (the greater probability
of a positive plurality). It would seem, then, that the strategy a candidate adopts
will depend on which assumption best characterizes his objective: to maximize
the probability of winning or expected plurality.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
164  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
In a world of uncertainty, maximizing one’s probability of winning might
appear to be the more natural assumption. But suppose a candidate, like the
Japanese firms noted above, is concerned not simply with winning, but with
trying not to lose, if that is to be the outcome, by as small a margin as possible
because doing so might allow him to compete in a future election. However,
any conclusions we draw about objective functions from Figure 4.4 are flawed
since they take no account of the candidate’s opponent and how that opponent
might respond to the objectives of the candidate we are discussing. In other
words, drawing conclusions from Figure 4.4 commits the error of confusing
decision theoretic and game theoretic thinking. Asking whether alternative
objective functions are equivalent or different, then, should be restated to ask
whether the equilibria that prevail under one set of assumptions differ in any
way from the equilibria that prevail under an alternative set of assumptions.
To explore this possibility, suppose again for purpose of illustrating things,
that Pli(c1,c2), candidate i’s plurality as a function of the two candidate’s strate-
gies, c1 and c2, is a random variable. Thus, a candidate that maximizes probabil-
ity of winning maximizes Pr[Pli(c1,c2) > 0] whereas a candidate that maximizes
expected plurality maximizes E[Pli(c1,c2)]. The strategy pair (c1*, c2*), then, is
an equilibrium for candidates maximizing probability of winning if and only if
Pr[Pli(c1*,c2) > 0] > Pr[Pli(c1*,c2*) > 0] > Pr[Pli(c1,c2*) > 0]
(4.1)
for all c1 and c2. Similarly, the strategy pair (c1**, c2**) is an equilibrium under
expected plurality maximization if and only if
E[Pli(c1**,c2)] > E[Pli(c1**,c2**)] > E[Pli(c1,c2**)]
(4.2).
Now suppose that the distribution of Pli is symmetric about its mean for all
(c1, c2) and suppose in addition that the election itself is symmetric—if the
plurality
0
f1 with x1
f2 with x2
Figure 4.4  Questioning the equivalence of objective functions

--- Sayfa 174 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  165
candidates switch strategies, they switch payoffs. These two assumptions imply
that in equilibrium, the probability that plurality, Pli(c1*,c2*), exceeds zero
equals 1/2 and that expected plurality, E[Pli(c1*,c2*)], equals 0. That is,
Pr[Pli(c1*,c2*) > 0] = ½ and E[Pli(c1*,c2*)] = 0
From the assumption that (c1*,c2*) is a Nash equilibrium, expression (4.1)
requires that
Pr[Pli(c1*,c2) > 0] > Pr[Pli(c1*,c2*) > 0] = ½,
But if the distribution of Pli is symmetric about its mean, then if Pr[Pli(c1*,c2*)
> 0] = ½, it must be the case that E[Pli(c1*,c2*)] = 0 and whenever Pr[Pli(c1*,c2)
> 0] > ½, it must be that E[Pli(c1*,c2)] > 0. Similarly, if Pr[Pli(c1,c2*) > 0] < ½,
it must be the case that E[Pli(c1,c2*)] < 0. Putting these inequalities together
reveals that if (c1*, c2*) satisfies expression (4.1), it necessarily satisfies expres-
sion (4.2). A parallel argument establishes that if (c1**, c2**) satisfies expression
(4.2), it necessarily satisfies (4.1). Thus, under the assumption that uncertainty
occasions a symmetric distribution for the random variable Pli, if the elec-
tion itself is symmetric and thus provides for no inherent bias favoring one
candidate over the other, maximizing probability of winning and maximizing
expected plurality are equivalent objective functions—if a strategy pair is an
equilibrium under one objective function, it is an equilibrium under the other.
As with our other examples, we appreciate that the assumptions imposed
here—notably the symmetry of probability densities and of the election—are
limiting. But once again we also see how a decision theoretic perspective is mis-
leading and that any answers to questions pertaining to the equivalence of can-
didate objectives require a game theoretic analysis.
4.7  The Strategy of Introducing New Issues
Candidates in competitive elections do not merely jockey for position in some
issue space. They also attempt to increase the salience of issues on which they
hold an advantage and to downplay those issues on which their opponents
might be advantaged. Thus, in the 2012 American presidential contest, Obama
emphasized Romney’s past ties to his venture capital company, Bain, in the hopes
that the public would view Romney as but another greedy out-of-touch-with-
the-average-person capitalist. Romney, in contrast, emphasized the economy,
with its 8% unemployment and declining middle class incomes. Interestingly, it
would seem that both candidates danced carefully around events in Libya and
the killing of the American ambassador there. For Obama, what happened was
at best an embarrassment and display of administrative incompetence, if not
outright deception, whereas for Romney, an emphasis on foreign policy typi-
cally benefits an incumbent in American politics.
The most stark example of the tactic of issue salience manipulation comes
when a challenger attempts to unseat an incumbent when the incumbent

--- Sayfa 175 ---
166  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
otherwise holds an advantage on all issues of the day. To see what we mean
here, suppose an electorate with three voters is initially concerned with but a
single issue and suppose the incumbent has positioned himself during his ten-
ure in office at precisely the median preference. A challenger, then, would seem
to confront an insurmountable obstacle. If he or she adopts any other posi-
tion, they will lose the election. But if they simply match the incumbent, then
voters might reasonably conclude that there is no reason to vote against the
incumbent because the challenger is offering nothing new. What, then, can the
challenger do? The answer, historically at least, has been (for sufficiently skilled
challengers) to attempt to introduce a wholly new issue that somehow divides
the electorate in a way that eliminates the existence of a Condorcet winner and
thereby renders the incumbent vulnerable.
If things were this simple, of course, we should never observe incumbents
being reelected. So, for purposes of exploring some possibilities as a way to
illustrate the value of a spatial perspective, suppose the two candidate’s posi-
tions on the first (pre-existing) issue are fixed at xC for the challenger and at xI
for the incumbent, where xI is the median preference on that first issue and xC
is not equal to xI. Thus, neither candidate is afforded the luxury of being able to
adjust their positions on the first issue. Now consider Figure 4.5a whereby we
assume that a second (vertical) issue has been added that leaves the ideal prefer-
ence of the median voter unchanged but which shifts the ideals of voters 1 and
3 up. The question we can ask now is if the challenger is limited to positions on
the vertical line passing through xC, can the incumbent find a position on the
vertical line passing through xI that renders him invulnerable to the challenger.
And for the circular indifference curves in Figure 4.5a, the answer to our query
is yes. In that figure we have drawn two indifference contours, one for voter 1
and one for 2 such that both curves slightly miss the vertical line coming up
from xC. To win, the challenger must both retain the loyalty of voter 3 and win
that of voter 1 or 2. But notice that the indifference curves for 1 and 2 intersect
so that if the incumbent moves to any part of the darkened portion of the line
coming up from xI, the challenger cannot attract either voter. But now consider
Figure 4.5b. Here we leave voter 3 as he was in Figure 4.5a, but assume that voter
2’s preferences become ellipses owing to the salience (to him) of issue 2, and,
more critically, render voter 2’s preferences non-separable—2’s indifference
contours now correspond to “tilted ellipses.” Under this construction, the chal-
lenger can adopt the position A and, because the indifference contours of voters
1 and 2 through A do not intersect on the dashed line coming up from xI, the
incumbent has no winning response (for elaboration, see Dean Lacy and Niou,
“Nonseparable Preferences and Issue Packaging in Elections,” in N. Schofield,
G. Caballero, and D. Kselman, eds., Advances in Political Economy: Institutions,
Modeling, and Empirical Analysis, London: Springer, 2013: 203–15).
What we’ve learned here, then, is that not any additional issue can be used
to unseat an incumbent. To do so requires, first, an issue that moves some sub-
set of voters off the old line characterizing the original issue. And second, the
issue needs to “interact” in some way with the pre-existing issue so as to yield
non-separable preferences for some voters.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  167
There is, of course, little that is game theoretic in this discussion since all we
have done is to play with the geometry of spatial preferences. But what we do
show here is that a more complete game theoretic model of elections would
include strategies that, in addition to positions on the issues, also include what-
ever instruments are available to the candidates for the manipulation of issue
salience. Unfortunately, we have little guidance as to what those instruments
might be and thus how they function in a way that would allow for their formal
issue 1
issue 2
XI
XC
3
2
1
Figure 4.5a  Issue-by-issue median invariance
issue 1
issue 2
2
A
1
3
XI
XC
Figure 4.5b  Issue-by-issue median variance

--- Sayfa 177 ---
168  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
mathematical representation. If we did, then the authors of this volume might
abandon academic writing in favor of a career as political consultants.
4.8  Elections with Uninformed Voters
The election models that we’ve considered thus far in this chapter distort real-
ity in at least one other supremely significant way—they assume that voters
are perfectly informed about the candidates’ issue positions, and they suppose
that candidates know the criteria voters use to evaluate them. This is at best
a curious assumption in light of public opinion polls telling us that citizens
often vote without even knowing the candidates’ names, never mind their issue
positions. In an age when elections in particular and democratic institutions in
general appear to be in ascendancy worldwide as the preferred mechanism for
choosing governments and at least for rendering a government legitimate, it is
indeed reasonable to ask whether democracies can function effectively in less
than perfect information environments. What was the impact of Obama’s strat-
egy of denigrating Romney’s character and candidacy in the 2012 presidential
contest in lieu of revealing the policies he proposed to pursue if reelected? Why,
as Republicans claimed prior to the actual balloting, might “left-leaning poll-
sters” attempt to make Obama appear more competitive than he might actu-
ally have been and why did Republicans care about any potential liberal bias
in those polls? More generally, does the incomplete information of voters and
candidates merely open the door to an insidious use of money as the primary
currency of democracy? Do our informational shortcomings allow a hidden
“power elite” to control the state so that it can generate policies that benefit it at
the expense of everyone else?
Of course, given the small chance that a voter will be decisive in any mass
election, and given the cost of information, we should not be surprised by the
fact that voters are rationally uninformed. In choosing between learning about
a candidate’s likely performance if elected versus learning about which brand of
television is the better buy, it is not unreasonable to suppose that learning about
televisions is the more efficacious investment. Indeed, those voters who are
informed often appear to approach politics as a sport as they gather informa-
tion for the same reason that others memorize baseball batting averages, with
persons of both types approaching their subject with the understanding that
they have a nearly equivalent influence on outcomes. But consider the hypoth-
esis that voters can use relatively costless cues in deciding for whom to vote.
The party identification of a candidate has long been interpreted as such a cue.
However, partisan associations are based primarily on historical events, and the
particular hypothesis we want to explore here is whether citizens can learn to
vote by using relatively costless information that is generated during the course
of an election campaign—information such as interest-group endorsements
and public opinion polls that report answers to such questions as, “If the elec-
tion were held today, for whom would you vote?” The particular question we
address is whether we should be disturbed by the fact that citizens, in lieu of
reading every news item analyzing current events and in lieu of a thorough

--- Sayfa 178 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  169
analysis of each candidate’s record, often use seemingly irrelevant contem-
poraneous information to make their decisions about how to vote (e.g., “I
voted for ___ because my brother-in-law preferred ___,” or “I preferred ___
because ___ slanted the news in favor of the opponent”).
For a hint as to how we might proceed here, consider America’s 1964 Pres-
idential election and its 1980 contest. In the 1964 election, which pitted the
Democrat incumbent Lyndon Johnson against Senator Barry Goldwater, if we
were to summarize Johnson’s campaign by a single sentence it might be some-
thing like, “My opponent is a right-wing extremist and if you vote for him,
he’ll get us into a war.” Similarly, the election of 1980 pitted the incumbent
Democrat Jimmy Carter against Ronald Reagan, wherein the dominant theme
of Carter’s campaign could be summarized by the statement, “My opponent is
a right-wing extremist and if you vote for him, he’ll get us into a war.” It would
seem, then, that a voter who was uncertain as to whether the Republican chal-
lenger was or was not an extremist confronted an identical dilemma in both
contests. There was, however, a difference between these two elections. Spe-
cifically, if an uninformed voter consulted the nightly network news on televi-
sion, in 1964 he would consistently hear reports that gave Johnson a projected
margin of victory of approximately 60% versus 40% for his opponent. Such
numbers were consistent with the hypothesis (and Johnson’s claim) that if
Goldwater was not a right wing extremist, he was surely quite conserva-
tive in his proposed policies. In 1980, in contrast, those nightly news broad-
casts reported a far more competitive contest—one in which, as the election
approached, projected a dead heat or even a slight advantage for Reagan. This
information, then, seemed wholly inconsistent with what Carter was saying
about Reagan and might reasonably have led uninformed voters to conclude
that Carter’s characterization of his opponent was little more than electoral
campaign bombast.
Taking our cue from the comparison of these two elections, and to approach
the topic of elections with uninformed voters in a general way, suppose again
then that an election concerns a single issue and that voter preferences over this
issue look like the ones that set the stage for the Median Voter Theorem. That
is, suppose each registered voter has a well-defined ideal point on the issue and
his or her utility declines symmetrically as we move away from that ideal in
either direction. Rather than assume, however, that all citizens know the can-
didates’ positions on this issue, and following the line of research introduced
by Richard McKelvey and Ordeshook (in the 1985 article, “Elections with Lim-
ited Information: A  Fulfilled Expectations Model Using Contemporaneous
Poll and Endorsement Data,” Journal of Economic Theory June), suppose the
electorate consists of two types of voters: (1) those who are informed about
each candidate’s issue position and (2) those who are uninformed about such
things. Next, suppose that a poll is published announcing which candidate in a
two-candidate election is ahead and by how much.
The preference for one candidate or the other of an informed voter should
not be influenced by the poll. At most, such a poll is entertainment. But con-
sider the poll’s potential impact on uninformed voters in a way suggested by

--- Sayfa 179 ---
170  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
our comparison of America’s 1964 and 1980 presidential contests. That the
information contained in such a poll need not be irrelevant to their prefer-
ences over the candidates, consider an uninformed voter who regards himself
as preferring a position to the right of “center” on the election’s issue and who is
concerned that the “conservative” candidate fits the extremist portrait painted
by his or her liberal detractors. If asked to vote without any information, this
citizen might simply choose randomly or abstain. However, if responses to the
question “If the election were held today, for whom would you vote?” indicate
that public preferences are approximately evenly divided between the candi-
dates, then only two hypotheses are consistent with the poll’s estimate. The first
possibility, of course, is that few respondents know the candidates’ positions
and that the polls are meaningless. Barring this possibility, however, and sup-
posing that a “reasonable” proportion of those polled know where the candi-
dates are, then either (1) both candidates are extremists of the opposite sort or
(2) both candidates are near the median respondent.
If our uninformed voter assumes that the poll contains true information
about preferences and perceptions, then regardless of whether subcondition
(1) or (2) holds, the most likely possibility is that he or she is closer to the con-
servative than to the liberal candidate: It cannot be simultaneously true that
the poll’s respondents are informed and that the liberal is a moderate and the
conservative an extremist, because this circumstance would produce a poll that
shows the moderate holding a significant lead. Nor can it be true for the same
reason that the liberal is an extremist and the conservative is a moderate. Hence,
if this citizen reasonably infers a preference for the conservative and if this or
other similar people are polled in a subsequent survey—including the election
itself—they should no longer choose randomly but should hold a preference
for the conservative.
Now consider an electorate in which each citizen’s preferences on the issue
are described by simple distance from the citizen’s ideal point, so voters vote for
the candidate who they believe (perhaps incorrectly in the case of uninformed
voters) is closest to their ideal. For example, suppose the electorate is divided
evenly into uninformed and informed subparts and that the ideal point density
for each subpart is as shown in Figure 4.6 (fU(x) and fI,(x) respectively, with f(x)
being the overall preference density). With respect to the information available
to voters, informed voters are defined as those who know the positions of the
two candidates, say xA and xB. Uninformed voters do not know xA and xB but
suppose, on the basis of such things as interest-group endorsements or the can-
didates’ party labels, they know that xA < xB (they know that candidate A is the
“liberal,” and B the “conservative”).
If we look now at what might happen in a sequence of public opinion polls
that ask, “If the election were held today . . . ?” informed voters have a clear
preference. In particular, we have drawn fI(x) in Figure 4.6 so that 30% most
prefer A and 70% most prefer B. Suppose now that among the uninformed
voters included in the poll (and keep in mind that pollsters do not generally
sort respondents by whether they appear informed or uninformed), respon-
dents are loath to admit that they are uninformed and, therefore, that they

--- Sayfa 180 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  171
respond randomly. If, for purposes of an example, we now suppose that there
are approximately the same number of informed and uninformed voters, then
an initial poll produces the result shown in Table 4.1 under poll 1. Of course,
pollsters do not know who is informed or uninformed—they merely report the
aggregate (average) result, which in this instance is a forty-sixty split between
A and B.
To this point, the poll serves the interest of those who look at politics as a
spectator sport. But now, to show how a poll might be used by an uninformed
voter to make an informed decision, suppose that uninformed voters are armed
with one additional piece of information—namely, their preferences on the
issue relative to the population. That is, suppose each uninformed voter knows
what proportion of the overall electorate prefers policies to the right and to the
left of his or her ideal. This assumption, of course, credits uninformed voters
with knowledge they are unlikely to possess in precise detail, but it is not unrea-
sonable to suppose that they have an approximate idea of where they are relative
to the overall population—more liberal, more conservative, much more liberal,
etc. Our assumption merely formalizes this idea so as to allow a formal treat-
ment. Specifically, if an uninformed voter assumes that all others are informed,
then any such voter can (inaccurately) infer from the poll whether the midpoint
Table 4.1  Poll Sequence with Informed and Uninformed Voters
Poll 1
Poll 2
Poll n
A
B
A
B
A
B
informed
30%
70%
30%
70%
30%
70%
uninformed
50
50
72
28
92
8
reported
40
60
51
49
61
39
B
A
fU(x)
fI(x)
f(x)
xA + xB
2
x´´´A + x´´´B
2
x´´A + x´´B
2
x´A + x´B
2
Figure 4.6  Informed and uninformed electorates

--- Sayfa 181 ---
172  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
between the candidates is to the left or right of his or her ideal point. And this
inference, in combination with the knowledge of which candidate is to the left
of the other, allows that person to infer which candidate is closer to their ideal.
Thus, in our example, all uninformed voters with ideal points to the right of the
fortieth percentile (at (x’A + x’B)/2) will infer that candidate B is closer to their
ideal, and those to the left infer a preference for A.
Now consider what happens in a second poll. Informed voters, of course, are
unaffected by the poll results because they know the candidates’ positions and
so they continue to divide 30–70 between A and B. But uninformed voters no
longer choose randomly (although those between the 40th and 61st percentile
are choosing incorrectly), and if all such voters to the left of the 40th percen-
tile indicate a preference for A while all uninformed voters to the right of this
percentile indicate a preference for B, then, as Figure 4.6 shows, uninformed
voters divide 72–28. The overall poll as reported in Table 4.1 under poll 2, then,
is 51% for A, 49% for B (corresponding to the midpoint (x”A + x”B)/2). At this
point, uninformed voters with ideal points between the 40th and 51st percen-
tiles should change their preference from B to A on the basis of a re-estimate of
the position of the candidates’ midpoint relative to their ideal (in which case the
inferred midpoint now becomes (x’”A + x’”B)/2). That is, the link between polls
and inferred preference introduces a dynamic to the process, and the question
we should ask is whether this process ends at any particular point—is there a
poll that reproduces itself and toward which this dynamic inevitably moves?
Our answer to this question (ignoring some mathematical niceties) is that this
process converges (poll n as n goes to ∞) to a situation in which all uninformed
voters to the left of the actual midpoint vote for A and those to the right choose
B. That is, in equilibrium, all uninformed voters act like informed ones.
To see the logic of this result, notice first that if everyone somehow infers
the true midpoint, then any poll will necessarily reproduce itself and there-
fore it cannot cause any uninformed voter to revise his or her preference. Thus,
everyone somehow inferring the correct midpoint between the candidates is an
equilibrium to the adjustment process. That such a circumstance is the unique
equilibrium follows from the fact that if the midpoint assumed by uninformed
voters differs from what informed voters know, then a subsequent poll will
average these beliefs (in proportion to the percentage of uninformed versus
informed) and result in a new inferred midpoint that lies somewhere between
reality and the old inference. A succession of such averages, then, converges to
the true midpoint that was known originally only by informed voters. Thus, we
have described a situation in which voters act like simple decision makers who
condition their decisions on readily available information—in this instance, on
a guess, derived from the poll, as to which candidate is closer to their ideal
preference. Unlike a standard decision problem, though, information is endog-
enous so that actions in one period (poll) affect information in the next, which
in turn affects actions in the next period, and so on.
Turning now to the strategic problem that confronts the candidates, in decid-
ing what policy position to adopt at the beginning of their campaign, these

--- Sayfa 182 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  173
candidates might contemplate appealing only to informed voters. However, if
the candidates appreciate the role that polls can play, they should also appre-
ciate that uninformed voters can eventually act like informed ones. Perhaps
we should not be surprised, then, when we see candidates either attempting
to manipulate the polls to their own advantage—a possibility that is especially
troublesome in those countries in which the major sources of news have party
affiliations—or denying the validity of polls that show them doing poorly.
Overall, though, the candidates should plan on choosing the electorate’s overall
median preference, and in this way the relevance of the Median Voter Theorem
can be reasserted.
Substantively, the preceding analysis suggests that although the attention
paid to the mass media’s predictions in an election campaign may be evidence
that the electorate regards politics merely as a spectator sport, we cannot also
preclude the possibility that parts of the electorate find useful information in
those polls. We have reached this conclusion, of course, with a number of heroic
assumptions, the most serious being that the election concerns a single issue
and that uninformed voters know their relative placement on the issue. Thus,
if this model is to be genuinely useful, we must generalize it to accommodate
more issues as well as more realistic indirect information sources for voters. In
fact, this model can be generalized in the following way: Rather than suppos-
ing that uninformed voters know which candidate is to the left and which is to
the right, assume, in the case of an election that concerns a single issue, that
there are two identifiable subpopulations in the electorate whose preferences
are polled and reported separately, and assume that uninformed voters know
how preferences are distributed within each subpopulation. Uninformed vot-
ers can then use the poll results from each subpart to estimate the midpoint
between the candidates as well as their left-right orientation. This approach can
then be generalized to n issues by merely supposing that there are n + 1 such
subpopulations.
Any complete model, of course, should also incorporate the fact that many
voters use retrospective information in deciding how to vote, as they answer
such questions as, “Am I better off today than I was four years ago?” Neverthe-
less, our discussion does expand the relevance of the Median Voter Theorem,
and it shows one circumstance under which uninformed voters can learn to vote
correctly and thus, one circumstance under which the candidates will maintain
their incentive to converge to the median preference under less than “ideal”
conditions. In addition, the above model brings into question how we should
evaluate voter knowledge. The usual measure is how accurately voters identify
the policy positions of candidates or parties. The preceding model, however,
tells us that such information is inessential to casting a correct vote. What voters
need to know is which candidate is closest to them in terms of proposed poli-
cies, and learning that need not require knowing precise policy positions. In the
above model, a voter can infer what he or she needs in order to cast a correct
vote by being aware of his or her preferences relative to the electorate as a whole
and paying due attention to learning which candidate is ahead in the polls and

--- Sayfa 183 ---
174  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
by how much. Not only is information of this sort less costly to secure, but
models of the sort we have just discussed promise the possibility that there are
other relatively costless sources of information voters might use to make judg-
ments about candidates and parties. It is not difficult, for instance, to extend
the above model to multiple dimensions and to suppose that it isn’t the entire
electorate being sampled by pollsters but rather only specific identifiable sub-
groups (e.g., farmers, urban residents, unemployed, Hispanics, small business
owners, members of a specific political party, and so on) whose general policy
orientations are known and who an uninformed voter can then use to sequen-
tially estimate bisecting lines or (in the case of more than three dimensions)
hyper-lines in order to estimate which candidate is closest to their ideal. Such
models remain highly mathematically abstract and it is certainly a stretch to
suppose that voters who are otherwise uninformed about party and candidate
policy positions are nevertheless capable of undertaking the econometric and
statistical tasks assigned to them in the preceding analysis. Nevertheless, that
analysis suggests that democratic elections may be far more robust than studies
of voter information might otherwise lead us to believe.
4.9  Other Applications
Because this chapter is intended to demonstrate the relevance of zero-sum
games to politics, our applications here of spatial preferences focus on electoral
competition between political parties or their candidates. There is, though,
no reason to suppose that such preferences apply only to voters or that other
alternative electoral schemes cannot be usefully studied with such preferences.
With respect to this latter point, Romer and Rosenthal (in their 1978 article,
“Political Resource Allocation, Controlled Agendas, and The Status Quo,” Pub-
lic Choice 33 and in their 1979 article, “Bureaucrats Versus Voters: On the Politi-
cal Economy of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 93) employ a spatial conceptualization of preferences to show how
those in control of the alternatives voters might confront in public referenda
can induce outcomes other than median preferences. Specifically, suppose a
referendum on, say, school budgets, is conducted wherein if a budget proposed
by a school board is not approved by the electorate, the school district’s bud-
get reverts to some predetermined value. Instead of choosing between candi-
dates, voters then are choosing between the proposed budget and the reversion.
And if school bureaucrats are intent on securing the largest budget possible,
it is in their interest to make the reversion as draconian and unacceptable as
possible—perhaps even $0. Romer and Rosenthal, in fact, go beyond this to
study referenda in which school bureaucrats are allowed to call for a succession
of budget referenda wherein the reversion takes hold only if proposed bud-
gets are defeated at the polls a fixed number of times. This, then, establishes an
interesting game between bureaucrats and voters wherein bureaucrats, unsure,
perhaps, of the electorate’s preferences, use the succession of referenda to see
how large a budget is feasible, but where voters, aware of the self-interest of

--- Sayfa 184 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  175
bureaucrats and interested in minimizing their taxes without undercutting a
viable public education system, understand the game that is being played.
In a wholly different context, Klevorick and Kramer (in their 1972 Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper, “Social Choice on Pollution Management: The
Genossenschaften,” Cowles Foundation, Yale University) examine a particularly
imaginative mechanism for controlling pollution along the Rhine River in Ger-
many wherein regional pollution control boards, consisting of representatives
from industry and from the towns and villages affected, vote on an effluent tax
rate. The particular twist here is that preferences for alternative tax rates are
derived mathematically from more fundamental preferences relating to, in the
case of industry, profits and the costs of pollution control, and for towns and
villages, from the impact of effluent charges on household budgets, and shown
to have a spatial representation. However, the innovative feature of Germany’s
Genossenschaften is that the relative voting weights of industry versus residents
of the affected towns and villages are endogenously determined as a function of
taxes paid—the greater the taxes paid, the greater is one’s voting weight. Assum-
ing that majority rule operates over the sole dimension of tax rate, Klevorick
and Kramer then establish that such a system has an equilibrium—that tax
rates and voting weights do not necessarily cycle endlessly.
Romer, Rosenthal, Klevorick and Kramer thereby illustrate the application
of spatial preferences to situations that go beyond simple plurality or major-
ity rule elections, and indeed, there is no reason to even limit spatial prefer-
ences to voters. Later in this volume, for instance, we assume such preferences
hold for members of a committee such as a legislature. We think, moreover,
that by now the reader can see how a spatial structure might be applied to, say,
understanding the decisions of a supreme or constitutional court wherein a
court’s members can be described as liberal or conservative, left-leaning versus
right-leaning, sympathetic to government expansion versus more concerned
with strict interpretations of individual rights. The discussion of such things,
though, will be postponed until after we consider a more fundamental problem
of collective action.
4.10  Key Ideas and Concepts
maxmin
minmax
Plott theorem
McKelvey’s “Chaos Theorem”
McKelvey’s 4r ball
redistributive politics
abstention from indifference
abstention from alienation
equivalent objectives
unimodal preferences
limited information elections

--- Sayfa 185 ---
176  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
Exercises for Chapter 4
1.
A (row chooser) and B (column chooser) must play the following 2 × 2 game:
8, −8
4, −4
2, −2
6, −6

Beforehand, B can pay four dollars to a third person to learn A’s decision.
a.
Draw the full extensive form, assuming that A does not know whether
or not B purchased the information.
b.
Portray the corresponding strategic form.
c.
Solve the game for equilibrium strategies.
2.
Games A – C are all zero sum. (Payoffs are to row chooser.) What is the
expected value of game A for row chooser?
b1
b2
a1
40
Play game B
a2
Play game B
Play game C
Game A
t1
t2
s1
10
40
s2
60
30
Game B
t1
t2
s1
40
30
s2
30
60
s3
40
20
Game C
3.
Does the following zero-sum strategic form game possess a pure strategy
equilibrium (games within cells are played if that cell is realized as a result
of players’ initial strategies)?
b1
b2
b3
a1
10
  1
  3
6
  4
  2
a2
  7
10
10
20
6
  6
  5
  5
10
a3
  8
  5
5
4.
The Median Voter Theorem states that if an election concerns one issue,
the median preference of the electorate is an equilibrium in the sense that
it cannot be beaten in a majority vote and that in two-candidate contests,
both candidates should adopt the median preference as their platform. We

--- Sayfa 186 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  177
also know that there is no such equilibrium with three candidates if those
candidates choose their platforms simultaneously. However, is there a pure
strategy equilibrium with four candidates? To simplify your argument,
assume that the voter ideal points are spread out uniformly across the elec-
tion issue, and assume either an even or odd number of voters, whichever
facilitates your analysis.
5.
Suppose two presidential election candidates, who maximize their prob-
ability of winning, must decide how to allocate three days among six states.
Whoever allocates the most time to a state wins that state and whoever
wins the most electoral votes wins the election. The states’ electoral votes
are as follows: 27, 27, 24, 18, 2, and 2. Assume that all ties are broken by a
coin toss and that transportation technology renders days non-divisible.
a.
Does the corresponding two-candidate election game have a Nash
equilibrium in pure strategies?
b.
Does your answer change if the three largest states have the same elec-
toral weight?
c.
Does your answer to part (a) change if days are divisible?
6.
Suppose there are six voters, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, who are all concerned with
the same issue, who have most-preferred positions that are ordered the
same as their labels (i.e., 1 most prefers the leftmost position and 6 the
rightmost position), and who have single-peaked preferences on this issue.
Also, suppose that weighted voting is used and that voter i has i votes. If
two plurality-maximizing candidates are free to adopt any position on the
issue as their election platform, and if all of the conditions for the Median
Voter Theorem are otherwise satisfied, which voter’s ideal point will they
adopt as their platform?
7.
In addition to choosing a policy on the real line, suppose the candidates can
also try to mask their positions by presenting themselves as lotteries—as
probability distributions over the feasible policy space. Suppose that two
parameters—the mean and variance—characterize a candidate’s strategy
(such as when that strategy corresponds to a normal density function),
and that voter i’s utility for position x is ui(x) = −(xi − x)2. Describe the
two-candidate election equilibrium if all other provisions of the Median
Voter Theorem apply.
8.
Consider a twenty-five voter electorate that is distributed across five dis-
tricts (A, B, C, D, E). Five voters live in each district, and each voter is
identified by his or her district (e.g., each “a” lives in A) and his or her ideal
point on the policy X = [1, 9]. Suppose the ideal points of the voters are as
follows:
x = 1
x = 2
x = 3
x = 4
x = 5
x = 6
x = 7
x = 8
x = 9
b
b
b
a
a
a
a
a
d
e
c
c
b
b
c
c
d
d
e
c
e
d
d
e

e

--- Sayfa 187 ---
178  Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences
All voters have single-peaked preferences. The electorate chooses a pol-
icy on X by using the following procedure: First, using majority rule, vot-
ers within each district choose a legislator from two possible candidates,
where these candidates compete by choosing positions on X. Second, the
five legislators, who are constrained to most prefer the policy they advo-
cated in getting elected and to offer that policy as a proposal before the full
legislature, meet and must decide, by majority rule, which point on X will
be the new policy.
a.
Tell which policy will be chosen, assuming that all legislators are
sophisticated and choose an agenda at random from the set of pos-
sible binary agendas, and explain why.
b.
How does your answer to (a) change if states A and D and the voters
in them are eliminated?
c.
How does your answer to (a) change if states C and E and the voters in
them are eliminated?
9.
Consider a nine-voter electorate in which voter i’s ideal point on the
issue equals i. Suppose a two-candidate election is held and that all of the
assumptions needed for the median voter result hold except that candidate
I must choose voter 3’s ideal point as his stated policy. Candidate II has no
such restriction.
a.
Who wins the election?
b.
Below are four possible descriptions of the outcome. Decide which of
the following statements are true.
i.
The median voter’s ideal point must be the outcome.
ii.
The median voter’s ideal point cannot be the outcome, but an-
other voter’s ideal point can be the outcome.
iii.	 The median voter’s ideal point cannot be the outcome and nei-
ther can any other voter’s ideal point.
iv.	 Either the median voter’s ideal point or another voter’s ideal
point can be the outcome.
10.	 Suppose an electorate consists of five votes with the following preferences
over the three platforms that each of two candidates might choose:
voters 1 and 2:
A
B
C
voter 3:
A
C
B
voters 4 and 5:
C
B
A
Suppose each voter, after each candidate (simultaneously) chooses his or her
platform, votes for his or her preferred candidate with probability p and for the
opponent with probability 1 − p, p > 1/2. If a voter is indifferent, p = 1/2. What is
the final outcome (A, B, or C) if both candidates maximize their expected plurality?
11.	 Consider the following twenty-nine player game, where two players (I and
II) are candidates and the other players, (1, 2, …, 27), are voters. Candidates

--- Sayfa 188 ---
Zero-Sum Games with Spatial Preferences  179
will compete for office by using one of four possible campaign strategies
(A, B, C, D) to recruit voters who will vote for them. The outcome of the
election will be determined by which of the two candidates has recruited
the most voters. In the first stage of the game, the two candidates simul-
taneously choose one of the four campaign strategies. For some combi-
nations of campaign strategy choices (BB, CC, DB), the candidates must
debate. Candidates choose debate strategies simultaneously, but afterward
they both learn the other’s campaign strategy. Below is a table that shows
the results of different combinations of campaign strategies. The cell values
represent the number of voters recruited by candidate I (row chooser); 27
minus the cell value equals the number of voters recruited by candidate II
(column chooser).

A
B
C
D
A
15
  3
21
  7
B
  9
12
27
  5
13
  0
15
C
17
19
24
17
23
14
18
D
11
12
13
27
11
11
14
After the campaign, the winner of the election is determined by majority
rule. Thus, the candidate that recruits a majority of voters, wins the election.
a.
Which candidate wins the election?
b.
If campaign laws are changed so that strategy D cannot be chosen,
which candidate wins the election?
12.	 In a seven-person electorate, all election outcomes depend on the candi-
date’s positions on one policy dimension, and the ideal point of voter i
on this dimension, xi, equals i. All voter utility functions are of the form
ui = −|W − xi|2 where W is the policy position of the winning candidate and
xi is voter i’s ideal point. In this electorate, there are two political parties.
Voters 1, 2, and 7 are in party X. Voters 4, 5, and 6 are in party Y. Voter 3 is
in neither party. There are four possible candidates: X1, X2, Y1, and Y2. Party
X uses majority rule to nominate X1 or X2. Party Y uses majority rule to
nominate Y1 or Y2. All voters then choose from among the two nominated
candidates to determine W, the policy position of the winning candidate.
Assume that all assumptions necessary for the Median Voter Theorem hold
except in the case where they conflict with the statement of the question.
Use the concept of Nash equilibrium to find the possible locations of W in
the following two situations.
a.
Voters are nonstrategic when nominating a candidate.
b.
Voters are strategic when nominating a candidate.

--- Sayfa 189 ---
5
The Prisoners’ Dilemma
and Collective Action
5.1  The Prisoners’ Dilemma
The primary Continental European powers in 1914—the “great powers” of
France, Germany, Austria and Russia—each faced a dilemma. With tensions
among them running high for a variety of reasons, each knew that whoever
mobilized first for war would possess a powerful strategic advantage should war
actually break out. Given the technology of warfare and transportation at the
time, the mobilization of armies took weeks. Troops had to be mustered, armed
and collected at disembarkation points, food and ammunition supplies gath-
ered, and transportation networks coordinated to move men and material to
the places conflict was most likely. It was also understood that being the first to
mobilize meant that any war would be fought on someone else’s territory, and it
was also understood that mobilization signaled a belief that war was imminent,
since no country could afford to maintain an indefinite state of mobilization
without seriously damaging morale, its economy and perhaps even the surviv-
ability of its regime. Thus, while all states might have preferred to avoid war
(a questionable assumption in the case of Austria), the current system of alli-
ances was all that was needed to ensure that the dilemma was played out fully:
If Austria attacked Serbia, Russia was bound to defend Serbia. Germany was
not only allied to Austria in its defense, but was concerned that if it waited too
long for the inevitable conflict to arise, Russia would complete the building-out
and upgrading of its rail system, making mobilization of that giant even easier.
France, in turn, was allied with Russia and in any conflict between Germany
and Russia that led to German mobilization, France could not lag because Ger-
many remained France’s arch enemy and primary strategic threat. Britain was
not tied firmly to any of these alliances, but it was the primary guarantor of
Belgian neutrality, and it was through Belgium that Germany was most likely
to advance on France. The Kaiser’s decision, moreover, to upgrade Germany’s
fleet was, from the British perspective, a form of mobilization to which it was
especially sensitive.
The dilemma to which we refer here has a name—the Prisoners’ Dilemma
(PD)—though it gets that name from a different, more fictionalized scenario.
In fact, of all the games that have drawn the attention of social scientists and,
in turn, given game theory visibility in the social sciences among those who

--- Sayfa 190 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   181
Thus, by turning state’s evidence and confessing, a prisoner can greatly
reduce the sentence he must serve. If one is the sole prisoner to turn state’s
evidence, suppose the deal struck with the prosecutor is to have all charges
dropped so that one’s accomplice must serve a full prison term of 10 years.
However, if both prisoners confess, each confession is worth less, in which case
all that’s secured is a reduced sentence of 7 years. If neither confesses, the pros-
ecutor cannot convict for the ostensible crime, but the prosecutors, being who
they are, are sufficiently enraged that they are able to secure a conviction for a
minor offense with a prison term of 2 years. The incentive of both prisoners
now is clear—regardless of what the other does, it’s in one’s interest to confess.
Regardless of what blood oaths might have been sworn to before being locked
in their separate cells, each prisoner can reason “I agreed never to rat on my
partner, but if he finks out and I stick to the agreement, off I go for 10 years;
and if he doesn’t rat, I can escape prison entirely. It would be pretty nasty of
me to rat, but what if he does and I don’t? And he just might do that because
he confronts the same incentive to do so as I do.” The end result, of course, is a
Nash equilibrium outcome that both prisoners prefer to avoid, (–7,–7), in favor
of some other possibility.
Of course, the Prisoners’ Dilemma would be of little interest if its application
were confined to prisoners. But, as we’ve already suggested in referring to the
motives of political elites leading up to WWI, this game has had broad applica-
tion and allows us to understand such things as the reason why people might
agree to the establishment of a state that has the power to coerce them, why col-
lectivities sometimes seem to act in ways that are irrational from the perspective
of the individuals involved, why various industries might even lobby to be regu-
lated by government, why governments regulate and license barbers and taxi
cab drivers but do little in the way of regulating automobile safety aside from
requiring the installation of seat belts, why our actions can depend critically on
whether we anticipate interacting with the same person again in the future, why
the simple basic act of voting in a democracy can be a difficult thing to explain,
why labor unions and various associations often offer low cost life insurance to
otherwise have minimal interest in that theory, none can compete with the one
we call the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Its name derives from a scenario in which two
criminals have in fact jointly committed a crime, but to successfully prosecute
them, the prosecutor needs a confession. To that end he has them locked in
separate cells so that they can no longer directly communicate and offers each
the deal of a reduced sentence if they confess. Payoffs, stated in terms of years
incarcerated, might then look as follows:
Confess
Don’t confess
    –7
    –7,
0, –10
–2,   –2
0
–10,
Confess
Don’t confess
Figure 5.1  The classic Prisoners’ Dilemma

--- Sayfa 191 ---
182  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
their members, why attempts at reforming the economy of one society prove
to be a success whereas similar reforms applied elsewhere lead to massive inef-
ficiency and corruption, and why nations sometimes war even when they might
prefer other means of resolving disputes.
The universality of Prisoners’ Dilemma-type situations is no better illus-
trated than the example from Chapter 1 of the school of herring that forms
a swirling ball when approached by predators, only to offer those predators a
ready and efficiently consumed target. The optimal strategy for the school, of
course, is to scatter itself in every direction, thereby thinning out so a predator
can, at best, consume a fraction of the species and perhaps even exhaust itself in
the process. Each individual fish in the school has two choices: Swim away from
the others or attempt to move to the center of the slowly shrinking ball so as to
not be the first to be eaten and perhaps hope that predators will sate themselves
before the ball is fully consumed. It seems reasonable to suppose now that stay-
ing put and/or trying to move into whatever remains of the swirling ball yields
a higher chance of survival than attempting to flee does, regardless of what all
others of your species do. If some or all others attempt to flee, predators will
be preoccupied picking off those swimming in their direction. If few or none
attempt to flee, then by being one of the few defectors, one becomes an invit-
ing target for predators. So in either case, it seems best to stick to the swirling
ball. In this context we are reminded once again of Pastor Martin Niemöller’s
famous quote in reference to the crimes committed by the Nazis with which
we introduce Chapter 2. Implicit in the moral lesson Niemöller offers is the
idea that if people fail to act when not personally and immediately threatened,
it is because the seemingly safe course is to keep one’s head down—to try, as
with the threatened school of fish, to swim to the center of the swirling ball. Of
course, if everyone acts in accordance with this reasoning so that no one has an
incentive to be the first to oppose the rise of authoritarianism, the end result is
that everyone suffers.
As we suggest in the introduction to this chapter, an earlier dilemma gripped
Europe’s imperial powers at the outbreak of World War I. Summarizing in her
seminal history of the outbreak of that war, The Guns of August, Barbara Tuch-
man wrote, “War pressed against every frontier. Suddenly, dismayed govern-
ments struggled and twisted to fend it off. It was no use. Agents at frontiers were
reporting every cavalry patrol as a deployment to beat the mobilization gun.
General staffs, goaded by their relentless timetables, were pounding the table
for the signal to move lest their opponents gain an hour’s head start. Appalled
upon the brink, the chiefs of state who would be ultimately responsible for
their country’s fate attempted to back away but the pull of military schedules
dragged them forward” (New York: Macmillan Co., 1962: 72). In its absolutely
simplest form, then, as represented by a 2-person game, the circumstances con-
fronting Europe’s Great Powers did not look much different than the game in
Figure 5.2, which is virtually identical to Figure 5.1.
Other examples of the Prisoners’ Dilemma abound in the literature, both
academic and classical. For readers of a more classical bent, consider Pucci-
ni’s opera Tosca in which the chief of police (Scarpia) condemns Tosca’s lover

--- Sayfa 192 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   183
(Cavaradossi) to death but offers to save him in exchange for Tosca’s favors.
Tosca consents. The problem as posed offers Tosca two alternatives: keep the
bargain, or double cross Scarpia by stabbing him when he comes to her. Simi-
larly, Scarpia must decide whether to issue blank or live ammunition to the fir-
ing squad that Cavaradossi will face. If the bargain is kept, Tosca’s satisfaction in
getting her lover back will be marred by her surrender to Scarpia, and Scarpia’s
satisfaction is diminished by having to reprieve his rival. If Tosca double-crosses
Scarpia and gets away with it, she wins most and he loses most; and vice versa.
If both double-cross, both lose, but not so much as each would have lost had
he or she alone kept the bargain. To see now how this situation corresponds
to a dilemma, let us choose some arbitrary numbers that nevertheless seem
reasonable and consistent with ordinal preferences, and let Tosca be the row
chooser and Scarpia be the column chooser, so that we arrive at the game illus-
trated in Figure 5.3. Notice now that we can assign payoffs in such a way that
both players have a dominant strategy—to double-cross the other. However, if
both double-cross, then an outcome prevails, (−15, −15), that is inferior to both
keeping the bargain.
5.2  Some Simple Dilemmas in Politics
The Logic of Term Limits: The political processes that mimic the Prisoners’
Dilemma in form are vast and we can survey only a few. But first, the thing to
keep in mind is that there is no reason to suppose that dilemmas are limited to
the interaction of two persons. Consider, for example, the issue of legislative
term limits as it arises in countries with single-member district representation.
Here the thing to be understood is why voters would want to tie their hands
and preclude the opportunity to reelect their representative to parliament or the
legislature. After all, by imposing a limit on the number of terms a politician can
serve, voters are foregoing the potential benefit of being represented by an expe-
rienced and ostensibly skilled individual. The answer to such queries, though,
is offered by the following scenario. Suppose a legislature consists of n (odd)
Mobilize
Don’t mobilize
–20,
–20
–10, –10
10
0
0,
10,
Mobilize
Don’t mobilize
Figure 5.2  World War I dilemma
Keep bargain
Double-cross
–10, –10
–20
–20, 20
–15,–15
 20,
Keep bargain
Double-cross
Figure 5.3  Puccini’s Tosca

--- Sayfa 193 ---
184  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
representatives, and suppose that in any given session of the legislature each rep-
resentative can place on the agenda a proposal to fund a project for his or her
district at national expense—a bridge, a highway, a publicly funded hospital,
and so on. Suppose each such project costs C and yields the benefit B, where that
cost is borne by all constituencies but the benefit accrues only to the constitu-
ency in question. Also, suppose that such projects are funded if and only if a
majority of the legislature approves of them as a package. Now let the voters in
each constituency choose between two candidates: The first is certain to propose
such a project for his or her district whereas the second is opposed to such proj-
ects with the argument that they are an inefficient use of taxpayer dollars. The
situation confronting voters, then, can be represented as shown in Figure 5.4
(our example here is taken from the 1985 article by Niou and Ordeshook, “Uni-­
versalism In Congress,” American Journal of Political Science 29(2) = 246 –258).
To see how the entries in this table are calculated, if X, the number of legisla-
tors proposing a program for their constituencies, is less than (n – 1)/2, then
even if the constituency in question elects a representative who will propose a
benefit, the number of legislators doing so remains less than a majority—in
which case we suppose no such projects are funded. If precisely (n – 1)/2 other
representatives propose a benefit for their districts, then the voters of the dis-
trict in question (row chooser) are pivotal for determining whether or not there
is a majority favoring such programs. If those voters choose a legislator who
will propose a program, they receive the benefit B, but at a cost of the (n + 1)/2
funded programs, (n + 1)C/2, which is shared across all n constituencies. Finally,
if a majority within the legislature proposes and approves of such projects
regardless of who the voters from the constituency in question elect, those vot-
ers will or will not get the benefit B depending on who they elect at a cost of
their share of all programs approved. Notice now that electing a legislator who
will propose a program (weakly) dominates the alternative if, when the constit-
uency in question is pivotal, B – (n + 1)C/2n > 0, or equivalently for large legis-
lators (where (n + 1)/n is approximately equal to 1.0), if B > C/2. Thus, if C > B
> C/2, voters in each constituency are caught in a Prisoners’ Dilemma: All have
an incentive to choose a representative who will propose an economically inef-
ficient program for his or her constituents, but with everyone doing so, the final
outcome has every constituency suffering a net loss of B – C < 0. And because
X < (n – 1)/2 other
legislators propose
a program for their
constituencies
Precisely (n – 1)/2 other
legislators propose
a program for their
constituencies
X > (n – 1)/2 other
legislators propose
a program for their
constituencies
Choose a legislator
who will propose a
benefit  for the district
0
B – (n + 1)C/2n
B – (X + 1)C/n
Choose a legislator
who will not propose a
benefit for the district
0
0
–XC/n
Figure 5.4  Term limits and inefficient public programs

--- Sayfa 194 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   185
it is a dilemma, no constituency has an incentive to unilaterally vote otherwise.
Term limits, so the argument goes, short-circuit this tendency to inefficiency
by removing the incentive of legislators to sponsor the narrow interests of their
constituents by removing their opportunity to pursue reelection.
Vote Trading in Legislatures: The preceding discussion of the ostensible
logic of term limits recognizes the fact that, in representing their constitu-
ents, individual legislators are often in the business of seeking votes for things
that, while beneficial to their constituents, are, ceteris paribus, opposed by a
majority of legislators. Thus, legislation often proceeds by trading votes—a
legislator gives up control over one or more pieces of legislation in exchange
for support on something else. To see, now, the sorts of dilemmas that vote
trading can yield, suppose three legislators (1, 2, and 3) are contemplating the
disposition of bills A, B, C, D, E, and F, where their payoffs from each bill’s pas-
sage are as shown in Table 5.1 (a bill’s defeat pays 0, and let payoffs be additive
across bills).
Notice that if all three legislators vote their preferences, all bills pass in a
majority vote and each legislator (or, hopefully, their constituents) earns +2.
Suppose, however, that legislator 1 sees that his loss from having D pass exceeds
his gain from having C pass and that exactly the opposite is true for legislator
2. Thus, 1 might propose that he and 2 trade votes on these bills, with 1 voting
against C and 2 reciprocating by voting against D in order to defeat both mea-
sures. Having consummated this trade, 1 sees a similar opportunity with legis-
lator 3 with respect to bills E and F, whereas 2 sees just such an opportunity with
3 on bills A and B. If all trades are made, though, no bills pass, and each legisla-
tor’s payoff, 0, is less than what he or she gets if no trading had occurred. Given
the inefficiency of unrestrained vote trading, suppose each legislator considers
refraining from such activity, hoping that others will do the same. This possibil-
ity yields the game in Figure 5.5, where “trade” means exhibiting a willingness
to trade with anyone who signals the same willingness, “refrain” means being
unwilling to trade with anyone, and where profitable trades require the agree-
ment of two legislators. As this figure shows, trading is a dominant strategy, so
the outcome (0, 0, 0) seems unavoidable (barring, of course, coalitional deals to
deliberately exclude one legislator from making any deals).
Table 5.1  A 6-Bill Opportunity for Vote Trading
Legislator
Payoff from Bill’s Passage
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
  3
  3
  2
−4
−4
  2
2
  2
−4
−4
  2
  3
  3
3
−4
  2
  3
  3
  2
−4

--- Sayfa 195 ---
186  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
America’s Electoral College: Although, as we noted earlier, the U.S. Consti-
tution affords each state the authority to determine how its Electoral College
vote can be apportioned among the candidates competing for the presidency
and vice presidency, the states themselves, in an effort to increase their impor-
tance in early presidential contests, converged incrementally to winner-take-all
systems whereby the party slate with a plurality of the popular vote in a state
wins all of that state’s electoral vote. Over time, however, this has left any num-
ber of relatively uncompetitive states feeling as if they are being ignored dur-
ing a presidential campaign. Why, for example, campaign in California, despite
its 55 votes in the Electoral College, when the outcome there between Demo-
crats and Republicans seems pre-ordained? Why not instead campaign in New
Hampshire, with its 4 electoral votes, since the outcome there can hang on who
visited that state last? As a consequence, a number of states, including Califor-
nia, have joined a movement to change the system so as to either elect electors
by district or allocate a state’s Electoral College vote proportionally in accord
with the popular vote. The proverbial fly in the ointment here, however, is that
uncompetitive states such as California are largely controlled by the dominant
party and a shift to proportional allocation can only benefit the opposition.
Thus, heavily Democratic California has little desire to unilaterally defect from
current arrangements unless it is joined by a populous state such as Texas that
favors the opposition. The individual states, then, are trapped in a dilemma,
with no one or two of them willing to defect from the status quo. As a con-
sequence, a number of them (totaling 132 Electoral College votes as of 2012)
have passed legislation mandating a shift to proportional allocation ONLY IF
the Electoral College weight of the states signing onto this compact totals a
majority, 270 Electoral votes. It remains to be seen whether the states here are
caught on the horns of a constitutional dilemma wherein the U.S. Constitution
prohibits them from “enter[ing] into any Agreement or Compact with another
State . . .” (Article I, section 10), but it’s clear they recognize that the incentives
of the status quo have them playing a Prisoners’ Dilemma.
Grading on a Curve: For an example of an admittedly contrived dilemma
that perhaps strikes closer to home for the readers of this volume, consider
again the example, briefly discussed in Chapter 1 to illustrate the difference
between decision and game theoretic decision making, of the professor who
grades on a curve and, aiming for an average grade of B, grades on the basis of
a mid-term and final exam weighted equally. Now consider the unlikely event
Legislator 3
Trade
Refrain
Legislator 2
Legislator 2
Trade
Refrain
Trade
Refrain
Trade
Refrain
0, 0, 0
−4, 4, 4
4, 4, −4
2, 2, 2
4, −4, 4
2, 2, 2
2, 2, 2
2, 2, 2
Figure 5.5  A vote trading dilemma

--- Sayfa 196 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   187
that every student in the class receives precisely the same grade of 85 out of 100
(a B) on the midterm exam. The dilemma confronting students now is whether
to study for the final. If none study and instead engage in a variety of more plea-
surable social activities, each will receive the same grade of B because the overall
curve for the class will not change. So suppose the students, meeting before or
after class, agree among themselves not to study. Now comes the night before
the exam when each student must decide, in the privacy of their dormitory
room, whether or not to abide by the agreement. Here, though, each can reason
thus: “If I study and few others do, I’ll get an A whereas if most others study I’ll
keep my B. And although I’ll keep my B if I don’t study and all others abide by
the agreement, even if only a few of my classmates defect and study, my grade
will drop to a C.” The students, then, are in a dilemma wherein studying, despite
whatever agreements they’ve reached beforehand, is the dominant strategy.
Gulags, Famines and Vote Fraud: Other instances of the Prisoners’ Dilemma
can be both more real and far more sinister. We have, for example, the following
observation about Stalin’s purges during his reign of terror in the 1930s:
Stalin and [NKVD head] Yezhov wanted “the direct physical liquidation of
the entire counter-revolution” . . . [and] the revised quotas were sent back
down from Moscow to the regions . . . Here Stalin and Yezhov anticipated
the execution of 79,950 Soviet citizens by shooting and the sentencing of
193,000 more to 8 to 10 years in the gulag . . . The killing and imprison-
ment quotas were officially called “limits” though everyone involved knew
they were meant to be exceeded. . . . No NKVD officer wished to be seen as
lacking élan when confronting “counter-revolution” . . . [and] by the end of
1938 the NKVD had executed some 386,798 Soviet citizens.
(Timothy Snyder, Bloodlands, NY: Basic Books, 2010: 81)
Despite the evident dominant strategy confronting regional NKVD officials, it is
not altogether clear whether this situation corresponds identically to a Prisoners’
Dilemma because we can only speculate about the preferences and perceptions of
those officials, though it is worth remembering that many were themselves sub-
sequently liquidated after they washed the blood from their hands. An equivalent
circumstance arose with Stalin’s induced genocidal famine in Ukraine in the early
1930s whereby, depending on who does the counting, between 3 and 10 million
Ukrainians died of starvation. There regional Communist party officials were
initially induced to over-report grain harvests so as to make it appear that their
efforts at collectivization had borne fruit. But those reports subsequently became
quotas that they either could not meet or could meet only by starving the local
population after confiscating whatever grain they held in reserve, including the
seed grain used for future planting. Ultimately, of course, those regional officials,
unable to meet the artificial quotas they themselves had inadvertently set, were
liquidated or were to be found on a slow train to the gulag.
It would seem, however, that Russia has a propensity to repeatedly imple-
ment dilemmas of this sort. Most objective analysts agree that the 2004, 2008
and 2012 presidential elections there (as well as the intervening parliamentary

--- Sayfa 197 ---
188  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
contests) were marred by massive vote fraud wherein upwards of 20%
of the “ballots” awarded to Putin or his 2008 puppet, Medvedev, were either
fraudulently cast or simply did not exist. The evidence is thin, however, that the
Kremlin itself engineered this fraud, and one might even argue that although
Putin sought a mandate for himself or his party, the actual level of fraud exceeded
what was deemed desirable by the Kremlin’s apparatchiks. Shortly after his initial
election to the presidency in 2000, though, Putin put in place a system of incen-
tives that paralleled those confronting NKVD officials under Stalin. In seeking
firmer control over the agencies of the state, Putin eliminated regionally elected
governors and replaced them with Kremlin-appointed officials. Thus, no less
than for the NKVD under Stalin, the newly appointed governors’ fates rested
entirely in Putin’s hands. But how were those appointed officials to provide a
measure of their adherence to “the party line”? The answer was: What better way
to indicate one’s subservience and loyalty to the powers that be than by reporting
overwhelming electoral support for those powers? What regional official wants to
be viewed as a weak supporter of Putin when others act differently? Thus, Putin’s
cadre of governors had an incentive to pursue any and all methods available to
inflate Putin’s vote so as to yield any number of election districts that, as in the old
Soviet Union, reported 100% turnout rates with 100% of the vote going to Putin.
Catch 22: Prisoners’ Dilemmas can also arise in humorous contexts, and it
was surely this that Joseph Heller had in mind when he penned this conversa-
tion between Major Major and the World War II bomber pilot Yossarian in
his cynical portrayal of the idiocy of war in his novel Catch 22 (NY: Simon &
Schuster, 1961: 125):
[MAJOR MAJOR]  Colonel Cathcart is our commanding officer and we
must obey him. Why don’t you fly four more missions and see what
happens?
[YOSSARIAN]  I don’t want to.
[MAJOR MAJOR]  Suppose we let you pick your missions and fly milk runs
. . . That way you can fly the four missions and not run any risks.
[YOSSARIAN]  I don’t want to fly milk runs. I don’t want to be in the war
anymore.
[MAJOR MAJOR]  Would you like to see our country lose?
[YOSSARIAN]  We won’t lose. We’ve got more men, more money, and more
material. There are ten million men in uniform who could replace
me. Some people are getting killed and a lot more are making money
and having fun. Let somebody else get killed.
[MAJOR MAJOR]  But suppose everybody on our side felt that way?
[YOSSARIAN]  Then I’d certainly be a damned fool to feel any other way.
There is, in fact, a more serious side to this Prisoners’ Dilemma, which Kings,
Queens, Prime Ministers, Presidents and Generals have long understood. While
appeals to “God and country” might motivate ordinary individuals to enlist and
wear a uniform, those appeals fray badly when bullets fly overhead and have
as much impact on the motive to put oneself in harm’s way as Major Major’s

--- Sayfa 198 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   189
words had on Yossarian. The solution, then, is to establish an esprit de corps
whereby the ordinary soldier’s loyalty is not necessarily tied to a particular
regime or geography but rather to those immediately around him—to his fel-
low combatants. Heroic deeds have been committed not because a soldier seeks
to defend some abstract ideology or to sustain a regime that he may or may
not approve of but rather because “he doesn’t want to let his buddies down.”
With one’s motives personalized in this way, the Dilemma is transformed into
something else.
Arms Races: More serious dilemmas include arms races, wherein both sides
of an implicit conflict find it impossible to reduce their spending on arms for
fear that the other side will not do so. Consider, then, the standoff between Pres-
ident Reagan and Premier Gorbachev at their 1986 Reykjavik summit where a
new agreement on arms control was thwarted, ostensibly, by Reagan’s insistence
on pursuing the development of an anti-missile defense shield known at the
time as Star Wars. Gorbachev’s objection was evident, despite the opinion of his
military that an effective shield would almost certainly be impossible to build
and if built could be overcome by a new generation of ICBM warheads. Star
Wars, Gorbachev argued and doubtlessly believed, would only exacerbate the
arms race between the US and USSR, which was a race the Soviet Union could
ill afford and could pursue only by undermining Gorbachev’s plans for reform
of a dismally performing Soviet economy. Thus, while both sides to the dispute
saw the benefit of curtailing the proliferation of atomic weaponry, that pro-
liferation seemed not only unavoidable but a problem magnified by a system,
however imperfect, designed to defend against such weapons.
For an admittedly contrived numeric example of this dilemma, suppose each
of two national leaders can either increase spending on armaments or decrease
spending. If both choose the same strategy, the security of both is unchanged
and worth, say, 100. Suppose further that the cost of any increase in armaments
is 75. However, if one country disarms unilaterally, suppose it is overcome by its
adversary, which gains 275, which is an outcome that is worth −100 to the van-
quished leader. The strategic form of this situation is portrayed in Figure 5.6,
which reveals that both persons have increasing arms spending as their domi-
nant choice.
The imperatives of the Prisoners’ Dilemma in this case suggest that if asked,
“Are two countries more likely to reach an arms agreement (1) if they more ear-
nestly and honestly approach arms negotiations, (2) if negotiators learn to trust
what the other side says, or (3) if domestic political-economic considerations
render the costs of pursuing arms buildups unacceptable?” we must answer that
it is only the last possibility that can lead to a resolution because it is the one
Increase arms
Decrease arms
Increase arms
Decrease arms
25, 25
200, −100
−100, 200
100, 100
Figure 5.6  A simple arms race

--- Sayfa 199 ---
190  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
that changes the situation’s payoffs. What needs to be appreciated here is that
we cannot resolve such dilemmas via mere communication and agreements to
coordinate. Regardless of what agreements are reached beforehand, once the
participants in the dilemma are left alone, the choice of a dominant strategy
seems inevitable.
Low Price Guarantees and Market Collusion: For an admittedly fanciful
example, although perhaps one that suggests that not all government regulation
of competitive markets is in our interest, imagine that a country’s buggy-whip
industry is in trouble: Given a declining interest in buggy whips owing to the
new-fangled invention of the automobile, there are far too many producers of
buggy whips (exactly two), so the price for such items has declined to $6 each,
while inflation has driven costs of manufacturing to $4/whip. At a $6 price tag,
400 whips/month/firm can be sold. Both producers deem this profit margin
unacceptable, so they’ve met to form a cartel to fix prices at $8/whip, in which
case 250 whips/firm will be sold. However, if either firm cheats on this agreement
and charges $6, it will capture the entire market of 800 whips. Abiding by the
time-honored political maxim, “I seen me chances and I tooks them,” suppose
you are a legislator with sufficient power to force the government to regulate
the price of whips “in the public interest”—no one, of course, wants “inferior”
quality whips flooding the market, especially those made in some distant Asian
country. However, rather than simply act to “protect jobs,” you ask yourself what
the upper limit might be on the campaign contributions you can demand of the
two firms in the whip industry. To answer this question, Figure 5.7 portrays the
strategic form confronting the firms. If both firms charge a market price of $6,
each earns $800 (400 whips sold at a profit of $2/whip) whereas if both charge
$8, each earns $1,000 (250 whips sold at a profit of $4/whip). A defecting firm
earns $1,600 and the other earns nothing. For an enterprising legislator, then,
there is an opportunity to “earn” up to $200 from each firm as gratitude for
government enforcement of a whip cartel—the difference between a competi-
tive $800 profit per firm versus a government-sanctioned cartel profit of $1,000.
This simple example, which by now may appear to the reader to be a mere
repetition of the same game with different payoffs, reveals something about
the marketing strategies we sometimes observe among competing retailers of
consumer goods. Suppose the two firms would prefer not to be a party to our
legislator’s attempt at extortion and that both instead offer the following deal
to their customers: “If you find a comparable whip cheaper elsewhere, we will
match the price and include in it a 10% discount.” Actually, this scheme works
best for retailers selling products not of their manufacture but where, instead,
Charge $6.00
Charge $8.00
Charge $6.00
Charge $8.00
$800, $800
$1,600, $0
$0, $1,600
$1,000, $1,000

Figure 5.7  Cartelizing the buggy whip industry

--- Sayfa 200 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   191
all retailers in the market sell similar or identical products. Since explicit col-
lusion on price (price fixing) is generally illegal (since if it were legal, how
could legislators extort?), the “low price guarantee” serves the same purpose.
Specifically, it removes any incentive retailers might have to defect from any
implicit agreement. If anyone defects, competitors offering such a guarantee
will, in effect via that guarantee, automatically lower their price to match that
of the defector (and with the 10% premium, even undercut the price charged by
the defecting firm). Thus, low price guarantees are a way for retailers to police
the pricing agreements they might make among themselves without the need
for government sanction or intervention. They have the advantage, moreover,
of seemingly offering the customer a guarantee that they are not being ripped
off while at the same time avoiding the need to bribe a legislature.
Foot Binding: Although its precise origins are unknown and thought to have
begun during the Soong Dynasty (960–1279), the practice of foot binding was
widespread throughout China by the 18th and 19th centuries. This was a prac-
tice whereby a young woman’s feet were deliberately deformed by daily (and
quite painful) binding so as to leave her unable to walk normally but which
was deemed essential to render her eligible to marry into a rich family. Indeed,
regardless of a family’s wishes, if they hoped to marry a daughter to anyone of
position, it was essential that her feet be deformed to correspond with conven-
tion. However, in the latter quarter of the 19th century, a number of Natural
Foot societies were established, often at the instigation of foreign missionaries,
in the attempt to rid China of this cruel practice. It would appear, though, that
society was trapped in a Prisoners’ Dilemma wherein however much individual
parents might have wished to spare a daughter years of pain and a lifetime of
virtual imprisonment owing to her inability to walk normally, it was difficult
or impossible to defect from a centuries-old standard of physical beauty and
consign a daughter to a marriage-less life and even servitude. Serious inroads
into the practice in urban centers weren’t made until the government of the
Republic of China in 1912 officially banned the practice; and even still, as late
as the 1940s, Mao and the Communist Party reported finding the practice still
in effect in rural China.
Canoe Races, Overthrowing the King and Gymnastics: Imagine the follow-
ing scenario: Two 2-man canoes are in a race. However, this race only determines
which two rowers will compete later against each other in a footrace for the ulti-
mate prize. It might seem that each pair of rowers has an incentive to submerge
whatever competitive issues they might have between them in order to win the
first race so that they can compete ultimately for the prize. Notice, however, that
the rowers in both canoes each have some incentive to slack off during the canoe
race in order to conserve their energy for the footrace. Indeed, we can imagine
this incentive growing stronger if, instead of 2-man canoes, we substitute 8-man
rowing shells so that slacking off becomes more difficult to detect. Failing to
exert maximum effort runs the risk of losing the rowing contest and thus fore-
going the opportunity to engage in the footrace, but if everyone else in your boat
slacks off, you’d be a fool to not do the same since otherwise you are sure to lose
the footrace even if your boat wins the rowing contest.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
192  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
The rowers, then, are in a Prisoners’ Dilemma, albeit one that is somewhat
muted by the desire to win the rowing contest and not be detected as a slacker.
Our example, though, has some real world parallels. In 208 bc imperial China,
during the reign of the son of the first emperor of China, the descendants of
the former rulers of the kingdoms of Yan, Zhao, Qi and Wei sought to over-
throw the Qin Dynasty and restore their states. However, much like our rowers,
the heads of the various armies had an incentive to slack off in their attack
on the capital of Qin in order to conserve their strength for the ultimate con-
test among themselves as to who would assume the throne to become the new
emperor. In this case, a solution to the Dilemma was found by agreeing that
whoever reached the Qin capital of Xianyang first would take Qin’s place.
One needn’t revert to ancient history for examples of similar dilemmas. Con-
sider, for instance, the competition among members of the same party in a
primary election for that party’s nomination to compete for the ultimate prize
of, say, president. The problem here is that during the primary campaign, each
contestant has an incentive to undercut their competitors by, perhaps, empha-
sizing those opponents’ character flaws. But if all primary election competi-
tors do this, they damage the party’s ultimate nominee in the general election.
Indeed, how many times do we see opponents in a general election using the
words of a competitor’s fellow party members—words that arose during the
fight for each party’s nomination? Thinking back to our rowers, now, we note
that three Olympic sports conduct both individual and team contests: gym-
nastics, swimming and track and field. In gymnastics medals are awarded for
a team of gymnasts as well as for individual performances, while in swimming
and track and field, medals are awarded for both individual competitions and
relays. What we find interesting here, though, is that the gymnastics team com-
petition precedes the individual ones whereas in track and field and swimming,
the relays come later. One might suspect, then, that the same issues that arose
for our rowers might arise here: If a swimmer or runner were to race in a relay
first, he or she might slack off a bit so as to conserve energy for the individ-
ual events. This possibility is forestalled, however, by holding those individual
events first. Why then is gymnastics different? The answer, we suspect, is that
the incentives would be fundamentally the same were it not for one modifica-
tion of the rules. Specifically, only the top two scorers from each country’s team
are allowed to compete for the individual all-around gymnast medals. Thus,
slacking off opens the door to being precluded from the next round of competi-
tion (for elaboration, see Emerson M.S. Niou and Guofu Tan, “External Threat
and Collective Action,” Economic Inquiry, 43(3): 519–530, 2005).
Markets, Public Goods and Why We Have Government: Suppose two peo-
ple are contemplating installing pollution control devices on their respective
cars, where each device costs C and provides a benefit of B in terms of a device’s
contribution to clean air. However, suppose the benefit accrues equally to both
persons since they both breathe the same air. If benefits are additive (i.e., if the
benefit of two installed devices is 2B to both persons) then the game between
them looks as follows:

--- Sayfa 202 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   193
Suppose finally that 2B > C > B. That is, the cost of each device exceeds the
benefit accruing to a single individual so that neither person has an incentive to
install such a device on his or her own. Such devices are beneficial only if both
persons install them. Thus, with 2B > C > B, our two motorists are caught in a
Prisoners’ Dilemma so that even if they agree beforehand to install such devices,
each has an incentive to cheat to realize the benefit B without incurring any
cost. The solution to this problem is, of course, well known. It is in the interest
of both players to find or establish a third player who will oversee the situation,
most likely by implementing a system of automobile inspections and fining
those who fail to have the appropriate equipment on their cars. The idea here is
that although this third person or entity is given the authority to coerce through
fines, no fines will be collected if the desired outcome is achieved, provided, of
course, that the newly created entity does not exceed its authority.
As simple as this example is, it reveals one of the fundamental problems asso-
ciated with unregulated markets and with collective action generally. The char-
acteristic of the commodity here of a pollution control device is that it exhibits
an externality, in this case a positive one. If one person “consumes” cleaner air
by purchasing and installing such a device, he or she automatically or inciden-
tally provides the benefit of clean air to everyone else. However, in deciding
whether or not to make that purchase, we can suppose that a person will base
their decision on the benefits and costs they alone experience. The cleaner air
in this case is what economists call a public good—a good that, when consumed
by one person can be consumed by others at zero additional cost. Public goods
stand in contrast to private goods, which are ostensibly those that, when con-
sumed by one person, have no impact whatsoever on the welfare of others.
In practice, the debate as to whether a good is public or private can some-
times be a contentious one since often that dispute concerns the proper role of
government. Consider for example a law that requires motorcyclists to wear
helmets. When such laws are imposed, it is not uncommon for many if not
most motorcyclists to object with the argument that their safety is their own
private concern and if they wish to take the chance of severe bodily injury they
should be free to do so. The counter argument is that if a subset of motorcyclists
fail to wear helmets, they necessarily raise the insurance rates for everyone,
including those who do not ride motorcycles. Here, then, some see a Prisoners’
Dilemma warranting government intrusion while others see no dilemma at all
but instead another instance of government trying to over-regulate our lives.
Regardless of which side of the debate one takes here, the existence of such
debates reveals that public goods and their associated externalities come in a
B, B – C
Install
Don’t Install
Install
2B – C, 2B – C
B – C, B
Don’t install
0, 0
Figure 5.8  A pollution control dilemma

--- Sayfa 203 ---
194  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
variety of forms. For the converse of a pollution control device, suppose you
decide that an inexpensive way to heat your home is by burning rubber tires in a
fireplace. Tires, being a petroleum product, most likely burn quite nicely and we
would guess, do an effective job of heating one’s home. However, the smoke and
soot produced are not likely to be appreciated by one’s neighbors. Tires, in this
case, or at least those in one’s fireplace, are a public bad because they engender
a negative externality—dirty air that your neighbors must then consume. Thus,
just as we might choose to regulate pollution control devices on cars by autho-
rizing the state to inspect and fine, we are equally likely to authorize that same
agent to regulate against the burning of tires for heating homes.
The variety and form of public goods and externalities is even greater than
our examples suggest. Consider a public park. Here we have a potential public
good that is nevertheless subject to exclusion: We can build a fence around it and
admit only those who pay a fee. However, once we build a park of even mod-
est size for one person, we can allow others to use it at zero marginal cost. The
park, though, is not a perfect public good since it is subject to exhaustion—in
this case, to overcrowding. Hence, the need perhaps for that fence and entrance
fee. Public parks, though, do illustrate a pervasive problem that warrants col-
lective action of some sort—specifically, they remind us of a class of goods that
yield a common resource dilemma. Areas that in one era are productive fishing
grounds can become depleted from over-fishing, water resources that benefit
thousands if not millions of acres can become depleted by over-irrigation, for-
ests that prevent soil erosion can become depleted to the extent that people
view wood as a free good, and fertile grasslands can become dust bowls from
overgrazing. Each of these situations corresponds to what social scientists refer
to as the Tragedy of the Commons whereby some shared resource—a public
good—is depleted by the actions of individuals acting rationally to produce
an otherwise “irrational” (collectively undesirable) outcome. And although we
do not wish to get into the debate as to its causes, a significant portion of the
scientific community argues that today the most threatening instance of this
“tragedy” is global warming.
Some public goods can be transformed on the basis of technology. Consider
lighthouses, where the warning a traditionally designed lighthouse provides is a
public good—the light it shines can be “consumed” by any passing ship. Leav-
ing provision of lighthouses to the private sector, then, is likely to yield an inef-
ficient outcome since whoever builds it cannot charge for its warning—once
the warning is made available to one, it is available to all (and is not subject to
exhaustion from consumption). We should not be surprised, then, to find the
provision of lighthouses a task commonly assigned to governments. But warn-
ings need not take the form of a bright light—they can also be radio signals,
the meaning of which can be learned only if one has subscribed to a service
and given a password. It may not be warnings that are consumed on various
websites, but subscribing to a website’s service (which, presumably, can be con-
sumed at zero marginal cost for any number of additional subscribers) for a fee
is hardly uncommon. Website services that are free, in contrast, illustrate some
of the private-sector inventiveness that often occurs when dealing with public

--- Sayfa 204 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   195
goods. Consider the production of TV programs. Cable and satellite services
may be required now to watch the vast majority of available programs, but
major networks continue to function in most countries, often without govern-
ment ownership or subsidy despite the fact that their transmissions are vir-
tually perfect examples of public goods—once the signal is sent into the air,
that signal can be consumed for free by anyone in range of its transmission.
The innovation here (if one wants to call it that) is a simple one—advertising;
charging companies a fee for advertising their product along with whatever is
intended to entertain or inform people. This, of course, is the same solution
reached by countless websites as well as newspapers sold on the street at below
the cost of production.
Sometimes externalities take a less than physical form. Consider the commer-
cial airline industry, which is perhaps one of the most heavily regulated indus-
tries today, at least with respect to the matter of safety. There is, of course, little
doubt that the flying public favors that regulation since who, after all, wants to
fly in a plane piloted by an exhausted, untrained or drunk pilot sitting in front
of an instrument panel that “doesn’t quite work”? But it is also the case that the
industry itself prefers to be regulated in this way even though it greatly increases
operating costs. Airlines know that absent regulation, they would find them-
selves in a Prisoners’ Dilemma whereby each, in the competition for customers,
would have an incentive to reduce operating costs by slacking off on aircraft
maintenance. But if just one airline cheats and its plane crashes with hundreds
of passengers killed, there is a negative externality that impacts all air carriers
in the form of an increased fear of flying on the part of the general public. Air-
lines, apparently, have a hard enough time being profitable, and if planes began
dropping out of the skies with some regularity, no doubt passengers and profits
would vanish. Air safety, then, is a public good for nearly everyone involved and
every reputable airline has an interest in having the government regulate it and
all other airlines in order to ensure that that good is in fact provided.
5.3  Cooperation and the Problem of Collective Action
In one respect the actions of the passengers of United Airlines flight 93 on Sep-
tember 11, 2001, were remarkable while from another perspective they were
not. In thwarting the attempt of the terrorists onboard to divert the flight and
fly the plane into either the U.S. Capital or the White House, the actions of the
passengers were clearly heroic because they did so while dooming themselves.
On the other hand, a cynic might argue that their actions were unremarkable
because they knew by then that they were doomed regardless of what they
did—information about the terrorist attacks on New York City’s World Trade
Center and the Pentagon became known when the terrorists allowed the pas-
sengers to call home. Nevertheless, attacking the terrorists as they did remains
an uncommon example of coordinated collective action. How many times do
we read of people in a bank, when confronted by an armed robber, meekly lying
down as ordered while the robber scoops up whatever cash he can carry despite
the fact that if all patrons rushed the robber they could almost certainly thwart

--- Sayfa 205 ---
196  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
the crime? A similar dilemma becomes evident when we ask the question, “How
do dictators survive when the vast majority of their populations prefer to do
away with them?” What, for instance, is the mechanism wherein a loathed dic-
tator such as Nicolae Ceausescu rules Romania with an iron fist for his own
private benefit, building absurd palaces his country can ill afford, and where
in a seeming instant after years of mis-rule, the population suddenly turns to
overthrow his regime? An equivalent situation arose, perhaps, in Nazi Germany.
As British and American troops crossed the Rhine in 1945, the nearly uniform
plea of German citizens in one village after another was to disclaim member-
ship in the Nazi party and proclaim opposition to Hitler’s rule, asserting even
that they viewed those troops as liberators. The troops themselves were hardly
prepared to treat Germans the same as Belgians or the Dutch, and for the most
part discounted such assertions, especially after they’d seen the death and labor
camps that permeated the countryside. However, we ought to keep in mind that
Hitler never, in any election, garnered majority support of the electorate. Thus,
while it’s possible to assume that a majority of the population had been emo-
tionally caught up in Germany’s early military triumphs, as casualties mounted
and the tide of war turned that enthusiasm surely began to dissipate so that
preferences after 1942 reverted to what they had been earlier. Nevertheless, the
common retort of Allied troops to individual Germans was, “Then why didn’t
you stop him?” However, with SS units still active and fanatical Hitler Youth
mercilessly killing anyone who exhibited less than unswerving loyalty to Hitler,
it is difficult to see how any individual acting unilaterally could have much of an
incentive to oppose the regime. One has to wonder, then, whether a consider-
ably larger percentage of Germans professing to think of themselves as having
been liberated by Allied armies were in fact sincere in their pleas.
Rulers, in sustaining their regimes, commonly take advantage of the difficul-
ties of those they rule to coordinate. For example, in discussing British impe-
rial rule, Stevenson (The First World War as Political Tragedy, NY: Basic Books,
2004: 101) notes that
In a population of 300 million [in 1914] British India contained in peace-
time some 1,200 white officials in the Indian Civil Service, 700 white police
officers, and 77,000 British soldiers along side 173,000 Indian troops. Simi-
larly, a few hundred British administrators and 4–5,000 white soldiers,
with 13,000 indigenous ones, governed 12.5 million Egyptians . . . British
leaders knew that their eastern empire . . . “depends on prestige and bluff.”
Prestige and bluff work, of course, only if the masses cannot coordinate to chal-
lenge the status quo.
There is, perhaps, no more dramatic example of the failure of the members of
a culture to coordinate with its very survival threatened than that of the Jews of
Europe in the 1930s and early ’40s. As Hitler and his henchmen incrementally
moved on Jews within Germany and thereafter in subjugated countries, there
may have been occasional points of resistance (not the least bit aided by the
powers that be in London or Washington), but for the most part disbelief was

--- Sayfa 206 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   197
followed by resignation and acquiescence. And although a general simultane-
ous uprising by all Jews in Europe might still not have been much of a match for
the Wehrmacht or the Einsatzgruppen’s death brigades, such an uprising would
surely have made Hitler’s policies more apparent to the rest of the world. How-
ever, to expect such an uprising is to ask people to act contrary to individual
incentives even when those incentives or motives allow for altruism. Individual
resistance holds no promise of positive rewards if one has little confidence that
one’s actions will encourage most if not all others to follow or will even be seen
by anyone other than those who are positioned to administer the ultimate pun-
ishment. And when communication and coordination are rendered difficult or
impossible, the dominant choice is to merely attempt to survive in the hopes
that someone or something will change the “game.”
Each of the preceding examples and scenarios illustrates an n-person Pris-
oners’ Dilemma wherein it’s in everyone’s interest to engage in collective or
coordinated action but where no one wants to be the first to move for fear that
others will not follow and that they will be the uniquely punished individual (or
at least the first to be punished). But coordinated collective action poses other
problems, illustrated in part by our contrived canoeing example. In the case of
the 2-man canoe, slacking off might be difficult to do because one’s actions are
likely to be noticeable. In an 8-man shell, on the other hand, the subtle slack-
ing of a single individual might not be so easily detected and might not even
greatly threaten the boat’s likelihood of winning the race. An equivalent large-n
problem arises in several other examples of the Prisoners’ Dilemma considered
thus far. Consider automobile pollution control devices. If the situation con-
cerned only two people, then we can imagine ways in which they might police
themselves to maintain any cooperative agreements. Perhaps they could simply
go with each other to observe the installation of the devices on their cars. But if
n equals millions, such a solution is impractical, with the problems of enforce-
ment exacerbated by the following reasoning: “My lone defection is likely to
go unnoticed and the damage to the environment caused by my car will, in
the greater scheme of things, do little to degrade the overall quality of the air.”
Similarly, if we consider again our example of two buggy whip manufactur-
ers, we can again imagine a small handful of companies finding ways to coop-
erate and to safeguard against defections. But suppose there are hundreds if
not thousands of manufacturers. In that case, sustaining a collusive agreement
might become exceedingly difficult. Indeed, consider the licensing of taxicabs.
From one perspective, such licensing makes sense—at least to the extent that
it provides a guarantee that the driver has some minimal capabilities when it
comes to driving and is using a vehicle that meets a few standards of safety. But
what then justifies governments acting to regulate prices as well? Why preclude
the opportunity of taxi drivers to offer their customers a bargain—a posted or
even ad hoc discounted price?
The answer here lies in the fact that defection is too easy and thus taxi drivers
or their companies find it difficult to collude on price without the intervention
of an outside agent—the state. Licensing drivers, moreover, has the additional
advantage of precluding entry so that “defectors” cannot come from outside the

--- Sayfa 207 ---
198  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
industry. We should not be surprised, then, to see governments regulating the
prices of things like taxi fares and acting as an agent for the firms themselves,
but not regulating, say, the price automobile manufacturers charge, where
the entry of “exogenous defectors” is more difficult (although we do see such
implicit government sanctioned and enforced collusion when those defectors
are foreign firms. Here the government can disguise the assistance it gives to
domestic manufacturers in the form of tariffs and import quotas with the argu-
ment that they are protecting domestic jobs).
Mancur Olson, in his seminal volume The Logic of Collective Action (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965), identified the problems associated
with public goods, externalities and Prisoners’ Dilemmas when the number of
participants grows large. But what he also saw was the many ways in which col-
lectivities invent mechanisms for circumventing those problems. For example,
consider Lenin’s organization of the Communist Party in Bolshevik Russia. The
specific problem with which he had to deal was that individual interests had
not yet been supplanted by the sought-after collective interest. Thus, individu-
als still had an incentive to shirk from their class responsibilities with respect
to such things as reporting counter revolutionaries and acting in the workplace
in society’s interests rather than their own. Lenin’s solution was to construct a
party with a well defined hierarchical structure wherein small cadres of people
would act as a unit and report to some higher authority, which in turn consisted
of a cadre of individuals that would itself report to some yet higher author-
ity, and so on and so forth up the chain of command. In this way, rather than
require that collective action be organized on a mass basis wherein individuals
have an incentive to shirk under the assumption that their shirking would go
unnoticed, he recast things as a set of smaller games where monitoring would
work more effectively because individual defections from more limited defi-
nitions of group goals would be more noticeable. Lenin’s solution, then, was
not much different in principle from that employed by armies wherein soldiers
become attached to those immediately around them as opposed to fighting for
grand abstract principles.
In contrast, Olson observed that entities such as labor unions and voluntary
associations such as the AARP (the American Association of Retired Persons)
did not have Lenin’s or the military’s solution available to them. The dilemma
for a union, for instance, is that unless employees of some firm are required
by law to belong to the union, individual workers have an incentive to view
whatever pay raises and benefits the union negotiates with management as a
public good and to refrain from joining the union and paying dues. A similar
problem confronts a lobbying entity such as the AARP. Why pay for a member-
ship if the benefits the Association provides through national law accrue to all
retired persons regardless of whether they are members or not? In this case,
both entities—unions and voluntary associations—find a solution in terms of
privatizing some of the benefits of membership. Thus, it is quite common to
find such organizations offering their members and only their members such
things as life or health insurance at a reduced group cost. Of course, it is not

--- Sayfa 208 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   199
unknown historically to see entities such as labor unions finding another way
to privatize the benefits of membership via the proverbial brick through the
window of those who refuse to join the union or a strike or to ostracize the
defector at the workplace.
Before we leave the subject of the problems associated with collective action,
let us consider an example that illustrates formally the problems of collective
action as it relates to large groups. Consider an extreme form of a public good
which, when provided by one person, is fully provided and benefits everyone
equally. This situation might correspond to the case of the crowd standing before
the loathed Ceausescu of Romania with everyone aware that if any one person
rises up to yell a denunciation of him, the rest would almost certainly follow. In
its 2-person variant, if we ignore the preferences of elites like Ceausescu and his
entourage as well as any complications arising from the presence or non-presence
of a Soviet army, such a situation might look as presented in Figure 5.9.
Notice that this game is much like our pollution control example in Fig-
ure 5.8 except that here one person’s action is sufficient to provide the good
and benefits are not additive. Thus, as long as B > C, this game is not a Prison-
ers’ Dilemma but instead has two pure strategy Nash equilibria in which one
person provides the good and the other free rides. It also has the mixed strategy
equilibrium ((1 – C/B, C/B), (1 – C/B, C/B)). Now, however, suppose there are
n players and that each, seeing the coordination problem that confronts them,
abides by a mixed strategy (p, 1 – p). If that strategy is an equilibrium, each
person’s pure strategies must yield the same expected value, since otherwise,
as we already know, the person would have an incentive to abandon the mixed
strategy and adopt the pure strategy yielding the greater expected return. For
the game at hand, it is clear that E(provide) = B – C since that payoff prevails
in every cell regardless of the decisions of the n – 1 other players. As for E(don’t
provide), the person in question receives B unless all other n – 1 persons fail to
provide. And the probability that all others fail to provide when abiding by their
mixed strategies equals (1 – p)n–1. Thus, the probability that at least one person
provides equals 1 – (1 – p)n–1, in which case
E(don’t provide) = B[1 – (1 – p)n–1] + 0(1 – p)n–1
or simply B[1 – (1 – p)n–1]. Setting E(provide) = E(don’t provide) yields, after
some algebraic manipulation
p = 1 – (C/B)1/(n–1)
Provide
Don’t provide
B – C, B – C
B – C, B
Provide
Don’t provide
B, B – C
0, 0
Figure 5.9  A public goods game

--- Sayfa 209 ---
200  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
Thus, the larger is n, the less likely will any one person unilaterally act to pro-
vide the benefit, whatever it might be. What interests us, however, is the likeli-
hood that no one chooses to provide as n increases. Since the likelihood that any
one person doesn’t provide is 1 – p = (C/B)1/(n–1), the likelihood that all n persons
fail to do so is this probability raised to the nth power, or
(C/B)n/(n–1)
Since n/(n – 1) decreases from 2 to 1 as n increases from 2 to ∞ and C/B < 1,
this probability necessarily increases as n increases (for example, if C/B = ½,
then for n = 2, this probability is ¼ whereas as n increases, the probability that
everyone chooses “don’t provide” converges to ½).
There are other ways to model the decreased likelihood of some public good
being provided as the number of relevant persons increases. One possibility
is to assume, as suggested earlier, that the likelihood of detecting a defection
decreases as n increases. Alternatively, we can suppose that the public good shows
diminishing marginal returns as more people contribute so that if a great many
contribute, no individual’s contribution will yield a private benefit that exceeds
its private cost. For a numerical example, suppose the public benefit of the pub-
lic good under consideration is (x – 1)/x when x people contribute. Thus, at
x = 2, the benefit is ½ and increases at a decreasing rate to 1 as x increases. Sup-
pose the individual cost to contributing is C. Thus, with x people contributing,
any person making a contribution enjoys a net benefit of (x – 1)/x – C, whereas
if that person shirks, his benefit becomes (x – 2)/(x – 1) but at no cost. Some
simple algebra, then, shows that a person should shirk if C > 1/x(x – 1). On the
other hand, a person would nevertheless enjoy a positive benefit from contrib-
uting if (x – 1)/x – C > 0. A person is thereby caught in a Prisoners’ Dilemma
if (x – 1)/x > C > 1/x(x – 1) - if he prefers to shirk but still experiences a net
benefit when contributing. Taking C out of this dual inequality reveals that the
dilemma exists as long as x > 2. Thus, regardless of the number of people ben-
efitting from provision of this good, no more than two people would contribute
and the rest would shirk. There is, of course, nothing magical about the number
2 here as it is merely the product of the functional form assumed for the benefit
of the good in question as a function of the number of people contributing to
that good. Nevertheless, what we see here is how a public good with diminishing
marginal value as its supply increases can yield a situation in which a significant
share of the relevant population shirks and attempts to pass off responsibility
for some minimal provision of the good to some small subset of people.
5.4  Escaping the Dilemma: Repetition and Reputation
Bricks through windows, fines, government intervention, low cost group life
insurance policies and monitoring systems that parallel Lenin’s Bolshevik revo-
lution are but a few of the ways people contend with Prisoner-type Dilemmas.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   201
Correspondingly, understanding how people overcome dilemmas is a major
component of political theory and leads immediately to speculation about the
role of leadership, about the incentives for politicians themselves to entrepre-
neur collective action, and about the potential role of preexisting institutions.
However, in contemplating such things we should consider the fact that no
Prisoners’ Dilemma is isolated from all other things in the world. For exam-
ple, abiding by agreements in legislative vote trading scenarios may confront
legislators with a dilemma, but it certainly is not a dilemma in which legisla-
tors are likely to participate only once nor are they likely to avoid interacting
with their fellow legislators subsequently in other contexts. Thus, among other
things, we should consider the possibility that the expectation of repetition
of the dilemma alters people’s incentives to choose one strategy over another.
Similarly, tariff negotiations also yield a dilemma wherein each country party
to any agreement most likely would prefer, ceteris paribus, to defect from any
agreement, but as with vote trading, countries must deal with each other on a
continual basis, so a defection in one instance has implications for subsequent
action and negotiations. Arms races are analogous to tariff negotiations, where
here the incentives to defect depend on the ability of the participants to detect
a defection, to respond to a defection by the other side, and the likelihood that
both countries might prefer to negotiate further arms limitations in the future.
The Legal Case of John P. Calvo: John Calvo was the publisher of the Spar-
tanberg Express of Spartenberg Georgia, but in July of 1861 he set sail out
of Charleston harbor to act as a privateer, intercepting Union ships so as
to secure their cargo for the Confederacy in America’s Civil War. Unfortu-
nately for Calvo, on August of that year he was caught by the Union frigate
Wabash while sailing the captured Mary Alice to North Carolina. Calvo was
immediately sent to New York, imprisoned and charged with the capital
crime of piracy, the penalty for which was execution. Seeking to avoid this
rather draconian punishment, Calvo wrote to President Lincoln, arguing
that he was not a pirate but a privateer, which was a distinction with a
difference since privateers were treated as prisoners of war and thus their
treatment regulated, at least in part, by international rules of war. Calvo’s
argument, though, was not based on mere legal principle—something
which nations can too easily twist to serve immediate self-interest. Instead,
he pointed out to Lincoln that if the Union treated privateers as pirates
rather than as soldiers, escalating recriminations would follow wherein the
Confederacy would do the same with members of the Union’s Navy that it
held or would in the future hold as prisoners.
The dilemma confronting Lincoln here would not arise if Calvo were an iso-
lated case. Clearly Lincoln preferred to dissuade the South from engaging in
privateering and implementation of a harsh penalty in the Calvo case would
contribute to that. On the other hand, as America’s Civil War began to unfold,

--- Sayfa 211 ---
202  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
Calvo quite correctly noted that the Union and the Confederacy were play-
ing a repeated game and while it might be in the interest of each “player” to
treat a prisoner as an ordinary criminal if the game were played but once, they
were about to play an indeterminate number of times. And repetition allows
for threats, promises, rewards and sanctions. A nearly identical situation pre-
vailed in World War II wherein Germany’s Luftwaffe established its own prisons
for captured Allied airmen shot down over Western Europe and where those
inmates in general received better treatment than other Allied prisoners (not to
mention those from the Soviet Union). The explanation was that the Allies held
any number of captured Luftwaffe airmen, and the expectation was that reci-
procity would prevail. The reader should not be surprised, then, to learn that
Calvo in May of 1862 was discharged as part of a prisoner exchange between
North and South.
The Ogallala Aquifer: Much of the water that midwest America uses for
irrigation, including the states of Texas, Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming,
Oklahoma, Colorado and New Mexico, comes from the Ogallala Aquifer—
one of the world’s great sources of fresh water. However, beginning in the
1950s when the aquifer was first tapped, the demands upon it were such
that the level of the water began dropping at the rate of a foot per year,
which threatened its ability to meet irrigation needs. Thus, beginning in
the 1980s both state and federal governments began exploring ways to
preserve the water table. One method was to directly regulate the amount
of water individual farmers could use, but American farmers are a rather
cantankerous group who do not take kindly to government inspectors
tromping through their fields monitoring things or insisting that regula-
tory gauges be installed on their irrigation equipment. Another, poten-
tially more effective, means was to institute new farming methods—for
farmers to abandon traditional methods of deep plowing in favor of more
water conserving technologies. The problem here was that moving to those
technologies required new and not inexpensive equipment. Thus, while
farmers could agree that the aquifer needed to be preserved and that they
would all be better off if everyone shifted to the new technologies, they
found themselves in a classic Prisoners’ Dilemma—to purchase the req-
uisite equipment and thereby increase individual production costs, they
would only leave themselves vulnerable to the lower costs of farmers who
defected from an agreement to abandon the old technologies. A variety of
governmental approaches were taken to encourage a shift in technology,
but one in particular seemed to bear fruit even before it was supposed to.
Among the things tried, doubtlessly with a measure of idealism that often
accompanies a bureaucracy’s actions but without an appreciation of the
fact that farmers were no less conscious of the need to conserve than were
bureaucrats at their desks, was teaching elementary schoolchildren about
conservation. The idea here was that when those children became adults
and farmers they would be more environmentally conscious than their
parents and grandparents. The impact of these programs, however, seemed

--- Sayfa 212 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   203
immediate. Indeed, as a 1993 National Geographic (183, March: 80–109)
article on the subject noted, nothing was as effective as a grandchild sitting
on his grandfather’s lap asking if the water would be there for him to farm
when he grew up: “a worried grandchild is worth five visits from a regula-
tory official” (p. 103).
John Calvo and midwest American farmers might seem to have little in com-
mon, and we do not assume that the reader yet sees the relevance of elementary
school education programs to the subject of Prisoners’ Dilemmas. Nevertheless,
among other things, both examples suggest that it is an imprudent research
strategy to treat many of our examples of Prisoners’ Dilemmas as we have—as
strategic situations isolated from the temporal flow of events—and that any
complete analysis should examine the context of that game and the larger
extensive form in which it is imbedded. And both examples, in fact, illustrate a
critically important potential solution to the Dilemma.
Of course, a Prisoners’ Dilemma, like any game, can be part of nearly any
larger scenario. But our earlier discussion of vote trading is a useful place to
begin a deeper study of such things. Specifically, we note that unless all the
bills upon which legislators might trade votes are placed in a single bill that
is voted on once, up or down, legislation is generally considered sequentially.
Thus, individual legislators confront the problem of whether or not to abide
by an agreement or to renege if the legislation with which they are most con-
cerned has already been disposed of. Alternatively, if that legislation is to be
considered late in a legislative session, one must then be concerned that others
will keep their side of the bargain after the bills that most concern them have
been disposed of. The problem this discussion points to is but another one of
the arguments against term limits. If legislators are likely to be reelected—or at
least if electoral rules do not prohibit them from seeking reelection—a defec-
tion in one legislative session can be punished in subsequent sessions. That is,
barring term limits, legislators are not playing a one shot game as portrayed in
Figure 5.5, but rather are playing that game a potentially indeterminate number
of times. Thus, one scenario in which we might embed a Prisoners’ Dilemma
has the Dilemma being replayed by the same participants. However, before
we charge ahead and try to write down an extensive or a strategic form for a
repeated game, we must decide whether it is repeated a finite and known num-
ber of times or whether it is repeated an unknown or infinite number of times.
This choice is critical, because if a game is repeated a finite number of times so
that the terminal nodes of the corresponding extensive form would be appar-
ent and well defined, we can analyze that form by backward reduction. On the
other hand, if the Dilemma is repeated an indefinite or even infinite number of
times, there is no point at which we can begin the backward reduction process.
Indeed, if only one branch leads to a repetition, then backward reduction can-
not be attempted and we must use other analytic tools to analyze the situation.
Interest in the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma does not arise merely because
it reveals interesting analytic problems. Rather, we can attribute that inter-
est to the fact that people, whether observed in the experimental laboratory

--- Sayfa 213 ---
204  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
or in everyday activity, seem able to use the fact of repetition to “solve” this
Dilemma for themselves and avoid mutually disadvantageous outcomes. Leg-
islators do not wholly succumb to granting every constituency a benefit so as
to wholly bankrupt the state (although the evidence is mounting that this is
not always the case in places like California); the trading relations of states do
not necessarily evolve into an anarchy in which each state imposes the high-
est tariff barriers sought by the interests within them; people do contribute to
charities even though they might each be better off by defecting to a pattern of
non-contribution; and subjects in the laboratory when playing the Prisoners’
Dilemma frequently choose to cooperate.
This last observation—from the experimental laboratory—suggests that rep-
etition of the Dilemma is an important variable in understanding the patterns
of cooperation that do emerge. This observation gains theoretical sustenance,
in turn, from the idea that if a person defects to a dominant strategy in an early
play of the Dilemma, others can sanction that person in successive plays by
refusing to cooperate. If, for example, a legislator defects from a vote-trading
agreement, then legislators can refuse to trade with that person subsequently,
and if a firm defects from the cartel price, then others can threaten to defect as
well, in which case the gains from unilateral defection are lost.
A rather graphic example of the effects of repeated play is provided by a par-
ticular event during World War I called “The Christmas Truce of 1914.” Despite
the mayhem and horrors of trench warfare in that conflict, where British and
German troops faced each other across the desolate fields of Flanders, a sign
was raised the day before Christmas from a German trench that read “You no
fight, we no fight.” On the British side, soldiers from the Queens Westminster
Rifles popped out of their trenches and then quickly retreated, but no shots
were fired. Similar events occurred along the line during the afternoon, where-
upon thousands of troops from both sides joined in the desolate no-mans-land
between them to spend Christmas Eve and Day playing soccer, sharing food,
cigarettes and song. One British soldier even sat so a German barber could give
him a haircut. Both the British and German high commands were furious when
learning of the truce—soldiers on the front lines were supposed to kill each
other, not sing and dance. The truce, though, represented a larger problem for
each side’s high commands. Their great fear was that when given the order to
attack, the troops would respond with “Why?” And the Christmas Truce threat-
ened precisely that, so that instead of meeting the goals set by Kings, Tsars, and
Kaisers—namely, for their troops in the field to slaughter each other with maxi-
mum efficiency—the horror of horrors of peace would spontaneously prevail.
That fear is understandable. If one looks at the motives of individual troops in
their muddy, rat-infested trenches, their primary objective is not to kill each
other for King, Kaiser or country, but rather to survive. And what better way
to survive than to somehow convince the men facing you that if they don’t
try hard to kill you, you won’t try hard to kill them. Viewed from the myopic
perspective of a single day, those troops on both sides confronted a Prisoners’

--- Sayfa 214 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   205
Dilemma wherein the dominant strategy was to kill the enemy and then go
home. But they weren’t playing this game only once—they played it repeatedly,
day after day, and therein found a solution to their Dilemma. Specifically, in its
repeated form, cooperation could emerge in which mortars would be aimed
imperfectly and rifles aimed high. If the British or Germans aimed well, the
other side would respond in kind, but if either aimed poorly or didn’t fire at
all, this action was reciprocated. As a consequence, the commands of both sides
confronted the threat of two armies who might refuse to kill each other with
the efficiency demanded of them. In short, repetition allowed for more compli-
cated strategies than simply “cooperate” or “defect”—it gave players the oppor-
tunity to signal a willingness to cooperate as well as the opportunity to punish
each other subsequently if either defected from cooperation.
Mere repetition alone does not “solve” the Dilemma for its participants. Spe-
cifically, suppose a 2-person Dilemma is to be played some finite number of
times and that the number of repetitions (as well as all other aspects of the situ-
ation) is common knowledge. Both persons know, then, that defection is domi-
nant (subgame perfect) in the last play of the game—by assumption, nothing
follows this last play and so the last subgame corresponds to a single play of the
dilemma. But this means that it is futile to cooperate on the next to the last trial
in the hopes of inducing cooperation on the last. Thus, both persons should
defect on the next to the last play as well. The repetition of this argument estab-
lishes that the only subgame perfect equilibrium to the finitely repeated Prisoners’
Dilemma is defection at every opportunity. This situation changes importantly,
however, if we suppose that the dilemma can be replayed an indefinite num-
ber of times. The first thing that changes is that we can no longer use back-
ward reduction—either there is no “last game” or the identity of that game is
unknown. But the second thing that changes is that the number of strategies
available to people becomes infinite (e.g., cooperate on every round; cooper-
ate on every ith round; cooperate until the other person defects, in which case
defect for j rounds; and so on). This multiplicity of strategies, in turn, opens
the door to the existence of a plethora of equilibria and a reemergence of the
problem of coordination to achieve any particular equilibrium.
However, before we can adequately address the issue of coordination, we
must consider a third thing that changes when we allow indefinite repetition.
In particular, although we might assume that people merely accumulate pay-
offs in the finitely repeated dilemma, we cannot make this same assumption
in the infinitely repeated case since, if all payoffs are positive, payoffs accumu-
lated ad infinitum imply that every strategy yields the same total—infinity (or
minus infinity as the case might be). Moreover, such an assumption makes
little behavioral sense, because it is only reasonable to suppose that people
weigh payoffs received early more than they weigh payoffs that will be realized
only in some distant future. Surely those mud-soaked troops sitting in their
rat-infested WWI trenches gave greater weight to surviving today and tomor-
row than they did to the promise of survival a week hence, and greater weight

--- Sayfa 215 ---
206  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
to the promise of survival a week hence to survival a month later. Similarly,
when making a financial investment, a profit today of $X is almost certainly
associated with greater utility than $X earned next month, and $X earned next
month is afforded greater utility than $X earned next year. It is reasonable to
suppose, then, that people discount future payoffs and evaluate strategies by the
present value of the payoffs they realize (notice that we can suppose that even
if people do not discount, there is always some probability, p, that the next play
will be the last. Some simple algebra shows that this assumption leads to the
same analysis we are about to undertake).
To represent this assumption formally in the context of a 2-person strategic
interaction, suppose uit(s1, s2) is person i’s utility in period t when 1 uses the
strategy s1 and 2 uses the strategy s2. Then using the same formula we use to cal-
culate present values in accounting, i’s discounted payoff from s1 across periods
t = 1, 2, … and so on, can be expressed as
ui(s1, s2) = ui1(s1, s2) + rui2(s1, s2) + … + rt−1uit(s1, s2) + …
where r, 0 < r < 1, is the rate with which person i discounts future payoffs.
Admittedly, such an expression is formidable if the utility number in each term
is different from the rest, but if all terms are the same, then we can use the fol-
lowing mathematical identity (which applies as long as 0 < r < 1) to simplify
the analysis:
1 + r + r2 + r3 + … + rn + … = 1/(1 − r).
The reader might legitimately wonder at this point how we arrived at this
expression. In fact it is quite simple, and worth reviewing since it allows us to
introduce an idea that we make considerable use of later. First, notice that if we
have a value X that reoccurs an infinite number of times but is discounted by r
each time, we can write the discounted value V as follows:
V = X + rX + r2X + … = X + r(X + rX + r2X + …) = X + rV
Where we give V the label continuation value. That is, after realizing X in the
first period, we anticipate realizing the discounted value of the endless stream
of payoffs. Solving for V, then, gives us
V = X/(1 – r).
To see now how we use this identity, suppose, for a numerical example, that
we take the simple Prisoners’ Dilemma portrayed in Figure 5.10a and assume
that it is played repeatedly an infinite or indeterminate number of times. If
both players choose to cooperate all the time, both persons receive an infinite
but discounted stream of payoffs of 10. Thus, the discounted present value of
10/(1 − r). On the other hand, if both persons defect to their dominant choice,

--- Sayfa 216 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   207
then their payoff is an infinite repetition of zeros, or merely zero. Which strate-
gies are in equilibrium in this repeated game depends on what other strategies
(out of the infinity of possibilities) we allow the players to consider. However,
since we are merely interested in illustrating the fact that infinite (or indetermi-
nate) repetition alone can induce cooperation as an equilibrium, consider these
four strategies: (c1) cooperate always; (c2) defect always; (c3) cooperate as long
as the other person cooperates, but defect forever when the other person defects
for the first time; and (c4) play tit-for-tat. The strategy of tit-for-tat, c4, requires
that a person cooperate on the first trial, and then on trial t it has that person
matching what the other person chose on trial t − 1. Of course, two tit-for-
tatters or a tit-for-tatter and someone choosing c1 or c3 never defect and thereby
they both realize the payoff of 10/(1 − r) from their strategies. On the other
hand, a tit-for-tatter playing against a person who chooses c2 gets a payoff of −5
in the first round, and zero thereafter, whereas the opponent receives +20 in the
first round and 0 thereafter. These calculations, then, allow us to describe the
strategic form of the game by using these repeated strategies, and Figure 5.10b
gives this form for the four identified strategies. The argument that repetition
can induce cooperation is made, now, by observing that any combination of
c3 and c4 such as (c4, c4) corresponds to a Nash equilibrium provided that 10/
(1 − r) ≥ 20, or equivalently, that r ≥ ½ – so cooperation is an equilibrium if
neither person discounts the future too greatly (if r is not “too small”).
Cooperate
Defect
Cooperate
Defect
10, 10
–5, 20
20, –5
0
0,
Figure 5.10a  A simple Dilemma
c1
c2
c3
c4
c3
c2
c1
c4
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
−5/(1−r ),
20/(1−r)
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
20/(1−r),
−5/(1−r )
0, 0
20, −5
20, −5
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r)
−5, 20
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
−5, 20
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r)
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r ),
10/(1−r )
10/(1−r )
Figure 5.10b  An infinitely repeated version of Figure 5.10a

--- Sayfa 217 ---
208  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
It is important to emphasize that we have merely established that repeti-
tion can induce a cooperative equilibrium; we have not shown that it neces-
sarily leads to cooperation. First, for such an equilibrium to exist, the players
must give the future sufficient weight—the discount parameter r must be suf-
ficiently high. We can speculate, then, why this observation explains the impact
of elementary school conservation programs on the willingness of America’s
Midwestern farmers to incur the cost of shifting to new farming technologies
in order to preserve the Ogallala aquifer. Those costs are largely short term
whereas the benefits were long term. It is reasonable to hypothesize, however,
that the “worried grandchild” on the grandfather’s knee expressing a concern
about the viability of farming in 20 or 30 years lowered the discount farmers
placed on the future (i.e., raised the value of r), and with this change in values,
cooperative outcomes became sustainable as equilibria.
There is, though, a second reason why we cannot use our example to argue
that cooperative outcomes will necessarily arise from repeated play even if
discount parameters meet the requirements for cooperation to be in equilib-
rium. Specifically, notice that the strategy pair (c2, c2)—(defect always, defect
always)—is also an equilibrium regardless of the value of r. Thus, repetition
adds equilibria, but it does not rid us of the “undesirable” one. Infinite rep-
etition, in fact, leads to new problems. Because infinite repetition allows an
infinity of pure strategies, equilibria multiply to keep pace. And we now know
through various folk theorems (named as such because it is uncertain who first
proposed or established them) that
In an infinitely repeated game, any outcome that gives each player what that
player can guarantee for himself if he plays the game without coordinat-
ing with anyone else—any outcome that satisfies the security value of each
player—can correspond to an equilibrium.
where by security value we mean the worst outcome a player can realize if all
other players act against his or her interest. As a result of such theorems, game
theorists have sought to limit the strategies they think are most likely to be con-
sidered by players. Stationary strategies, for example, require that a player make
the same choice every time he encounters strategically equivalent information
sets—information sets that encompass the same number of decision nodes
such that the nodes in such sets can be matched with identical subsequent sub-
games. Defecting always and cooperating always are stationary, but tit-for-tat
is not since it requires a player to condition his action on the opponent’s previ-
ous decision. Trigger strategies have players playing cooperatively until someone
defects, at which point the strategy “triggers” a permanent punishment. The
strategy c3 is a trigger strategy. Trigger strategies are a special case of punishment
strategies, of which tit-for-tat is the most familiar example. Finally, game theo-
rists have examined strategies that allow only certain degrees of complexity. All
of the strategies in Figure 5.10b are simple because they do not require that a
player store much information about past moves; however, a strategy that says,
“In the event of a defection punish for five rounds,” requires a player of more

--- Sayfa 218 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   209
complexity because the player must now count periods. We will not review this
research because most of it requires complex analytic structures. We merely
point to its existence in order to demonstrate that game theory is not yet a
closed area of inquiry.
Even if we set aside the analytic complexities associated with an infinitely
repeated game, one objection to the above “solution” to the Prisoners’ Dilemma
is that it is difficult to imagine a situation in which people play an infinite
sequence of games with anyone, never mind with the same person and the same
game. But this fact allows us to introduce and understand another idea, that of
reputation. Imagine a situation in which a person in fact does play a PD game
an infinite or indeterminate number of times, but not necessarily with the same
person any two times in a row. Thus, it is not possible for any one person to
punish a defection with a strategy of tit-for-tat by defecting themselves on the
next play of the game since if they did so they’d be punishing the wrong per-
son. On the other hand, suppose defectors can be identified and in some way
“labeled” whereby it is known to everyone whether a specific individual coop-
erated on their last play of the game. In this instance they can be punished by
whoever plays with them next. Moreover, we can imagine even more complex
arrangements in which a failure to punish someone who warrants punishment
is itself deemed a defection. In this way society might attempt to construct a
system of self-enforcing social norms.
Ancestors and Genealogy: If we allow ourselves the opportunity to engage
in a bit of wild speculation, we note that the authors of this volume have
long been fascinated by the fact that it is not uncommon in Asian society,
China especially, for a person to be able to trace back their ancestry 30, 40
or even 50 generations. This contrasts sharply with European societies in
which it is not uncommon for a person to barely know the identities of their
great grandparents. But consider how two abstract societies might evolve;
in one, there is a well-developed legal system available for the enforcement
of contracts and, in the other, little or none at all. In the first, then, punish-
ments can be formally applied, whereas in the second something must act
as a substitute. And that substitute might just be the promise (threat) that
any defection from an agreement today will place a heavy burden on one’s
progeny generations into the future. Thus, even if discount rates are “high,”
the potential for a long series of inter-generational punishments neverthe-
less renders the threat of punishment as compelling as that provided by any
cadre of lawyers.
The door is now open, of course, to a variety of complex modeling exercises
in which we explore things such as the emergence and evolution of social norms,
the role of computational complexity and the different ways people learn to
coordinate in repeated games. More on that later. Instead, to further illustrate
the role of reputation in repeated PD situations, consider legislators who from
time to time strike deals with each other to support each other’s pet legisla-
tive projects. If those projects are much like the private constituency-specific

--- Sayfa 219 ---
210  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
proposals we considered earlier when arguing for why voters might prefer term
limits, then clearly legislators have a short-term incentive to defect from any
agreement (especially if such legislation is voted on sequentially). That incen-
tive increases, moreover, if a legislator thinks there is a good chance that those
with whom he has struck bargains might not be in the legislature next ses-
sion either because of electoral defeat or retirement. But if a legislator himself
intends to make a career of being a representative, he surely has an interest in
maintaining a reputation as one who keeps a bargain because otherwise he may
find it difficult if not impossible to come to agreements with others at some
future date. Those others may simply refuse to “do business” with him because
he is deemed unreliable or to enforce a legislative norm of keeping bargains
once agreed to.
When the Mob Ruled Vegas: To conclude this discussion with yet one
more example, consider casino gambling in Las Vegas. We know that the
casinos are, like airlines, heavily regulated although not with the issue of
anyone’s safety in mind. Rather, those regulations are intended to keep
the casinos honest—no loaded dice, no unbalanced roulette wheels, and
no slot machines preset to never pay off. But why would casinos agree to
be stringently regulated? Indeed, during the period when “the mob ruled
Vegas” why didn’t the mob subvert whatever regulatory authority the state
of Nevada established so as to render its authority impotent? Surely the
likes of Moe Dalitz, Frank Costello, Lucky Luciano, Meyer Lansky, and
Bugsy Siegl, if they preferred to do so, weren’t above using whatever means
were available to them, some not very nice, to have themselves regulated
in ways that allowed for crooked casino gambling. Instead of cheating the
casino’s patrons, the mob chose to cheat the government by skimming its
profits and under-reporting income. The mob, however, as well as today’s
suit and tie corporate casino CEOs, understood one thing: If the casinos
earned a reputation for crooked gambling, then it would be impossible
to attract the type of customer they preferred—middle class America.
Despite images to the contrary, the great mass of disposable income in
America lies in its middle class, which is unlikely to make Vegas a vacation
destination if the roulette wheel is fixed, the dice loaded, the cards marked
and the slot machines too heavily biased in favor of the house. A reputa-
tion for honesty is a public good for the casinos and when given a choice
between cheating their customers versus cheating the government, cheat-
ing the government was the more profitable thing to do. Still, why be regu-
lated by an independent state agency? Surely the casinos, acting on their
own, could in the era of mob rule, regulate themselves. It may be true that
each casino or mob family had an incentive to defect and rig a game here
or there, but self-regulation in the era of Bugsy Siegl and the like required
little more than a bomb in a car or a ride to the desert to give a defector
a permanent home under the tumbleweed and sand. However, not only
would middle income America stay away from rigged casinos, they might

--- Sayfa 220 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   211
be even less inclined to visit Vegas if it earned a reputation for having bod-
ies continually discovered here and there with an occasional car explod-
ing in casino parking lots. The solution to all problems—detecting and
punishing defectors—was to be visibly and straightforwardly regulated
by a state agency that was wholly independent from any casino influence
and that worked at sustaining its own reputation for being cleaner than
the Pope.
5.5  Constitutional Design and A Recursive Game
The preceding discussion and analyses of the Prisoners’ Dilemma point to two
general “solutions” for avoiding the consequences of being caught in an unsa-
vory equilibrium: Either change the game or somehow embed it in a repeated
context. Insofar as the first solution is concerned, it should be evident by now
that Prisoners’ Dilemmas in their various forms are commonly employed to
justify government intervention into unregulated markets and, in a broader
context, to justify the very existence of the state itself. Recall our discussion of
public goods and the example of installing anti-pollution devices on cars. As
we note, a solution to the Dilemma here has the players establishing or hir-
ing an agent (government) who can inspect cars and levy fines in the event
a car is found without the appropriate device so that by thus altering the
game’s payoffs we render the situation something other than a Dilemma. This
solution, though, immediately takes us to the central problem of democratic
politics: Empowering an agent qua government to resolve society’s Dilemmas
requires that we somehow ensure that the agent acts as intended. As Madison
eloquently stated the problem: “In framing a government which is to be admin-
istered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable
the government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control
itself” (Federalist #51).
The usual sought-after method for controlling government—at least demo-
cratic governments—is via a well-crafted constitution that defines the structure
of the state and specifies the limits of its powers. But this merely pushed the
problem back a step to understanding how constitutional provisions are them-
selves enforced, especially those that constrain what the state cannot do. One
commonly asserted answer is that those provisions are enforced in a democracy
by the courts in combination with voters sanctioning incumbent candidates
in elections. But this also only pushes the problem back because we now must
specify how the authority of the courts is maintained and why incumbent poli-
ticians do not simply subvert competitive elections with fraud or the outright
elimination of potential competitors (which we know they in fact sometimes
prefer to do).
It is not uncommon for people to think of constitutions as a contract—a
social contract. However, this conceptualization runs afoul of the search for
an ultimate enforcer of constitutional provisions. In the world of business,
both legal and illegal, there are readily identifiable sources of enforcement,

--- Sayfa 221 ---
212  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
ranging from the courts to the gun, whereby defectors from a contract can
be sanctioned. But the things that enforce such contracts are either unavail-
able or are themselves the product of a constitution’s design when it osten-
sibly establishes the institutional structure of a democratic state and specifies
that state’s legitimate functions. Interestingly, however, game theory and the
various folk theorems just alluded to provide an alternative hypothesis about
constitutional enforcement that, at the same time, give some guidance as to
proper democratic constitutional design. The specific hypothesis we are about
to offer and elaborate on, in fact, derives from the second “solution” to Prison-
ers’ Dilemmas offered in the literature: namely, repeated play. Earlier we show
how infinite repetition of the Dilemma introduces strategies such as tit-for-tat
that admit of equilibria which are not present in the single or finite play of this
game and which include wholly cooperative or efficient outcomes. But now
we have a new problem: The infinitely repeated dilemma has a great many
equilibria, including the old one in which the players maintain an inefficient
outcome. What is required to ensure that this solution “works properly,” then,
is a mechanism that coordinates people to a specific cooperative (efficient)
equilibrium.
Returning then to the issue of constitutional enforcement, suppose that
instead of viewing democratic constitutions as social contracts, we instead
conceptualize them as equilibrium selection devices—as mechanisms for
political-social coordination. With this perspective, a democratic constitution’s
enforcement derives from its ability to coordinate society to equilibria of a spe-
cific sort—namely, to equilibria that pertain to the structure of the state and,
with Madison in mind, to the state’s intended functions.
To begin to see what we mean, consider the provision in the U.S. Consti-
tution that requires that two thirds of the Senate approve of treaties negoti-
ated and proposed by the President (Art. 2, Sect. 2) or the provision that allows
the Senate and House to over-ride a Presidential veto of legislation with a two
thirds vote in each chamber (Art. 1, Sect. 7). One question we can ask is: How
important is it that the fraction in both cases be two thirds? Might the republic
have foundered if it were three fifths, or if it were three fifths for any special vote
in the House but two thirds in the Senate, or vice versa? Or instead of stating the
requirement as a fraction, what if the U.S. Constitution had a number in deci-
mal form, such as 0.69, which, after all, is pretty close to two thirds? The fact is
that while the specific fraction or number chosen might make a difference with
respect to a particular item of legislation or treaty, it probably is of little conse-
quence in terms of the republic’s long-term survival. Instead, what’s important
is that a specific number be agreed to beforehand and that it not be subject
to negotiation as we move from issue to issue. Absent such an agreement, the
choice of a number would merely inherit the instability that would character-
ize the specifics of the policy being addressed. Recall that if the majority rule
cycle A > B > C > A pertains, then any one of these outcomes can be made the
final majority choice by the judicious selection of an agenda—by the choice
of which two alternatives are paired against each other first, with the survivor

--- Sayfa 222 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   213
pitted against the third outcome. In this case, if that same committee were
to vote on which agenda to use, the majority preference over agendas would
inherit the intransitivity that exists over the alternative outcomes themselves.
This problem, however, is general, and absent a prior agreement over rules and
voting procedures, we should anticipate interminable and dysfunctional debate
over those procedures.
What is also interesting about the U.S. Constitution as originally drafted is
that aside from identifying a quorum in the legislature so as to preclude it from
conducting any business if too few legislators are present, it never speaks of
majority rule and specifies a rule only when something other than a simple
majority is deemed necessary. What, then, we might ask precludes Congress
from adopting a policy of approving legislation only if some super-majority
votes for it (as it does when closing debate by implementing cloture) or what
precludes the U.S. Supreme court from requiring that its decisions be binding
only if the opinions of the justices are, as we typically require in jury trials,
unanimous? The answer, of course, is nothing, so we can then also ask whether
the drafters of the U.S. Constitution left the door open to some dangerous pro-
cedural manipulations by not requiring majority rule in those cases. Did they
forget to dot the i’s and cross the t’s?
The answer, if history is any judge, is no because the delegates in Philadel-
phia assumed a society-wide consensus existed as to when simple majority rule
was legitimate. Stated in game theoretic terms, although there may have been
a multitude of potential equilibria when it came to voting rules, society was
already coordinated to the equilibrium of using majority rule in most instances
and thus their document needed to address—and thereby coordinate to—a dif-
ferent rule only in those instances where something other than a simple major-
ity vote was deemed advisable. This same argument can be applied to other
parts of the constitution. The convention in Philadelphia in 1787, for instance,
discussed a number of ways of selecting a chief executive, for appointing federal
judges, and schemes of legislative representation. In each case, there were pas-
sionate preferences over the alternatives, but once again it is reasonable to sup-
pose that in terms of the republic’s survival, it was less important as to which
alternative was chosen in each case and more important that they simply chose
some alternative.
From this perspective, constitutions are best conceptualized not as con-
tracts but as equilibrium coordinating devices. And it is this conceptualization
that explains the source of their enforcement as well as some of the gener-
ally accepted rules for writing national constitutions. Specifically, if they do
in fact coordinate to an equilibrium, then once they have attained legitimacy,
they become self-enforcing. Their provisions are adhered to because unilateral
defections decrease the payoffs of defectors either directly or in the long term
via constitutionally sanctioned punishments. The view of constitutions as equi-
librium selection and coordination devices, we might add, also helps us grapple
with the ill-defined word “legitimacy.” Specifically, we can say that a constitu-
tion is legitimate if each member of society expects that all other members will

--- Sayfa 223 ---
214  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
abide by its provisions. A constitution can be said to be legitimate, then, if it suc-
cessfully coordinates expectations about the beliefs of people to an equilibrium.
This discussion, though, leads to one last question; namely, what have we
gained by viewing constitutions as equilibrium selection devices as opposed to
contracts? We cannot answer this question fully here since this volume is not
specifically about constitutional design. But one answer is provided by noting
that one rule of good constitutional design that appears to have widespread
acceptance is “the shorter the better.” Overly long national constitutions that
read like the complex contractual documents drawn up by lawyers are usually
deemed suspect at best and doomed to failure at worst. If a constitution is to be
an effective coordination device, then it needs to be relatively understandable
to the population generally. Having it be understandable only to specialists and
some small cadre of lawyers, or to require convoluted interpretations, makes it
difficult, if not impossible, to coordinate people’s expectations as to what they
can expect from the state and what are the legitimate versus the illegitimate
actions that the state may take when regulating society. In this respect, we can
compare constitutions to social norms, which also coordinate society. So by
way of example, consider the norm “give an old lady a seat on the bus.” When
this norm is taught to us, it is taught using no more complex a specification
than those nine words. But imagine such a norm being written in the language
of contracts. First we must define “old” and then in all likelihood make provi-
sion for exceptions. Perhaps the norm should be applied also to middle-aged
women carrying heavy packages. But now, how heavy must those packages be?
Is 10 kilograms heavy enough? Who determines a package’s weight? Shall we
place scales on buses to determine when to apply the norm? What if the pack-
age didn’t appear to be heavy but was nevertheless overly cumbersome? How
cumbersome does it have to be? At this point of course, the norm begins to
degenerate into silliness and is no longer likely to work. And by work we mean
if we were to find ourselves seated on a bus and an elderly lady stood before us,
at what point would we feel guilty by remaining seated? Clearly, the norm here
that is likely to work best is the one our parents taught us. The same is generally
true of constitutions.
A great many other things coordinate people, many of which fall under the
general rubric of social norms. And here we find yet another reason for keeping
a constitution short. Specifically, the longer, more expansive and more detailed
a constitution, the more likely it is to “step over the line” and try to regulate
things that are regulated by preexisting norms. A society’s norms, however, are
likely to consist of things that have evolved over millennia so that they have a
greater hold on people’s beliefs and actions than any newly crafted document.
Thus, in any conflict between a pre-existing norm and a written constitution,
we can expect the norm to prevail and, in the process, to erode the perceived
legitimacy of the document. Consider again the Chinese practice of foot bind-
ing, which we discussed earlier as an example of a Prisoners’ Dilemma. There,
despite the formation of innumerable Natural Foot societies, the 1902 edict of
the Dowager Empress Cixi and the formal prohibition of the practice in 1912

--- Sayfa 224 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   215
by the Nationalist government, the practice was reported to have continued in
rural regions as late as the 1940s. It took nearly three-quarters of a century to
rid the country of this standard of erotic beauty, thereby illustrating the dif-
ficulty one encounters with changing social norms. Thus, to imbed such a pro-
hibition in a national constitution, however well intended, would most likely
only undermine the perceived legitimacy of the entire document. If one part of
a constitution is deemed ineffectual, it can only damage the ability of its other
parts to coordinate in other domains.
This view of constitutions also tells us that James Madison was wrong when
he argued against the inclusion of a Bill of Rights in the U.S. Constitution. Once
again, there is nothing in the document per se that enforces those rights. If
we were to again argue that the court does so, we must again ask why anyone
would abide by the court’s decisions. The real answer here about enforcement
is that the listing of rights coordinates people’s expectations not only about
what they believe are legitimate rights, but also about what they think others
will think and how others will act if those rights are violated by the state. Bills
of rights, then, coordinate to equilibria wherein no one has an incentive to uni-
laterally act to oppose them—most importantly political elites who find rights
an “inconvenience” when applied to the rest of us. The role of the court then
becomes that of interpreting those rights in circumstances that may or may not
have been anticipated by the original authors with the assumption that their
edicts will be binding because people are already coordinated to yet another
equilibrium—namely, one in which the courts are the ultimate referee in their
interpretation.
To this point, our argument about the coordinating function of constitu-
tions has been verbal, and it is perhaps useful then to offer an analytic illus-
tration of things. So consider the issue of secession and whether, in a federal
state, federal subjects should be constitutionally allowed or barred from seced-
ing. The usual argument is that such words in a constitutional document are
simply that—mere words on paper—and that federations survive or dissolve
depending on how “profitable” they are to their individual components. How-
ever, let us consider an abstract scenario in which a federation consists of three
members, 1, 2 and 3, where member 1 is contemplating secession. Thus, let 1’s
alternative strategies be
S: secede from the federation
S’: don’t secede
Members 2 and 3, in turn, have two strategies:
P: If member 1 secedes, punish it so as to maintain the federation
P’: If member 1 secedes, don’t punish it and allow the federation to dissolve
As things stand right now with the federation intact, suppose its overall “value”
(measured in some way) is π, where member i is afforded the share ai. Thus,

--- Sayfa 225 ---
216  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
the status quo payoff vector for the federation is (a1π, a2π, a3π), where a1 + a2 +
a3 = 1. If the federation collapses, which we assume occurs if member 1 secedes
and is not punished, the payoff vector (π1, π2, π3) prevails. However, to forestall
this collapse in the event that 1 attempts secession, players 2 and 3 must both
act to punish, in which case we can suppose that the payoff vector (b1π, b2π –
C, b3π – C) is realized, where C > 0 is the cost incurred by 2 and 3 in applying
the punishment and the b’s correspond to a new allocation of the federation’s
“value.” Finally, if only one member acts to punish 1, the punishment is ineffec-
tual, the federation dissolves, and the unit acting unilaterally to punish incurs
a cost of c > 0. Thus, modeled as a 2 × 2 × 2 strategic form, we have the game
in Figure 5.11.
Consider the last column of this table, where what is being compared for
member 1 is the value of seceding without being punished, (S,P’,P’), versus
maintaining the status quo, (S’,P’,P’). Thus, (S,P’,P’) is an equilibrium if π1 >
a1π and πj > πj – c. Since this second inequality is necessarily satisfied, (S,P’,P’)
is an equilibrium if it is more profitable for member 1 to see the federation
dissolved than maintained without any attempted secession. At the same time
(S’,P’,P’) is an equilibrium if the opposite is true with respect to member 1.
Thus, whether or not the federation survives would appear to depend on the
usual economic arguments about its value to individual members. However,
notice that (S’,P,P), which corresponds to member 1 not seceding because it
will be punished by members 2 and 3 if it tries to do so, is also an equilibrium
whenever a1 > b1. Nothing we have said about this example, though, precludes
the possibility that b1 < a1 < π1/π, and if this condition is satisfied then we
have two diagonally opposite equilibria, one in which member 1 secedes and
is not punished and one in which it doesn’t secede because it will be punished
if it attempts to do so. Whether the federation survives and member 1 refrains
from seceding, then, depends on whether members 2 and 3 can coordinate to
punishing 1 if it attempts to secede. And it is this coordination that a constitu-
tion can provide.
Modeling secession as a single play game, however, is admittedly a bit of a
stretch, since if a federal subject chooses not to secede in one period, there is
Member 1
Member 3
P
P’
Member 2
Member 2
P
P’
P
P’
S b1π, b2π-C, b3π-C
a1π, a2π, a3π
a1π, a2π, a3π
π1, π2, π3-c
π1, π2-c, π3
π1, π2, π3
a1π, a2π, a3π
a1π, a2π, a3π
S’
Figure 5.11  Game of secession

--- Sayfa 226 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   217
no reason why it cannot reconsider its decision later. So by way now of intro-
ducing the idea of a recursive game, suppose we complicate things by assuming
that if the federation is not dissolved either because player 1 does not attempt
to secede or because it does but is punished for doing so, the game is repeated.
Thus, two branches of the game’s extensive form double back on each other. To
see how such situations are treated, suppose, in any iteration of the game, that 1
secedes with probability p1 and that 2 and 3 punish 1 with probabilities p2 and p3
respectively. Infinite repetition, of course, allows for an infinity of strategies, but
here we consider only one type—stationary strategies. In fact, the primary rea-
son for extending our example of secession is to introduce this type of strategy,
which requires that a player make the same choices at every iteration of a game.
Thus, with a stationary strategy, a player does not condition his or her choice
on the past, so tit-for-tat in the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma is an example of a
strategy that is not stationary. Figure 5.11 continues to describe the one period
payoffs to the players but by way of some additional useful notation let V(S) be
the payoff to 1 of the stationary strategy of attempting to secede and V(S’) be
the expected payoff of not seceding. Similarly, let Vj(P) and Vj(P’) be player j’s
expected payoffs of punishing and not punishing, j = 2 or 3, if and when player
1 chooses to secede. Finally, following the first play of the game, let v1 be the
continuation value of the game for member 1 -its payoff from all future plays of
the game, which we discount in the first period by δ (with Vj defined in the
same way for j = 2 and 3). Whether 1 chooses S or S’ depends, of course, on
which is greater, V(S) or V(S’). Thus, with stationary strategies,
v1 = max {V(S), V(S’)}
v2 = v3 = max {V(P), V(P’)}
Our notation, in combination with the entries in Figure 5.11, is sufficient to
calculate V(S), etc. Specifically
V(S) = p2p3(b1π + δv1) + (1 – p2p3)π/(1 – δ)
V(S’) = a1π + δv1
Vj(P) = p1pk(bjπ – C + δvj) + p1(1 – pk)(πj/(1 – δ) – c) + (1 – p1)(ajπ + δvj)
Vj(P’) = p1πj/(1 – δ) + (1 – pk)(ajπ + δvj)
If we narrow our search for equilibria to pure strategies, we know that
p1 = 1 if V(S) ≥ V(S’) in which case v1 = V(S)
p1 = 0 if V(S) < V(S’) in which case v1 = V(S’)
pj = 1 if V(P) ≥ V(P’) in which case vj = V(S)
pj = 0 if V(P) < V(P’) in which case vj = V(P’)
There are eight possible pure strategy stationary equilibria, with the conditions
for each to be an equilibrium presented in Table 5.2 (where X assumes various
complex algebraic values, all of which are complex but of little consequence to

--- Sayfa 227 ---
218  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
our conclusions). From this table, however, we can see that (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1),
(1, 1, 0) (1, 0, 1) and (1, 1, 1) cannot be stationary equilibria since otherwise
we violate the assumptions that c > 0 and a1 > b1. So as before, we have the two
equilibria (0, 0, 0) and (1, 0, 0) in which player 1’s decision to secede or not
depends solely on whether remaining in the federation is more profitable or
valuable than going it alone. And then, as before, there is the additional equi-
librium, (0, 1, 1), in which 1 does not secede since, if it does, it knows it will be
punished. It is the coordination of 2 and 3 to this equilibrium that, presumably,
a constitution can accomplish.
It is, of course, unsurprising that we reach the same conclusion treating Fig-
ure 5.11 as a recursive game as we did when treating it as a one shot game,
given the restrictions we place on potential equilibria—namely, stationary pure
strategies. Our example here is intended primarily to introduce the notions
of continuation value and stationary strategies—ideas to which we return in
subsequent chapters. Our example is also quite limited in allowing only mem-
ber 1 to contemplate secession. However, lest the reader think our example is
too far removed from reality to convey any substantive lessons, imagine what
might have happened had the U.S. Constitution explicitly prohibited secession
or explicitly allowed it. If it had explicitly prohibited it, we can ask whether
Robert E. Lee, with his sense of duty and legality, would have turned down
Lincoln’s offer to lead the Union Army against secessionist South Carolina?
Absent Virginia and Lee’s leadership, the American Civil War arguably would
have been a brief and far less bloody affair. Conversely, if the Constitution had
explicitly allowed secession, could Lincoln have mobilized the North to contest
a South intent on separation, especially when perhaps a majority of the North
had little sympathy for those who argued for the abolition of slavery? Similarly,
imagine a Soviet Union in 1989 in which Premier Gorbachev, in lieu of render-
ing secession legal by encouraging the Politburo to amend the Soviet Constitu-
tion to lay out a specific, albeit tortuous process for secession, had left things
as they were. Would the Baltic Republics have felt encouraged to declare their
separation from the USSR as they obviously did? Similarly, we can view the
dissolution of the Warsaw Pact as a sequence of secessions, with Poland leading
Table 5.2  Potential Equilibria to the Recursive Secession Game
Cases
Player 1
Player 2
Player 3
(0, 0, 0)
a1 ≥ π1/π
c ≥ 0
c ≥ 0
(0, 1, 0)
a1 ≥ π1/π
c < 0
C ≥ X
(0, 0, 1)
a1 ≥ π1/π
C ≥ X
c < 0
(0, 1, 1)
a1 ≥ b1
C < X
C < X
(1, 0, 0)
a1 < π1/π
c ≥ 0
c ≥ 0
(1, 1, 0)
a1 < π1/π
c < 0
C ≥ X
(1, 0, 1)
a1 < π1/π
C ≥ X
c < 0
(1, 1, 1)
a1 < b1
C < X
C < X

--- Sayfa 228 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   219
the way. But keep in mind that all that changed prior to the Pact’s dissolution
was the Kremlin (and Gorbachev in particular) explicitly stating that it would
hereafter abide by the “Sinatra doctrine” of letting each member state “do it
their way.” Soviet troops were still present and still capable of punishing defec-
tors as they had done in 1956 (Hungary) and 1968 (Czechoslovakia). Only the
words had changed, but that change was sufficient to change expectations and,
thus, the equilibrium members of the Pact assumed they were in. We wouldn’t,
though, want to leave the reader with the impression that members of the Pact,
immediately upon hearing of the ostensible change in Kremlin policy, assumed
a new equilibrium had prevailed. The powers that be in the Kremlin, after all,
might change their mind and one couldn’t also preclude the possibility that the
personnel of the Kremlin itself might change, peacefully or otherwise. What
ensued, then, upon Gorbachev’s announcement of a new policy with respect
to its allies was a gradual and hesitant shift in the actions of the Pact’s member
states, with the Kremlin’s reaction being carefully observed and with everyone
on the alert for a signal that Gorbachev’s words had been somehow misinter-
preted or were but a part of Gorbachev’s public relations agenda with respect to
the West. In Hungary, for example, the events of 1956, originally officially called
a “counter-revolution” were, in January 1989, renamed a “popular uprising,”
whereupon Hungarian officials waited to see the Kremlin’s response. The sub-
sequent absence of a response was taken to mean that the Sinatra Doctrine was,
in fact, real. Later, in Chapter 7 we will examine such signaling more closely,
but our point here is simply that words can coordinate to one equilibrium or
another since they coordinate expectations and beliefs as to what strategies are
legitimate and which ones others are abiding by.
5.6  Evolutionarily Stable Strategies and Corruption
One of the ostensible mysteries of economic reform following the collapse of
the Soviet Union is why states that were a part of the USSR’s Central European
empire largely succeeded in their reform efforts whereas the component parts
of the Union itself, Russia included, have been far less successful at establishing
markets that avoid the inefficiencies of massive corruption.
Corruption, of course, takes a great many forms, from election fraud to the
outright buying of favors from incumbent politicians, and it also has many
sources, from a weak or non-existent rule of law to a mass media controlled by
the state and thus unlikely to do the investigative work that uncovers official
malfeasance. There are, though, intermediate causes, and here let us consider
the situation that existed in ex-Soviet states following the USSR’s dissolution.
Clearly, a great many individuals hoped for a rapid transformation of the econo-
mies of, say, Russia and Ukraine into something that mimicked Western Europe
or the Scandinavian states, but soon enough Western investors learned that
the obligation of contracts meant something different in ex-Soviet states than
what they had anticipated or hoped for. As many an investor learned, former
Soviet apparatchiks and members of the old nomenklatura regarded contracts

--- Sayfa 229 ---
220  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
as something binding only until a better offer came along or they were able to
extract another bribe to maintain an agreement. The particular problem was
that Western investors, having previously operated in political systems with a
strong legal code, invested with long-term planning horizons wherein they were
willing to make investments even if profits did not materialize years down the
road. In contrast, those raised under a Soviet regime in which the law favored
whoever had access to the powers that be, operated with far shorter planning
horizons if only because there was the inherent uncertainty as to who would
be favored tomorrow by those powers. What rendered this situation especially
frustrating was that there did exist a core of native ex-Soviets willing to operate
by the West’s rules and who preferred the establishment of a meaningful rule
of law in their countries whereby long-term contracts could be enforced. Soon
enough, though—as early as the late ’90s—those same persons acted no differ-
ently than their apparatchik and nomenklatura counterparts.
The suggestion here, then, is that post-Soviet states consisted of two types of
individuals—those who placed a high discount on the future and those with a
low discount. And in this context it is easy to imagine a situation in which even
those who might have preferred operating with a long-term planning horizon,
found themselves in a game in which the only viable alternative for them was
to operate with a short-term horizon. To illustrate, consider the 2-person game
in Figure 5.12:
With numbers here meant only to convey relative preferences, the idea is
that if both persons operate with a short-term horizon, they are precluded
from engaging in those mutually beneficial long-term investments that require
enforceable contracts and their profits are minimal. On the other hand, if one
of them adopts a long-term perspective, there’s a good chance he can be taken
advantage of by someone who gives little weight to the future and the sanctity
of contracts—hence the asymmetric payoffs in the corresponding cells. Finally,
if both adopt a long-term perspective, then presumably both can realize the full
potential of efficient markets.
Obviously, the game in Figure 5.12 is a Prisoners’ Dilemma, but by itself it
can at best offer a rather simple-minded and incomplete explanation for why a
society attempting to develop a viable rule of law and efficient markets might
fail to do so. There is obviously something missing here because this example
Short term
Long term
Short term
20, 20
40, 0
Long term
0, 40
35, 35
Figure 5.12  Prisoners’ Dilemma of planning horizons

--- Sayfa 230 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   221
does not explain why Central Europe, in contrast to the USSR (with the excep-
tion of the Baltic Republics), succeeded in its economic reforms. To offer an
explanation for this difference requires that we introduce a new idea—that of
evolutionary stability.
Evolutionary Stability: Setting aside the issue of corruption for the time
being, if we return once again to the infinitely repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma,
we note that its repeated version illustrates a problem that plagues many of
the abstract models people use in the attempt to understand politics from a
game theoretic perspective. Specifically, equilibria need not be unique and, as
the folk theorems establish, equilibrium outcomes can encompass a great many
possibilities with distinctly different implications within any one game. Our
discussion in the preceding section argues that one mechanism for choosing
an equilibrium is the coordinating function of a sustainable national constitu-
tion. The mathematical game theorist’s approach, though, has been somewhat
different, devoting a considerable research effort at formulating refinements of
Nash’s original idea with the hope of narrowing predictions in some way. This
research agenda has not been altogether successful because many games have
multiple and equally reasonable equilibria that no mathematical trick can or in
fact should refine. After all, the existence of different cultures, of different solu-
tions to common problems across cultures, and even so fundamental a thing
as the existence of different languages suggest that we cannot do away with the
possibility of equally plausible multiple equilibria. We are left, then, with noting
that aside from such explicitly engineered creations as political constitutions,
we have not yet fully addressed the general question of how people coordinate
to ensure that some equilibrium ultimately prevails or the processes whereby
one equilibrium as opposed to some other ultimately dictates outcomes. It is
one thing to say in the context of the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma that coop-
erative equilibria exist, but it is quite another thing to assert that people will
somehow achieve such an outcome.
The problem at hand, then, can be restated to ask why people might be pre-
disposed to one strategy (pattern of behavior) rather than another. We can ask,
for example, why certain norms persist in legislatures and why freshmen leg-
islators, who may not share these norms, are nevertheless socialized to accept
them (as against the possibility that some norm carried to the legislature by
one or more freshmen becomes dominant). We could also ask why some stan-
dards of behavior but not others differentiate cultures. To address such ques-
tions, let us take a biological view and think of strategies as gene types in which
a process of natural selection reinforces one strategy as against another. The
classic illustration of what we mean by this is offered by a situation called Hawk
and Dove.
Hawk–Dove: Suppose whenever two individuals confront each other, each
must choose between being a Hawk versus a Dove. Being hawkish means
to fight until injured or until the opponent retires; being a Dove is to strut

--- Sayfa 231 ---
222  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
Viewing this example as a single-play game, notice that (Dove, Hawk) and
(Hawk, Dove) are equilibrium pairs if D > V, and only (Hawk, Hawk) is an
equilibrium if V > D. However, rather than interpret this figure as the strategic
form of a two-person game let us merely take Figure 5.13 as a table that tells us
what payoffs are realized whenever two types of creatures encounter each other.
Now suppose that all creatures in a society are of the same type and are genet-
ically predisposed to choosing one particular strategy so that all interactions are
between pairs who abide by the same strategy—pure or randomized. But sup-
pose also that on occasion (with the small probability p) “normal” strategies
confront mutants (the norm held by the unsocialized freshman legislator?)—
creatures who choose a different strategy. If, for example, society consists only
of Doves, then the expected payoff to a Dove is
0p + (1 – p)V/2 = (1 – p)V/2
(5.1)
whereas the payoff to a mutant Hawk is
p(V – D)/2 + (1 – p)V = V – p(V + D)/2
(5.2)
Some simple algebra reveals that as long as V exceeds pD, expression (5.2)
is greater than (5.1), so on average mutants will “perform” better than
non-mutants. If we now suppose that these payoffs measure the ability of a
gene to reproduce itself (i.e., genes with higher payoffs reproduce more success-
fully than genes with lower payoffs), mutants will proliferate at the expense of
Doves. On the other hand, if society consists of Hawks and it is Doves who are
rare mutants, Hawks experience an expected payoff of
(1 – p)(V – D)/2 + pV = [V – D + p(V + D)]/2
(5.3)
whereas the payoff to a mutant Dove is
about, but to retire whenever confronting a Hawk. Thus, if a Hawk meets
a Dove, the Hawk extracts all value, V, from the situation and the Dove
gets nothing. Suppose further that the winner in a physical confrontation
between two Hawks gets V and the loser suffers a loss of D. Finally, if two
Doves meet, they merely split V equally. Hence, if similar opponents have
equal probabilities of winning and losing, then Figure 5.13 portrays the
expected payoffs of two competing animals:
Hawk
Dove
Hawk
(V−D)/2, (V−D)/2
V, 0
Dove
0, V
V/2, V/2
Figure 5.13  Hawk–Dove payoffs

--- Sayfa 232 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   223
(1 – p)0 + pV/2 = pV/2
(5.4)
Thus, as long as V exceeds D, mutant Doves will suffer relative to Hawks. That
is, with V > D, being a Hawk is evolutionarily stable.
To generalize this example, consider the following definition:
s is an evolutionarily stable strategy if, for any other strategy s',
u(s, s) > u(s′, s)
(5.5)
or
u(s, s) = u(s′, s) and u(s, s′) > u(s′, s′).
(5.6)
To see this definition’s relation to our argument that a society of Hawks is evo-
lutionarily stable whenever V > D, notice first that the expected return from
using the strategy Hawk, E(Hawk), can be written
E(Hawk) = (1 − p)u(Hawk, Hawk) + pu(Hawk, Dove)
(5.7)
whereas the payoff from Dove is
E(Dove) = (1 − p)u(Dove, Hawk) + pu(Dove, Dove)
(5.8)
where the various values of u are given in Figure 5.13. Expressions (5.7)
and (5.8) are, of course, the same as (5.3) and (5.4) written more gener-
ally, so if all Hawks is evolutionarily stable, we require that E(Hawk) >
E(Dove), or
(1 − p)u(Hawk, Hawk) + pu(Hawk, Dove) >
(1 − p)u(Dove, Hawk) + pu(Dove, Dove).
Since p is very small (a Dove is the rare mutant), this inequality is satisfied if
u(Hawk, Hawk) > u(Dove, Hawk),
which is what expression (5.5) requires and which, the reader might note,
parallels the definition of a Nash equilibrium. Occasionally, however, equality
might hold here as when a Hawk has no advantage over a Dove when confront-
ing another Hawk. But we surely wouldn’t want to label the situation evolu-
tionarily stable if at the same time a Hawk does have an advantage over a Dove
when confronting Doves. Thus, if equality in the above expression holds, then
evolutionary stability requires
u(Hawk, Dove) > u(Dove, Dove),
which is what expression (5.6) requires.
One case now remains to be considered—namely, when D > V > pD (where
pD is approximately 0 for very small p). Keeping in mind that we are not

--- Sayfa 233 ---
224  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
interpreting Figure 5.13 as a game matrix, but merely as a table revealing the
payoffs players receive when confronting someone of the same or different type,
since neither all Doves nor all Hawks is an evolutionarily stable situation if
D > V > 0, consider the possibility that the non-mutant (normal) members
of the species each abide by a mixed strategy (q, 1 − q). Once again, if mutants
(who use the strategy (r, 1 − r), r ≠ q) arise with some small probability, then
(after some algebraic manipulation in conjunction with Figure 5.13),
u(q,q) = [V – q2D]/2
u(r,q) = [rV + V – qrD – qV]/2
In accordance with expression (5.5), if we set u(q, q) > u(r, q) we get
(q − r)(V − qD) > 0.
We do not know, however, whether q is greater than or less than r. Indeed, if the
mixed strategy (q, 1 − q) is evolutionarily stable, it must be that neither strate-
gies with r > q or r < q can gain a greater payoff. So the only circumstance in
which we are assured that the preceding expression holds universally is if we set
q = V/D. But now equality holds in the first part of expression (5.6), so it is the
later part of expression (5.6) that must be satisfied. So computing u(q, r) and
u(r, r),
u(q,r) = [qV + V – qrD – rV]/2
u(r,r) = [V – q2D]/2
Expression (5.6)’s requirement that u(q, r) exceed u(r, r) becomes, after some
algebraic manipulation,
(q − r)[V − rD] > 0,
which can be rewritten as
D(q – r)[V/D – r] > 0
Substituting q = V/D gives
D(q − r)2 > 0,
which is necessarily satisfied whenever r is not equal to q, because D is assumed
to be positive and since the squared term is necessarily positive.
A natural question to pose at this point is to ask about the relationship
between evolutionarily stable strategies and Nash equilibria, and here our result
is straightforward: If we interpret the payoff structures used to represent the
interaction of alternative types or species, such as Figure 5.13, as a symmetric
strategic form game, then an evolutionarily stable strategy corresponds to a Nash

--- Sayfa 234 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   225
equilibrium, but not every Nash equilibrium corresponds to an evolutionarily sta-
ble strategy. To see the first part of this statement, expressions (5.5) and (5.6)
combine to state that s is evolutionarily stable only if u(s, s) > u(s', s), which is
simply the requirement that a player has no incentive to defect unilaterally from
s. A Nash equilibrium need not correspond to an evolutionarily stable strat-
egy, on the other hand, because of the second part of expression (5.6)—evo-
lutionary stability imposes a somewhat stricter requirement on strategy pairs
than does the definition of a Nash equilibrium. Notice, however, that any Nash
equilibrium in which a player’s payoffs decrease (as opposed to merely remain
unchanged) by a unilateral defection is evolutionarily stable.
Let us now return to our original problem of the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma
in order to assess what kind of solution the notion of evolutionary stability
provides there. Before we do so, however, let us generalize (5.1) and (5.2) in a
way demanded by the context of the analysis. Specifically, what we must keep
in mind is that we are not analyzing merely the interactions of two specific
individuals; instead, we are looking at how a particular strategy performs in a
“population of strategies.” Thus, it is possible that there are multiple simultane-
ous mutations occurring, and the ability of one strategy to predominate against
another will depend not only on how the strategy does against a particular
mutation but also on how each performs against other common “adversaries.”
To develop an appropriate notation that handles this possibility, let sj (j = 0,
1, 2, …, n) denote a particular strategy and let pj denote the probability that
any particular creature employs strategy sj. Further, let s0 denote the “normal”
(non-mutant) strategy (which means that p0 is very much larger than p1, p2, and
so on), and let sn denote the particular mutant strategy that concerns us. Then
the extension and general form of expression (5.7) becomes
P0U(s0, s0) + pnU(s0, sn) + ΣpjU(s0, sj),
(5.9)
and the extension and general form of expression (5.8) is
p0U(sn, s0) + pnU(sn, sn) + ΣpjU(sn, sj)
(5.10)
where both summations are over all values of j except j = 0 and n. The particular
difficulty with the Prisoners’ Dilemma, now, is that there are a great many strat-
egies for which U(s0, s0) = U(sn, sn) and U(s0, sn) = U(sn, sn) —Tit-for-Tat and
Always Cooperate are two such examples, since neither ever defects against the
other. One may hold an advantage over the other, however, because it performs
better against a third type of strategy that appears in (5.9) and (5.10) only after
the summation signs. Suppose there are three strategies: Tit-for-Tat (TFT);
Tit-for-Two-Tats (TF2T, which allows for being the victim of two consecutive
defections before it retaliates with a defection); and Suspicious-Tit-For-Tat
(STFT, which begins with a defection and plays TFT thereafter). Notice now
that TF2T can invade a population in which everyone plays TFT if it performs
better against STFT than does TFT—if U(TF2T, STFT) > U(TFT, STFT). To see
that this inequality in fact holds, notice first that TF2T versus STFT yields the

--- Sayfa 235 ---
226  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
sequence of choices (Cooperate, Defect), (Cooperate, Cooperate), (Cooperate,
Cooperate), . . .—or, using the same numbers used to generate Figure 5.10b,
the sequence of payoffs −5, 10, 10, 10, and so on. On the other hand, TFT ver-
sus STFT yields (Cooperate, Defect), (Defect, Cooperate), (Cooperate, Defect),
(Defect, Cooperate), . . .—or, the payoff sequence −5, 20, −5, 20, −5, and so on.
Thus, as long as the discount rate does not weight the second-round payoff of
20 too greatly at the expense of subsequent payoffs, TF2T can invade TFT.
We can use the preceding argument, now, to establish that no pure strategy is
evolutionarily stable for the Prisoners’ Dilemma in every possible environment.
No pure strategy, of course, is dominant and thus no such strategy is at least
as good and sometimes better than any other. Suppose X and Y are two strate-
gies that earn the same payoff against each other as they do against themselves.
Then there exists a strategy Z that is better against X than it is against Y, and
there exists another strategy W that is better against Y than it is against X. Then,
if X is the normal strategy and if Y and Z are possible mutants, Y can invade
because of its relative advantage with respect to Z. On the other hand, if Y is
the normal strategy and X and W are the mutant types, X can invade Y. What
such an exercise tells us, then, is that the types of strategies likely to prevail as
evolutionarily stable will be mixed strategies (see the 1987 article by R. Boyd
and J. Lorberbaum, “No Pure Strategy is Evolutionarily Stable in the Repeated
Prisoners’ Dilemma,” Nature 327, May).
Despite this somewhat pessimistic conclusion with respect to the Prisoners’
Dilemma, we can still see here in the notion of evolutionary stability a way to
approach such issues as learning, the evolution of social norms and endoge-
nous processes of social coordination. It is, admittedly, a bit farfetched to imag-
ine norms and social coordination arising out of some pure biological process
whereby those with the “wrong” norms or who fail to coordinate effectively in
everyday mundane circumstances die off at a greater rate than others or fail to
reproduce at the same rate as anyone else. But consider the following thought
experiment: Imagine that the human brain contains countless heuristics that
direct our day to day actions, including heuristics as to when to apply other,
higher level heuristics when encountering a new circumstance. Through trial
and error, a person learns, consciously and unconsciously, which heuristics or
ideas work best and which work poorly, with the poorer performing ideas being
discarded or at least applied with decreasing frequency. If we think of these
ideas or heuristics, then, as competing genes, the notion of evolutionary stabil-
ity can be seen to have broader application than to mere biological processes.
It is the application of this perspective to the issue of corruption and economic
reform that we consider in the next subsection.
Corruption: Returning now to the issue of corruption and the relative success
of countries at making a transition to competitive markets, we can begin with the
supposition that post-Soviet states consisted of two types of individuals—those
who placed a high discount on the future and those with a low discount. Refer-
ring back to our discussion of the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma, then, those
with a high discount acted as if they had a low value of r (denoted rlow) whereas

--- Sayfa 236 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   227
those with a low discount on the future acted as if they held a high value for r
(denoted rhigh). It would seem wholly reasonable, now, to suppose we can take
the payoffs of the Hawk/Dove scenario and simply transplant the labels rlow and
rhigh for Hawk and Dove respectively. That is, a person who discounts the future
highly and who thereby exhibits a low value for r will be quite willing to forego
honoring any contract in favor of an immediate payoff and will, when deal-
ing with a person who discounts the future less, be able to take advantage of
that person. Two persons with long-term perspectives will each realize the full
potential of their investments, V/2, whereas two persons with heavy discounts
of the future will realize only a diminished payoff, V – D. Recall now that if
V > D, the evolutionary strategy was to be a Hawk. Thus, here if V > D, it is
evolutionarily stable to discount the future greatly. Mutant rhigh’s—those who
place a high value of maintaining long-term contracts—cannot invade a society
in which the predominant culture is to operate as it was in the Soviet past with
short-term planning horizons.
Of course, not all components of the USSR faired as poorly in their transi-
tion to efficient markets as did Russia and Ukraine. The Baltic states of Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania seem to have performed quite well, as did, as we noted ear-
lier, the Central European states of the former Soviet Empire, especially Poland,
Hungary, and both parts of the former Czechoslovakia. Thus, we cannot say
that it was simply the prior existence of a Soviet-style Communist regime that
explains the differences we observe. At the time of this transition it was not
uncommon for journalists and other commentators to say that the difference
was that Russia and Ukraine had been under Communism for 70+ years whereas
the Baltic states and those in Central Europe only suffered a post-World War II
experience with Communism. This “explanation,” however, is no explanation
at all; it is merely an empirically observed fact. It can, though, be made a part
of an explanation if we suppose that with 70+ years under Soviet rule, there
were few if any persons with the experience of having functioned in a “normal”
Western-style economy; but with only 40 or so years of being a Soviet satellite,
and with a significant diaspora willing to return to their countries once those
countries freed themselves from a Soviet hegemony, there were a great many
more persons in those states who held Western values or perspectives when it
came to investments and the obligation of contracts. Thus, in these states it was
the rlow’s who filled the role of mutant.
There remains, though, a problem with this analysis insofar as explaining the
experience of Central Europe and the Baltic states. Specifically, even if rlow’s are
mutants, as long as V > D, rhigh cannot be evolutionarily stable. Mutant rlow’s will
be able to invade a population of rhigh’s. However, suppose the payoffs in the pre-
ceding table are themselves discounted under the assumption that they merely
represent the one-period payoff of a potentially infinite sequence of payoffs. In
other words, suppose we express payoffs as in Figure 5.14.
Now notice that even if V > D, if rlow is sufficiently low relative to rhigh, there
are two equilibria if we interpret the preceding table as a game, which opens
the door to all rhigh’s being evolutionarily stable. Suppose, moreover, that the

--- Sayfa 237 ---
228  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
None of this, of course, proves that an evolutionary approach holds the key
to understanding why one society moves in the direction of becoming corrupt
and another does not. There remains, for instance, some dramatic variance in
the economic performance of the countries that existed under Communism
for an identical period of time, especially if we include the former components
of Yugoslavia. In 2011, for instance, Croatia’s GDP growth was 0% whereas
Estonia’s was 7.6%. Nevertheless, such an analysis gives us a more promising
approach to a theoretically satisfying explanation than does doing little more
than making reference to the length of time one society versus another lived
under Soviet-style Communism.
0 payoffs are not strictly 0 but some small amount α, in which case our table
becomes
Now even if V > D, if rlow is sufficiently low and rhigh sufficiently high, only rhigh
is evolutionarily stable. For example, if V = 5, D = 3, rlow = 0 and rhigh = 0.9 then
Figure 5.15 becomes Figure 5.16, in which case all α need be 0.1 or greater for
rhigh to be the unique evolutionarily stable equilibrium.
(V − D)/2(1-rlow),
(V − D)/2(1-rlow)
V/(1-rlow),0
rlow
rhigh
rlow
rhigh
0,V(1-rlow)
V/2(1-rhigh),
V/2(1-rhigh)
Figure 5.14  Hawk-Dove with discounted payoffs
(V − α)/ (1-rlow),
(V − α)/ (1-rlow),
α/ (1-rhigh)
α/ (1-rhigh),
(V − D)/ 2(1-rlow),
(V − D)/2(1-rlow)
rlow
rhigh
rlow
rhigh
V/2(1-rhigh),
V/2(1-rhigh)
Figure 5.15  Hawk-Dove with non-zero payoffs and discounting
1, 1
5 – α, 10α
10α, 5 – α
25, 25
rlow
rhigh
rlow
rhigh
Figure 5.16  A numerical example

--- Sayfa 238 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   229
5.7  Key Ideas and Concepts
Prisoners’ Dilemma
cooperation
collective action
public goods
externalities
reputation
social norm
tit-for-tat
trigger strategy
discount rate / discount factor
continuation value
recursive game / stationary strategy
coordination
evolutionarily stable equilibrium
evolutionary game
Exercises for Chapter 5
1.
For what values of x is the following game a Prisoners’ Dilemma?
x, 1
3, −4
1, 3
2, 3
2.
What is the minimum fine someone could levy such that the following
game is not a Prisoners’ Dilemma (payoffs are to the row chooser and col-
umn chooser faces an equivalent choice)? What minimum fine renders
the game not only not a Prisoners’ Dilemma but establishes the “efficient”
strategy as dominant?
0
9
−1
3
3.
If free competition reigns in an industry, 20 million units of that indus-
try’s products will be sold by each firm at a net profit of $1 per item. But
if they collude to set a higher price, each firm will sell 15 million units
at a net profit of $2 each. If one firm defects to a lower price, its sales
will soar to 35 million units while every other firm will sell nothing, and
the creditors will begin to circle overhead. Senator Billie Bob proposes a
licensing agreement whereby each member of the industry must pay a
tax of $.20/item to produce the product at the fixed price that the car-
tel prefers—ostensibly to insure that “destructive competition” does not
“leave hard-working Americans unemployed.” What is the upper limit on
how much money he can extract from each firm in the form of campaign
contributions to his party?
4.
If the cartel price for some commodity earns each firm $10 million, if each
firm can earn $3 million in the competitive market, and if each firm can, by

--- Sayfa 239 ---
230  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
defecting from the cartel, capture the entire market, which of the following
games best illustrates this situation (all numbers are in millions)?
a.
10, 3
12, 0
0, 12
3, 10
b.
10, 10
20, 0
0, 20
3, 3
c.
0, 0
10, 0
0, 10
3, 3
d.
10, 10
0, 20
20, 0
3, 3
e.
none of the above
5.
You direct Consolidated Smoke and you must decide whether or not to
agree to meet the president of Acme Sludge so that the two of you can fix
prices for your similar products, in which case your corporations each earn
$220 million. Both of you recognize however that the situation is a Prison-
ers’ Dilemma: at the market price, you each earn $90 million, while if only
one defects from the agreement, his corporation earns $300 million and
the other corporation earns “zip.” Being competitive entrepreneurs with
your MBAs, neither of you trusts the other to maintain any agreement
reached. An additional danger is that federal antitrust investigators (with
probability .4) will detect your agreement, negate the price fixing scheme,
and impose a fine of $50 million each. Congressman I. M. Crass, however,
proposes to offer legislation that will make the cartel legal and enforceable
in a court of law, and that will provide the regulatory teeth to maintain it;
he demands some assistance in the next election—say, $50 million from
each firm. The problem is he wants his money up front, before the legisla-
ture votes, and he can promise only a fifty-fifty chance that the proposed
legislation will pass. Assuming that you make the best decision possible in
the circumstances, what are your firm’s expected profits?
6.
Three students, 1, 2, and 3, have enrolled in Political Theory and the
instructor has announced beforehand that he will award one A, one C,
and one F (no pass-fail option this quarter). Homework does not count
towards the final grade and the students have earned scores of 55, 65, and
70, respectively, on their midterm exam. Each student associates a payoff of
2, 1, and −1, respectively, with receiving an A, C, or F, and each knows that
if they study at maximum effort they will earn an 80 on the final exam, and
a moderate-low effort will yield a grade of 40. Suppose that, ceteris paribus,
each student prefers as little effort as possible, but is willing to study if

--- Sayfa 240 ---
The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action   231
doing so changes that student’s grade for the better. A student’s final grade
is based on his or her relative standing as determined by the sum of mid-
term plus final exam grades.
a.
Assuming that all three students must decide whether or not to study
without being informed about the action taken by any other student,
portray the situation in strategic form, with letter grades denoting the
outcomes in each cell.
b.
Is there a determinate final outcome?
c.
Suppose students 1 and 2 can observe 3’s action beforehand. Does this
change their strategies and the final outcome?
7.
Two farmers must share an irrigation system, which they use by alternating
their access to it day by day. The farmer whose turn it is to extract water on
a particular day must choose between taking the allotted share (for a ben-
efit of 0 to himself and a cost of 0 to the other farmer) versus taking more
than the allotted share (for a benefit of B to the farmer in question and a
cost of C to the other farmer). However, the farmer who must otherwise sit
idly by for the day can choose to inspect his opposite number’s activities
at a cost to himself of K. If an excessive extraction is detected, the farmer
is empowered to fine the offender an amount F, which can be kept as com-
pensation for any economic injury.
a.
Assuming that all parameter values exceed zero, and taking a myopic
one-day view, for what parameter values is there a pure strategy equi-
librium in which the farmer inspects with certainty?
b.
Assuming that there is no pure strategy equilibria, what is the mixed
strategy equilibrium?
c.
Suppose that one of the farmers is to be picked at random as the one to
use the irrigation system, and suppose the parameters are set such that
(take more than allotted share, inspect) is a pure strategy equilibrium.
Can we raise the value of F so that the farmers prefer that there not be
any pure strategy equilibrium over what they would expect to get from
playing the game with the old parameter values?
8.
Two lobbyists, 1 and 2, each seek legislation that is diametrically opposed
to the legislation sought by the other. Since we cannot construe this leg-
islation as being “in the public interest,” they must decide when to con-
tribute money to a legislator’s campaign war chest. (Assume legislators
“come cheap,” so the size of the contribution can be ignored in the calcu-
lation of a lobbyist’s payoff.) The legislator sees no reelection threat and
intends to convert this war chest into a personal retirement fund. But in the
science-fiction world of this problem, suppose the law frowns on all such
activities and that as a consequence, neither lobbyist dares to make a sec-
ond offer if his or her first one is refused. The exact nature of the legislator’s
behavior, however, is unknown, so both lobbyists employ the following
model: If the lobbyists commit at times t1 and t2 (0 < t1, t2 < 1), respec-
tively, and if ti  < tj, then the probability that the contribution leads the

--- Sayfa 241 ---
232  The Prisoners’ Dilemma and Collective Action
legislator to support i is ti. If the legislator does not commit to supporting i at
this time, he either supports the legislation sought by j with probability tj or
he supports no one with probability 1 − tj. The possibility exists, then, that
the legislator never commits and that neither lobbyist gets what he wants.
Assume that the payoff of no legislation to a lobbyist is equivalent to an
even chance that one or the other lobbyist gets his or her way.
a.
If lobbyist i (i = 1 or 2) makes the first move (by choosing ti < tj), lobbyist
j learns this fact at that time and also learns the legislator’s response to i’s
offer. Letting a strategy be the time at which to make the offer, does this
situation have a pure strategy equilibrium, and, if so, what is it?
b.
How is the situation changed if an offer and its rejection (but not its
acceptance) cannot be observed by the competing lobbyist?
9.
Show that if the “normal” strategy in a society playing the Prisoners’
Dilemma is TFT, and if the allowable mutants are STFT, ALLD (always
defect), and TF2T, then TF2T can invade if the probability of ALLD is low
compared to STFT, whereas the opposite is true if ALLD is more common.

--- Sayfa 242 ---
6
Agendas and Voting Rules
6.1  Agendas and Voting
Earlier chapters offer several examples of legislative and parliamentary bodies
giving coherence to their deliberations and voting by establishing formalized
voting rules whereby a set of alternatives is considered and voted on in some
sequential fashion until a final outcome is arrived at. Agendas, though, need
not be formal well-defined parliamentary procedures dictated by such things
as Robert’s Rules of Order. For example, as Convention delegates saddled up or
stepped into their horse-drawn carriages in 1787 for the trip to Philadelphia, a
young James Madison had already squirreled himself away in that city to study
and refine his proposal for a radically new national charter. Called the Virginia
Plan by historians, the delegates ultimately rejected many of Madison’s ideas,
including things he deemed critically important, such as having states repre-
sented in both legislative chambers, the House and the Senate, in proportion to
their populations; a provision for a federal legislative veto over state laws; and a
president selected by the national legislature. Nevertheless, having formulated
a comprehensive proposal, much of the subsequent debate that summer was
dictated or influenced by Madison’s draft. Indeed, we should keep in mind that
the delegates were, in fact, directed by the then-U.S. Congress to consider only
amendments to the current Articles of Confederation whereas Madison’s draft
tossed the Articles into the trash and started anew. Madison, then, largely set the
agenda for the Convention, albeit not in a formally defined way.
Whether formal or informal, game theory, and especially the analysis of exten-
sive forms, seems especially well suited to the study of agendas and addressing a
number of issues that arise with respect to them. These issues include examin-
ing the extent to which outcomes can be manipulated by choosing one agenda
over another, assessing the power of agenda setters and the opportunities for
voters to thwart the intentions of setters, the role of a strategic misrepresen-
tation of preferences, the opportunities for manipulating outcomes by either
inserting or withdrawing alternatives from an agenda, and the various forms
agendas take in different legislative bodies and how those forms might bias out-
comes in one direction or another.
Before we get to such substantive matters, however, we should first return
to a reconsideration of McKelvey’s result, discussed in Chapter 4, concerning

--- Sayfa 243 ---
234  Agendas and Voting Rules
dominated outcomes and his “4r ball.” In doing so, it is also useful to introduce
yet another abstract idea that is commonly employed in academic treatises on
agendas, the uncovered set. Briefly, if S is a set of feasible outcomes, and if x, y and
z are three outcomes in S, then x covers y with respect to S (which we can write
as x CS y) if and only if x defeats y (generally, in our case, by a majority vote)
and for each z in S that y defeats, x defeats z as well. The uncovered set is then
the set of outcomes that are not covered (there are variations of this definition
to treat such things as indifference and ties, but this definition, which essentially
establishes an equivalence between being uncovered and being undominated, is
good enough for our purposes as it conveys the essential idea). The close corre-
spondence between uncovered and undominated sets, now, establishes the con-
nection to McKelvey’s analysis—namely, with spatial preferences, the uncovered
set necessarily lies within the 4r ball defined by his result.
Focusing on one special class of agendas called amendment agendas most
easily illustrates the relevance of these ideas to the study of voting with formally
prescribed agendas. An amendment agenda can be represented as a finite vec-
tor (a, b, c, d, ….) to indicate that the rule of voting is “a against b, the win-
ner against c, the winner of that vote against d, and so on.” Academia being
what it is, the fact that amendment agendas have such a simple representation
accounts, perhaps, for the fact that it is the most widely studied form despite the
fact that virtually no parliamentary or legislative body employs it when consid-
ering more than three alternatives. For example, suppose one of the chambers
of the U.S. Congress is considering five alternatives: The status quo, q; a bill, b,
reported to the floor out of committee; an amendment to the bill, ba; a substi-
tute bill, s; and an amendment to the substitute, sa. As we note in Chapter 2, the
prescribed order of voting is as follows: First, the substitute is “refined” (i.e.,
a vote is taken between s and sa); then the bill reported out of committee is
“refined” (i.e., a vote is taken between b and ba); next, a vote is taken between the
winner of the first vote (s or sa) and the second vote (b or ba), with the winner
then put against the status quo q, where the status quo corresponds to no bill
passing. Such an agenda, then, requires a somewhat more complicated repre-
sentation, such as ((s, sa), (b, ba), q).
Despite the limited substantive significance of amendment agendas, their
analysis nevertheless reveals much about agendas in general, how formalized
voting procedures can be used to manipulate final outcomes, and the sorts of
questions we might try seek to answer generally by formalizing an analysis of
other agenda forms. It doesn’t hurt, moreover, that the analysis of amendment
agendas is especially simple once we have their vector representation. To see
what we mean, consider the agenda (a, b, c, d, e) and suppose that all voters are
naïve and fail to look ahead to the consequences of their actions. Then all we
need do to determine the final outcome is to determine the majority preference
relation between a and b and to choose a winner, then between that winner
and c, and so on, with the survivor corresponding to the naïve voting outcome.
On the other hand, suppose all voters act strategically by looking ahead to see
where their votes might lead. In other words, suppose voters work backwards

--- Sayfa 244 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  235
up the extensive form of the game tree or voting tree used to describe the situ-
ation. In this case, our vector representation provides a convenient means of
identifying the final outcome, the strategic voting outcome. Looking again at (a,
b, c, d, e), suppose d beats e in a majority vote. Then we leave d in the vector and
move on to c. Suppose c defeats d but loses to e. Since c fails to defeat every “sur-
viving” alternative that follows it in the agenda, we eliminate c, and move on to
b with the assumption that our agenda is now (a, b, d, e). If b beats both d and
e we leave it in the vector, whereupon unless a defeats b, d and e, the strategic
outcome is b; otherwise, it is a.
This might all seem a strange construction, but to understand its logic, let
us look at the agenda in Figure 6.1 and consider what must be the case for a
to emerge as the final outcome under strategic voting. Assuming that d beats
e, that c loses to e and that b beats d and e, we have underlined the strategic
equivalents of each node except those pertaining to a. What we see here is that
for b to survive and challenge a in the initial vote, it must defeat the alternatives
in the agenda that follow it and that survive, as well as the last alternative on
the agenda, e, since if b is to emerge as the eventual outcome then regardless of
whether voting is sincere or strategic, it must defeat this last entered alternative.
Now consider a. Like b, if it is to emerge as the final outcome, it must defeat e.
If it does so, it must then defeat d provided that d defeats e. In the second vote,
a will be paired against c, but a need not defeat c since, in this example, c is
“bumped off” by e. Thus, for a to emerge as the final outcome under strategic
voting, it must defeat b, d and e—all those alternatives that defeated the “surviv-
ing” alternatives that follow it in the agenda.
Some simple results follow from this analysis of an amendment agenda’s vec-
tor representation. First, it should be obvious that
a
a
a
b
b
b
d
d
d
c
b
b
b
d
d
d
d
d
e
e
d
a
d
d
d
d
d
c
c
c
c
c
b
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
Figure 6.1  A 5-outcome amendment agenda

--- Sayfa 245 ---
236  Agendas and Voting Rules
if any alternative on an amendment agenda is a Condorcet winner, it will
emerge as the final outcome regardless of whether voters are naïve or strategic.
Once the Condorcet winner is paired against something, it will defeat that
something and anything considered subsequently. But what if there is no Con-
dorcet winner? What if, in fact, the majority preference relations over some or
all outcomes on the agenda are intransitive? Consider again an agenda such as
(a, b, c, d, e) and for purposes of argument suppose, in applying our previous
method of analyzing an agenda using its vector representation, that c has thus
far survived by beating both d and e. But suppose c is covered by b (i.e., b beats
c and everything that c beats; notably, d and e). Then b survives and c can-
not emerge as the strategic voting outcome. Alternatively, if c covers b, which
minimally requires that c beat b, then b cannot survive. This, then, illustrates
the following fact:
if x and y are any two alternatives on an amendment agenda A, and if x CA
y (if x covers y with respect to the other alternatives on the agenda A), then y
cannot emerge as a sophisticated voting outcome.
By itself, though, this result is of limited value since it tells us something about
the outcome of an agenda only after the alternatives to be voted on have some-
how been set exogenously. And as is often the case in committees and legisla-
tures, political conflicts and disagreements often occur beforehand when it is
being decided what alternatives are to be voted on. Madison’s Virginia Plan,
for instance, suggested no formal agenda; its impact was in offering specific
proposals and defining the issues to be considered. Nevertheless, the preced-
ing result about the uncovered set does tell us something about what kind of
strategy legislators might pursue when attempting to defeat something on an
agenda or the strategies they might pursue when making proposals for alterna-
tives to be considered later in the voting. For example, it tells us that if it has
already been established that y will be voted on and if a person finds y distaste-
ful, then if that person can introduce into the agenda something that covers y,
this will ensure under strategic voting that y will not emerge as the eventual
outcome regardless of what else is proposed.
There is, of course, little game theory here aside from the simple idea of work-
ing backwards up voting trees or extensive forms to deduce eventual outcomes
when all persons look ahead to the likely consequences of alternative actions. But
suppose we ask a somewhat more complicated question. Specifically, suppose we
ask what outcomes are likely to emerge if the things that can be put onto the
agenda have a spatial representation so that the available alternatives are infinite
in number and where people’s preferences are like the one’s we illustrate in ear-
lier chapters when dealing with spatial voting games. To answer such a question
obviously requires a model of the process whereby alternatives can be entered
onto the agenda. One possibility is that those voting employ some strict form of
parliamentary procedure that dictates who, when and what types of alternatives
can be offered. Alternatively, we have the example described by Charles Plott

--- Sayfa 246 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  237
and Michael Levine in 1978 of the California flying club that was considering an
upgrading of the airplanes in its inventory (“A Model of Agenda Influence on
Committee Decisions,” American Economic Review 68,1). As they described the
situation, any decision about upgrading the club’s fleet was a complex one and
entailed a number of interdependent choices, including which planes to refur-
bish, which to sell, how many new planes to buy, and what brand and types of
planes to buy if any. Seeking to make their deliberations coherent, the president
of the club assigned (somewhat unadvisedly, given his preferences) the design of
the agenda to Plott and Levine, who then set out to devise an agenda that served
their preferences as opposed to those of the club’s president.
It is interesting to note at this point that our two scheming academics vol-
unteered to establish an agenda not simply to make the club’s decision process
coherent, but also so they could manipulate the result to achieve an outcome
close if not identical to their most preferred alternative. And it was only as
the consequences of the agenda began to unfold that the club’s president
realized that Plott and Levine had been something other than purely altru-
istic. We leave it to the reader to do a bit of study on their own to learn how
events ultimately unfolded. All we will add here is that the president would
have been well advised to get a copy of this chapter (had it been available
at the time) before relinquishing control of the design of an agenda to Plott
and Levine.
One implication of Plott and Levine’s experience is that the process whereby
agendas are established—the selection of alternatives to be voted on and the
manner in what that voting is to occur—can be an important part of politics,
especially in those legislative assemblies such as the U.S. Congress that proceed
by formalized parliamentary rules. And since such situations are likely to be
conflictual, with different “players” preferring different outcomes and thus dif-
ferent agendas, it is important that we look at such strategic situations more
closely. And here perhaps the most important intellectual contribution to date
is R.D. McKelvey’s 1976 analysis of endogenous agenda formation (“Intransi-
tivities in Multidimensional Voting Models and Some Implications for Agenda
Control,” Journal of Economic Theory 12). Briefly, formulating endogenous
agenda formation as a game, each player’s strategy in McKelvey’s analysis is
an alternative, chosen from a spatial representation of the alternatives, to be
entered onto the agenda. Thus, with n players, we let s = (s1, s2, …, sn), where si is
player i’s strategy and each strategy is a point in the policy space. McKelvey then
assumes that the players choose their strategies without knowing each other’s
choices and the order in which the alternatives entered will be voted on. Letting
Ui(s) be the utility or payoff player i associates with a particular strategy vector,
and letting A(si) be the set of all possible agendas that can be formed if player i
chooses si, then (taking some liberties with notation and mathematical details
concerning continuous preferences and alternative spaces), McKelvey defines
Ui(s) thus:
Ui(s) = min ui(X*)
s ∈ A(si)

--- Sayfa 247 ---
238  Agendas and Voting Rules
where X* is the strategic voting outcome of the corresponding agenda. This
then defines a game in which each player chooses something to enter onto the
agenda simultaneously with all other players and where payoffs are evaluated
pessimistically as the worst outcome that might arise given one’s choice. Mc-
Kelvey then proves a rather nice result: namely, that there exists a Nash equilib-
rium in pure strategies to the described game.
We will bypass McKelvey’s imaginative but complex proof, and turn instead
to some subsidiary and substantively interesting results. Notice that if X* is
covered with respect to the set of all feasible alternatives, those players who
prefer an alternative that covers X* will have an incentive to shift to that alter-
native as their strategy. Thus, only uncovered outcomes can correspond to a
Nash equilibrium here. And if that is the case, then the set of alternatives that
can emerge from the above described agenda setting process must lie in the
space’s uncovered set, which we know from an earlier result of McKelvey, must
lie within his 4r ball. So suppose we return to our peculiar example of the gro-
cery store in which people’s shopping carts are filled by some sort of collec-
tive majoritarian process. Earlier we established that if that process entailed
choosing two voters to serve as candidates who are given an incentive to emerge
victorious, the final platforms of those candidates would lie inside that 4r ball,
because in eliminating dominated strategies they would eliminate from con-
sideration as campaign strategies all covered alternatives. Now we see that if,
instead, all consumers within the grocery store are required to act as a com-
mittee and if they voted using an agenda established as described above, the
domain of possible outcomes is the same as if they chose an outcome via an
electoral competition between candidates. This is not to say, of course, that the
identical outcome would be chosen under the two different procedures. But it
does tell us that there is a degree of institutional invariance with respect to final
outcomes, where the extent of that invariance depends on the size of the 4r ball,
which itself is a function of the extent to which the distribution of preferences
corresponds to a symmetric function.
Once again, we emphasize that our discussion here considers only one pos-
sible way to model the endogenous construction of an agenda. Nevertheless, it
does illustrate how game theory can contribute to a comparative assessment of
political institutions. Here we see two specific institutional forms that are essen-
tially equivalent if individual preferences render 4r “small.” In this case, then,
the question of whether or not those two forms are interchangeable becomes a
question about the nature of individual preferences in specific substantive con-
texts and the various aspects of reality that might act to keep those forms from
performing as described in their abstract representations. The situation is not
much different, then, when we say that a falling ball and a feather will fall at the
same rate in a vacuum even though we know that our real life experiences with
balls and feathers do not match this theoretical prediction. It then becomes
incumbent on us as social scientists to discover the ‘frictions’ that operate in the
real world just as it is incumbent on the student of fluid dynamics or aeronau-
tics to understand how the density and currents of air interact with irregularly
shaped objects.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  239
6.2  Two Special Voting Rules and Peculiar Results
Jupiter, Saturn and Condorcet Winners: In 1977 the California Institute of
Technology’s Jet Propulsion Lab, in concert with America’s National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration (NASA) launched two Voyager space
probes intended to fly by Jupiter and Saturn and then to move on to Ura-
nus and Neptune. Both probes were loaded with a variety of experiments
and measurement instruments designed by and under the direction of a
number of distinct science teams, each with its own interests. Some teams
were focused on planetary atmospheres, others on the various moons and
still others on the composition of Saturn’s rings. Needless to say, there were
strong preferences among the teams over alternative trajectory pairs. Those
teams whose instruments were directed at planetary atmospheres wanted
to fly close to the planets themselves, with perhaps one team concerned
with Saturn and another with Jupiter. Scientists interested in Jupiter’s
moons, on the other hand, preferred different trajectories, while anyone
interested in Saturn’s rings had their own preferred route for the probes.
How then to pick a pair of trajectories? The approach taken by two of JPL’s
(Jet Propulsion Lab) staff, James Dyer and Ralph Miles, was to first identify
35 or so alternative feasible pairs and get the preferences of the 15 science
teams involved with each probe’s instrumentation (see Dyer and Miles, “An
Actual Application of Collective Choice Theory to the Selection of Trajec-
tories for the Mariner Jupiter/Saturn 1977 Project,” Operations Research 24,
March 1976). In addition, efforts were made to get a sense of cardinal pref-
erences (utility functions) via a series of in-depth interviews of the science
teams. But now, what to do with this data? The problem was not simply to
pick a pair of trajectories but to have the selection process itself seem fair
to everyone involved. As a consequence, a variety of somewhat normative
measures were calculated, such as the alternative that ranked highest on
average, the alternative with the highest Borda Count, the alternative that
maximized the sum of cardinal utilities after the utilities were normalized
to [0,1] and so on. With all of this, the pairs were narrowed to three, euphe-
mistically labeled A, B and C. After a bit of tweaking of A, Dyer and Miles
recommended it to the selection committee, whereupon that committee
chose B. While various teams may have grumbled a bit about not getting
their first or even second choice, the process was, apparently, deemed fair,
but the question is: Why did the committee choose B and not A? We don’t
know the answer to this, but in a reanalysis of their data it was learned that
among the 35 trajectory pairs considered, B was the Condorcet winner.
Thus, B could have been realized with any number of voting schemes that
would choose such a winner when one exists.
Our interest in JPL’s problem and approach does not lie in any professional
interest in space probes, but rather in the fact that a Condorcet winner was
chosen—and not only chosen but, in combination with the method of selec-
tion, was deemed a fair choice. This, perhaps as much as any other thing points

--- Sayfa 249 ---
240  Agendas and Voting Rules
to the centrality of such winners as a means of evaluating alternative elections
systems. Specifically, if there is a Condorcet winner, there should be good rea-
sons for choosing some other alternative—reasons we cannot formalize here
by some set of rigorously stated criteria, but that nevertheless render the pro-
cedure employed as being judged by participants to be “fair.” To that end, let us
consider two voting schemes that we have not yet discussed but that neverthe-
less receive considerable attention in the literature—the Borda Count and Hare
voting.
The Borda Count: People are perhaps never more creative than when invent-
ing rules for voting, and much of the study of voting originated in a dispute
between the Marquis de Condorcet and Jean-Charles de Borda over how to
elect members to the French Academy of Sciences. Condorcet, objecting to a
method proposed earlier by Borda, argued for a system that would necessarily
yield a Condorcet winner (not called that at the time, of course) if one existed.
Borda’s scheme, in its simplest form, required all voters to rank the alternatives
from first to last on their ballot. Assuming n alternatives and taking the ballots
one at a time, n points would then be awarded to the alternative ranked first on
the ballot, n – 1 points to the alternative ranked second, and so on. The number
of points awarded to each alternative would be summed across all ballots and
the alternative with the greatest point total declared the winner. This scheme,
then, would, unlike Cordorcet’s criterion, necessarily result in an outcome. It
is interesting to note, though, that the Borda Count has found preciously few
applications in government, and instead its applications have been restricted
largely to non-governmental institutions. American sports, in particular, seems
enamored of this scheme, using it for example to select the Heisman Trophy
winner in college football, to bestow the Most Valuable Player award in profes-
sional baseball and, by AP and UPI, to rank college football teams based on the
rankings of sportswriters and coaches. The Eurovision Song Competition also
employs a version of this method.
Aside from guaranteeing the selection of something even when there is no
Condorcet winner, the Borda Count initially at least seemed to solve a some-
what different problem. Note that ordering alternatives by majority rule is but
one way we might define what we mean by “society’s preferences.” But having
run afoul of intransitivities, we shouldn’t expect the search for an alternative
to end, and a seemingly natural one would be to measure people’s utilities over
the outcomes, add up utility across individuals for each outcome, and then
rank the outcomes by their total “utility count.” The insurmountable difficulty
here, however, is that there is no way to compare and add utility across people.
Utility scales are arbitrary and there is no standard, no platinum rod in Paris,
with which to calibrate comparisons. Nor, given the purpose of the concept of
utility, which is simply to represent a person’s attitudes toward risk, will there
ever be such a rod that inter-personally standardizes and justifies a comparison.
The Borda Count, then, seems to many to be the “next best thing”—something
guaranteed to yield an outcome that depends in some way (albeit in a some-
what arbitrary way) on individual preferences.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  241
We suspect that the Borda Count would find wider application were it not for
the fact that it exhibits some peculiar properties and can yield some seemingly
paradoxical results. First, it is especially susceptible to strategic misrepresenta-
tion of preferences. If, for example, an alternative that a person sincerely ranks
in the middle of his or her preference is believed to be a serious competitor to
those alternatives ranked higher, then there is a clear incentive to rank that alter-
native near the bottom in one’s reported ballot or reported preference ranking.
Of course, we already know that any interesting voting scheme is susceptible to
manipulation so the incentive to rank one’s most preferred alternative first and
its viable competitors last is hardly a devastating “defect.” More problematical is
the fact that the Borda Count might not yield a Condorcet winner if one exists,
which necessarily formed the core of Condorcet’s objection to this scheme.
Consider, for example, the following preferences among 7 voters:
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
A
A
B
B
B
C
B
B
B
C
C
A
A
C
C
C
A
A
C
B
Clearly, A is the Condorcet winner. It defeats B 4 votes to 3, and defeats C 4
to 3. However, the Borda point count for these three alternatives is A with 15
points, B with 16 points and C with 11 points. Now consider these preferences:
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
X
X
X
A
A
B
B
C
C
C
X
X
A
A
B
B
B
C
C
X
X
A
A
A
B
B
C
C
Here X receives 22 points, A gets 17 points, B gets 16 points and C gets 15
points. So X is the clear Borda winner. However, suppose X proves to be ineli-
gible after the balloting. It seems only reasonable for the choice to fall to A,
which came in second in the count. But suppose instead that X is deleted from
all the ballots and new count calculated. Now A gets 13 points, B gets 14 points
and C gets 15 points. Paradoxically, then, the alternative that initially ranked
lowest now ranks highest.
If this seems strange, consider what happens if we reverse the preferences in
the preceding example so that they become
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
A
A
B
B
C
C
B
B
B
C
C
X
X
C
C
C
X
X
A
A
X
X
X
A
A
B
B
Here X ranks last: A secures 18 points, B 19, C 20 points and X only 13.
Thus, C is the winner. Suppose, though, that the voting rule is a runoff ballot

--- Sayfa 251 ---
242  Agendas and Voting Rules
using a Borda Count among the top three competitors. With X eliminated from
all ballots, the point counts become A with 15 points, B with 14 and C with
13 points. Thus, with the elimination of a seemingly irrelevant alternative, the
winner becomes the loser and a loser becomes the winner. One can be certain,
of course, that those in a position to control who is and is not allowed on a bal-
lot will seek to take full advantage of such paradoxical possibilities.
One generalization of the Borda method entails giving positive points to only
the top k < n ranked alternatives. That is, if ranked first, an alternative is given
k points; if ranked second, k – 1 points;.  . . if ranked kth, 1 point; and any lower
ranking, 0 points. So consider these preferences:
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
A
A
B
B
C
C
B
B
B
C
C
D
D
C
C
C
A
D
A
A
D
D
D
D
A
B
B
For k = 1 we have simple plurality rule, in which case A is the winner. For the
usual Borda method (k = 4), C gets 20 points, A and B each get 19 points, and
D gets 12 points, so C is the winner. However, with k = 2 the winner is B with 7
points (and 6 points for A and C, and 2 points for D). Thus, not only can final
outcomes be manipulated by introducing or eliminating otherwise irrelevant
alternatives and by strategic voting, but they can also be manipulated by the
details of the Borda Count’s implementation.
For our final example, let us consider a situation in which, initially at least,
the Condorcet winner is selected by a Borda Count; specifically five voters with
the following preferences:
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
X
X
X
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
X
X
A
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
As things stand now, X’s Borda Count is 23 (3 × 5 + 2 × 4) whereas Y’s is 22
(3 × 4 + 2 × 5), so the Condorcet winner, X, is selected. However, to fully assess
this method’s character, notice that if voter 5 votes strategically by reporting X
as his least preferred alternative, Y’s Borda Count remains 22, whereas X’s count
drops from 23 to 20. Thus, voter 5’s strategic move secures his most preferred
alternative. Of course, any one of voters 1, 2 and 3 can now respond to this
maneuver by dropping Y in his or her reported preference so as to defeat Y. Sup-
pose voter 1 does so. This response, though, can be countered by having voter
4 drop X to the bottom of his preference, whereupon another voter who most
prefers X, say voter 2, can respond to that move by dropping Y to the bottom
of its list. The net result of these sequential moves can, then, yield the following

--- Sayfa 252 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  243
reported preferences, in which case neither X nor Y is chosen but A instead (A’s
count is now 19, X’s is 17 and Y’s is 16):
Voters
1
2
3
4
5
X
X
X
Y
Y
A
A
Y
A
A
B
B
A
B
B
C
C
B
C
C
Y
Y
C
X
X
This example, then, underscores the fact that a full understanding of the
Borda Count’s properties requires an assessment of how voters might strategi-
cally choose to misrepresent their preferences. And to see that the situation can
become complicated here, suppose we simplify matters by assuming that voters
1, 2 and 3, who share the same preferences, vote as a block and that voters 4 and
5 do the same. For purposes of discussion let us limit these two blocks to two
strategies: Voting sincerely and voting strategically by dropping their second
choice to the bottom of their preference rankings. In this case we get the follow-
ing “2-person” game (where, in effect person 1—row chooser—has a weight of
3 and person 2—column chooser—a weight of 2):
Y X A B C
Y A B C X
X Y A B C
X
Y
X A B C Y
X
A
What we see here, then, are two pure strategy equilibria: One in which the
first block votes strategically and the other in which the second block votes
strategically. This simple example, then, raises the possibility that under a Borda
Count, there may be an inherent indeterminacy as to what outcomes ultimately
prevail, depending on who or whether voters coordinate their strategies.
To see this with another example, consider these three preference orders over
three alternatives:
Voters
1
2
3
A
B
C
B
C
B
C
A
A
In this case B is both the Condorcet winner and the Borda Count winner.
However, suppose each of our three voters contemplates voting strategically by
dropping their second-ranked choice to last. Portrayed in strategic form, then,
we have the game in Figure 6.2.
Depending now on the voter’s attitudes towards risk, this game has 4 poten-
tial equilibria. For example, if voter 3, whose true ranking is C B A, is risk accep-
tant, he might opt to report the preference C A B in order to bring about a
3-way tie. And if voter 2 acts strategically by casting the ballot B A C because
C is B’s closet competitor, a risk acceptant voter 1 might prefer to bring about

--- Sayfa 253 ---
244  Agendas and Voting Rules
a 3-way tie by misrepresenting his preferences. Our point here is not that vot-
ing sincerely is no longer a Nash equilibrium, but that other equilibria appear
when voters try to be strategic, and whether or not there are equilibria in mixed
strategies depends not merely on ordinal preferences but on attitudes towards
risk as well.
The Single Transferable Vote: If people are inventive when it comes to choos-
ing a single alternative from some list, their inventiveness appears to increase
exponentially when they set out to fill a committee. Consider the possibilities:
First, we can decide to divide the polity up into geographic districts and elect
a single representative from each. Even this simple procedure admits of sev-
eral variants, where the two most commonly used are simple plurality rule or
majority rule in which we require a runoff election between the two top vote
getters if no one wins more than 50% of the vote on the first ballot. And here we
have some sub-variants wherein the runoff is simultaneous with the first round
of voting or, as is more common, conducted at a later date. In the simultaneous
case voters rank the candidates and if no one is ranked first on more than 50%
of the ballots cast, all but the top two first place vote getters are eliminated from
the ballots cast and the votes recounted. Yet another system is that of approval
voting whereby voters have the opportunity to “approve” of as many candi-
dates on the ballot as they wish, with the candidate receiving the most approvals
being elected. Alternatively, we can make the polity into a single large constitu-
ency and require that competition be among parties (or equivalently, among
lists of candidates). Seats in the legislature can then be allocated among the lists
in proportion to their share of the vote. Here, of course, people worry about
how to treat fractional seats, and needless to say any number of alternatives
have been proposed and used. There are also two intermediate cases between
geographically defined districts and proportional representation by party list.
The polity can be divided geographically again, but where it elects several mem-
bers from each district, either by party list or where the top vote getters are
selected (and here we can add the variation wherein voters get a single vote or
as many votes as there are seats to fill from a district).
Of course, when designing a legislature, it is often unclear which electoral
system advantages whom; in which case, what we often see is a compromise in
which a share of the seats are allocated according to party lists and the remain-
der contested for in single-member districts. This of course opens the door
to a debate over what share of the legislature should be elected by each of the
two methods, wherein surprises arise among those unfamiliar with democratic
C B A
C A B
B C A
B A C
B C A
B A C
B
B
3-way tie
A
A B C
A C B
C
3-way tie
C
A
Figure 6.2  Strategic voting with the Borda Count

--- Sayfa 254 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  245
practice. Upon the tottering and subsequent collapse of the Soviet empire in
Central Europe in the late ’80s and early ’90s when reformers and incumbent
Communist regimes negotiated electoral reforms alongside various power
sharing arrangements, the Communist parties in countries like Poland and
Hungary assumed that their organizational structure gave them an advantage
in single member districts while reformers, largely agreeing with this view,
assumed that proportional representation would allow them to secure at least
a share of seats. Of course, what the Communists failed to appreciate was that
after 40 years of being in power, their electorates had largely decided that a
wholesale cleansing was in order, in which case in the long run, at least, it prob-
ably mattered little what electoral scheme was adopted (though in the short
run, it is possible to imagine voting schemes that would have delayed the fall
of Communism). Things are no less interesting in established democratic fed-
eral states. Suppose there are natural geographic subdivisions to a polity with
unequal populations (e.g., states in the United States, provinces in Canada, and
Lander in Germany). In this case we have a variety of options, including divid-
ing each region up into a set of single member districts or, as was practiced
in Japan and Taiwan, if a district is entitled on the basis of population to k
seats, elect the top k candidates when counting the ballots. And even this system
allows for variants whereby voters are given either a single vote or k votes (and
here yet another sub-variant is either to allow or disallow voters from cast-
ing all k of their votes for a single candidate). Alternatively, we might consider
conducting proportional representation (i.e., party list) contests in each region.
But consider this variant of simple proportional representation: Suppose each
party in each region submits its own separate list, but in determining a party’s
share of seats in the national legislature, we take its national vote total. Thus,
if a party wins X% of the vote nationally and if, of that vote, Y% came from a
specific region, then one possibility (see, for instance, Germany) is to fill Y% of
the X% of the seats to which the party is entitled from the list submitted by the
party’s organization in that district.
At this point we suspect the heads of many readers will be spinning with eyes
glazing over the confusion of possibilities. This brief (and quite incomplete)
survey, though, should give the reader some idea as to the opportunities avail-
able to those who might attempt to manipulate things by influencing the choice
of electoral procedure. Confounding such things though is the fact that if voters
vote strategically, the performance of various procedures can be exceedingly
difficult to ascertain. If calculation and the substantive informational require-
ments of strategic voting are a challenge in a well-defined procedure such as in
amendment agendas, imagine what they must be under the various rules for
filling the seats of parliaments and legislatures. And indeed, political research to
date has only scratched the surface in understanding the nature of strategic vot-
ing in but a handful of possibilities. It might be argued, in fact, that if one thinks
for whatever reason that voting should elicit sincere preferences, then the best
procedure is one that is so complicated that it becomes unlikely that voters will
vote strategically by misrepresenting their preferences (as opposed to sincerely)
because it is unclear what kind of misrepresentation is in a person’s interest.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
246  Agendas and Voting Rules
Faculty Politics and Oscar Nominations: In the 1980s, the Government
Department at the University of Texas was highly fractured, split between
older tenured members and younger untenured faculty, between those who
had been newly recruited from outside the university and paid handsome
salaries versus those who had been in the department for years and whose
salaries had languished in the process, and split as well between those who
sought to infuse the study of politics with the sort of material offered in
this volume versus those who argued that formalism was inadequate to
develop a full understanding of the complexities of political process. Such
disputes are commonplace in academia and hardly unique to Political Sci-
ence or Government faculties. But what made things especially contentious
was the university’s decision to turn an important administrative task over
to an 8-member executive committee elected by the department. Specifi-
cally, while the university would determine the department’s overall salary
budget increase (if any) for the forthcoming academic year, the executive
committee would decide how that budget was to be allocated among the
department’s 50 or so members. Naturally, the various cleavages within the
department all sought some form of representation within the committee,
but people were at a loss as to how to organize the vote to achieve that end
or even an approximation to it. The procedure that was ultimately selected
and that, to our knowledge, is still in place today was Hare voting.
There’s little reason to suppose that many people know what Hare vot-
ing is, unless, of course, you are an aficionado of Hollywood and know
how a movie can become an Oscar nominee for Best Picture of the Year.
Hollywood and the world produce thousands of pictures per year, with the
vast majority being relegated to after-midnight television. But a multitude
do make it to a theatre, and it is from this bag that the approximately 5700
members of America’s Academy of Motion Pictures must nominate can-
didates for Best Picture. And like the government faculty of the University
of Texas, there must be more than one nominee (at least 5) but unlike that
faculty, the actual number is not fixed (it can be up to 10). Needless to say,
not all 5700 members can meet in some room and hold a coherent dis-
cussion as to how many and who ought to be nominated, so instead each
member mails in a preferential ballot that ranks their five most preferred
candidates. The question, then, is: How does the Academy (actually, the
accounting firm of Price Waterhouse) aggregate these ballots to construct
a list of between 5 and 10 nominees? The answer, as the reader should
suspect, is again a version of Hare voting (and it should also be noted that
nominations in all other categories are subject to some version of Hare
voting as well).
Hare voting, named after its ostensible inventor in 1850, Sir Thomas Hare,
but also referred to as the single transferable vote system, seeks to ensure propor-
tional representation when a committee of m members must be selected from
n > m candidates within a single constituency. Its potential advantage is that it
serves as an alternative to artificially constructed divisions within a polity such

--- Sayfa 256 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  247
as when we draw geographically defined district boundaries in a single-member
district system. Its other ostensible advantage is that its complexity makes stra-
tegic voting especially difficult. In its simplest form this procedure, described as
a step-by-step algorithm, operates as follows:
1.
Each voter, j = 1, 2, …, v, begins with a voting weight, wj, of 1.
2.
Each voter casts a ballot that ranks the n candidates from first to last (we
could assume that voters submit partial lists, but we will ignore this com-
plication here).
3.
Letting
W
w
j
v
i
j
j
=∑δ
1

where δj = 1 if voter j’s ballot currently ranks candidate i first, and equals 0
otherwise, then candidate i is elected if
Wi ≥ q = It
v
m +








+
1
1

where “It” represents “the integer portion of.”
4.
There are now two possibilities:
a.
If Wi ≥ q fails to hold for any candidate, strike from all ballots the
names of those candidates who receive no first-place votes. Then
delete from the ballots the names of those candidates who receive the
fewest first-place votes. (If the number of candidates surviving at any
stage in this process equals the number of seats to be filled, then those
candidates are elected.) In the event of ties, use a fair lottery to elimi-
nate candidates. Return to step 3.
b.
If Wi ≥ q holds for one or more candidates, elect all candidates for
whom Wi ≥ q, and delete their names from all ballots.
5.
If candidate i is elected, then, after deleting i from all ballots, set
wj = (Wi − q)/K

for voters who had i ranked first on their ballots at the time of i’s deletion
where K is the number of ballots that rank i first. Return to step 3 unless all
committee positions are filled.
There is no reason to suppose that any of this makes intuitive sense and indeed
one of the objections to its use is the supposition that it is far too complicated a
system for voters to understand. At a minimum, though, the reader should see
why the quota q requires that we divide v by m + 1 rather than, say, m. If, for
instance, we are filling a single seat (m = 1), the definition of q requires that the
selected candidate secure a majority of the vote as opposed to all of the vote if
m = 1. And if two candidates are to be elected, than dividing by m + 1 simply

--- Sayfa 257 ---
248  Agendas and Voting Rules
requires, logically enough, that the quota be a fraction more than one third of
the vote. In any event, to illustrate this voting method’s character, let us con-
sider a few numerical examples.
Example: Suppose nine voters, who must choose two candidates from the
set {a, b, c}, submit the following ballots ranking these candidates:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
a
a
a
a
a
b
b
c
c
b
b
c
c
c
a
c
a
b
c
c
b
b
b
c
a
b
a
The quota q, in this instance, is the integer part of 9/(2 + 1) + 1 = 4,
which candidate a satisfies. Thus, a is elected, and is deleted from all bal-
lots. However, notice that a actually receives 5 votes—one more than the
quota. In this case, the first five voters—those who ranked a first and who
can be thought of as having used four fifths of their vote to elect a – are
each reassigned the voting weight (5 − 4)/5 = 1/5. At this point, the vote for
b totals 12/5 whereas the vote for c totals 13/5. Since neither of the remain-
ing two candidates meets the quota, candidate b, with the lowest vote total,
is eliminated and c joins a on the committee.
Suppose now that one or more of these voters contemplate voting
strategically—that is, let us ask whether sincere voting is a Nash equilib-
rium. Specifically, consider whether a voter holding the preference “a pre-
ferred to b preferred to c” secures any advantage by ranking b above a. If
one such voter does so, then candidate a’s vote equals the quota but a has
no excess votes to transfer to b or to c after being elected. After a is elected
and eliminated from all ballots, candidate b has four first-place votes while
c has five. Candidate c, then, is again elected. Thus, insincerity in the form
of ranking b above a is fruitless.
Example: Although the preceding example illustrates a situation where
sincere voting corresponds to a Nash equilibrium, it is uninteresting in one
sense—the Condorcet winner, a, is elected regardless of whether any indi-
vidual defects from sincerity. Generally, we prefer that Condorcet winners
be selected if they exist, but there is no guarantee that Hare voting elects
such a candidate. To see this, suppose 38, 37, and 24 voters, respectively,
hold each of the following three preference orders over five candidates:
1
2
3
a
b
c
e
d
d
d
e
e
b
c
a
c
a
b
If three candidates are to be selected, q equals the integer part of 99/
(3 + 1) + 1 = 25 and the final outcome is {a, b, e} – a and b are elected

--- Sayfa 258 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  249
immediately with 38 – 25 = 13 and 37 – 25 = 12 excess votes, respectively,
which, after eliminating a and b from all ballots, gives 13 votes to e, 12 to
d. Since no candidate meets the quota, the candidate with the fewest votes,
d, is eliminated, electing e with 25 first-place votes. But d is the Condorcet
winner and since it is never the case that any individual is pivotal, no one
has an incentive to defect from sincerity by casting an insincere ballot.
This example, however, is reminiscent of those voting situations in which
“bogus” equilibria exist whenever no individual voter is pivotal and where
those bogus equilibria can be eliminated only by applying the notions of sub-
game perfection or weak domination (e.g., as when everyone is unanimous in
their preference orders but where, for whatever reason, everyone lists the least
preferred alternative first, in which case no voter is pivotal and thus no voter
can improve the outcome by unilaterally altering their revealed preference).
Thus, ascertaining whether sincere voting is a reasonable equilibrium in this
example and learning whether the Condorcet winner is unlikely to be elected
requires the application of these ideas. Instead, though, let us consider another
example that shows that Condorcet winners need not be elected in equilibrium
even when individual voters are pivotal.
Example: Suppose 25, 25, 25, 8, 8, and 8 voters, respectively, hold the fol-
lowing six preference orders over four candidates:
25 votes
25 votes
25 votes
8 votes
8 votes
8 votes
a
b
c
d
d
d
d
d
d
a
b
c
b
c
a
b
c
a
c
a
b
c
a
b
If three candidates are to be elected, then q = 25, and the sincere vot-
ing outcome is {a, b, c} even though d is a Condorcet winner. Notice now
that if one of the voters whose preferences correspond to the first order
above (i.e., a > d > b > c) moves d up into first place on his ballot, the out-
come becomes {d, b, c}. But under any reasonable assumption as to how
preferences over individual candidates relates to preferences over sets of
candidates, {d, b, c} is the voter’s least preferred possibility (e.g., if a voter’s
preference for {d, b, c} is given by a separable utility function u({d, b, c}) =
u(d) + u(b) + u(c)). Thus, this voter (and by similar reasoning, all others),
has no incentive to shift unilaterally to an insincere ballot in order to secure
the Condorcet winning candidate.
After admitting that Condorcet winners need not be selected by Hare voting,
there is one final possibility that we might consider—namely, that the strategic
misrepresentation of preferences, whenever it occurs, renders the selection of a
Condorcet winner more likely. However, as our final example shows, insincere
voting here can actually lead away from the selection of such a winner.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
250  Agendas and Voting Rules
Example: Ignoring the preferences in parentheses for the moment, sup-
pose 18, 17, 32, and 32 voters respectively hold the following four prefer-
ence orders (ignore the alternatives in parentheses):
18 voters
17 voters
32 voters
32 voters
a
a (c)
c
b
b
c (a)
b
a
c
b (b)
a
c
If everyone votes sincerely and if two candidates are to be selected, a is
elected first because its vote, 35, exceeds the quota of 34, at which point b is
elected because its share of a’s excess vote exceeds c’s share, breaking the tie
between b and c in favor of b. So the Condorcet winner, b, is elected. Now
consider the incentives to be strategic. In particular, suppose a voter of the
second type casts a ballot that corresponds to the preference in parenthe-
sis. As before, a is elected with 34 votes, but now c’s vote exceeds b’s so b is
eliminated on the second round. The reader should confirm that this single
insincere ballot is an equilibrium strategy.
Hare voting and its variants are not widely used, in part because of its com-
plexity. In fact, what we have summarized here with respect to strategic voting
and the selection of Condorcet winners pretty much exhausts our theoretical
knowledge of this voting scheme. But Hare voting is also not widely used for
purely political reasons. In the United States, for example, its sole use is for the
city council and school committee of the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
The city council of Cincinnati, Ohio, employed it from 1924 to 1957, but was
subsequently abandoned in favor of a district system. And its reasons for aban-
donment seem evident: As the city’s black population increased, under Hare
voting, that population’s representation on the council increased as well. Any
reasonable population projections past 1957 suggested to the majority white
population that black representation on the council would continue to increase
were Hare voting maintained. Hence its discontinuance.
Oscar Reconsidered: As noted earlier, Oscar nominations for Best Pic-
ture of the Year employs a variant of Hare voting, wherein the number of
movies nominated can vary between 5 and 10. This variability in the final
number of nominees derives from the particular way in which Hare voting
is implemented. Suppose 5500 of the 5700+ members of the Academy of
Motion Pictures cast a ballot. To be even in the running for a nomination, a
movie must rank first on at least 5% of all ballots cast. Otherwise it is elimi-
nated from all ballots. Now, since 10 is the maximum number of nominees,
the quota is calculated by letting q = 10 + 1 = 11, so that any movie appear-
ing at the top of 5500/11 = 500 ballots is nominated.
The Borda Count and Hare voting hardly exhaust the list of voting schemes
that might be employed for electing individual candidates or filling a commit-
tee. In addition to plurality rule and majority rule with a runoff, which we will

--- Sayfa 260 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  251
examine shortly, two other schemes have been proposed and employed in lim-
ited contexts. One is approval voting whereby instead of simply indicating a first
choice or having one’s ballot rank all candidates, a voter indicates all candidates
of which he or she “approves”—is willing to see elected or serve on a commit-
tee. The difficulty with analyzing this scheme, however, so as to establish its
formal properties is that we have no natural way of identifying where any one
voter would draw the line between approving and not approving of a candi-
date. Thus, if given a voter’s preference order even with cardinal utility num-
bers attached, we have no idea where he or she would “draw the line,” and two
voters with identical preferences might draw their lines differently. Thus, while
any number of claims have been made by proponents of this scheme, includ-
ing that it would act to increase turnout and be more likely to elect Condorcet
winners than, say, plurality rule or the Borda Count, these claims are difficult if
not impossible to validate. Another scheme is cumulative voting, which perhaps
can best be viewed as a competitor to Hare voting. Suppose voters are filling an
n-member committee and are given n votes. The usual method here is to have
voters vote for n or fewer candidates, with the candidates receiving the most
votes elected. A variant on this, though, is to allow voters to cast more than one
of their n votes for the same candidate, including casting all n votes for that
candidate. However, rather than pursue a seemingly endless list of alternative
voting schemes and their many variants, we turn next to the two most common
methods for filling a single office by election, plurality rule and majority rule
with a runoff.
6.3  Two Alternative Rules for Electing Presidents
Plurality Rule: Choosing a method of electing a president is often a conten-
tious constitutional issue for newly emerging democracies, with debate com-
monly focusing on two alternatives: plurality and majority rule with a runoff.
Runoff schemes seem to have gained the ascendancy, with objections against
simple plurality rule being of two sorts. First, there is the concern that someone
will win with significantly less than a majority of the vote and thereby preclude
that person from being viewed as “legitimate.” Second, there is the concern that
the plurality winner cannot defeat any of his or her challengers in a head to
head vote—that the winner will not be a Condorcet winner and may in fact
be a Condorcet loser. To explore this second issue, consider a plurality contest
among three candidates, x, y and z. There are then six possible strict preference
orders within the electorate as follows, where ni denotes the number of voters
holding preferences of the ith type:
n1
n2
n3
n4
n5
n6
x
x
y
y
z
z
y
z
x
z
x
y
z
y
z
x
y
x
To simplify our discussion, however, we will suppose that the election also con-
cerns a single issue and that voter preferences are single peaked over that issue,

--- Sayfa 261 ---
252  Agendas and Voting Rules
in which case we cannot have ni be non-zero for all six preferences—there is no
ordering along a single dimensions of x, y and z such that more than four pref-
erences are single peaked. Suppose, for example, that preferences are ordered on
the issue (from left to right), x, y and then z, in which case we cannot portray
the preferences of voter types 2 and 5 as single peaked. The reader is free, now,
to confirm that no ordering of the alternatives on a line yields all six preference
types simultaneously single-peaked. It is also useful at this point to establish the
following fact:
If voters have single peaked preferences in a one-dimensional election and if,
among three candidates, there exists a Condorcet winner with no candidate
ranked first by a majority, the candidate positioned between the other two
candidates is the Condorcet winner.
The precondition of this result that no candidate is ranked first by a majority of
the electorate is intended to preclude the case in which all candidates are to the
left or right of the median preference. Now let candidates A, B and C be ordered
from left to right alphabetically, and let MAB and MBC be the midpoints, respec-
tively, between A and B and between B and C. Simplifying matters by assuming
that preferences are symmetric about their ideas, and letting N(a,b) denote the
number of voters with ideal points in the interval [a,b], then the number of
voters who prefer B over A is N(MAB,∞), which must exceed 50% of the vote
since, by assumption, N(-∞,MAB) is less than 50%. By the same reasoning B is
preferred by a majority over C. Candidate B, then, is a Condorcet winner.
Limiting our attention now to situations in which no candidate gains a major-
ity under sincere voting since if there is such a candidate, it is a Condorcet win-
ner and there are no incentives for strategic voting of any sort. Taking account
of the arbitrariness in the labeling of the alternatives, if we let candidate x be
the plurality winner, there are four cases to be considered with respect to the
majority preference relation:
Case 1: x > y > z, so the plurality winner, x, is also the Condorcet winner
Case 2: y > x > z
Case 3: y > z > x, so the plurality winner, x, is the Condorcet loser
Case 4: x > y > z > x, so a Condorcet winner does not exist. This case, how-
ever, can be ignored since with a single dimension and single-peaked
preferences, a Condorcet winner necessarily exists.
Case 1: If x is the Condorcet winner, neither the preference order n4 nor n6 can
arise—for the one-dimensional case with single peaked preferences: If no one
wins 50% of the vote, then x must lie between y and z, thereby precluding the
orders y > z > x and z > y > x. Clearly neither those with type 1 or 2 preferences
has an incentive to vote for their second choice, those with type 3 preferences
cannot do anything to make y more likely to prevail, and those with type 5 pref-
erences have no incentive to take advantage of the support given to y by type 3
voters to bring about a victory for y by voting for it.

--- Sayfa 262 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  253
Case 2: Here x is the plurality winner, but y is the Condorcet winner. In this
case, with single peaked preferences, y must lie between x and z, in which case
type 2 and 5 preference orders cannot exist. Clearly, those with type 1 prefer-
ences have no incentive to vote strategically since their candidate is already win-
ning, nor do those with type 3 preferences have an incentive to strategically vote
for x since x already has a plurality. Type 4 voters can try to make z a plurality
winner by voting for it instead of y, but this move can be countered by type 3
voters voting for x instead of y. Thus, z being the plurality winner cannot be a
Nash equilibrium. On the other hand, if type 6 voters vote strategically for y
instead of z, y becomes the plurality winner and no one can counter this move
(since n3 + n4 + n6 > n1, otherwise x is necessarily both the plurality and Con-
dorcet winner). Thus, the emergence of the Condorcet winner from strategic
voting is a Nash equilibrium.
Case 3: Once again, if y is the Condorcet winner, it must lie between x and z
so that preference order types 2 and 5 again cannot exist. Now, however, unlike
in Case 2, if type 4 voters strategically vote for z instead of y, they give z a plu-
rality, whereas if type 6 voters unilaterally vote strategically for y instead of
z, they give y a plurality. And if both types vote strategically simultaneously,
they cancel each other out and x again wins. Looking only at these two types,
then, we see that unless n4 or n6 is great enough to render voting strategically
for one’s second choice a dominant strategy, types 4 and 6 are in effect playing
a “battle of the sexes” game with two alternative and distinct equilibria such
that an equilibrium is guaranteed to prevail only if the players coordinate their
choices. Type 1 voters, however, can forestall such possibilities by voting for
y instead of x, in which case y wins a plurality with certainty. Whether type 1
voters prefer the certainty of y to a probability that types 4 and 6 inadvertently
yield x will depend, then, on the degree of risk aversion among type 1 voters.
And although there are other conditions to be considered such as when types 4
or 6 have dominant strategies, what we have established here is a case in which
there is a Nash equilibrium with sophisticated voting, but the Condorcet win-
ner need not prevail in that equilibrium.
What we have learned here, then, is that unlike in, say, amendment agen-
das (which, of course, involves an entirely different substantive scenario than
multi-candidate elections), there is no guarantee that Condorcet winners
emerge under plurality rule even if voters are strategic. The problematical case
is Case 3 and thus we might ask how likely this case is to pertain to plurality
elections. We suspect, in fact, that it is not altogether uncommon. For example,
suppose preferences are distributed uniformly over the interval [0,1], that x is
at 0.2, y at 0.6 and z at 0.7. Then, in a straight plurality vote, x gets 40% of the
vote, y gets 25% and z gets 35% so x is the plurality winner. However, y clearly
is the Condorcet winner since it is closer to 0.5 than x or z, and z defeats x
since it is closer than x to 0.5 as well. We note, in fact, that this situation most
likely corresponds closely to Chile’s 1970 election in which Salvador Allende
won the plurality vote with a 36.2% share while the centrist Radomiro Tomic
received 27.8% and the right-leaning Jorge Alessandri won 34.9%. The fit with
our example comes from the supposition that Tomic’s Christian Democrats

--- Sayfa 263 ---
254  Agendas and Voting Rules
were most likely ideologically closer to Alessandri’s Nationals than to Allende’s
Socialists and Communists. Allende’s victory, then, has as much to do with the
center and right parties being unable to coordinate and compromise. Other
similar examples include the 1987 South Korean presidential contest and the
2000 Taiwain presidential election.
Majority Rule with a Runoff: If simple plurality rule has a competitor, that
competitor is electing presidents under majority rule with a runoff. Here, as
well as with simple plurality rule, there are a number of issues to be considered
before proclaiming one rule superior to another. One concern with a runoff
system, for example, is the question of what incentives it creates for a conten-
tious multiparty system or for a splitting up of existing parties into smaller fac-
tions. In this context one can also debate whether requiring a strict majority to
forestall a runoff is superior to setting some lower threshold. If, for example, a
threshold of say 40% is set, we perhaps lose the legitimacy that comes with the
winner ultimately securing a majority of the vote in a runoff, but it would also
seem to lessen the incentives for the formation of small special interest parties
whose sole purpose is to keep candidates from securing a majority on the first
ballot. Here, however, we will look at the same issue we addressed with respect
to plurality rule; namely, the likelihood that a Condorcet winner is selected
if such a winner exists. We lay out our analysis using the same four cases as
before with the precondition that no candidate wins 50% of the vote under
sincere voting and voters have single-peaked preferences (see Niou, “Strategic
Voting under Plurality and Runoff Rules,” Journal of Theoretical Politics 13,2,
April 2001).
Case 1: If the Condorcet winner is also the plurality winner under sincere
voting, then regardless of whether y or z survives the first round along with x,
x will prevail in the runoff. So voting strategically for z or y is inconsequential.
Case 2: If y > x > z, the plurality winner, x, will lose to y, the Condorcet win-
ner, in the runoff if no one votes strategically in the first round. The sole hope
for defeating y is for z to enter the second round alongside x. If z and x are
paired in the runoff, x wins, so only those who prefer x to y have an incentive to
defect unilaterally from sincere voting—those with type 1, 2 or 5 preferences.
However, since y is the Condorcet winner, if the election is one dimensional,
then as before preference types 2 and 5 cannot exist and only type 1 exists to
vote strategically—in this case for z. Such a unilateral move, however, cannot be
an equilibrium since then type 6 voters would act to counter it by voting for y.
And with types 3, 4 and 6 voting for y, no one thereafter has an incentive to shift
unilaterally to any other strategy.
Case 3: Here y > z > x, and the plurality winner x is the Condorcet loser. Here,
unlike in Case 2, type 1 voters have no incentive to initiate strategic voting since
their first choice cannot win in the second round regardless of whether x is pit-
ted against y or z. Type 2 and 5 voters again cannot exist in the one-dimensional
context, which leaves type 6 voters, who hold the preference z > y > x, a poten-
tial candidate for strategic voting. But voters of this type cannot bring about a
victory for z and thus sincere voting by everyone is the Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 264 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  255
Aside from illustrating the combination of the ideas of unidimensional spa-
tial elections, Nash equilibria and strategic voting, the preceding discussion
also tells us something about candidate entry in these election systems. Spe-
cifically, if two candidates compete initially and a third candidate must con-
sider whether or not to enter the contest, we know now that in simple plurality
rule contests, strategic voting cannot preclude a Condorcet loser from winning
(Case 3 in our assessment of plurality rule). This opens the door to entry by a
third candidate even if a pre-existing candidate is a Condorcet winner. In other
words, the theoretical possibility of strategic voting under plurality rule does
not necessarily deter the third candidates from entering the contest even when
a Condorcet winner exists. Under the runoff rule, however, the Condorcet win-
ner always wins when one exists. Consequently, there is less of an incentive for
a third candidate who is not a Condorcet winner to enter the competition if the
candidate’s objective is to win the election. We appreciate that this assessment
ignores other political considerations such as the incentives of third parties to
simply begin building an organization for the future or, by their mere existence,
to effect the relative salience of issues. Such possibilities, of course, open the
door to other possible modeling exercises.
It is, of course, true that simple plurality rule and majority rule with a runoff
are but two of the multitude of rules that might be employed to fill a single
elected office. There are those, for instance, who advocate an instant runoff
scheme wherein voters submit a preferential ballot and if no candidate crosses
the required threshold of first place votes, all candidates except the two with the
most first place votes are eliminated from the ballots and the votes recounted.
But at this point the reader should note that our discussion of the Borda Count
and Hare voting makes no use of spatial preferences while our comparison
of plurality and runoff systems does so but only by way of assuming single
peakedness so as to eliminate possible ordinal preferences. And quite frankly, it
remains to be seen what sorts of general results can be established if a compara-
tive analysis of election systems were to be imbedded somehow in a system that
imposes a specific Euclidean topology on preference. Sadly, that research does
not exist for us to review, which, we suppose, merely points to the fact that it is
not yet the case that everything is known about everything.
6.4  Controlling the Issues Voted On
In 1787, the delegates who drafted the U.S. Constitution moved back and forth
among the various issues that concerned them—the powers of the presidency,
selection or election of a chief executive, the structure of representation of the
states in the national legislature, the powers of the new federal government with
respect to the individual states, methods of appointing federal judges, and so
on. Moreover, as we noted earlier in this volume, they often voted so as to seem-
ingly decide an issue, only to return to it days or weeks later to vote on the mat-
ter again as if their earlier vote hadn’t occurred. One can readily imagine, then,
a convention that proceeded differently. The delegates were hardly opposed

--- Sayfa 265 ---
256  Agendas and Voting Rules
to forming subcommittees such as the Committee of Style and the Commit-
tee of Unresolved Matters, so it’s conceivable that, as they had done in 1776
when debating independence, they might have first formed various subcom-
mittees where each would address one of the core issues that concerned them.
The constitution could then be constructed by combining the decisions of the
several subcommittees, perhaps using a Committee to Resolve Inconsistencies.
The delegates also well understood that allowing amendments to the various
subcommittee reports could yield interminable debate. They did after all report
their final product as a take-it-or-leave-it proposition to the individual state
ratifying assemblies since they knew their efforts would be for naught in terms
of achieving closure if each state made ratification contingent on the adoption
of amendments. Thus, we can also imagine the convention operating under
a “closed rule” whereby the delegates would have to consider each subcom-
mittee’s report with a take it or leave it vote. How different might things have
been, then, if the Constitutional Convention had operated in what might seem
a more consistent way—allowing for debate and amendment in the ratifica-
tion process just as it had in its deliberations, or, alternatively, operating with a
closed rule that precluded amendments to the decisions of their issue-specific
subcommittees?
The point we want to make is that deciding how to discuss and debate com-
plex things is very much a part of the agenda setting process and often involves
more than merely choosing which alternatives will be placed on a formally
defined agenda. And so the question here then is ascertaining how the theoreti-
cal perspectives taken in this volume can contribute to our understanding of
this somewhat less precise agenda process. To that end we begin with Figure 6.3,
which once again portrays the spatial preferences of three voters over two issues
and a status quo at the point xo. But now, in lieu of supposing that any poten-
tial move away from xo is to be decided by, say, a two-candidate election or by
a mechanism wherein 2 or 3 alternative proposals are made and placed on a
formal agenda, suppose this 3-member committee operates somewhat less for-
mally with a round-table discussion. Here, however, let us consider two alter-
natives as to how they might proceed. One alternative is where the committee
operates in a “free-wheeling” way—no formal votes are taken until two or more
of its members vote to end debate with a specific alternative identified as the
alternative to the status quo. Another procedure has the committee deciding
beforehand to consider the two issues separately, perhaps debating one in the
morning and the other in the afternoon, and that when any two alternatives
are discussed they are allowed to differ on only one of the two issues. The first
scenario, then, might correspond to a situation in which our three members act
as a “committee of the whole” and where quite possibly it is mere exhaustion
that terminates discussion. Since the tools for analyzing such loosely structured
situations must await a later chapter we instead consider the second method,
that of issue-by-issue deliberation and voting.
Figure 6.3 also displays a dashed line h1 through the status quo parallel to
the horizontal axis. If we suppose that our committee takes up issue 1 first,

--- Sayfa 266 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  257
then they are in essence limiting themselves to debating alternatives along
h1. And here, if spatial preferences are of the sort considered thus far in this
volume—specifically, represented as drawn in the figure by circular indifference
contours—then preferences along h1 will each be single peaked and where each
committee member’s ideal preference on h1 is given by dropping a perpendicu-
lar line from their ideal point in the 2-dimensional space to it (since that point
corresponds to the point of tangency of that voter’s indifference contours to h1).
In our example, then, voter 1’s preference is the median preference and thus the
issue-constrained winner. Now suppose the committee takes up issue 2, and,
with the status quo now changed to (x11,x20), it must vote on alternatives along
the dashed vertical line h2. Dropping perpendiculars to that line tells us that
voter 3’s ideal along h2 is the median preference, in which case the point (x11,x32)
is now the issue-constrained winner.
Now, however, suppose our committee debates and votes instead on issue
2 first. In our example, the reader should be able to confirm that x32 would
still be the value arrived at on this issue and that after considering issue 1, the
committee, as before, would arrive at the outcome (x11,x32). Indeed, the reader
should also confirm that regardless of which issue is voted on first, and even
if issues are reconsidered, the point (x11,x32) remains the final outcome. This is
not to say, of course, that (x11,x32) would prevail if the committee allowed itself
to consider alternatives that proposed a change on both issues simultaneously
since we already know that with three voters portrayed as they are here that
there is no overall Condorcet winner—the social preference under majority
rule is wholly intransitive. But by limiting themselves to discussions and votes
issue 1
issue 2
h1
h3
h2
x32
x*3
x*1
x*2
x11,x32
x20
x0
x10
x11
Figure 6.3  Issue-by-issue voting, circular indifference contours

--- Sayfa 267 ---
258  Agendas and Voting Rules
that consider only one issue at a time, the committee has, in effect, guaranteed
itself a determinate outcome. In this context, then, we can anticipate either of
two possibilities: Either the committee will choose (x11,x32) or a majority of the
committee, seeing alternatives that are better for it than (x11,x32), will attempt
somehow to rid itself of its issue-by-issue constraint.
Our example, however, is of a very special sort; namely, it portrays preferences
with circular indifference contours. This means that what a person prefers on
one issue is invariant with whatever is the status quo on all other issues. Thus,
we should not be surprised to see an invariance with the order with which the
issues are considered. Specifically, with circular indifference contours (or their
n-dimensional generalization) a person’s preference on one issue is invariant
with whatever is the status quo on all other issues. We can, however, readily
imagine situations where this is a poor representation of preference. Suppose,
for instance, that the two issues concern investing in urban highway construction
versus commuter rail development. To some extent these two transportation
systems are redundant and the value a legislator or city council member might
place on one will reasonably be a function of how much is invested in the other.
Or, for a more headline-driven example, consider the debate of how, whether
or when to fund and implement America’s Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”)
and the contemporaneous scandal over high level bureaucrats within the Inter-
nal Revenue Service targeting Obama’s ideological opponents (notably various
Tea Party groups). It might seem that these are two separate issues, but they are
in fact interconnected in that it is the IRS that is to monitor compliance with
the act and the act’s opponents have sought to use the IRS scandal as a way
of sidetracking its implementation. So instead, consider Figure 6.4a, where the
indifference contours of our three committee members are now “tilted ellipses”
issue 1
issue 2
C
B
A
D
Q
L1
x*3
x*2
x*1
L1′
L2′
L2
Figure 6.4a  Issue-by-issue voting, elliptical indifference contours

--- Sayfa 268 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  259
so that the greater the value on one dimension, the lower is the preferred value
on the other for voter 3, but the higher is the value for voters 1 and 2.
To see now how things change with these preferences, suppose once again
that we vote on issue 1 first with Q being the status quo. Looking at the line L1
we see that the point A is the median preference on that line (i.e., the tangency
of voter 2’s indifference contour to that line is the median tangency) so that if
we now vote on issue 2 (i.e., consider alternatives along the line L2) the median
preference is at B. Suppose, on the other hand, that we first vote on issue 2 and
thus consider the alternatives along the line L2’. In this case, we’d presumably
move to the point C (the tangency of voter 1’s indifference contour to L2’),
and if we were then to consider issue 1 (i.e., alternatives along the line L1’),
we’d move to D. And unlike the case of circular indifference contours, D is not
the same as B. That is, the order of voting on the issues impacts the eventual
outcome. There is, moreover, an additional difference between this example
and the previous one with separable preferences; namely, revoting on the issues
will change the outcome further still. For example, the reader should confirm
that if a vertical line, L2”, is drawn through the point D in Figure 6.4a, there is a
median preference on it that differs from both D and B.
The sensitivity of the final outcome to the order with which the issues are
considered as well as to whether or not we allow a reconsideration of issues raises
a new question; namely, whether a process of continual re-voting can ever set-
tle down and converge to a unique and well-defined point? Is there, in other
words, an equilibrium? To see that the answer to this query is yes, consider Fig-
ure 6.4b, where the curve S1 corresponds to the locus of all tangencies of the
issue 2
issue 1
A
D
X
X*
2
X*
3
X*
1
B
C
S2
S1
Figure 6.4b  Intersection of issue-by-issue median curves

--- Sayfa 269 ---
260  Agendas and Voting Rules
median preference to all the horizontal lines we might draw in Figure 6.4a (the
seminal analysis here, upon which most of this section is based, is Gerald Kram-
er’s “Sophisticated Voting Over Multidimensional Choice Spaces,” Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 2, 1972). Thus, if we fix issue 2 at any value, S1 tells us
the value on issue 1 that would correspond to the committee’s choice as dictated
by majority rule. Similarly, the line S2 tells us the value on issue 2 that would be
arrived at by the committee if we fix issue 1 at any specific value. Now consider
the intersection of these two lines at the point X. Suppose X is the status quo. By
construction, there is no issue-by-issue vote that can be taken that would lead us
away from X. The point X then is the equilibrium to issue-by-issue voting in our
example. The construction of S1 and S2, moreover, tells us that if indifference
contours have some specific mathematical properties (e.g., there are no flat spots,
they are continuous and they define convex sets), then the intersection of S1 and
S2 will be unique. The reader can confirm, moreover, that beginning at any point
on S1 or S2, successive votes on alternating issues will converge ultimately to X.
Of course, proof of a proposition using two dimensions does not necessar-
ily mean the result extends to issue spaces of higher dimension. However, we
will merely state here that such an extension exists but we skip its proof since
there is a more immediate concern that needs to be addressed (and since that
proof is more a complex exercise in linear algebra and the geometry of vectors
than it is of game theory). Specifically, note that to this point we assume that
our committee members vote sincerely. However, if they know that issues can
be reconsidered and that the order of voting on the issues can impact outcomes,
might they not find it advantageous to vote strategically? We approach this ques-
tion by supposing that X is the sincere voting equilibrium under issue-by-issue
voting and ask the question: Is there an agenda that leads away from X to some
new outcome Y that a majority prefers to X? Limiting our illustrative discussion
once again to two dimensions, we know that Y cannot have the same value as X
on either dimension. Otherwise X is preferred to Y by a majority. So suppose the
path to Y from X has the committee voting on issue 1 first and, with at least one
voter voting insincerely, forcing a move from X to W, which is then pitted against
Y where Y differs from W on issue 2 and is preferred by a majority to W. To see,
then, whether such a move is possible we need to analyze the agenda in Figure 6.5
where A is the outcome achieved if the move to W is defeated but a horizontal
move away from X is nevertheless voted on in the second round that otherwise
would have led to Y if W had passed.
With strategic voting now, there is only one way to realize Y; namely, the com-
mittee votes for W over X in the first vote, and then Y defeats W (since, with X
being the sincere voting equilibrium, X defeats A in a majority vote). Thus, for
strategic voting to move away from X it must be the case that Y defeats both W
and X. Whether this is possible or not, however, depends on the precise nature
of indifference contours. The first possibility is that preferences are separable,
in which case we revert to the special case of circular indifference contours to
simplify our presentation. And as a further simplification let us limit discussion
to two dimensions. So, suppose that Y is preferred to W by a majority—that
is, let u(Y) > u(W) for all members of this majority. We know, though, that W

--- Sayfa 270 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  261
differs from Y on only one dimension (ostensibly the second) and that if we
let W = (w1,w2), we can write Y = (w1,w2 + b), where b is the amount that W
and Y differ on that dimension. However, since preferences are separable, we
can write u(Y) as the sum of two utility functions u1(y1) + u2(y2) = u1(w1) +
u2(w2 + b) and, correspondingly, W as a similar sum, u1(w1) + u2(w2). With
Y preferred to W by a majority, if indifference contours are circles (indeed, if
they define convex sets generally), a paper and pencil exercise shows that if V is
any point on the line between Y and W, then V is preferred to W as well by that
same majority. So let V = tY + (1 − t)W. Of course, since the line between Y and
W is parallel to the second dimension, V can differ from Y and W only on this
second dimension. That is,
V = (w1,t(w2 + b) + (1 − t)w2) = (w1, w2 + tb).
And since u(V) > u(W), with separable preferences this must mean that
u2(w2 + tb) > u2(w2).
However, recall that X, the current status quo, differs from W only on issue 1
and not 2. That is, x2 = w2, so the previous inequality can be rewritten as
u2(x2 + tb) > u2(x2)
for members of the majority that prefers Y to W, in which case it must be that
u(x1, x2 + tb) > u(x1, x2) for this same majority. This, however, violates the
assumption that the point X is the sincere voting equilibrium . . . that no major-
ity prefers an alternative to X if we limit the voting to votes over only one issue.
Hence, X must also be the strategic voting equilibrium.
A great deal of fuss has been made in the literature over the preceding result,
with some writers proclaiming that issue-by-issue voting is the solution to some
of the instabilities inherent in situations without Condorcet winners. Labeled
institutionally induced equilibria, the argument is that the committee system in,
A
A
Y
X
W
W
Figure 6.5  Strategic voting agenda under issue-by-issue voting

--- Sayfa 271 ---
262  Agendas and Voting Rules
for example, the U.S. Congress or parliamentary procedures wherein debate is
constrained by a rule requiring that discussion be germane to the issue at hand
are viewed as ways in which deliberative bodies can ensure a stable outcome
when otherwise there is none. Notice, however, that the preceding proof of sta-
bility depends critically on the assumption of separable preferences. Indeed,
while there may be a strategic voting equilibrium under issue-by-issue vot-
ing without separability, there is no guarantee that such an equilibrium exists.
Issue-by-issue voting, then, can induce stability, but it is guaranteed to do so
only under the restrictive condition that each voter’s preference over one issue
is invariant with preferences over all other issues that might be considered.
Example: To see the effect of non-separability on issue-by-issue voting,
consider the three-member committee in Figure 6.6, with ideal points at
x1, x2, and x3, each of whom perceives some relationship between the issues.
Suppose the committee votes first on issue 2, then issue 1, and consider
what eventually prevails as a function of what the committee agrees to on
issue 2. For instance, if they choose x* on issue 2, they must then vote on the
line h1, in which case C ultimately prevails, because C is the median prefer-
ence on h1. On the other hand, if the committee chooses x**, then, B is the
median on the line h2. And if the committee initially agrees to x*** on issue
2, then the final outcome is A. The curve S, then, maps all such outcomes
and tells us what prevails as a function of what is chosen on the first ballot
over issue 2. To this point, then, matters seem unexceptional, but consider
the significance of S and its shape. S tells us what eventually prevails on
both issues, given a specific decision on issue 2. Thus, when evaluating how
to vote on issue 2, committee members should look ahead and evaluate the
outcome on S implied by their initial decision. However, because S is not
a straight line (which it is with circular indifference contours), commit-
tee members can have preferences that are not single-peaked along it. For
example, voter 2’s ideal preference on S is the point A, but notice that the
point C would lie on a higher indifference curve for 2 than would B. Thus,
it is not the case that preferences decline monotonically as we move away
from a person’s ideal—voter 2’s utility declines as we move from A until we
get to B, and then it increases until C is reached. That is, preferences are not
single peaked on S.
The fact that at least one committee member does not have a single-peaked
preference means, of course, that a cycle can develop when evaluating what
to do on issue 2. Indeed, A, B, and C cycle in our example. (Voter 3 most
prefers B and least prefers C, voter 1 most prefers C and least prefers A, and
voter 2 most prefers A and least prefers B—which occasions the usual Con-
dorcet cycle.) Thus, issue-by-issue voting fails to induce a stable outcome.
In this example, then, although the committee’s procedure seeks to enforce a
separate consideration of the issues, this separation does not exist in the minds
of the committee’s members. So if those members anticipate the consequences

--- Sayfa 272 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  263
of their actions on one issue, procedures alone cannot ensure stability. Hence,
the extent to which rules induce stability depends on many things, including,
as our examples show, the extent to which the rules themselves are subject to
revision and whether issues take a special, separable form. This conclusion does
not mean, however, that rules are unimportant. Indeed, if we take the previous
example and suppose that the committee votes first on issue 1, rather than issue
2, then the reader should be able to confirm that an equilibrium exists (pro-
vided that the committee does not allow a reconsideration of the issues). Thus,
even a simple rule such as one that designates the voting order has a profound
effect. We are, then, emphasizing two things. First, in determining the influ-
ence of a rule or institution, we should suppose that people react strategically
to its imposition, with the understanding that all others are trying to do the
same thing. And second, to reiterate a lesson learned from the analysis of agen-
das, those who wish to study legislative outcomes must understand legislative
procedures and the opportunities for individuals and majorities to manipulate
those procedures for their own ends.
6.5  Referenda and Separability of Preferences
One alternative, of course, to the vagaries of legislative or parliamentary rep-
resentation and voting is to do away with politicians in their entirety and to
issue 2
issue 1
h1
S
C
A
B
h2
x2
x3
x1
xx
xxx
xxxx
Figure 6.6  Disappearance of stability without separability

--- Sayfa 273 ---
264  Agendas and Voting Rules
institute a system of direct democracy by referenda. The resurrection of direct
democracy through referenda is one of the clear trends of democratic poli-
tics. Nevertheless, opponents of this trend raise a variety of concerns, the most
notable being an overall distrust of the abilities of the average citizen to process
information on complex public issues and to make political decisions that serve
their interests. We’ve already seen in Chapter 4, however, how voters might use
indirect and relatively costless sources of information to guide their vote. Nev-
ertheless, there are other objections to referenda, including a concern about the
susceptibility of the public to well-rehearsed advertisements and well-financed
campaigns by special interests and the impact of the initiative and referendum
mechanism on other political institutions such as parties and legislatures. Here,
however, as a further illustration of the application of the perspectives of this
volume, we can offer a different critique of using referenda to measure the pref-
erences of voters. Briefly, our critique does not apply if there is a single issue
on the ballot. But if, as was the case in California in 2012, for example, there
are upwards of eleven state-wide propositions to be voted on, referenda as cur-
rently practiced compel people to separate their votes on issues that may in fact
be linked. That is, when voters have non-separable preferences across the issues
being voted on, the common practice of tallying votes one issue at a time can
fail to select an overall Condorcet winner if one exists. Worse yet, as we show
shortly, referendum voting can select an overall Condorcet loser or an outcome
that is Pareto-dominated by every other possible outcome.
We have, of course, made reference to the concept of separable and
non-separable preferences earlier, especially with reference to spatial pref-
erences in the preceding section wherein we note that circular indifference
contours correspond to separable preferences. For a somewhat more homey
example, consider the food connoisseur’s view that red wine should only be
eaten with meat dishes and white wine with seafood. Thus, one’s preferences for
wine, so we are told, are not or should not be separable from our dinner entre.
In a domain more relevant to this text, it is not difficult now to identify real
instances of referenda that failed to yield separable preferences. For example, a
1978 Swiss national referendum contained one issue on the age of retirement
and another on a revision of the old-age pension. Similarly, another Swiss ref-
erendum in 1990 contained one proposal to establish a 10-year moratorium on
nuclear plant construction, while a separate proposal called for an end to the
use of nuclear energy. And in November 1988, California voters confronted five
separate ballot proposals dealing with automobile insurance reform. Since the
five proposals addressed essentially identical issues, many voters probably had
non-separable preferences across the alternatives.
To illustrate the problem non-separability occasions with these voters, suppose
a referendum is held on two issues, where, for example, YN indicates approval of
issue 1 and defeat of issue 2. Voters can vote YES or NO on each issue, and their
(non-separable) preference ranking is given for outcomes on both issues as fol-
lows (the analysis that follows relies heavily on Dean Lacy and Niou, “A Problem
with Referendums,” Journal of Theoretical Politics 12,1, January 2000):

--- Sayfa 274 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  265
1
2
3
YN
NY
NN
YY
YY
YY
NY
YN
NY
NN
NN
YN
Thus, if each voter votes according to his first preference, the outcome is NN:
Voters 2 and 3 vote N on issue 1 and Voters 1 and 3 vote N on issue 2. This is
the behavior we might expect in a simultaneous vote where voters do not know
each other’s preferences, and the problem is apparent: YY is the Condorcet win-
ner whereas NN is the Condorcet loser. In this case, then, it would seem that
the referenda provide the wrong answer to the question, “What do the people
want?”
The outcome of a referendum can be even worse than our example suggests.
Consider the case of a bond referendum where three voters must vote on three
bonds. Suppose all three voters, in their preferences, impose a budget constraint
of two bonds; they want two to pass, but they disagree on which two. All voters
prefer the passage of any two bonds to the passage of any one bond, and all vot-
ers rank last the passage of all three. The voters may believe that passage of three
will increase state debt and raise taxes while passage of one or two will not create
an unreasonable financial burden on the state. Looking then at the preferences
below, we can surmise that if voters act myopically in the absence of informa-
tion about each other’s preferences, all three bond issues pass even though no
voter wants such an outcome. Voter 1 votes to approve of issues 1 and 2, voter
three votes to approve of issues 1 and 3, and voter 3 votes to approve of issues 2
and 3, thus resulting in majority approval of all three bond referenda. In other
words, the referendum selects an outcome that is Pareto-dominated by every
other possible outcome.
1
2
3
YYN
YNY
NYY
YNY
NYY
YYN
NYY
YYN
YNY
NNY
NYN
YNN
YNN
YNN
NYN
NYN
NNY
NNY
NNN
NNN
NNN
YYY
YYY
YYY
Strategic Voting: Under the assumption that voters are uninformed about each
other’s preferences, we have thus far assumed that voters vote for their most
preferred outcome. But if voters know the preferences of others, strategic inter-
action may change their vote choice and thus the outcome. Nevertheless, as
the preferences below show, in a simultaneous vote, strategic voting does not
guarantee the selection of a Condorcet winner.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
266  Agendas and Voting Rules
1
2
3
NY
YN
NN
YY
YY
YY
NN
NN
NY
YN
NY
YN
Since voters 1 and 2 have separable preferences, their dominant strategy is to
vote for their most preferred alternative. To see this, suppose voter i’s most pre-
ferred outcome is (x1, x2, …, xm), and suppose i is pivotal on issue k. From the
definition of separability, i prefers (x1, …, xk, …, xm) to (x1, …, xk’, …, xm) and
it must also be the case that he prefers (x1, …, xj , xk’, …, xm) to (x1, … xj’, xk’,
…, xm). Thus, by transitivity i prefers (x1, …, xk, …, xm) to (x1, … xj’, xk’, …,
xm). Voter 3 has non-separable preferences and is pivotal for each issue. His
best response to the votes of 1 and 2 is to vote NN, in which case NN is the
social choice and a Nash equilibrium outcome even though YY is the Con-
dorcet winner. To see this notice that if 1 unilaterally changes his vote to YY, the
outcome YN prevails—voter 1’s least preferred outcome; and if 2 changes his
vote to YY, the outcome NY prevails, which is his least preferred outcome. In
short, strategic voting alone proves insufficient to resolve the problem created
by non-separable preferences.
Sequential Voting: There is one final thing we might consider insofar as find-
ing a method whereby referenda avoid undesirable outcomes; namely, voting on
the issues sequentially. Sequential voting, of course, allows people to avoid the
problem observed in our example of three bond referenda: Once bond issues
1 and 2 pass, the voters are unanimous in defeating issue 3. We can begin by
noting that sequential voting offers a solution to the problem observed in our
first example, where NN is majority dominated by every other pair of outcomes
in a simultaneous vote. Suppose, however, that each voter begins by voting for
her or his most preferred outcome on the first issue, which produces N as the
outcome. Once N is revealed, voters 1 and 2 will choose Y on the second issue,
yielding NY as the outcome. If the order of the issues in the voting sequence is
reversed, then on the second issue (voted on first), the outcome is N and on the
first issue (voted on second), the outcome will be Y, resulting in the outcome
YN. Thus, sequential voting here prevents the selection of Condorcet losers.
We can, in fact, say more; namely, if voters are sophisticated, then sequential
voting will select the Condorcet winner if one exists. Suppose all voters reason
through the possible outcomes of sequential voting in our first example. If issue
1 is voted on first and the outcome is seen to be Y, voters 2 and 3 will vote Y on
issue 2, and the outcome will be YY. If the outcome of issue 1 is N, then voters
1 and 2 will vote Y on issue 2 and the outcome will be NY. All voters can look
ahead to see that if Y wins on issue 1, the outcome will be YY; if N wins, the
outcome will be NY. Voters 1 and 3 prefer YY to NY, so they will vote Y on issue
1, then Y on issue 2, and the outcome is YY. Similarly, suppose issue 2 is voted
on first with Y as the outcome. Voters 1 and 3 will vote Y on issue 1 and the
outcome will be YY. If the outcome on issue 2 is N, then voters 1 and 2 will vote

--- Sayfa 276 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  267
Y on issue 1 and the outcome will be YN. Since all voters can reason through
this sequence, they know that a Y vote on issue 2 will produce YY while an N
vote will lead to YN. Since voters 2 and 3 prefer YY to YN, they will vote Y on
both issues in the sequence, producing YY as the outcome. This result can in
fact be generalized by a formalization of this argument so as to establish that
sophisticated sequential voting on multiple binary issues will produce an overall
Condorcet winner when one exists, regardless of whether voters have separable or
non-separable preferences.
6.6  Key Ideas and Concepts
uncovered set
undominated set
amendment agenda
endogeneous agenda
Borda Count
Hare voting
institutionally induced equilibria
single transferable vote
approval voting
cumulative voting
plurality rule
majority rule
runoff elections
issue by issue voting
referenda
sequential voting
Exercises for Chapter 6
1.
You are a member of a three-person committee that must choose one out-
come from the list (A, B, C, D). Suppose the following preference orders
describe the committee (from most to least preferred):
you:
A
B
C
D
member 2:
D
C
A
B
member 3:
C
B
D
A
Which of the following procedures would you prefer to see implemented
if you believed that the other two members of the committee were sophis-
ticated: (1) an agenda that first paired B against C, the winner against A,
the winner against D; (2) an agenda that first paired C against A, the win-
ner against D, and the winner against B; (3) an agenda that first paired B
against D, the winner against C, the winner against A; or (4) you should
not care which is chosen.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
268  Agendas and Voting Rules
2.
Assume the following preferences by a five-member committee:
1
2
3
4
5
A
B
C
C
B
B
C
A
A
C
C
A
B
B
A
What is the outcome of the agenda (A, B, C) if only voter 2 is strategic? If
voter 2 can educate at most one other person to be sophisticated, whom
should he or she educate, assuming that voter 1 is too dumb to ever catch
on to what is required?
3.
Suppose a majority of the legislature prefers A to B. If you are opposed
to A, if A and B must be voted on first regardless of what amendments
are introduced, and if everyone is a sophisticated voter, which alternative
would you prefer to introduce: C or D? C creates the majority rule cycle,
“A preferred to B preferred to C preferred to A” while D defeats both A and
B. Your preferences are “B preferred to D preferred to C preferred to A.”
4.
You are a legislative aid advising a committee chair, who must choose
between reporting bill A or B out of committee. If A is reported, it is certain
to lose to the status quo Q. If B is reported out, it will be amended on the
floor (alternative C), and you will be able to offer a substitute bill, D. Sup-
pose the remaining members of the legislature fall into one of three equally
numerous groups, with preferences as follows:
group 1:
B
D
A
C
Q
group 2:
C
Q
A
D
B
group 3:
Q
B
C
A
D
You are a member of the second group. Suppose the legislature votes us-
ing the agenda: “substitutes against the amendment, the winner against
the bill, the winner against the status quo.” You are certain that as things
stand, everyone but you votes sincerely. Suppose the dollar value to you
of each alternative is: C = $2,000, Q = $1,500, A = $500, D = $0, and
B = −$3,000. What is the upper limit on how much you would be willing
to pay to have someone educate the legislature so you and everyone else
votes sophisticatedly?
5.
A legislature (which we assume has three members) can consider four
motions, where each motion affects the amount of money going to a leg-
islator’s district. Let the amounts (in thousands) to each district from each
motion be as follows:
District 1
District 2
District 3
A (status quo)
300
0
−400
B (committee bill)
500
−600
0
C (possible amend.)
0
800
−900
D (possible amend.)
−900
400
450

--- Sayfa 278 ---
Agendas and Voting Rules  269

Motions A  and B are on the floor as proposals and you must decide
whether to propose an amended bill. If you propose C, the agenda will be
C versus B the winner against A; if you propose D the agenda will be D
versus B the winner against A. If D and C are both proposed, the agenda
is D versus C, the winner against B, the winner against A.
a.
Suppose you are the representative from district 2. Which amendment
should you propose: C, which pays your district $800,000 or D, which
pays $400,000?
b.
Suppose you are chairman (and dictator) of the relevant legislative
subcommittee, and that you can report out of your subcommittee
either B or C or D as the bill that the legislature must consider. But
you are also certain that whatever alternatives you fail to report out
will be introduced on the floor as amendments. Thus,

If you report B, the agenda is “C versus D, winner versus B, winner
versus A.”

If you report C, the agenda is “B versus D, winner versus C, winner
versus A.”

If you report D, the agenda is “C versus B, winner versus D, winner
versus A.”

What would you choose as your bill if you were the representative
from district 2?
c.
With respect to part (b), if majority rule is used by the subcommittee
to choose whether to report B, C, or D, what will it report?
6.
Consider the following preferences within two chambers (lower and upper
houses) of a legislature:
Upper house legislator
Lower house legislator
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
B
C
D
A
B
B
D
C
C
D
A
C
O
D
A
B
D
O
C
B
C
A
O
D
O
A
O
O
D
O
C
O
A
B
B
D
A
C
B
A

Suppose the president cares only that some bill pass to upset the status quo.
To achieve this, he can submit a single agenda to both houses of the legis-
lature. All members of each house of the legislature are strategic and the
lower house must vote before the upper house. If both houses choose the
same bill for the president to sign, he signs it. If the houses choose different
bills, the outcome is “No New Law” (O). If the president is strategic, which
of the following four agendas should he submit?
i.
(A, B, C, D)
ii.
(D, C, B, A)
iii.
(C, D, A, B)
iv.
(B, D, C, A)

--- Sayfa 279 ---
270  Agendas and Voting Rules

where (x, y, z, w) means “x versus y, the winner against z, the winner
against w.”
7.
A nine-member legislature using majority rule faces a budget that allows
them to pass two of three proposed programs (A, B, C). The legislature has
the following preference orders (ranked from most to least preferred):
Legislator
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
B
A
B
A
C
C
B
A
C
C
B
A
C
A
B
A
C
B
A
C
C
B
B
A
C
B
A

You chair the legislature and are legislator 1. The voting procedure is as
follows:

First, vote whether to keep or veto alternative B. If B is vetoed, the vot-
ing ends and alternatives A and C are implemented. If B is kept, then vote
whether to keep or veto alternative C. If C is vetoed, the voting ends and
alternatives A and B are implemented. If C is kept, then vote whether to
keep or veto alternative A. If A is vetoed, the voting ends and alternatives
B and C are implemented. If A is kept, one member of the legislature must
choose which alternative should be vetoed.
a.
As chairman, should you choose yourself to make this veto decision or
legislator 4?
b.
Assuming that legislator 4 makes the veto decision, design an agenda
of the type illustrated in which B and C are nevertheless passed.
8.
Suppose three candidates, A, B, and C, are competing in a plurality-rule
election and that an initial poll of the electorate’s preferences reveals the
following information:
31% prefer A to B to C with u(A) = 10, u(B) = 9, u(C) = 0,
29% prefer B to A to C with u(B) = 10, u(A) = 9, u(C) = 0,
40% prefer C to A to B with u(C) = 10, u(A) = 1, u(B) = 0.
a.
If the pollster accurately reports the poll result, and if all voters assume
that those who hold the same preferences vote in the same strategic
way, who wins the election in equilibrium?
b.
Suppose the pollster misrepresents the poll and announces that 40%
prefer A, 31% prefer B, and 29% prefer C. Who wins?
c.
Suppose the pollster instead announces that 40% prefer B, 31% prefer
A, and 29% prefer C. Who wins?

--- Sayfa 280 ---
7
Games with Incomplete Information
7.1  Incomplete Information
Thus far, we have assumed that any uncertainty we choose to incorporate
into our models has nature as its source. More importantly, if nature’s moves
are revealed to one person, we have thus far assumed that they are revealed
to everyone, so that there are no informational asymmetries—no one has any
private information, aside, possibly, from the choices they make as the situa-
tion unfolds. More generally, though, many important political processes can
be modeled only if we assume that decision makers have private information,
such as the details of their own preferences or their capabilities. A great many
examples and subsidiary questions come to mind:
What costs are terrorists willing to incur after hijacking a plane, and how
willing should a government be to make concessions or to risk sacrificing
hostages?
What are a weapon system’s capabilities that might not be observ-
able or measurable by other countries, and how does this asymmetry in
information affect the willingness of countries to engage in arms control
negotiations?
How can a congressional committee monitor and regulate an executive
agency when it knows that the agency will have better information about the
program’s performance than Congress once that program goes into effect?
How should we approach a negotiation if we don’t know an adversary’s
willingness to compromise or how it values the time spent negotiating?
When some voters are informed about a legislator’s actions and oth-
ers are not, what weight will the legislator give to the informed versus the
uninformed members of his constituency?
With respect to the important issue of strategic deterrence, what value
does a country’s leadership place on exacting revenge with a counter-strike
after being attacked even though it knows that such a strike can only invite
its own counter-strike?
The Pripyat Marshes: The Pripyat marshes, stretching across northern
Ukraine and southern Belarus, were, during WWII, the bane of the Nazis’

--- Sayfa 281 ---
272  Games with Incomplete Information
drive into the Soviet Union. Largely impenetrable by mechanized armor,
they were the ideal refuge of partisans, who could launch their attacks
against the Wermacht and then disappear. But in 1986, they achieved noto-
riety for a different reason: Following the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, they
glowed in the dark. One can, in fact, date the inexorable dissolution of the
USSR by that disaster—when the failings of the regime became apparent
to not only the powers that be in the Kremlin, but to ordinary Soviet citi-
zens as well. In the present game theoretic context, though, it is interest-
ing to look at events that bracketed Chernobyl, beginning in 1983 when
President Reagan branded the Soviet Union the “Evil Empire” and to recall
that six years later that empire, in the form of the Warsaw Pact, dissolved.
In the interim, we find not only Chernobyl, but the ex-KGB head, Yuri
Andropov, being replaced as Soviet Premier by Gorbachev, who in turn
sought to implement a series of domestic reforms under the labels glasnost
(openness) and perestroika (restructuring). And we should also recall that
throughout this decade the USSR’s ostensible allies—Hungary, Czechoslo-
vakia, Romania, Bulgaria, East Germany and especially Poland—had been
edging toward reform of their own economies and, for a variety of nascent
“revolutionaries,” of their political systems as well. Reformers in the past,
however (e.g., in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968), had met
a bitter end, so needless to say, political leaders and their reformist oppo-
sition in Central Europe were, to say the least, cautious. But Gorbachev
promised a new regime, so what to make of his admonitions to the heads of
the USSR’s satellite states that they should do what they think best without
interference from the Kremlin? What were they to make of his telling them
that the Brezhnev Doctrine had been replaced by the “Sinatra Doctrine”—
do it your way? They’d been told such thing in the past, only to learn those
were empty words. What ensued thereafter were a series of actions by the
satellite states that, explicitly intended or otherwise, caused the Kremlin to
signal its true intentions. Perhaps the first such signal, aside from words,
came in March 1989 when Hungary’s Prime Minister, Miklos Nemeth, told
Gorbachev that Hungary intended to tear down the 200 kilometer elec-
tronic fence between it and Austria—and Gorbachev did nothing. A sec-
ond signal came when Moscow merely encouraged a “political settlement”
between Solidarity and the Communists after Solidarity won a landslide
election victory in June. Again in June there was Moscow’s silence after
Hungary, following a reburial of the leader of its 1956 uprising, Imre Nagy,
labeled that uprising a popular one as opposed to a “counter revolution.”
Then, when Hungary in August inquired as to Moscow’s view of letting
the East Germans, who were flooding their country, move on into Austria
(and thence into West Germany), Russian Foreign Minister Shevardnadze
replied that the issue didn’t concern Moscow. In October, while visiting
Berlin, Gorbachev signaled the green light for the Communists to remove
the sclerotic Communist Honecker. In November, perhaps by accident, the

--- Sayfa 282 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  273
Berlin Wall came, metaphorically speaking, crashing down, and once again
the Soviets did nothing. The rest, as people are wont to say, is history.
These examples have one common element: One person (or entity, in the case
of the Kremlin) knows something another does not know—costs, capabilities,
policy position, program performance, and so on. One need not revert, how-
ever, to situations that rarely if ever concern us mere mortals as opposed to
government decision makers or military planners in order to identify par-
allel situations of asymmetric information. When one buys a used car, the
dealer is generally at an advantage in terms of knowing whether a car has seri-
ous mechanical issues that almost any dealer will attempt to disguise with a
thorough cleaning of the interior, a removal of dents, and a good coat of wax.
Alternatively, when buying a new car, the most common advice given to the
consumer is to not reveal beforehand one’s willingness to pay since following
that advice increases one’s chances of a better deal. Or consider the interac-
tion between a person interviewing for a job and the potential employer. The
employer’s task is to somehow assess the interviewee’s capabilities and short-
comings, while the person being interviewed has every incentive to hide the
things he or she thinks will keep them from being hired. And then there are
those situations that concern the reputations of the players. A high school bully,
for instance, may know that there are people who, if they challenge him, could
show him to be a phony, so instead he picks fights with lesser foes in the hopes
of establishing a reputation for toughness and physical prowess so that he will
not be challenged by those who might overcome him.
Treating situations in which there are parts of an extensive form that are
unknown to one person or the other will require some additional tools if only
because asymmetric information opens the door to new and more compli-
cated forms of “he-thinks-that-I-think” regresses and more complex forms of
strategic interaction. To see what we mean, consider this restatement of the
“he-thinks” regress: I believe that you believe that the game we are playing is ___,
in which case you will conclude that ___ is an appropriate strategy for me to adopt.
And if you believe that I believe that the game we are playing is in fact ___, then
you should conclude that I will indeed choose___ as my strategy. At this point we
can label the game “solved,” because our beliefs, by assumption, are identical.
Now, however, suppose our beliefs are not identical because we each hold some
private information. Of course, each of us might be expected to begin the “play
of the game” with some initial guess about each other’s private information, but
since these are only guesses, as the situation unfolds we might find that each of
us is making choices that are inconsistent with initial suppositions. At this point
both of us might have reason to revise our initial guesses about the situation,
but such reasoning opens the door to thoughts of the following variety:
If I know something that you don’t know and if you are aware of your own
uncertainty, then I may try to deceive you. However, based on what you know

--- Sayfa 283 ---
274  Games with Incomplete Information
about the situation’s strategic structure, you might try to infer what I know
from what I say or do as the situation unfolds. Of course, I know you will try to
make such inferences, and therefore I will choose my strategy carefully so that
it is not only a best response to your actions, but leads you to believe things
that induce actions on your part that are advantageous for me. However, you
know that I am trying to do this, and therefore you have reason to interpret
my actions carefully—possibly as part of an attempted deception.
To bring matters closer to home, recall those glorious years in which dating led
to endless periods of introspective agony. “If I try to kiss her, will she humiliate
me with rejection or will she respond in kind?” “Will he ever try to kiss me, or
is he dating me merely to pass the time until he can get a date with ___?” “How
can I signal my desire for a deeper relationship?” “If I ask her out again, will she
say no?” “Did he not ask me for a date because he’s interested in someone else,
or is he too shy to make the first move?” The agony here, of course, is that at
least one person knows something the other doesn’t know—in general, in fact,
each knows something the other doesn’t know—in which case, neither person
can be certain they understand completely the “game” being played. What fol-
lows thereafter, then, is each person, paying special attention to every nuanced
word or action, attempts to infer what the other wants or doesn’t want, but
where both sides to the relationship are aware that the other is doing this and
adjusting their beliefs in some manner or another.
Such situations reveal that our current typology of games—which includes
games of perfect and imperfect information—is incomplete. To this typology,
we must also add games of incomplete information in which characteristics
of the situation are revealed only to some subset of players so that one or more
of them knows something about the extensive or strategic form representa-
tion of the situation that others don’t know. But even this category of games
has some distinct sub-categories that are worth noting. Consider what happens
when we match information with the order of moves. If the player who has the
first move possesses private information, that first move becomes a signal for
the other players, in which case we refer to the situation as a signaling game.
Games of reputation are typically signaling games, and in our discussion of
events leading to the USSR’s empire’s dissolution it was the Kremlin that was
attempting to signal that its reputation, earned under Stalin and Brezhnev, was
no longer relevant. Alternatively, if it’s the player who lacks private information
who must move first, then we call the situation a screening game. Our exam-
ple of a person being interviewed for a job illustrates such a game wherein an
employer might offer a job candidate various benefits such as stock options or
signing bonuses without knowing what the potential employee knows about
their qualifications or what it would take for the potential employee to agree to
be hired. Screening also characterizes the task of insurance companies wherein
they must decide whether or not to issue life insurance policies to people who
perhaps possess private information about the status of their health. There are,
of course, other forms of games with asymmetric incomplete information but

--- Sayfa 284 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  275
rather than concoct any new typologies, we begin in the next section with a
simple numerical example that illustrates more precisely the complexity asym-
metric incomplete information adds to the analysis.
7.2  A Simple Game of Incomplete Information
Example: A lobbyist (l) who receives $20 if a particular bill passes must
choose between
C:  Offer a campaign contribution of $15 to a specific legislator (L) who
will be pivotal on the bill’s final vote for passage, conditional on the legisla-
tor (L) voting for the bill, and
~C:  Take the chance that the legislator will vote for the bill without the
contribution
Appreciating that the magnitudes of the numbers we associate with
outcomes are not stated with realism in mind, the lobbyist’s payoff from
each outcome is
$20  If the bill passes without a bribe being paid
$5  If the bill passes with a bribe
$0  If the bill fails without a bribe
The problem for the lobbyist, however, is that he is uncertain about how
the legislator’s constituents feel about the bill. For purposes of a numeri-
cal example, suppose that, depending on the preferences of constituents,
the legislator in question derives either $10 or −$10 from the bill’s passage
(and nothing if it fails). Keeping in mind that the vote of the legislator in
question is pivotal, the legislator’s payoffs, then, are
$25  If constituents favor the bill and if the legislator is paid the bribe by
the lobbyist after voting for it
$10  If constituents favor the bill but no bribe rewards the legislator’s
vote for the bill
$5  If constituents oppose the bill but the legislator is bribed so as to
vote for the bill
$0  If the legislator votes against the bill, there is no bribe and constitu-
ents oppose the bill
−$10  If there is no bribe, constituents oppose the bill, and the legislator
stupidly votes for the bill’s passage
To make this example more interesting, we let the legislator have the first move
in this game, which is either to ask the lobbyist for a contribution (A) or to
pass on his move and to let the lobbyist approach him (~A). Figure 7.1 por-
trays this situation’s extensive form if we assume that the legislator’s infor-
mation about his or her constituents is no better than the lobbyist’s. In this
instance, we give nature an initial move in which it sets constituents’ prefer-
ences by setting the actual payoffs to the legislator. Thus, the legislator prefers,
ceteris paribus, to pass the bill (denoted P) with probability p(P) since that is
the probability his or her constituents favor the bill, and holds the opposite

--- Sayfa 285 ---
276  Games with Incomplete Information
preference (denoted ~P) with probability p(~P) = 1 − p(P). Notice that the
top half of this figure is identical to the lower half except for the preferences
the legislator associates with specific outcomes.
To this point our example merely corresponds to an extensive form game of
the usual sort, but it seems unreasonable to suppose that a legislator is unin-
formed about the preferences of the people he or she represents. So suppose
the legislator knows something the lobbyist doesn’t know, namely his or her
constituents’ preferences. In this case, the situation’s extensive form becomes
the one in Figure 7.2, which is identical to Figure 7.1 except that it removes
the information sets surrounding the legislator’s decision nodes. Thus, we now
have a situation in which the legislator learns nature’s move and is aware of
his or her preferences before it is the legislator’s turn to first act. The lobbyist,
on the other hand, learns the legislator’s first move but is uninformed about
nature’s move.
C
A
C
C
C
~C
~C
~C
~C
A
0
prefers
~prefer
p(P)
p(~P)
1
1
1
~A
~A
Y
25,5
0,0
10,20
0,0
25,5
0,0
10,20
0,0
5,5
0,0
−10,20
0,0
5,5
0,0
−10,20
0,0
N
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
1
Figure 7.1  Symmetric incomplete information

--- Sayfa 286 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  277
With respect now to the issue of common knowledge, notice that there is
nothing to stop us from assuming that the probabilities p(P) and p(~P), as well
as the information conveyed in this figure, are common knowledge. Common
knowledge does not mean that one player is precluded from knowing some-
thing that another does not know; instead, it simply requires that everyone
is aware of the informational uncertainties of others, everyone is aware that
everyone else is aware, and so on. Thus, saying that the structure portrayed in
Figure 7.2 is common knowledge implies that the lobbyist believes that nature
chooses between P and ~P with probabilities p(P) and p(~P), the legislator is
aware of the lobbyist’s beliefs, the lobbyist knows that the legislator is aware
of these beliefs . . . and so on. Put differently, both persons are fully informed
about the situation’s extensive form, each is aware that the other is aware, and
so forth.
It might seem, then, that there is nothing unusual in this situation—nothing
that we have not encountered before in terms of analytic complexity. However,
C
A
C
C
C
~C
~C
~C
~C
A
0
prefers
~prefer
p(P)
p(~P)
1
1
1
~A
~A
Y
25,5
0,0
10,20
0,0
25,5
0,0
10,20
0,0
5,5
0,0
−10,20
0,0
5,5
0,0
−10,20
0,0
N
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
Figure 7.2  Asymmetric incomplete information

--- Sayfa 287 ---
278  Games with Incomplete Information
here we must keep in mind that p(P) and p(~P) are simply the prior beliefs of
the lobbyist—his or her beliefs prior to the legislator’s first move. In deciding
what to do and how to approach the situation, one possibility is for the lobby-
ist to ignore the legislator’s initial move and assume simply that the probabil-
ity that the legislator’s constituents favor the bill equals p(P). In this instance,
choosing C (offering the bribe) yields the lobbyist a payoff of $5 because under
all contingencies the legislator will vote for the bill whereas if no bribe is offered
(~C), the lobbyist gets 20p(P) + 0p(~P) = 20p(P). Doing so, though, ignores the
fact that before deciding whether to offer a bribe, the lobbyist observes whether
the legislator requests the bribe. That is, simply maintaining the probability
estimates of p(P) and p(~P) ignores the opportunity for the lobbyist to con-
dition an estimate of these probabilities on the information set reached—on
whether the legislator requests a contribution. The lobbyist, in this case, must
wonder whether asking or not asking for a bribe reveals something about the
information possessed by the legislator—namely, whether or not his or her
constituents favor the bill.
At this point in our discussion, we cannot suppose that the method whereby
such conditional probabilities are calculated is apparent. Indeed, it is frequently
the case that this calculation can be difficult. Nevertheless, we can indicate here
its general structure, which makes use of the strategic context of choice. Pre-
sumably, the legislator will choose a strategy that specifies whether to choose
A or ~A, depending on whether nature chose P or ~P. Thus, if the legislator
chooses a strategy that states, in part, “Choose A  if nature chooses ~P, but
choose ~A if nature chooses P,” and if the lobbyist knows this strategy, then,
the lobbyist can infer nature’s choice after observing the legislator’s choice. Of
course, we must then contend with the fact that the legislator knows that the
lobbyist is making such inferences, in which case the lobbyist must contend
with the possibility that the legislator is engaging in some form of deception
when choosing A by asking for a bribe. And once the lobbyist asks this ques-
tion of himself, the he-thinks-that-I-think regress begins anew. So the question
remains as to what probabilities the lobbyist should assign to P and ~P after
observing the legislator’s initial move. Notationally, the probabilities of interest
are termed conditional probabilities, denoted p(S|e), where S is the outcome or
state of nature in question and e is the event that is observed and upon which
we condition our estimate of p. In the present context, the two probabilities
being estimated are denoted p(P|~A) and p(~P|A)—respectively, the probabil-
ity that the legislator’s constituents prefer the bill given that the legislator does
not ask for a bribe and the probability that those constituents are opposed to
the bill given that the legislator request a bribe. The answer to that question
can be learned only by solving this regress—only by once again solving for an
equilibrium of both strategies and beliefs.
The Taiwan Straits: Before we see how to find such an equilibrium, we
should first dissuade the reader from thinking that such situations are of
pure academic interest. Recall our brief discussion in Chapter  1 of the

--- Sayfa 288 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  279
situation confronting China, Taiwan and the United States and the uncer-
tainty that confronts the two adversaries across the Taiwan Straits as to
the likely response of the United States to any initial hostilities between
them. As things stand now, neither China nor Taiwan are certain of that
response and our argument is that American ambiguity is deliberate. Were
the U.S. to commit unambiguously and unconditionally to Taiwan’s defense,
Taiwan would most likely declare independence and literally dare China to
make a military response. Conversely, were the U.S. to commit unambigu-
ously to a declaration that Mainland-Taiwan relations fall outside of its
sphere of interest, China would almost certainly make aggressive moves
to absorb Taiwan and negate whatever independence it currently enjoys.
The particular difficulty for the U.S. lies in maintaining that ambiguity
whenever it reacts to various moves by either Taiwan or China—reactions
that might reveal its true intentions. That is, even if the U.S. knows what it
would do in the event of a military confrontation between China and Tai-
wan, it must act in ways that leaves both sides of the conflict unable to infer
its intentions. Of course, if there were a deadline of some sort whereby
the U.S. had to commit or not commit to Taiwan’s defense, the option of
maintaining ambiguity about its strategic plans would no longer be avail-
able and the situation would more closely match our previous legislative
example. The real game, though, is even more complicated because both
China and Taiwan also in reality have the option of making choices that
might compel the U.S. to reveal its preferences, where their incentives for
doing so are also dependent on their prior beliefs and a calculation as to
whether or not they in fact want either side to refine their beliefs about the
U.S. Similar situations are unfolding now even between China and Japan
over islands that both countries claim as well as between China and several
other South East Asian states. Nor are strategic scenarios of this sort lim-
ited to Asia. A somewhat similar situation exists today in the Middle East.
Despite its longstanding commitment to Israeli security, the United States
fears an all-out conflict between Israel and Iran—a conflict that could ulti-
mately escalate to involve not only Russia and other states of the region,
but also the exchange of nuclear weapons. So here, too, the U.S. has to
worry that by being too strong a supporter of Israel, it might encourage
it to launch a pre-emptive strike against Iran’s nuclear facilities, whereas
by being too weak in its support, it will only encourage Iran to take more
aggressive action. As with Taiwan and China, then, the U.S. thus far appears
to have chosen a policy of deliberate ambiguity, whereby neither Iran nor
Israel knows how far the U.S. is willing to let Iran go in the development
of nuclear technology. The complication here, though, is that although the
U.S. policy appears to be that of avoiding reacting to either state in a way
that allows one or the other to infer its intentions with certainty, in the
Taiwan straits the players know that that ambiguity is deliberate policy
whereas in the Middle East ambiguity can readily engender a reputation
for indecision.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
280  Games with Incomplete Information
The July Crisis of 1914: Although World War I  officially began in
August  1914, the preceding month provides a clear example of incom-
plete information in a strategic environment wherein political elites had
to update their estimates of the preferences of others as events unfolded.
We know, of course, that the assassination of the Habsburg Empire’s heir
apparent, Franz Ferdinand, led to a series of actions by political leaders in
Russia, Austria, Serbia, Germany, Britain and France that resulted in war.
If we were to attempt an explanation of that outcome (which, in fact, takes
us beyond the confines of this text), suppose, as is often the case when
attempting a shorthand explanation for complex events, that we simplify
matters by being anthropomorphic about things and treat states as indi-
vidual decision makers. The difficulty here, though, is that in ascribing
preferences, we must take account of the personalities and complex policy
disputes within those states. For instance, France’s president, Poincare,
took a far more aggressive stance against Germany as compared to that
country’s prime minister, Rene Viviani. Austria’s foreign minister, Leopold
Berchtold, had to balance between the belligerent position of his country’s
army chief of staff, Franz Conrad, and a more accommodating Hungar-
ian minister-president, Stefan Tisza. For Russia, an analyst would have to
consider the impact of Poincare’s summit with the Tsar and the choices
made by Russia’s normally prevaricating foreign minister, Sergei Sazonov.
In Germany, the issue was the Kaiser’s willingness to confront Russia in
the event that she intervened on Serbia’s behalf in combination with the
political skills (or lack thereof) of Chancellor Hollweg Bethmann. For Brit-
ain, we must assess the strategic skill of His Majesty’s foreign secretary,
Sir Edward Grey, when dealing with the non-interventionist faction of his
own government. And as for Serbia, would its Prime Minister, Nikola Pasic,
find a way to balance the demands of his country’s military against a desire
to appear the innocent victim of Austrian aggression?
The preferences each state would act in accordance with were thus
determined by a complex interplay of individual motives, domestic poli-
tics and skill at political maneuver and the best anyone at the time could
do in choosing a strategy was to assign preferences probabilistically to each
state. Would Tisza succeed in moving Berchtold away from the more bel-
ligerent Conrad; would Poincare’s dislike of Germany dominate an oth-
erwise unstable French polity; would the Tsar, following his summit with
Poincare, be swayed wholly to the Frenchman’s view or would Sazonov’s
reputation for indecision dictate Russia’s actions; would the crisis over
home rule in Ireland and the non-interventionists within Grey’s govern-
ment bring that government down; would Pasic find an accommodating
response or would the threat of a military coup dictate Serbia’s actions;
and once the Kaiser read the text of Austria’s ultimatum to Serbia, might
he backtrack on his resolve to support the dual monarchy? Anyone who
thinks that they, as analysts, can assign certainty to any state’s preferences

--- Sayfa 290 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  281
and the choices those preferences would ultimately dictate in explain-
ing the outbreak of hostilities is making too great a use of hindsight. The
preferences we might use in any explanation only became clear as events
unfolded—as the wording of Austria’s ultimatum became widely known,
as Serbia mobilized when confronted with that ultimatum, as Russia began
doing the same even before the deadline had been reached for Serbia’s
response, as it became evident that Viviani would leave France’s foreign
policy to Poincare, and as Germany reacted to Russia’s mobilization.
Incompleteness of information and its potential consequences is also
well illustrated by events in July of 1914. Although German officials, on
the basis of a variety of scattered reports being fed into Berlin, were well
informed about the status of Russia’s mobilization, Grey arguably believed,
on the basis of the report of Britain’s ambassador to Russia, Sir George
Buchanan, that Russia had not begun to mobilize. Grey, acting as if he
believed that mediation was still possible, gave the appearance of taking
Russian denials of mobilization at face value, which only served to sustain
the hypothesis in German eyes that Britain had taken sides in the dispute.
Given Britain’s links to France and France’s to Russia, a non-neutral Britain
yielded Germany’s worst strategic nightmare—a Franco-British-Russian
military alliance—which thereby required immediate German mobiliza-
tion and preventive war.
7.3  Bayes’s Law and Bayesian Equilibrium
As a first step toward analyzing the strategic complexity that private informa-
tion admits in such situations, what we need is a model for how people might
adjust prior beliefs on the basis of what they observe—a general rule about
probability that allows us to calculate conditional probabilities. That rule is
Bayes’s Law, and to illustrate it, it is convenient to step away from purely strate-
gic issues and consider instead a relatively simple one-person decision problem.
Example: A legislator must decide how to vote, believing initially that there
is a .75 chance—the legislator’s prior or initial beliefs—that a majority of
his constituents favor its passage. Because the bill is of such profound sig-
nificance, the legislator will be reelected if and only if his vote on the bill
matches his constituent’s majority preference. Thus, a pollster is hired to
gauge preferences more accurately. The pollster, however, admits that there
is only a .95 probability that the poll and the true majority preference will
agree, and thus a .05 probability that the poll will indicate a majority in
favor (opposed) when in fact a majority opposes (favors) the bill. To rep-
resent this situation using more general notation than we employed in Fig-
ures 7.1 and 7.2, let
t1 denote “a majority favor the bill” (corresponding to P in Figure 7.1),
t2 denote “a majority oppose the bill” (corresponding to ~P in Figure 7.1).

--- Sayfa 291 ---
282  Games with Incomplete Information
Similarly, let
e1 denote “the poll indicates that a majority favors the bill,”
e2 denote “the poll indicates that a majority opposes the bill.”
In accordance with the legislator’s prior probabilities,
p(t1) = 0.75 and p(t2) = 0.25.
The pollster’s information about the accuracy of the poll, on the other
hand, can be expressed as
p(e1|t1) = p(e2|t2) = 0.95,
p(e1|t2) = p(e2|t1) = 0.05.
where the notation “|” reads “given that.” The legislator, however, is not
concerned with the accuracy of public opinion polls per se but rather with
how he should revise his estimates of p(t1) and p(t2) based on these polls.
That is, looking at Figure 7.3, he must consider the likelihood that he is at
one decision node versus the other, regardless of which information set
pertains. That is, a choice must be made, conditional on what is observed
(e1 or e2), so that the numbers that ought to concern the legislator are the
conditional posterior probabilities p(t1|e1) and p(t1|e2). For example, the
probability p(t1|e1)—the probability that a majority favor the bill, given
L
L
L
L
e1
p(t1)= .75
p(t1)= .25
p(t2le2)
p(t2le1)
p(t1le2)
p(t1le1)
e1
e2
e2
Figure 7.3  Conditional probabilities

--- Sayfa 292 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  283
that the poll reveals that such a majority exists—corresponds to the prob-
ability, given the pollster’s report, that the legislator is at the first node of
the first information set.
To analyze the problem confronting a decision made in this situation requires,
then, a rule as to how beliefs change as a function of observed events. So consider
first a simpler situation. First, we require a definition of conditional probability,
so suppose that O is an observed event, which we believe can occur with prob-
ability p(O), and that p(A) is the prior belief that situation A pertains. Thus, the
probability that O is observed and A pertains can be expressed in either of two
ways: p(A|O)p(O) or p(O|A)p(A). Setting these two terms equal gives
p(A|O) = p(O|A)p(A)/p(O)
assuming of course that p(O) ≠ 0. The generalization of this identity, now, using
the notation of the preceding example can be written thus: Letting {t1, t2,…,tm}
be nature’s possible choices and {e1, e2,…, en} be the events that a decision maker
might observe, and upon which he will condition his guess as to the likelihood
that nature makes a particular choice, then Bayes’s Law is
p(ti|ej) = p(ej|ti)p(ti)/[p(ej|t1)p(t1) + p(ej|t2)p(t2) + … + p(ej|tm)p(tm)]
Thus, in our example, p(t1|e1), the probability that a majority of constituents
prefer the bill, conditional on the fact that the poll indicates that the electorate
holds this preference, is given by the equation
p(ti|e1) = p(e1|ti)p(t1)/[p(e1|t1)p(t1) + p(e1|t2)p(t2)]
= 0.95 × 0.75/[0.95 × 0.75 + 0.05 × 0.25] = .9828
To put such calculations in the context of the USSR’s Warsaw Pact allies fol-
lowing Gorbachev’s rise to power, suppose those allies believe the following
initially:
p(nothing has changed) = 0.7
p(USSR has changed) = 0.3
p(Kremlin reacts negatively | nothing has changed) = 0.9
p(Kremlin reacts negatively | USSR has changed) = 0.1
p(Kremlin does not react | nothing has changed) = 0.1
p(Kremlin does not react | USSR has changed) = 0.9
So, initially, the USSR’s allies here begin with the supposition that there’s only
a 0.3 chance that there’s been a fundamental shift in Soviet policy toward its
allies that match Gorbachev’s words. But now suppose something occurs, such
as Hungary opening its border to Austria, and there’s no Soviet reaction. Bayes’s
Law dictates that those allies should then update their belief that nothing has
changed as follows:

--- Sayfa 293 ---
284  Games with Incomplete Information
p(nothing has changed | Kremlin does not react) equals
P(Kremlin does not react | nothing has changed) × p(nothing has
changed)
divided by
P(Kremlin does not react | nothing has changed) × p(nothing has
changed) plus
(Kremlin does not react | USSR has changed) × p(USSR has changed)
which equals
0.1 × 0.7 / [0.1 × 0.7 + 0.9 × 0.3] ≈ 0.21
Thus, given how unlikely it is that an unchanged Kremlin would fail to react
to a provocation (0.1), observing precisely that—a failure to react—yields a
significant drop in the belief that the Kremlin’s policies do not match what
Gorbachev has been saying. And although it would certainly be a stretch to say
that Communist party elites in Central Europe were familiar with Bayes’s Law,
it is evident that they and the reformers within those countries acted as if they
were thus familiar.
For another example of the application of Bayes’s law, which illustrates its use
in subsequent sections, suppose you are trying to ascertain someone’s prefer-
ences over three alternatives, A, B and C. Based on your experience with similar
situations, suppose the prior probabilities you associate with each of the six
possible preference orders over these alternatives are as shown in Table 7.1.
Letting e1 correspond to “A preferred to B” and letting e2 correspond to “A not
preferred to B,” clearly the preceding orders require that
p(ej|ti) = 0 if j = 1 and i = 3, 4, 6, or if j = 2 and i = 1, 2, 5,
p(ej|ti) = 1 if j = 1 and i = 1, 2, 5, or if j = 2 and i = 3, 4, 6.
Now, however, suppose you observe this person committing an act that cannot
be rationalized if that person prefers A to B. So, excluding the first, second, and
fifth orders as possibilities, and substituting the preceding values for p(ej|ti), we
can use Bayes’s Law for computing your posterior probability on, say, the third
order, p(t3|e2) = “Probability that s3 pertains, given that A is not preferred to B.”
In this instance we get
p(t3|e2) = p(t3)/[p(t3) + p(t4) + p(t6)]
Table 7.1  Prior Beliefs About Possible Preference Orders
probabilities:
p(t1)
p(t2)
p(t3)
p(t4)
p(t5)
p(t6)
A
A
B
B
C
C
B
C
A
C
A
B
C
B
C
A
B
A

--- Sayfa 294 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  285
To see now how we use Bayes’s Law in game theory, let us return to our
legislator-lobbyist game and suppose that one or the other player is attempt-
ing to establish whether a strategy pair, say (a, b), is an equilibrium. Keeping
in mind that any pair of strategies constitutes an equilibrium if and only if
each strategy is a best response to the other, consider Figure 7.2 again, which,
in accordance with the notion of subgame perfection, we simplify in Figure 7.4
by supposing that the legislator, L, only makes dominant choices at his sec-
ond move (the game’s last move). Notice that in this instance, the legislator’s
strategies are of the form, “If my preferences are __, then choose __, but if my
preferences are __, then choose __ instead,” whereas the lobbyist’s strategies are
of the form, “If my opponent chooses __, then choose __, but if my opponent
chooses __, then choose__.”
The particular strategic complication confronting the lobbyist, player l, is
that to evaluate alternative strategies, he or she must somehow evaluate the
probability that nature has selected “prefer” (P = t1) as against “don’t prefer”
(~P = t2). We assume that p(P) and p(~P) are common knowledge, and thus
known to the lobbyist. But, as already noted, a lobbyist who simply uses these
probabilities when computing a strategy’s expected value is failing to make full
1
1
1
1
A
~C
~C
~C
C
C
C
~C
~A
L
A
1st information set
2nd information set
~A
L
0
C
25,5
10,20
25.5
10,20
5,5
0,0
5,5
0.0
p(t1)= .75
p(t2)= .25
Figure 7.4  Initial reduction of Figure 7.2

--- Sayfa 295 ---
286  Games with Incomplete Information
use of the available information. Specifically, the lobbyist observes the legis-
lator’s choice, which is itself conditioned on the legislator’s preference. So in
evaluating its strategies, the lobbyist can update the estimate of the likelihood
that nature has chosen one state or the other as a function of the legislator’s
observed action. And this updating, we assume, satisfies Bayes’s Law.
To calculate the appropriate conditional probabilities in our example and,
subsequently, an equilibrium, suppose you are the lobbyist, and consider the
pair of strategies (a, b), where for the legislator
a = “if P, choose A; but if ~P, choose ~A” [i.e., if a majority of the legisla-
tor’s constituency favors the bill then ask for a contribution; otherwise do
not ask]
and for the lobbyist
b = “if A, choose ~C; but if ~A, choose C” [i.e., if asked for a contribution
then do not offer a bribe, but if not asked, then attempt to bribe]
The first step in determining whether (a, b) is an equilibrium is to determine
whether b is a best response to a, which requires first that we calculate the
expected value to the lobbyist (l) of b when the legislator (L) chooses a. Owing
to the simplicity of our game, we can compute this expected return, denoted
Elobbyist(a, b), quite easily by noting that, given a’s specification, L chooses A only
if nature chooses P, which occurs with probability .75—in which case, given that
your strategy is b, you get 20—whereas L chooses ~A only if natures chooses ~P,
which occurs with probability .25—in which case you get 5. Thus,
Elobbyist(a, b) = .75(20) + .25(5) = 16.25.
To see that this calculation is consistent with Bayes’s Law, consider the following
reasoning: Suppose you find yourself at your first information set (you observe
that L chooses A). Then, given that your strategy is b, you choose ~C and get 20
with probability p(P|A) and 0 with probability p(~P|A). If, on the other hand,
you find yourself at your second information set (if you observe L choosing
~A), then, given b, you choose C and get 5 with probability p(P|~A) and 5 again
with probability p(~P|~A). Thus, your expected payoff from b, given that the
legislator acts in accordance with the strategy a, is
Elobbyist(a, b) = p(A)[20p(P|A) + 0p(~P|A)] + p(~A)[5p(P|~A) +
5p(~P|~A)].
From L’s strategy (i.e., choose A if P and ~A if ~P), however, we know that
p(A) = 0.75 and p(~A) = 0.25. From Bayes’s Law, the probability that the con-
stituency favors the bill when the legislator asks for a contribution is

--- Sayfa 296 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  287
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
(P|A)
(A|P) (P)
(A|P) (P)
(A|~P) (~P)
=
+
which equals 1 in this instance because L’s strategy dictates that p(A|~P) = 0.
Similarly, p(~P|A) = 0, p(P|~A) = 0, and p(~P|~A) = 1, which yields Elobbyist(a,
b) = 0.75(20) + 0.25(5) = 16.25.
Of course, determining whether b is a best response to a requires calculating
the expected return of each of the lobbyist’s other strategies. And ascertain-
ing whether (a, b) is an equilibrium requires that we determine whether a is
a best response to b. However, before we determine the actual equilibrium for
our example, let us first review its structure so we can generalize the analysis.
Once again, the important feature of the example is that the legislator knows
something about his constituency and, thus, about his preferences, which the
lobbyist does not know. Although we might have constructed a more elaborate
scenario by allowing the interest group to have some private information, the
example’s essential features are that
1.
Each person is characterized by a parameter that is distributed according to
a common-knowledge probability density function.
2.
The value of this parameter is “chosen” by nature as the first move in the
extensive form.
3.
The realization of this parameter is private information. (Since the interest
group has no private information, we can think of the density that charac-
terizes its “parameter” as allowing only a single value.)
In the example, the parameter in question is the preference of the legislator’s
constituency and, by extension, the legislator’s preference. The probability
that the constituency prefers the bill, however, is common knowledge. That is,
although both the legislator and the lobbyist have different information about
the constituency, the legislator knows the type of information that the lobbyist
possesses, the lobbyist knows that the legislator knows the extent of this infor-
mation, and so forth.
We can generalize the representation of such situations now by supposing
that person i is a particular “type,” which is determined probabilistically from
some set of possibilities. The notion of “type” can refer to almost anything,
including even whether the player has meaningful choices and is a relevant par-
ticipant in the game. Generally, though, we let a person’s type manifest itself, as
in our example, as a particular utility function. Not only does this interpretation
allow us to model players who occasionally make mistakes (by maximizing the
“wrong” utility function), but it also allows us to consider the possibility that a
person is “irrational,” by which we mean that the person acts as if he or she is
maximizing some improbable or self-destructive utility function. The people
we are modeling are then characterized by a common-knowledge density func-
tion p(t1, t2,…, tn) that specifies the probability that person 1 is of type t1, person

--- Sayfa 297 ---
288  Games with Incomplete Information
2 is of type t2, and so forth. Finally, we suppose that after observing their own
type, each person i computes the conditional density p(t1,…, ti−1, ti+1,…, tn|ti)
according to Bayes’s Law. The simplest possibility, however, is that each per-
son’s type is determined independently of every other person, in which case
we can characterize the population by a set of densities {p1(t1),…, pn(tn)},
where pi(ti) is the common-knowledge density governing i’s type. To keep our
discussion of examples as simple as possible, we restrict our attention to this
special case.
A Bayesian equilibrium to any game in strategic form is defined, now, in a
straightforward way. Each person should, of course, condition their strategy
on their type, because it is this type that, by assumption, determines prefer-
ences over outcomes. Thus, person i knows that at each of j’s information sets,
j’s strategies will be of the form, “If I am of type t j
1 then I will choose ___, if
I am of type t j
2, then I will choose ___, and so forth.” Holding everything else
constant (including the choices of others if there are more than two relevant
persons), the payoff i associates with particular strategies on his and j’s part
should be computed as follows: the utility of the outcome that follows if j is of
type t j
1 —the outcome that follows from my choice in combination with the
choice j makes when he or she is of type t j
1—times the probability = [pj(t j
1)
that j is of this type, plus the utility of the outcome that follows if j is of type
t j
2 times the probability, pj(t j
2), that j is of this type, . . . and so forth. A Bayes-
ian equilibrium is then just like a Nash equilibrium—a strategy n-tuple such
that, given their types, and given the probabilities that determine types, no per-
son has any incentive to move unilaterally to some other strategy. Similarly,
a Bayesian equilibrium is subgame perfect if it is a Bayesian equilibrium for
every subgame.
To complete our analysis of our legislator-lobbyist example using our general
notation (and here specifically that means letting t1
1 correspond to P, a major-
ity in the legislator’s district favors the bill, and t1
2 correspond to ~P, a major-
ity opposes the bill), notice that L has four strategies that we can represent as
follows:
a1: Choose A regardless of type.
a2: Choose ~A regardless of type.
a3: If t1
1, choose A; but if t1
2 choose ~A.
a4: If t1
1, choose ~A; but if t1
2, choose A.
Similarly, the lobbyist (l) has these four strategies:
b1: Choose C regardless of what L does.
b2: Choose ~C regardless of what L does.
b3: If L chooses A, then choose C; otherwise choose ~C.
b4: If L chooses A, then choose ~C, otherwise choose C.
We complete the strategic form by entering the expected payoffs into the cells of
the 4 × 4 game matrix, where the computation of these payoffs uses the fact that

--- Sayfa 298 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  289
p(P) = p(t1
1) = 0.75 and p(~P) = p(t1
2) = 0.25. For example, (a3, b3) yields, “the
legislator chooses A and the lobbyist responds with C with probability 0.75 and
the legislator chooses ~A and the lobbyist responds with ~C with probability
0.25.” Thus, the expected payoff to L of (a3, b3) is 0.75(25) + 0.25(0) = 18.75,
whereas the payoff to the lobbyist is 0.75(5) + 0.25(0) = 3.75. Figure 7.5 now
portrays the full strategic form and shows that there are two pure strategy equi-
libria, both involving b2, in which legislator L either does (a1) or does not (a2)
ask for a contribution regardless of type. Looking back at the actions that a1
and a2 imply for L (asking for a bribe regardless of type and not asking for a
bribe regardless of type), we see that both equilibria in this instance are what
game theorists call pooling equilibria—equilibria in which a person chooses the
same act regardless of their type or the information that nature reveals to them.
Thus, in equilibrium, the lobbyist in our example cannot infer anything about
the legislator’s type on the basis of the legislator’s initial action (of course, we
should determine whether there are any mixed strategy equilibria). However, in
this instance, a check of possibilities reveals that any mixture over a1 through a4
that might reasonably be an equilibrium strategy for the legislator would only
induce the lobbyist to choose b2.
7.4  A Game with Two-Sided Incomplete Information
We should not be surprised to learn that the legislator’s initial choice of A or
~A does not provide any useful information to the lobbyist. Because the choice
of A is costless to the legislator, it never hurts to request a bribe, regardless of
the constituencies’ preferences on the bill in question. Our example might have
been more interesting if we had assumed that there is a cost associated with
choosing A (corresponding, for example, to the chance that constituents learn
about the request). We will consider such possibilities later, but first we want
to suppose that more than one person in a situation has private information.
Fortunately, this possibility introduces no new conceptual issues.
Example: Suppose two people prefer different candidates, and for purposes
of an example suppose that if both vote (for their preferred candidates) or
if both abstain, the candidate that voter 1 prefers wins (our example here
a1
20, 5
7.5, 15
20, 5
7.5, 15
a2
20, 5
7.5, 15
7.5, 15
20, 5
a3
20, 5
7.5, 15
18.75, 3.75
8.75, 16.25
a4
b2
b1
b4
b3
20, 5
7.5, 15
8.75, 16.25
18.75, 3.75
Figure 7.5  Strategic form of legislator-lobbyist game

--- Sayfa 299 ---
290  Games with Incomplete Information
This approach to our example, however, does not allow both persons to make
full use of their information—specifically, it does not allow them to condition
their decisions on the fact that each knows that the other is conditioning a deci-
sion on private information. So to see how this fact might affect our analysis,
notice that this situation’s extensive form, Figure 7.7, shows that each person
has three information sets, and at each information set there are two choices.
Thus, the number of strategies is 23 = 8, where a typical strategy for person 1
is taken from Thomas Palfrey and Howard Rosenthal, “Voter Participation
and Strategic Uncertainty,” American Political Science Review 79, 1985). If
Ci is person i’s cost of voting, and if a person associates a payoff of 1 with
his or her preferred candidate and 0 with the opponent, then Figure 7.6a
describes the outcomes that prevail, given the choices of both people (row
chooser = person 1, column chooser = person 2). Suppose finally that nei-
ther person knows the other’s cost of voting. Thus, person 1 knows C1 but
not C2, and 2 knows C2, but not C1. Suppose further, however, that 1 knows
that C2 has the same chance of equaling 1/8, 2/8, and 3/8, and that 2 knows
that C1 has the same chance of equaling 4/8, 5/8, and 6/8. Thus, although C1
and C2 are random variables, person 1 faces higher average costs than does
person 2 (5/8 versus 1/4).
In addition to assuming that both persons have private information,
this example differs from the previous one in that neither person has any
opportunity to signal anything about their private information. Thus,
deception does not appear to be an issue, which might lead us to believe
that we can analyze the situation in a more straightforward manner by
merely substituting the expected values of C1 and C2 into Figure 7.6a and
solving the resulting game for equilibrium mixed strategies (there are
no pure strategy equilibria). This assumption leads to the 2 × 2 matrix in
Figure 7.6b and the conclusion that person 1’s probability of voting is 3/4
and person 2’s is 5/8.
Vote
Abstain
Vote
Abstain
1−C1, −C2
1−C1, 0
0, 1−C2
1, 0
Figure 7.6a  Two voters with incomplete information
Vote
Abstain
Vote
3/8, –1/4
3/8, 0
Abstain
0, 3/4
1, 0
Figure 7.6b  Simple substitution of values into Figure 7.6a

--- Sayfa 300 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  291
reads: If C1 = 6/8, abstain, otherwise vote. We denote such a strategy by (a, v, v)
to indicate that the person abstains if the cost of voting assumes its maximum
value and votes if this cost takes on a moderate or minimum value. However,
four of the eight possible strategies—those that have a person voting if the cost
of voting is high but abstaining if the cost is low—are easily seen to be domi-
nated. Restricting our attention, then, to the four strategies (v, v, v), (a, v, v),
(a, a, v), and (a, a, a): Figure 7.8 (with all payoffs multiplied by seventy two to
eliminate fractions and decimal points) portrays the corresponding strategic
v
v
1
1
1
2
2
2
C2 = 3/8
C1 = 6/8
C2 = 1/4
C2 = 1/4
C2 = 1/4
C2 = 1/8
C2 = 1/8
C2 = 3/8
C2 = 1/8
C2 = 3/8
C1 = 5/8
0
0
0
C1 = 4/8
a
1,0
0,5/8
1/4.0
1/4,–3/8
1,0
0,6/8
1/4,0
1/4,–1/4
1/4,–1/8
3/8,–3/8
3/8,–1/8
1/2,–3/8
1/2,–1/4
1/2,–1/8
3/8,–1/4
1,0
1,0
0,7/8
0.5/8
0,7/8
0,7/8
0,3/4
0,5/8
0,3/4
1/2,0
1/2,0
1/2,0
3/8,0
3/8,0
3/8,0
1/4,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
1,0
a
Figure 7.7  Two-person voting decision

--- Sayfa 301 ---
292  Games with Incomplete Information
form, which establishes that for the parameters of our example, ((a, v, v),
(a, v, v)) is the Bayesian equilibrium. In this case, then, both voters vote with
probability two thirds (that is, they each vote if either of two circumstances
prevails out of the three equally likely possibilities).
To see how the payoffs in these cells are computed, consider the equilibrium
cell ((a, v, v), (a, v, v)). Looking at things from person 1’s perspective, if C1 = 6/8,
then 1 abstains and, given 2’s strategy, realizes the payoffs 1, 0, and 0 depending
on whether C2 = 3/8, 1/4, or 1/8. Since each of these costs occurs with prob-
ability 1/3, when C1 = 6/8, person 1 realizes an expected payoff of 1/3. Similarly,
when C1 = 5/8, then 1 always votes and realizes a payoff of 3/8, regardless of 2’s
cost and subsequent actions, whereas if C1 = 4/8, then 1 again always votes and
realizes a payoff of 1/2, regardless of 2’s costs and actions. Hence, 1’s overall
payoff is 1/3[1/3] + 1/3[3/8] + 1/3[1/2] = 29/72.
Because, in this instance, the strategic form disguises the reasons why we have
arrived at a different answer than the one we get if we rely simply on a strategic
form calculated from simple expected values, let us consider the problem from
a different perspective. Notice that each of i’s strategies can be characterized
by a number, C*i, such that i votes if the cost of voting, Ci, is less than C*i, and
abstains otherwise. It is straightforward to see, from a simple decision theoretic
calculation, that barring other considerations, C*i equals the probability that
the voter is decisive times the utility difference between the candidates. That is,
a citizen votes if
(u1 − u2)Pr[create or break a tie] − C > 0,
in which case the critical value for C that determines whether a person votes
is (u1 − u2)Pr[create or break a tie]. In large electorates, we might assume that
Pr[…] is merely a subjective estimate based on public opinion polls and the
like and that it is reasonable to ignore interactive effects of individual decisions.
But in small electorates, Pr[…] clearly depends on what a person thinks others
will do, which is a function of what they think he will do, and so forth. Suppose
then, that we let Pi denote the probability that the citizen is decisive and let pi be
the probability that i votes. Then for our two-voter example, P1 is a function of
vvv
avv
aav
aaa
vvv
27, −18
27, −9
27, −3
27, 0
avv
21, 6
29, 7
37, 5
45, 0
aav
12, 30
28, 23
44, 13
60, 0
aaa
0, 54
24, 39
48, 21
72, 0
Figure 7.8  Strategic form of Figure 7.7

--- Sayfa 302 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  293
p2, and P2 is a function of p1. The critical number C*1, then, equals P1 times the
utility difference between the candidates, which is 1 in our example. Thus, the
citizen votes if C1 < C*1 = P1. The game theoretic nature of the problem follows
from the fact that, since P1 is a function of p2, and since p2 is a function of C*2,
then C*1 is a function of C*2, and vice versa—which is to say that 1’s optimal
strategy depends on 2’s strategy (1’s strategy should be a best response to 2),
and 2’s optimal strategy depends on 1’s strategy (2’s strategy should be a best
response to 1). The Bayesian equilibrium identified in Figure 7.8 is merely the
pair of strategies that are best responses to each other.
7.5  Agendas Reconsidered
Aside from some additional complexity in the calculation of expected payoffs,
the examples of incomplete information considered thus far do not look much
different than the games we consider in previous chapters. Also, by setting
things into strategic form it does not appear as though we are using Bayes’s Law.
So instead, let us consider voting agendas again, and recall our conclusion that
if an amendment agenda includes an alternative that is a Condorcet winner, it
necessarily emerges as the final outcome. However, voting in legislatures and
committees assumes a more interesting and strategically complicated character
if we suppose that not all legislators know the preferences of all other legisla-
tors. Indeed, unless we are willing to suppose that all legislative votes merely to
ratify and legitimize outcomes that everyone knows are foregone conclusions,
agendas, especially complicated ones, almost certainly occur in an incomplete
information environment. We cannot explore all ramifications of this fact,
but we can address the question of whether the conclusion about the eventual
emergence of Condorcet winners necessarily holds if information about prefer-
ences is private while simultaneously illustrating more explicitly the relevance
of Bayes’s Law. We begin with an especially simple possibility.
Example: Consider a committee of n people who can hold one of the
following three preferences of the six possibilities when there are three
alternatives, where any individual can hold preferences of type i with prob-
ability pi, but every person knows their own type:
type 1
type 2
type 3
A
B
C
B
C
A
C
A
B
In addition, assume that all voters assign a utility of 1 to their most-
preferred alternative, 0 to their least-preferred alternative, and v (0 < v < 1)
to the alternative that ranks second on their preferences. Finally, suppose
that the committee uses an agenda that first sets A against B, the winner
against C.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
294  Games with Incomplete Information
What we want to show is something that we suspect is not intuitive—that even
if it is almost certainly true that the committee is unanimous in its preferences
so that a Condorcet winner is almost certain to exist, that winner will definitely
not be selected if the committee is sufficiently large (here our discussion is taken
from Thomas Palfrey and Ordeshook, “Agendas, Strategic Voting, and Signaling
with Incomplete Information,” American Journal of Political Science 32, 1988).
To establish this seemingly perverse fact we must proceed a bit differently
than before since even with a 3-member committee and three possible prefer-
ence types for each voter, nature can choose any one of 27 possible commit-
tee profiles. Thus, even before we include the branches representing the voters’
choices, our extensive form becomes unwieldy. Hence, we must use some
shortcuts—specifically, just as we pruned Figure 7.2 by eliminating the legisla-
tor’s dominated choices (and thus dominated strategies) in order to arrive at
Figure 7.4, we should first try to eliminate dominated strategies for different
types of voters so as to move as quickly as possible to the identification of sub-
game perfect Bayesian equilibria.
We begin by noting that as in our earlier analyses of agendas, regardless of
the outcome on the initial ballot between A and B, everyone should vote sin-
cerely on the second ballot. Next, notice that we can identify dominant strate-
gies for two of the voter types.
Type 2 voters: With everyone voting sincerely on the last (second) bal-
lot, the uncertainty about preferences means that a victory for A on the
first ballot yields a lottery between A and C whereas a victory for B yields
a lottery between B and C. The exact nature of this lottery depends, of
course, on the probabilities we assign to voters being of one type or the
other. However, regardless of these probabilities, a type 2 voter—a voter
who prefers B to C to A—prefers any lottery between B and C to any lot-
tery between A and C. From the assumption of common knowledge, then,
everyone knows that type 2 voters will vote for B on the first ballot.
Type 3 votes: The analysis of type 3 is a bit more complicated, but once
again we can show that a unique strategy is part of any equilibrium for
such a type. Briefly, if there are n voters, there are two possibilities:
1.
(n + 1)/2 or more other voters do not have type 3 preferences.
2.
(n + 1)/2 or more other voters have type 3 preferences.
No voter knows with certainty which of these possibilities describes the
committee, but if case 2 holds, then C prevails regardless of what anyone
does on the first ballot. On the other hand, if case 1 holds, then B prevails
eventually if it wins on the first ballot, whereas either A or C can prevail if
A wins on the first ballot. Since B is a type 3 voter’s least-preferred alter-
native, voting for A on the first ballot is equivalent to voting for a lottery
between A and C and is, thereby, a dominant choice for a type 3 voter, a
voter who prefers C to A to B.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  295
This discussion means that we can reduce the strategies we must consider for
every voter to the following two alternatives:
s1:
If type 1, then vote sincerely for A.
If type 2, then vote for B.
If type 3, then vote for A.
s2:
If type 1, then vote strategically for B.
If type 2, then vote for B.
If type 3, then vote for A.
As with our previous examples, we might next try to construct a strategic form.
However, given the nature of the problem, we encounter too much complexity
for our liking. Specifically, if there are n voters, then the corresponding strategic
form has 2n cells that we must check as potential equilibria. At this point, how-
ever, we should keep in mind that we merely want to show that something dif-
ferent can occur when there is private information—namely, that a Condorcet
winner does not necessarily prevail as the final outcome. Thus, we look only at
two specific strategy n-tuples and forgo an analysis of those cells in the strategic
form that have different voters choosing different strategies. That is, we restrict
our attention to two possibilities: (1) all voters choose s1, in which case all type
1 voters vote sincerely for A on the first ballot, and (2) all voters choose s2, in
which case all type 1 voters vote strategically for B on the first ballot.
Checking first whether the n-tuple (s1, s1,…, s1) can be a Bayesian equilib-
rium, what we want to see is whether any voter has an incentive to unilaterally
defect to some other strategy. Since we already know that type 2 and type 3 vot-
ers have dominant choices on the agenda’s first ballot, no voter has an incentive
to defect to a strategic choice when it holds either of these types of preferences.
The only possible defection is from a type 1 voter who chooses to vote strategi-
cally for B. At this point we come to the next trick in our analysis. Notice that
there cannot be any positive incentive to defect if the voter in question is not
pivotal on the first ballot. If, for example, the vast majority of voters have pref-
erences of one particular type, then no type 1 voter can be pivotal, and, thus, no
type 1 voter will have an incentive to defect unilaterally from s1. So in ascertain-
ing whether (s1, s1, …, s1) is an equilibrium, we should examine whether a type
1 voter has an incentive to defect unilaterally from A to B, conditional on that
voter being pivotal on the first ballot.
To see whether any specific type 1 voter might defect in this circumstance,
notice that the only situation in which such a voter can be pivotal on the first
ballot is if precisely (n − 1)/2 other voters in the committee have type 2 prefer-
ences since, if everyone abides by s1, it is only these voters who are voting for B.
And in this event, a voter must evaluate the two first-ballot vote choices thus:
Choice 1: If the voter in question swings the outcome to B by voting for B,
then that voter and the (n − 1)/2 type 2 voters who voted for B on the first
ballot will join on the second ballot to produce B with certainty.

--- Sayfa 305 ---
296  Games with Incomplete Information
Choice 2: If the voter in question swings the vote to A by voting for A,
then the result is a lottery between A and C. In this lottery, C prevails if
there is at least one type 3 voter among those who voted for A on the first
ballot and A prevails if all others who chose A have type 1 preferences. Of
course, since we are holding constant the strategies of all voters but one,
the (n − 1)/2 voters who chose A cannot be type 2 voters, and from Bayes’
rule, the conditional probability that a particular one of them has type
3 preferences, given that that voter cannot have type 2 preferences, is
p3/(p1 + p3) and the conditional probability that a particular one of
them has type 1 preferences is p1/(p1 + p3). The probability that all of the
(n − 1)/2 voters who chose A on the first ballot are of type 1, given that
they are not type 2, is
p
p
p
p
(t |~ t )=
+
1
2
1
1
3
(n -1)/2








and the probability that one or more of these voters has type 3 preferences
is simply
p t
t
p
p
p
(
|~
)=1
+
3
2
1
1
3
(n 1)/2
−








Thus, whenever the voter in question is pivotal, choosing B yields a payoff of v,
whereas choosing A yields an expected payoff of 1 times P(t1|~t2) plus 0 times
P(t3|~t2) = 1 − P(t1|~t2), or simply P(t1|~t2). Thus, this voter prefers to defect
unilaterally from the strategy of voting sincerely for A if
v
p
p
p
>
+
1
1
3
(n -1)/2








Since the term in brackets is less than 1, we can make the right side of this
inequality as close to 0 as we choose by increasing n. Since v > 0, this means that
all type 1 voters voting sincerely cannot be an equilibrium if the committee is
sufficiently large.
Now consider the second n-tuple, (s2, s2,…, s2) as a possible equilibrium
wherein type 1 voters vote strategically for their second choice, B, on the first
ballot. If a vote is decisive on the first ballot, there must be precisely (n − 1)/2
type 3 voters since it is only voters of this type who vote for A in the conjectured
equilibrium. Once again we must consider the consequences of a type 1 voter
swinging the first ballot outcome from B to A.
Choice 1: If our type 1 voter in question chooses B, then as before B prevails
with certainty since it is only the type 3 voters who will vote for C if B wins
on the first ballot and there are only (n – 1)/2 such voters.
Choice 2: If the voter in question defects from the presumed equilib-
rium and chooses A on the first ballot, then again a lottery results in which
A prevails if all of the (n − 1)/2 voters who originally voted for B are type

--- Sayfa 306 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  297
1’s, and C prevails if only one of these voters has type 2 preferences because
such a voter will join with the (n − 1)/2 type 3’s on the final ballot.
Making a similar calculation as before, the conditional probability that all of the
B-voters have type 1 preferences, given that they are not type 3, is
p t
t
p
p
p
( |~
)=
1
3
1
1
2
(n 1)/2
+








and the probability that one or more of them has type 2 preferences is 1 minus
this probability. Thus, for the pivotal voter in question, the expected value of
voting for A is 1 times [p1/(p1 + p2)](n−1)/2, plus 0 times 1 minus this probability.
The voter prefers to stick to the strategy of voting strategically for B, then, if
v
p
p
p
>
+
1
1
2
(n 1)/2








As before, this inequality is satisfied if n is sufficiently great. That is, if n is suf-
ficiently great, the situation in which all type 1 voters voting strategically for B
is part of a Bayesian equilibrium.
To see what we have just done now in strategic form, suppose the voter in
question is not pivotal, in which case, depending on whether everyone else is
strategic or sincere, he or she receives some fixed payoff. However, when they
are pivotal, that voter gets [p1/(p1 + p3)](n-1)/2 or [p1/(p1 + p2)](n-1)/2 depending on
whether or not everyone is sincere or strategic. Since we restricted our analy-
sis to looking for symmetric equilibria wherein all voters abide by the same
strategy, if we ignore the fixed payoffs when the voter is not pivotal, the situa-
tion’s strategic form reduces to the one shown in Figure 7.9. It is here that we
show, for sufficiently large n, that only the lower right cell can correspond to an
equilibrium.
This example illustrates a profound difference between games of complete
and games of incomplete information. Notice that we can make p2 and p3 quite
small, thereby making it nearly certain that A is the unanimous or nearly unani-
mous committee preference, and still maintain a Bayesian equilibrium in which
B prevails. For example, if each voter has type 1 preferences with probability
.99, and type 2 and 3 preferences each with probability .005, if the committee
has 100 or more members, and if v exceeds .78, then the n-tuple (s2, s2,…, s2)
is a Bayesian equilibrium. To see why our conclusions here differ so markedly
Everyone sincere (s1)
Everyone strategic (s2)
Sincere (s1)
[p1/(p1+p3)](n-1)/2
v
Strategic (s2)
v
[ p1/(p1+p2)](n-1)/2
Figure 7.9  Strategic form of agenda game

--- Sayfa 307 ---
298  Games with Incomplete Information
from the ones we offer when information is complete, notice that in deter-
mining whether a particular strategy n-tuple is an equilibrium, we look only
at those situations in which a person is decisive. It is, after all, only in these
situations that a person might have an incentive to defect from one strategy
to another. With incomplete information, by conditioning on such possibili-
ties, voters are conditioning their decisions on unlikely (but feasible) events.
And if people focus on these events, sincere voting becomes an undesirable
strategy. When information is complete, on the other hand, such events are no
longer feasible—voters know with certainty that voting sincerely is a dominant
strategy—and, thus, they cannot create incentives to vote insincerely.
Despite this argument, our result might still seem counterintuitive. We sus-
pect ourselves that it does not apply with full force to most legislatures—that
legislatures are not constantly going about passing bills that are otherwise
defeated by Condorcet winners that appear simultaneously on agendas. Our
reason for supposing that this is true, however, is not because we believe that
there is a fundamental flaw in the preceding analysis, but because we suspect
that that analysis is incomplete. Actual legislatures are characterized by consid-
erable pre-vote discussions that may include straw votes among subsets of legis-
lators, as when in the U.S. Congress Republican and Democratic members meet
in caucus. Prior commitments to vote one way or the other, in conjunction with
nonbinding straw votes, may allow the revelation of sufficient information so as
to reduce considerably the likelihood of the apparent paradox of our example.
However, before we can suppose that prevoting discussions and verbally stated
commitments can materially affect our conclusions about agendas, we must
consider the fact that such discussion and stated commitments can themselves
be part of a person’s strategy to deceive others. Thus, we must more explicitly
consider the various signals that people can offer prior to acting as part of a
situation’s strategic character. Another reason for speculating that our example
is special is the fact that although we can be nearly certain that a Condorcet
winner exists, the probability of its existence is not 1.0. So consider what hap-
pens if a Condorcet winner exists with certainty.
Example: Suppose voters have one of the following preferences:
type 1
type 2
type 3
type 4
A
B
B
C
B
A
C
B
C
C
A
A
That a Condorcet winner exists in this instance follows from the fact
that if we order the alternatives A-B-C on a single dimension, then all pref-
erences are single-peaked and regardless of the distribution of preferences
across types, the Median Voter Theorem applies. Of course, we do not know
which alternative is the Condorcet winner since we do not know how many
people of the different types actually exist in the committee. Paralleling

--- Sayfa 308 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  299
our previous analysis, and assuming that the agenda is A versus B, the win-
ner against C, notice that both type 2 and type 3 voters have dominant
strategies—voting sincerely for B. Holding everyone else’s choices constant,
let us now look at how type 1 and type 4 voters vote on the first ballot:
If a type 1 voter is pivotal, it gets A with certainty if it chooses A (since
such a voter is pivotal if and only if there are precisely (n + 1)/2 type 1 vot-
ers) and it cannot do better voting for B. Thus, it has no incentive to defect
from a sincere strategy,
If a type 4 voter is pivotal, then both choices confront it with a lot-
tery with a clear trade-off. If B is chosen, the voter gets its most preferred
alternative, C, only if every type 4 voter constitutes a majority, whereas if it
votes for A it gets C if type 3 and type 4 voters are a majority. Thus, choos-
ing between A and B involves a trade-off for a higher probability of a first
choice versus accepting some probability of a last versus a middle choice.
We will not derive the exact probability relationship that guarantees
sincerity, except to note that it is more easily satisfied, ceteris paribus, as n
increases. [The exact function is
v
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
n
n
n
n
>
+
−
+
+
−
(
)
(
)
1
3
4
1
2
3
4
wherein the right side of this inequality necessarily tends to 0 as n goes to
infinity as long as p2 > 0]. On the other hand, the fact that such a condition
is necessary indicates that even for the case of single-peaked preferences,
there is no guarantee that Condorcet winners will prevail—incomplete
information is a qualitatively different situation than complete informa-
tion, at least for agenda voting.
The preceding discussion suggests that to extend our analysis of agendas we
should consider more complicated forms. Unfortunately, such an extension
requires a level of analysis inappropriate for this text. In particular, the feature
of our examples that renders them tractable (although it might not seem so to
all readers) is that they allow only two ballots. With only two opportunities to
vote, voters cannot use what they might learn on the first ballot to affect how
they act subsequently. Although a voter’s initial beliefs about probabilities (the
voter’s priors) are revised after the first ballot, this information cannot lead to
any changes in behavior because everyone votes sincerely on the second (final)
ballot. Voting, then, gains an added strategic dimension with three or more
ballots—not only must one vote to direct outcomes toward one’s preferences,
but, as in our legislator-lobbyist example, voters must also be concerned with
what others might infer from one’s actions. That is, in games of incomplete
information, the possibility exists that a person can learn something valuable
as the game unfolds—players can begin to refine their estimates of the prefer-
ences of others, and if the game allows non-trivial multiple stages, then the
“manipulation” of beliefs becomes part of one’s strategic concern. Thus, if we
allowed multiple ballots in agendas, everyone must be concerned with what

--- Sayfa 309 ---
300  Games with Incomplete Information
interpretation others will give to one’s actions, and they must be concerned as
well with the interpretation that should be given to the actions of others—all
with the understanding that everyone is trying to take account of such matters
simultaneously, while making decisions that lead to the best possible outcome
under the circumstances. It is perhaps for this reason that we see multistage
voting in committees even when, after the fact, there is an evident Condorcet
winner.
7.6  Reputation and the Chain-Store Paradox
If we were to consider a formal analysis of games of incomplete information
with sequences of moves, the analytic complexity of things would quickly
move beyond what we are prepared to present here. Nevertheless, it is evident
that such games are an important component of political processes. Consider
again the unraveling of the USSR’s Warsaw Pact. That unraveling was a pro-
cess wherein the Kremlin chose to ignore a sequence of actions by its allies as
those allies sought to understand Moscow’s new policy toward them. There was
also, we suspect, a degree of “contagion” whereby Communist officials in one
country observed the Kremlin’s response to actions elsewhere, in which case
the relevant players were able to update their priors even when they themselves
did nothing. That updating, moreover, was a complex process for all involved,
including political leaders in the West. Innumerable secret and not-so-secret
conferences were held in Washington, for instance, in the attempt to assess
Moscow’s motives, with Gorbachev’s visits to New York, London and Bonn all a
part of his attempt to shift priors away from what they had been under previous
Soviet regimes. And at every stage of this process the players involved, especially
those in the West, had to act carefully so as to give Gorbachev the room and
support he needed to out-maneuver his potential domestic opposition while
allowing for a gradual transition of regimes in Central Europe.
In lieu of delving into analytic complexities that take us far from an intro-
ductory treatment of game theory, let us instead outline the general nature of a
solution to a specific abstract game that has received considerable attention in
the academic literature—the Chain-Store Paradox:
A large retail store chain with, say, an outlet in each of n markets, enjoys
a monopoly in those markets and, accordingly, charges a monopoly price
for what it sells. However, a single small competitor “waits in the wings”
of each market, and beginning with market 1, each must decide one at a
time whether to compete against the chain. If a competitor enters a market,
the chain store must then decide whether to appear “weak” by adjusting
its prices to the competitive market price or whether to try to establish a
reputation for toughness by slashing prices drastically in that market to the
point that neither it nor its competitor can earn a positive profit.
The potential advantage of appearing tough, then, is that the chain can try
to dissuade future competitors from entering its markets. On the other hand,

--- Sayfa 310 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  301
acting tough can cost the chain considerably in terms of lost profits. Assuming
that it is a different potential competitor with whom the chain must content
in each market, we have here an “n + 1 person” game. Without incomplete
information, we can solve for equilibria in the usual way by working down the
extensive form and conclude with reasonable payoffs that competitors should
enter in all markets, and the chain should always capitulate. Specifically, in the
last (nth) market there is no opportunity for deception or reputation building,
in which case a competitor knows that its entry will force the chain to capitu-
late by lowering its price to meet the competition. Knowing this, the potential
competitor in the n-1st market will also enter since it knows that the chain
will not attempt to establish a reputation for “toughness” since, regardless of
its reputation, a competitor will enter in the nth market. This situation, then,
is like the finitely repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma in that the chain, preferring to
avoid negative profits, will capitulate in the nth (last) market so a competitor
enters there; similarly, competitors enter and the chain capitulates in markets
n − 1, n − 2,…1.
Such a prediction seems counterintuitive to the extent that we frequently see
people in similar circumstances attempting to gain or to maintain reputations
for toughness in order to forestall future competition. Anyone familiar with the
Robber Baron period of American industrial development in the 19th century
and with the actions of such industrialists as Rockefeller, Carnegie, Fisk and
Vanderbilt will also be familiar with the strategies they often pursued that, in
the short term, were quite costly, but in the long run either eliminated their
competition or dissuaded anyone from becoming a competitor. For a more
contemporary example, it is convincingly argued that we should not negotiate
with terrorists even if failing to do so results in a loss of life among hostages,
since displaying a willingness to compromise merely encourages future terror-
ists. Similarly, mainland China breaks diplomatic relations with those states rec-
ognizing Taiwan as an independent entity in order to maintain its reputation
for diplomatic toughness, thereby hoping to keep other states from establishing
formal diplomatic ties with what it deems to be nothing more than a renegade
province.
What allows for the establishment as well as the dissolution of a reputation in
each of these situations is some incomplete information about preferences. Ter-
rorists are uncertain about our willingness to abandon hostages, and countries
are uncertain about mainland China’s willingness to incur the economic costs of
breaking diplomatic relations. Thus, if we allow some uncertainty about a chain
store’s preferences—some uncertainty as to its willingness to incur short-term
costs—then the chain may be able to establish a reputation for toughness and a
willingness to incur short-term losses in order to realize the longer term gains
of keeping others from entering its markets.
The analysis of this game when no competitor knows for certain whether
the chain is “tough” or “weak” is challenging. In fact, additional refinement of
the Bayesian-Nash equilibrium concept is required in order to restrict predic-
tions and to contend with the possibility that the players must decide what
to do if they find themselves at a decision node that is otherwise regarded as

--- Sayfa 311 ---
302  Games with Incomplete Information
being impossible to reach. Nevertheless, if we assume that once the chain fails to
“act tough,” everyone thereafter knows that the chain is weak, then the general
form of the solutions to this game from the perspective of the chain store is as
follows: The chain begins by acting tough against any early entrant. Although
it incurs a short-term loss by doing so, it gains because one or more poten-
tial competitor in the future is scared away. As the game progresses, the chain
switches to a mixed strategy between being tough and letting competitors in.
Once it acts weak, it acts weak thereafter, and as the last market is approached,
the chain, because there are no longer enough markets for it to secure sufficient
rewards from its reputation, allows entrants to compete at market prices. We
should also note in passing that sometimes it is difficult to rid oneself of a repu-
tation for toughness. Referring again to events in Central Europe, the Soviet
Union entered that decade with a reputation for ‘toughness’—for not tolerating
deviations from an official Party line—based not only on how it treated dissent
within its own borders, but how it treated any deviations in its satellite states.
Thus, when the Soviet Union attempted to rid itself of what it deemed the eco-
nomic burden of maintaining Communist regimes in Central Europe, telling
the leadership of those countries to follow the “Sinatra Doctrine” of solving
their problems, reformers within those countries had a difficult time believ-
ing that if reforms went “too far” the Soviet army would not once again make
an unwelcome appearance. It took several years and multiple instances of the
Kremlin failing to react to significant deviations from the old party line before
reformers felt secure in pushing things as far and as fast as they did.
7.7  Signaling, Deception and Mutually Assured Destruction
The Path to WWI: Multiple moves in an extensive form whether in the
case of international sanctions or voting agendas open the door to a pos-
sibility we cannot study outside of the context of games of incomplete
information—signaling and deception—since otherwise, by assumption,
the players know all there is to know about each other. If we look again at
events leading up to the outbreak of World War I, we find a clear example
of the role of signaling in a game of incomplete information wherein one
player attempts to get another to act in a way that reveals their type. Briefly,
German military planners were suffering from the anxiety occasioned by
the belief that the military capabilities of the Entente states, and of Russia in
particular, were increasing at a rate as to render Germany ultimately inde-
fensible. This assessment, in turn, supported the argument for a preventive
war against Russia and, if need be, France as well. There were, of course,
opposing views within the Reich, but if it could be shown that Russia was
committed to warring against Germany, then Germany’s best course of
action was to initiate a preventive war immediately. But how to learn Rus-
sia’s intentions—its type? The answer arrived at by decision makers in Ber-
lin was to stand firm in support of Austria in its confrontation with Serbia.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  303
If Russia chose to fully mobilize in support of Serbia, this would be taken
as signaling its determination to seek a revision in the balance of power
on the Continent—a revision wholly to Germany’s detriment. In attach-
ing this inference to a decision to mobilize, we should keep in mind that
mobilization was anything but a costless action. Trains had to be comman-
deered and rerouted, manufacturing output shifted, thousands of horses
requisitioned and re-shoed, troops called back from their homes and farms
(thereby impacting agricultural output) and then soldiers equipped and
re-stationed. Put simply, mobilization was not a “cheap talk” move—in
the early 20th century it was equivalent to a wholesale restructuring of a
national economy. Thus, by supporting Austria and forcing Russia’s hand,
“the Germans were not taking risks, but testing for threats” (Christopher
Clark, The Sleepwalkers, Great Britain: Penguin, 2012: 419). And, as we
know, Russia did mobilize and strategic planners in Germany did conclude
that preventive war was their best option.
It goes virtually without saying that signaling is a critical component of inter-
national relations—and indeed of politics generally. Not only do we see it here
in events leading to WWI, but we saw it as well when Gorbachev sought to
change the USSR’s relations with its satellite states; when the United States and
the Soviet Union negotiated various arms control treaties; when, in negotiat-
ing a budget, legislative and executive branches of a government signal what
they are willing to accept and what they are unlikely to agree to; and when
labor and management negotiate a contract. But the participants in such situ-
ations also must concern themselves with the possibility of artful deception.
Leaders of the communist states of Central Europe not only had to concern
themselves initially that Gorbachev’s utterance were empty words, but also with
the possibility that nothing had fundamentally changed in the Kremlin and the
powers that be there were merely trying to “smoke out” those political elites
who were less than loyal to the Soviet regime. Similarly, in labor-management
negotiations, union leaders may have an incentive to disguise the compromises
they think their members will accept while management will attempt to make
compromises on wages and pensions appear more onerous to profits than they
might actually be. It’s unreasonable to suppose, however, that the participants
in such scenarios are unaware of the incentives that operate within them, in
which case we must ask: Is it possible to deceive someone who knows you’re
trying to deceive them?
To examine signaling and the possibility of deception more closely, then, let
us return to our legislator-lobbyist example, except that now suppose that the
legislator incurs a cost, C, if it asks for a favor. Because this cost assures the
lobbyist that a request for a bribe is no longer cheap talk, both the lobbyist and
the legislator may want to evaluate their strategies more carefully. Hence, look-
ing back at Figure 7.5, notice that the lobbyist’s payoffs (column chooser) are
unaffected by the cost, and so we needn’t concern ourselves with the strategy b1

--- Sayfa 313 ---
304  Games with Incomplete Information
because it is dominated by b2. Thus, constructing the 4 × 3 strategic form in the
usual way, we get Figure 7.10.
The inclusion of these costs has clearly destroyed one equilibrium, (a1, b2),
but it has left the remaining pooling equilibrium, (a2, b2), intact. However, no
new pure strategy equilibria are introduced, with the possible exception of (a2,
b3) if C is sufficiently great, although this equilibrium produces the same out-
come as (a2, b2). What is interesting about this example, though, is that we now
have a mixed strategy equilibrium involving the pure strategies a1 and a4 for the
legislator and b2 and b3 for the lobbyist. Such a mixture does not exist if C = 0,
since if the lobbyist gives b4 zero weight, a1 dominates a4. But with C > 0, some
messy algebra establishes that the following is an equilibrium.
((1/9, 0, 0, 8/9), (1 − C/15, C/15, 0))
In this equilibrium, the legislator will most probably choose a strategy, a4, that
would otherwise reveal its type. However, by placing some probability on a1,
which requires that the legislator ask for a bribe even if he or she doesn’t need
to be induced to vote for the bill, the lobbyist must give some weight to offer-
ing bribes when asked. In this example, though, the mixed strategy (as some
additional algebra reveals) is not beneficial to the legislator, who now receives
an expected payoff of 7.5 − C/6. This fact, however, is largely a consequence of
parameter values and the fact that the interests of the legislator and the lobbyist
are not diametrically opposed—the lobbyist, after all, wants to induce the leg-
islator to vote for the bill when constituents oppose it, and the legislator wants
to be thus induced.
So, with situations such as the relationship between Taiwan and mainland
China or between competing states in the Middle East in mind, let us consider
a second example that begins to address one of the most interesting applica-
tions of game theory to strategy in political science. Specifically, we know that
for upwards of 45  years, the United States and the Soviet Union ostensibly
coexisted with each abiding by a strategy of mutual deterrence—if one coun-
try attacked the other, presumably with nuclear weapons, the attacked country
would retaliate in kind to inflict losses on the aggressor. The difficulty peo-
ple had with viewing Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD) an equilibrium,
a1
7.5−C,15
20−C,5
7.5−C,15
a2
b2
7.5, 15
7.5, 15
20, 5
a3
b3
b4
7.5–3C/4, 15
18.75–3C/4, 3.75
8.75–3C/4, 16.25
a4
7.5−C/4, 15
8.75−C/4, 16.25
18.75−C/4, 3.75
Figure 7.10  Legislator-lobbyist game with costs

--- Sayfa 314 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  305
though, was somehow negating the advantage given to a first strike. With each
country possessing enough nuclear weapons to destroy the other several times
over, a first strike would essentially render its victim impotent, or nearly so. And
even if the attacked country possessed some residual retaliatory capability, what
incentive would it have to use it if that would merely invite the initial aggres-
sor to launch a second strike as a virtual coup de gras? Put simply, theoretically
MAD shouldn’t have worked, but it did!
Example: There are two countries B and L. B is a big country that can almost
certainly defeat L, a little country, in any military confrontation. However,
although it probably can’t win even if it resists an attack, L can impose a
heavy cost on B in the event of an outright conflict. Assume B chooses
first (between Attacking and Not Attacking) and that L chooses second
(between Resisting and Capitulating). Clearly, if B knows L’s preferences,
we have described a rather uninteresting situation—one that does not leave
much room for what people find interesting about strategic deterrence in
international affairs; namely, uncertainty and the possibility of deception.
So suppose that B is uncertain as to whether L will resist (if it is “strong”)
or capitulate (if it is “weak”) in the event of an attack, and that it associ-
ates the probabilities p and 1 − p, respectively, with these two possibilities.
In addition, suppose country L can make an initial move, which consists
of signaling or not signaling its resolve to resist B if attacked. Finally, to
make matters more interesting, suppose this signal is costly. Of course, we
should not expect this signal to convey information if it is costless, so sup-
pose that if L signals its intention to resist, the cost C is subtracted from its
final payoff.
The issue is not simply whether L should send a costly signal, but whether the
opportunity to signal can improve L’s welfare. We are interested in such mat-
ters because it is not uncommon, for example, for people to question the value
of some weapons system, especially if that system seems overly costly given its
ostensible strategic mission. But consider this possibility: By building such a
system, can a country communicate its willingness to fight if attacked? Can a
country say, in effect, something like the following to an enemy:
“Although you may be able to defeat me, I  can punish you severely if
attacked. And although you might question my resolve, I would certainly
punish you; otherwise, I would not have built such a costly weapons system
in the first place.”
To see whether this argument makes theoretical sense, consider the outcomes
and payoffs in Table 7.2, where we assume the following general relationships:
First, the big country prefers that L capitulate if it is attacked, i.e.,
Uc > 0 > Ur,

--- Sayfa 315 ---
306  Games with Incomplete Information
and, second, we assume that what differentiates a strong from a weak little
country is these two inequalities:
0 > – C > ur
s > uc
s and 0 > – C > uc
w > ur
w.
Figure 7.11 portrays this situation’s extensive form by assuming that L but not
B knows L’s type. First, since L will not resist if it is weak or capitulate if it is
strong, the X’d branches can be deleted. This reduction of the extensive form
allows us to simplify our notation by deleting the superscripts on the u’s (i.e.,
only a strong L resists, and only a weak one capitulates). To solve for equilibria
we next construct a strategic form using the following strategies for B and L.
First, for B
B1: Attack regardless of whether or not L signals.
B2: Attack if L signals; don’t attack if it doesn’t.
B3: Don’t attack if L signals; attack if it doesn’t.
B4: Don’t attack, regardless of whether or not L signals.
and for L
L1: Don’t signal regardless of type.
L2: Signal if strong; don’t signal if weak.
L3: Don’t signal if strong; signal if weak.
L4: Signal regardless of type.
To see how we determine the payoffs in the game’s strategic form shown in
Figure 7.12, suppose B chooses B3 and L chooses L2. So L signals with probabil-
ity p, B doesn’t attack, and the outcome is −C for L and 0 for B; and L doesn’t
signal with probability 1 − p, B attacks, and the outcome is uc for L and Uc for
B. Thus, with (L2, B3), the expected payoff for L is −pC + (1 − p)uc, and for B it
is (1 − p)Uc.
Regardless of the numbers we assign to payoffs, we can see that there are no
separating equilibria—equilibria in which the little country behaves according
to its type by signaling when it is strong and not signaling when it is weak, or
vice versa. That is, neither the strategy L2 nor L3 is involved in any pure strategy
equilibrium. This follows from the fact that if L chooses L2, then B prefers B3,
given that Uc > 0 > Ur, but if B chooses B3, then L prefers L4. If, on the other
hand, L chooses L3, B’s best response is B2; but (L3, B2) cannot be an equilibrium
Table 7.2  Country Payoff Notation
Outcome
B
strong L
weak L
status quo
0
0
0
B attacks, L resists
Ur
ur
s
ur
w
B attacks, L capitulates
Uc
uc
s
uc
w

--- Sayfa 316 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  307
because L’s best response to B2 is L1. Since there is no separating equilibrium, we
next look for a pooling equilibrium in which L sends the same signal regardless
of its type. Ignoring the knife-edged possibility of equality, we have two cases:
case 1: pUr + (1 − p)Uc < 0
case 2: pUr + (1 − p)Uc > 0.
If p is sufficiently large—if B initially believes that L has a sufficiently great
probability of being strong and willing to resist aggression, then case 1 applies
weak
L
L
B
~S
~S
S
S
~A
~A
A
A
0, 0
~A
A
A
~A
L
L
B
B
B
L
0,0
uw
c,Uc
uw
r,Ur
uw
c,−C, Uc
uw
c,−C, Uc
us
c,−C, Uc
us
c,−C, Uc
− C,0
−C, 0
us
c, Uc
us
r, Ur
L
L
L
L
L
r
c
r
c
r
c
r
c
strong
0
Figure 7.11  A deterrence signaling game

--- Sayfa 317 ---
308  Games with Incomplete Information
and there are at least three (pooling) equilibria: (L1, B2), (L1, B4) and (L4, B4). In
addition, if −C > ur, then (L4, B3) is an equilibrium as well. All three of these
equilibria, however, are equivalent in the sense that B never chooses to attack.
Case 2 is more interesting, because attacking L is a reasonable bet—in the
absence of other considerations, B’s expected payoff from attacking is greater
than the status quo’s value, zero, and the unique pure strategy equilibrium is
(L1, B1). The question is whether the opportunity to signal creates any worth-
while possibilities for L. The answer to this question is, admittedly, sensitive
to parameter values. So, in order to merely establish some possibilities, let
p = 0.10, and
Uc = 100, Ur = −100, ur = −250, and uc = −75/0.9.
Since B4 is dominated by Bl when case 2 holds, we can eliminate B4 from consid-
eration. Finally, for purposes of an example assume that C = 50, in which case
the relevant strategic form is the one shown in Figure 7.13 (country L = row
chooser, country B = column chooser):
Solving for mixed strategies for a 4 × 3 game can be tiresome, and so here
we short-circuit some details and, without explanation, focus our attention on
B1
B2
B3
L1
−100, 80
0, 0
−100, 80
L2
−105, 80
−30, −10
−80, 90
L3
−145, 80
−120, 90
−70, −10
L4
−150, 80
−150, 80
−50, 0
Figure 7.13  Numerical example of Figure 7.12
pur+(1−p)uc
pUr+(1−p)Uc
0
0
pur+(1−p)uc
pUr+(1−p)Uc
0
0
p(ur−C)+(1−p)uc
pUr+(1−p)Uc
p(ur−C)
pUr
−pC+(1−p)uc
(1−p)Uc
−pC
0
pur+(1−p)(uc−C)
pUr+(1−p)Uc
(1−p)(uc−C)
(1−p)Uc
pur−(1−p)C
pUr
−(1−p)C
0
L1
B1
B2
B3
B4
L2
L3
L4
pur+(1−p)uc−C
pUr+(1−p)Uc
pur+(1−p)uc−C
pUr+(1−p)Uc
−C
0
0
0
Figure 7.12  The strategic form of Figure 7.11

--- Sayfa 318 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  309
the strategies L2 and L4 for L and B1 and B3 for B. Assuming that both players
place zero weight on the excluded strategies, if we compute mixed strategies in
the usual way for a 2 × 2 game, we get a solution of p = (0, 8/9, 0, 1/9) for L and
q = (6/15, 0, 9/15) for B. If B chooses between Bl and B3 with probabilities q and
1 − q, then L must be indifferent between the lotteries that L2 and L4 offer. In
other words,
−105q − 80(1 − q) = −150q − 50(1 − q),
which solves to establish that q = 6/15. Similarly, if L chooses between L2 and
L4 with probabilities p and 1 − p, then B is indifferent between B1 and B3 only if
80 = 90p, which yields p = 8/9.
Two tasks remain at this stage: (1) showing that this strategy pair improves
L’s welfare and (2) establishing that it is indeed an equilibrium and B’s expected
payoff is 80. First, some straightforward algebra establishes that L’s expected
payoff from (p, q) is −90, which is more than what L gets, −100, if L cannot
signal. Second, to see that (p, q) is in fact an equilibrium, we must show that
neither B nor L has an incentive to place positive probabilities on those strate-
gies to which p and q, respectively, assign zero probability. To see that this is
indeed the case, notice that B has no incentive to give any weight to B2 at the
expense of the other two pure strategies since B2 necessarily gives B less than
80 as long as L mixes only between L2 and L4. Hence, B has no incentive to shift
unilaterally from (p, q). And given that B is mixing between the strategies B1
and B3, L will not give any weight to L1 since this strategy earns −100; nor will L
give any weight to L3 since this also earns L an expected payoff of (−145)6/15 +
(−70)9/15 = −100. Thus, (p, q) is an equilibrium.
Using a mixed strategy in a game that has a pure strategy equilibrium might
seem strange. Nevertheless, that L can use the opportunity to signal only by
implementing a mixed strategy makes sense. The pure strategies L1 and L4 con-
vey no information and, thus, they cannot be used to deceive an opponent.
On the other hand, using L2 or L3 with certainty merely signals one’s type to
the opponent and invites attack when one is weak. Thus, deception requires a
mixed strategy—a strategy that always signals resolve when one is strong, but
which leaves something to chance when one is weak.
This fact about deception is useful, at least in the context of the relatively
simple game of our example. It reveals that if we observe two persons playing
a game that allows for the possibility of deception, we cannot come to any firm
conclusion as to whether deception will or will not be attempted. Moreover,
since we may only get to observe the game played once—so that we will only
have the opportunity to observe a single joint choice of pure strategies—even
if a player abides by a mixed strategy, we cannot determine whether that player
has played well or poorly on the basis of the final outcome nor can we deter-
mine whether that player intended to deceive. Our example also gives us a clue
as to how strategic deterrence worked during the years of the U.S.–Soviet stand-
off. Specifically, there were at least two sources of incomplete information. First,
even if both sides knew the capabilities of their own weapons system (which

--- Sayfa 319 ---
310  Games with Incomplete Information
we might question), there was necessarily some uncertainty as to the precise
capabilities of the opponent. Thus, the country launching a first strike could
not be certain as to the surviving capabilities of the other. Second, in terms of
the willingness of the attacked country to invite a second retaliatory attack by
retaliating to the first strike, one had to know the attacked country’s willingness
to incur additional losses. What value did either the U.S. or USSR place on ret-
ribution even if the administration of that retribution would almost certainly
invite a further degradation of one’s country? This, we now know, was a ques-
tion that neither country wanted to see answered.
7.8  Economic Sanctions in International Affairs
One substantive context in which players have an opportunity to “signal” their
types lies in the context of economic sanctions, which have become an increas-
ingly common coercive tool in international disputes. We have, of course, the
successful example of sanctions being imposed by a vast array of states on
South Africa in the 1980s so as to induce an end to its system of apartheid. On
the other hand, we can look back at the sanctions imposed by the U.S. on Japan
prior to WWII wherein steel and oil exports were halted in combination with
the freezing of Japan’s financial assets in the unsuccessful attempt to induce a
withdrawal from China. This, and the more recent examples of Iran, Cuba and
North Korea leave the impression that sanctions are at best a clumsy tool of
international affairs and rarely meet their objectives. This raises the question as
to why they are so often threatened when they are unlikely to succeed.
To see how games of incomplete information might help answer this question
and to further illustrate the analysis of games of incomplete information, we
offer here a 2-person game that involves a dispute on some issue and the poten-
tial for one of them to impose sanctions if that issue is unresolved (our analysis
here is from Dean Lacy and Niou, “A Theory of Economic Sanctions and Issue
Linkage,” Journal of Politics 66,1, February 2004). Each disputant can be of two
types. The coercer—the player that can threaten and impose sanctions—can be
either resolute or irresolute, which will dictate whether it prefers to impose sanc-
tions if the target state does not comply with its demands. The target, in turn,
can be resilient or compliant, defined by whether it prefers to capitulate to the
coercer’s demands instead of suffering sanctions. And as in our earlier examples
of incomplete information, a player’s type is known with certainty only by that
player—information is incomplete and asymmetric. Finally, for simplicity, sup-
pose the issue under dispute has a binary outcome, either x = coercer’s demand
is met and ~x = coercer’s demand is not met. Sanctions also involve a binary
outcome, where s = sanctions are applied and ~s = no sanctions.
The strategic moves in the game begin with a choice by the coercer of whether
to threaten sanctions. If there is no threat, the game ends and the status quo,
O1, prevails. If the coercer threatens sanctions, the target complies or does not
comply. If it does not comply, the coercer then chooses whether to impose the
sanctions, after which the target decides whether or not to capitulate to the

--- Sayfa 320 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  311
coercer’s demands. The extensive form of this scenario wherein each player is
uncertain as to the type of its opponent is then shown in Figure 7.14, where the
possible outcomes are as follows:
O1 = (no threat) = the status quo
O2 = (threat, compliance) = (x,~s)
O3 = (threat, no compliance, sanctions, no capitulation) = (~x,s)
O4 = (threat, no compliance, sanctions, capitulation) = (x,s)
O5 = (threat, no compliance, no sanctions) = (~x,~s).
Preferences will depend on a player’s identity and type. For a potential target of
sanctions, O5 and O1 imply the same outcome, except that O5 entails a reputa-
tion gain due to having resisted the coercer’s demands. We assume, then, that
targets prefer O5 to the status quo since the actions leading to O5 may carry
future benefits such as insurance against future sanctions. The worst outcome
is O3 for the compliant target whereas for the resilient target the worst outcome
is O2 or O4, and, for purposes of analysis, we will assume that O4 is worse than
O2. However, the results that follow hold regardless of the target’s relative rank-
ing of O2 and O4. In short, for the compliant target, O5 > O1 > O2 > O4 > O3;
for the resilient target, O5 > O1 > O3 > O2 > O4.
We assume that a potential coercer prefers not to impose sanctions if the
target complies. If the coercer has the preference ordering O2 > O4 > O1 > O5
> O3, it is irresolute since it prefers not to impose economic sanctions regardless
of whether the target complies. Alternatively, it might rank the outcomes O2
> O4 > O3 > O1 > O5. If the target complies, the coercer prefers no sanctions
to sanctions; if the target does not comply, it prefers sanctions to no sanctions.
This coercer is resolute since it will incur the cost of sanctions if the target does
not comply with its original demand. Both types of coercers prefer the status
quo, O1, to O5 because of the loss of reputation and credibility associated with
backing down against a target after threatening sanctions.
Normally in this context we would express these preferences as a utility func-
tions, where, say, for the target we might use the notation ut(O1/R) to denote
the utility of the target for outcome O1 if it is resilient (R). However, to avoid
such notational complexity, we use the notation provided by Table 7.3.
Suppose the target believes that the coercer is resolute with probability p and
irresolute with probability 1 – p, while the coercer assesses probability q that the
target is resilient and probability 1 – q that it is compliant. Given the preference
rankings and reasoning backward along the game tree, if the coercer is reso-
lute, then it is always in its interest to threaten sanctions instead of accepting
the status quo. If the target does not comply, the coercer will impose sanctions
if it is resolute and will not impose sanctions if it is irresolute. If the target is
resilient, its dominant strategy is not to comply with the coercer’s demands.
After eliminating dominated strategies, we can now solve the game by con-
structing its normal form using the remaining type-contingent strategies for
target and coercer. For the coercer, the first strategy listed is for a resolute player;

--- Sayfa 321 ---
312  Games with Incomplete Information
not threaten
not threaten
not threaten
not threaten
threaten
threaten
not sanct on
not sanction
sanction
sanction
sanction
sanction
not sanction
not sanction
threaten
threaten
Coercer
Coercer
Coercer
Coercer
Compliant
Compliant
Irresolute
Resolute
q
1-p
p
1-q
q
1-q
Resilient
Resilient
not comply
not capitulate
not capitulate
not capitulate
not capitulate
capitulate
capitulate
capitulate
capitulate
Target
Target
Target
Target
not comply
not comply
not comply
comply
comply
comply
comply
z3, x2
z1, x3
z5, x5
z4, w1
z5, w3
z1, w4
y4, x2
z2, w5
z2, x4
z4, x1
z3, w2
y3, x5
y5, w1
y2, w5
y3, w3
y4, w2
y1, x3
y1, w4
y2, x4
y5, x1
Figure 7.14  Game of economic sanctions in extensive form
Table 7.3  Payoff Notation
Target
Coercer
Outcome
Resilient
Compliant
Resolute
Irresolute
O1
w2
x2
y4
z3
O2
w4
x3
y1
z1
O3
w3
x5
y3
z5
O4
w5
x4
y2
z2
O5
w1
x1
y5
z4

--- Sayfa 322 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  313
the second, for an irresolute player. For the target, the first strategy is played by
a resilient player, the second by a compliant one:
Coercer:
(Threaten/Sanction, Threaten/Sanction) = (TS, TS)
(Threaten/Sanction, Threaten/Do Not Sanction) = (TS, T~S)
(Threaten/Sanction, Do Not Threaten/Sanction) = (TS, ~TS)
(Threaten/Sanction, Do Not Threaten/Do Not Sanction) = (TS, ~T~S)
Target:
(Do Not Comply/Do Not Capitulate, Comply/Capitulate) = (~C~C, CC)
(Do Not Comply/Do Not Capitulate, Do Not Comply/Capitulate) =
(~C~C, ~CC)
Figure 7.15 gives the reduced strategic form of the extensive form in Figure 7.14,
where the payoffs are computed in the usual way.
As algebraically ugly as the entries in this form might appear, we can readily
reduce the potential equilibria down to three possibilities (the italicized cells in
Figure 7.15).
(~C~C, CC)
(~C~C, ~CC)
pqy3+p(1-q)y1+(1-p)qz5+(1-p)(1-q)z1
pqw3+p(1-q)x3+(1-p)qw3+(1-p)(1-q)x3
pqy3+p(1-q)y2+(1-p)qz5+(1-p)(1-q)z2
pqw3+p(1-q)x4+(1-p)qw3+(1-p)(1-q)x5
pqy3+p(1-q)y1+(1-p)qz4+(1-p)(1-q)z1
pqw3+p(1-q)x3+(1-p)qw1+(1-p)(1-q)x3
pqy3+p(1-q)y2+(1-p)qz4+(1-p)(1-q)z4
pqw3+p(1-q)x4+(1-p)qw1+(1-p)(1-q)x1
pqy3+p(1-q)y1+(1-p)qz3+(1-p)(1-q)z3
pqw3+p(1-q)x3+(1-p)qw2+(1-p)(1-q)x2
pqy3+p(1-q)y2+(1-p)qz3+(1-p)(1-q)z3
pqw3+p(1-q)x4+(1-p)qw2+(1-p)(1-q)x2
pqy3+p(1-q)y1+(1-p)qz3+(1-p)(1-q)z3
pqw3+p(1-q)x3+(1-p)qw2+(1-p)(1-q)x2
pqy3+p(1-q)y2+(1-p)qz3+(1-p)(1-q)z3
pqw3+p(1-q)x4+(1-p)qw2+(1-p)(1-q)x2
(Resolute,
Irresolute)
(TS, TS)
(TS, T~S)
(TS, ~TS)
(TS, ~T~S)
Figure 7.15  Sanctions game

--- Sayfa 323 ---
314  Games with Incomplete Information
(1)	 (TS, T~S; ~C~C, CC) = (Threaten/Sanction, Threaten/Do Not Sanction;
Do Not Comply/Do Not Capitulate, Comply/Capitulate),
(2)	 (TS, ~TS; ~C~C, CC) = (Threaten/Sanction, Do Not Threaten/Sanction;
Do Not Comply/Do Not Capitulate, Comply/Capitulate), and
(3)	 (TS, ~T~S; ~C~C, CC) = (Threaten/Sanction, Do Not Threaten/Do Not
Sanction; Do Not Comply/Do Not Capitulate, Comply/Capitulate).
To illustrate how we can eliminate all other cells from consideration as possible
equilibria, consider the cell corresponding to (TS,T∼S) and (∼C ∼C, ∼CC).
Comparing this cell to the one immediately below it for row chooser, note that
these two cells differ only in the last two terms, where the cell in question con-
cerns the utility z4 in those terms whereas the cell below it concerns the utilities
z3. But from Table 7.3, z3 > z4. Thus ((TS,T∼ S), (∼C ∼C, ∼CC)) cannot be an
equilibrium. The remaining un-italicized cells can be eliminated in a similar
way. So, turning our attention first to the strategy-pair (TS, T~S; ~C~C, CC), it
is an equilibrium when neither the coercer nor the target have an incentive to
deviate from the prescribed strategies, which requires that the following weak
inequalities be satisfied:
q
q
z4  (1
)z1    z3
+
−
≥

(1)
x3    (1
)x1
x4
≥
+
−p
p

(2)
Considering inequality (1), ceteris paribus, the irresolute coercer is more likely
to threaten sanctions if: (a) the target is likely to be compliant (q is low), (b) if
the cost of backing down after threatening sanctions compared to the value of
accepting the status quo is relatively low (z4 is small), or (c) if the value of the
target complying is relatively higher than the status quo (z3 is high). For the
compliant target, inequality (2) suggests that the target will comply if threat-
ened and capitulate if sanctioned, (CC), if the coercer is likely to be resolute (p
is large), if the cost of complying on X is relatively low, or if the cost of sanctions
is relatively high.
When inequality (1) is reversed, (TS, ~TS; ~C~C, CC) and (TS, ~T~S;
~C~C, CC) become equilibria, though both lead to the same outcome and pay-
offs. If the target is likely to be resilient (q is high), if the cost of backing down
after threatening to sanction is relatively high, or if the value of the target com-
plying is not much higher than the value of accepting the status quo, it is more
likely that the irresolute coercer will choose not to threaten sanctions in the
first place. If inequality (1) is an equality, then all three strategy combinations
are Nash equilibria since the coercer has no incentive to deviate from any of the
three strategies.
When inequality (1) is satisfied but inequality (2) is not, the game does not
have a pure strategy equilibrium, but it has at least one equilibrium in mixed
strategies. Inequality (2) is less likely to be satisfied if: (a) the coercer is more

--- Sayfa 324 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  315
likely to be irresolute (1 – p is high); (b) the value of not complying without
being sanctioned is high (x1 is high); or (c) the difference between complying
after being threatened and capitulating after being sanctioned is small (x3 – x4
is small).
In equilibrium, player types are separating in the sanction stage but pooling
in the threat stage. Both a resolute and an irresolute coercer may threaten sanc-
tions. But if the target state does not comply, then only the resolute coercer will
impose sanctions. Two important insights follow from the equilibrium results.
First, the threat stage is critical for understanding sanctions. When sanctions
are successful, their success will often come at the threat stage. When a target
does not comply, then the game proceeds to the sanctions stage. In the sanctions
stage, sanctions will be applied only when a resolute coercer meets a resilient
target, which highlights the second insight from the model: When sanctions are
actually imposed, they often will not succeed.
Based on the equilibrium results, we describe the conditions under which
each of the five possible outcomes will arise, giving empirical examples of each.
Outcome 1: Coercer does not threaten sanctions.
Conditions: The coercer is irresolute, and the cost of backing down if the tar-
get ignores its threat is high while the value of the target complying is not much
greater than the value of enduring the status quo.
Example: In the second Clinton administration, the U.S. did not link renewal
of China’s most favored nation status to improvements in its human rights
record. The administration may have been irresolute while perceiving China
to be resilient. Furthermore, the reputation cost of backing down against the
PRC is high.
Outcome 2: Coercer threatens economic sanctions; target complies.
Conditions: Outcome 2 describes the conditions under which sanctions are
probably most successful. But note that in this case sanctions are never imposed,
only threatened. The conditions are that the target is compliant, the cost of com-
plying is low, and the cost of sanctions is high. To make the conditions sufficient,
then (a) the coercer believes the target is likely to be compliant, (b) the cost of
backing down if the target does not comply is low, and (c) the value of the target
complying is much greater than the value of maintaining the status quo. If we
are to judge the success of economic sanctions, then full examination of this
category of outcomes is critical. Outcome 2 demonstrates that debates about the
success of sanctions that fail to consider the threat stage will miss the point of
sanctions.
Outcome 3: Coercer threatens economic sanctions; target does not comply;
coercer imposes sanctions; target does not capitulate.
Conditions: The necessary and sufficient conditions are that the coercer is
resolute and target is resilient. The classic cases of the failure of economic sanc-
tions are examples of this outcome. The Soviet Union, for instance, did not
withdraw from Afghanistan after the U.S. grain embargo in 1979; Iraq did not
withdraw from Kuwait in 1990 and 1991 despite sanctions by the UN; and the
Castro regime in Cuba has been under a general U.S. embargo since the 1960s.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
316  Games with Incomplete Information
Outcome 4: Coercer threatens economic sanctions; target does not comply;
coercer imposes sanctions; target capitulates.
Conditions: In either of the perfect Bayesian equilibria in pure strategies
described above, the compliant target always complies after the coercer makes
a threat. Only the resilient target will hold out. But the resilient target will not
capitulate even if the coercer imposes punishment. Therefore, Outcome 4 can
occur only in a mixed-strategy equilibrium, that is, when inequality (2), x3 ≥
(1 – p)x1 + px4, is not satisfied. The conditions for a compliant target to defy
the threat of sanctions but to capitulate once sanctions are imposed are: (a)
the target believes that the coercer is irresolute (p is small), (b) the value of
not complying without being sanctioned is high (x1 is high), or (c) the dif-
ference in value between complying after being threatened and capitulating
after being sanctioned is small (x3 – x4 is small). In 1933, for example, the U.K.
barred importation of a number of goods from the Soviet Union after the Sovi-
ets imprisoned two British citizens. In 1979 several Arab states imposed sanc-
tions on Canada after the Canadian government announced it would move its
embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. In 1989 and 1990, India imposed
economic sanctions on Nepal after Nepal increased military ties with China. In
all cases, the target state complied with the coercer’s demands after sanctions
were imposed. Our model predicts that such outcomes are not often observed
since they involve the play of mixed strategies. An irresolute coercer plays a
mixed strategy of imposing or not imposing sanctions in order to avoid having
target states take advantage of the coercer. In the three cases above, the coercers
likely realized that in order to avoid their opponents’ taking advantage of them,
they must sometimes impose sanctions, even if the sanctions may not be success-
ful. Similarly, compliant targets know that in order to avoid being taken advan-
tage of by potential coercers who threaten sanctions, they must sometimes avoid
backing down to the initial threat of sanctions. The compliant targets then force
the hands of irresolute coercers by making them impose sanctions. By assigning
some probability to the strategy of not complying with threatened sanctions,
the compliant target may deter irresolute coercers from threatening sanctions.
Outcome 5: Coercer threatens economic sanctions; target does not comply;
coercer does not impose sanctions.
Conditions: The target is resilient and the coercer is irresolute. In addition,
the coercer believes the target is likely to be compliant, the cost of backing down
if the target does not comply is low, and the value of the target complying is
much greater than the value of maintaining the status quo. If the game proceeds
to the stage where the coercer must decide whether to impose sanctions when
the target has not backed down, it must be that the irresolute coercer miscalcu-
lates the target’s resilience in the first stage but decides to further test it in the
second stage. In the early days of the Clinton administration, for instance, U.S.
policymakers apparently wanted to grant China MFN status in exchange for
improvements in China’s human rights record. But without an improvement
in China’s human rights status, the U.S. preferred not to grant MFN status. The
Clinton administration acted as though it were resolute, but the administra-
tion was likely bluffing in order to induce China to improve its human rights

--- Sayfa 326 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  317
record. China did not comply with U.S. demands, and the Clinton administra-
tion later pushed for China’s MFN status and membership in the World Trade
Organization.
The conditions under which each of the outcomes will arise reveal that even
if sanctions are threatened, they may not be imposed, and, if imposed, they may
not be successful. In only two of these outcomes does a coercer ever impose
sanctions. In both cases the target is resilient and unlikely to capitulate. The
model explains several puzzles in the literature on economic sanctions and
issue linkage. First, some scholars have defined success in narrow terms to mean
that a state achieves its most preferred outcome, and they have concluded from
case studies that economic sanctions generally do not succeed. The real success
of sanctions will not be observable in cases in which sanctions are imposed.
Rather, sanctions succeed by convincing potential targets that the coercer is res-
olute. The model reveals that the threat of sanctions can be as potent a policy
tool as the imposition of sanctions. If the target is compliant and if the target
believes that the coercer is likely to be resolute, Outcome 2 shows that the threat
of imposing punishment can effectively compel targets to comply. Empirical
studies that examine only cases in which sanctions were imposed omit a class of
cases that represent successful sanctions, though the sanctions were threatened
but not imposed. Examining cases of only imposed sanctions generates a selec-
tion bias in empirical research on sanctions.
Second, successful sanctions may also be measured as an improvement over
the status quo, even if a state’s most preferred outcome is not realized. Many
scholars consider sanctions a failure if the coercer imposes sanctions and the
target does not capitulate. But a resolute coercer prefers the outcome (threat,
no compliance, sanctions, no capitulation) to the status quo. Even though the
coercer does not achieve its most preferred outcome, it does achieve an out-
come it prefers to the status quo. The resolute coercer is certainly no worse off
imposing sanctions that are ignored than it is continuing under the status quo.
Third, sanctions are often unsuccessful. In the pure strategy equilibrium, the
compliant target always complies after the coercer threatens sanctions. Capitula-
tion by the target after the coercer imposes sanctions is an equilibrium only in
mixed strategies: the outcome occurs only when a pure-strategy equilibrium
does not exist, which explains why sanctions often fail. However, this does not
mean that sanctions should never be imposed if a target does not concede. If
a coercer never imposes sanctions, it and other potential targets will always
ignore sanction threats. The success of sanctions should be judged not by the
cases where sanctions are imposed and fail but by the cases where threatened
sanctions change the behavior of targets.
7.9  Rationality Reconsidered
We are now in a position to reconsider the Centipede Game offered in Chapter 2
in Figure 2.16 and the contradiction that subgame perfection appears to imply
with respect to the presumed rationality of players there. Actually, though, our
interest in this game is not simply that we want to resolve an apparent paradox

--- Sayfa 327 ---
318  Games with Incomplete Information
in the application of the concept of subgame perfection. We should, after all,
leave such matters to game theorists. Rather, we want to confront the possibility
that “irrationality” itself may be rational.
The Cincinnati Kid: A classic of Hollywood was the 1965 movie The Cin-
cinnati Kid in which Steve McQueen, playing the role of the brash, upstart
gambler, challenges the “old pro,” Edward G. Robinson. After hours of end-
less play, Robinson’s age appears to show as he seemingly wilts under the
“Kid’s” relentless assault of tactical skill and luck. The dramatic end to their
game of five-card stud has McQueen an almost certain winner with a full
house against Robinson’s flush. The cards, as they are dealt, fall as follows:
First, both players are dealt a face down card, which even the movie’s audi-
ence is not allowed to see. The cards that follow are then dealt face up and
Robinson is given the 8♦ while the Kid (McQueen) gets the 10♣. The Kid
bets $500 and Robinson calls. Robinson next gets the Q♦ and the Kid the
10♠. The Kid bets $1,000 and Robinson raises $1,000. The Kid calls. Next
Robinson is dealt the 10♦ and the Kid gets the A♣. The Kid bets $3,000
and Robinson calls. Robinson’s final card is the 9♦; the Kid gets the A♠.
With his card in the hole being the A♥, thus giving him a powerful Full
House—three aces and two tens—the Kid checks since he doesn’t want
to signal the strength of his hand and since he is certain that if Robinson
guesses he has a Full House, he’d drop out. Seemingly suckered into think-
ing that the Kid merely has the two pair showing, Robinson bets $1,000.
The Kid, thinking he’s suckered Robinson into betting an additional $1,000,
immediately raises with the remaining money in front of him, $3,500, with
the expectation that this bet will lead Robinson to fold. Robinson, how-
ever, reaches into his wallet, meets the Kid’s bet and raises another $5,000.
McQueen hasn’t the money, but still convinced that Robinson is merely
bluffing and that the best he can be holding is another diamond (and thus
a Flush, which his Full House beats), he offers Robinson his “marker”—his
IOU. Robinson agrees, the Kid calls the bet and is subsequently stunned
into submission as Robinson turns over his face-down card, the J♦ for a
Straight Flush. Robinson, of course, wins and McQueen is busted, con-
fused, and humiliated. How, he asks, could Robinson bet as he did with
at best an improbable chance of being dealt cards that would defeat a
Full House? Robinson’s answer is the admonition that poker oftentimes
involves making the wrong move at the right time. Robinson’s apparent
irrationality has suckered McQueen into losing it all.
Our Centipede Game has nowhere near the drama of this scene, especially in its
Hollywood portrayal, but it too may require “irrational” action on the part of
rational decision makers. To see what we mean, recall that the particular diffi-
culty we confront with this situation centers on this question: Subgame perfec-
tion requires that we determine what a player should choose in the initial stages
of the game on the basis of what rational players choose subsequently in later
stages. But if reaching those stages requires that players choose irrationally in

--- Sayfa 328 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  319
earlier stages, then what is the basis for supposing that players choose rationally
in these later stages? Successive pruning of the game’s extensive form, then,
seems to make sense only if we allow a contradiction of the notion of rational-
ity that underlies the idea of subgame perfection. Put differently, a player at
something other than an initial decision node of the extensive form can reason
thus: “If everyone is rational, then I should choose . . . But wait a minute! If
everyone is rational, then I wouldn’t have the opportunity to choose at this
node in the first place! So something must be wrong with my assumption that
my opponent is rational.”
Players can reach successive decision nodes in our example, then, only if
one or both of them are irrational, or at least if one or both of them find it
rational to appear irrational. So consider the possibility that each player selects
a strategy under the hypothesis that there is some small probability that the
opponent is in fact irrational. We can model this irrationality in any number of
ways, including letting people have utility functions that differ from the ones we
otherwise specify (for example, we could suppose that irrational people dislike
money and that the utility of x dollars equals −x). Equivalently, we can suppose
that there is some small probability that a player, for whatever reason, simply
cannot make a choice that is otherwise optimal.
For the game in Figure 2.16, then, we can assume that there is some prob-
ability that, in lieu of picking the money up off the table, any particular player
is incapable of such an action and passes at every opportunity. In the Bayes-
ian game format, this means each player knows that he or she is rational, each
knows that there is some probability that the opponent is irrational, each knows
that the opponent believes that there is some small probability that it is irratio-
nal, and so on. The game theoretic question, then, becomes: Is there an equi-
librium in which two players, both believing that the other might be irrational,
make the “irrational” decision of waiting until the game’s final stages before
opting to take the money offered? Is it sometimes rational to act “irrationally”?
To evaluate this possibility, consider the extensive form in Figure 7.16, which
takes the game in Figure 2.16 and assumes that each player has some probability
of being unable to do anything except pass. Information sets are drawn, how-
ever, to indicate that each player knows its own type but is uncertain about the
“rationality” of the opponent.
Because we exclude the possibility that an irrational player can do anything
but “pass,” each player has three strategies in this extensive form that take
account of his or her type:
s1:	If rational, then “take” on the first opportunity (which ends the game),
but “pass” if irrational.
s2:	If rational, then “pass” on the first opportunity, “take” on the second
(which ends the game), and always “pass” if irrational.
s3:	If rational, then “pass” on both opportunities and “pass” if irrational.
To construct a numerical example, let q = 0.97, so each player has a 0.03 chance
of being incapable of taking the money. Figure 7.17 shows the corresponding

--- Sayfa 329 ---
320  Games with Incomplete Information
strategic form. For example, if both players choose s1, then 1 receives a payoff
of 40 [if 1 and 2 are both rational] with probability (0.97)2, a payoff of 40 [if 1
but not 2 is rational] with probability (0.97)(0.03), a payoff of 20 [if 1 but not 2
is irrational so that 1 passes but 2 takes] with probability (0.03)(0.97), and a
payoff of 640 [if 1 and 2 are both irrational and always pass] with probability
(0.03)2. Thus, we enter a payoff to 1 of
40[(0.97)2 + (0.97)(0.03)] + 20(0.03)(0.97) + 640[(0.03)2] = 40
pass
rational
take
40,10
0.97
0.97
0.03
0.03
0.97
0.03
40,10
40,10
40,10
20,80
20,80
20,80
160,40
80,320
640,160
80,320
80,320
640,160
640,160
640,160
160,40
160,40
160,40
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2 irrational
Nature
2 rational 2 irrational
2 rational
irrational
Nature
Nature
1
1
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
1
p
p
1
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
80,320
20,80
Figure 7.16  Centipede game with possibility of irrationality

--- Sayfa 330 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  321
in the (s1, s1) cell. The remaining cells are computed in a similar fashion.
Notice that s3 is dominated for player 2 by s2, which makes sense since s3
requires that 2 pass at the last branch even if rational, rather than simply take
the larger payoff. Checking the other cells reveals that the game does not have
a pure strategy equilibrium, so mixed strategies must be considered. At this
point, however, we must proceed carefully in order to compute a mixed solu-
tion, because we do not yet know whether player 1 should mix over all three
pure strategies or over some subset of them. We begin then by supposing that
player 2 mixes between s1 and s2 with probabilities r and 1 − r. Then player 1’s
pure strategies must each yield the following expected payoffs:
E(s1) = 41.7 − 1.7r,
E(s2) = 158.1 – 133.5r,
E(s3) = 96.8 – 58.6r.
We know, of course, that if strategies si and sj each have nonzero probability
associated with them in player 1’s mixed equilibrium strategy, it must be that
s1
s1
s2
s3
s2
s3
40, 12.2
41.7, 19.2
58, 14.5
24.6, 78.9
158.1, 48.3
17.4, 43.6
38.2, 82.4
96.8, 315.2
640, 160
Figure 7.17  Strategic form of Figure 7.16
180
1’s expected payoff
160
140
s2
s3
s1
120
100
80
60
solution
40
20
0 0
r
1
Figure 7.18  Finding a solution to the game in Figure 7.17

--- Sayfa 331 ---
322  Games with Incomplete Information
E(si) = E(sj)—otherwise player 1 would prefer to unilaterally alter his or her
mixed strategy by shifting probability from one pure strategy to the other. How-
ever, Figure 7.18, which graphs each of the preceding expected value equations
against r, reveals that only two expected values can be equal simultaneously,
and that there are three possible pairings. This figure also reveals, however, that
player 1’s expected payoff is greatest if he or she sets E(s2) equal to E(s3)—if
player 1 chooses a mixed strategy that assigns positive probability only to s2 and
s3. Hence, setting E(s2) = E(s3) gives r = 0.814—that is, player 2’s mixed equilib-
rium strategy is (0.814, 0.186, 0).
We can solve now for 1’s mixed equilibrium strategy (0, p, 1 − p) by using
the fact that 2 must be indifferent between s1 and s2 whenever 1 abides by (0, p,
1 − p). For player 2,
E(s1) = 82.4 – 3.5p
E(s2) = 315.2 – 266.9p
Setting these two equations equal to each other and solving for p gives p = 0.884.
Thus, player 1’s mixed equilibrium strategy is (0, 0.884, 0.116).
Although this particular solution depends on our initial assumption that
each player’s probability of “irrationality” is .03, what we want to emphasize is
that this irrationality is now a self-fulfilling prophecy. Both players, even if they
are rational in a traditional sense, have non-zero probabilities of passing rather
than taking at any decision node. Appearing to be irrational is now rational
and is sustained on the part of both players by the initial assumption that each
person has some small probability of actually being (as opposed to appearing
to be) irrational.
There are other models that we could use to “explain” any observed irratio-
nality, models that do not require players knowing with such specificity the
probability that the other is irrational. For example, we could suppose that each
player’s probability of irrationality is itself a random variable drawn in accor-
dance with some commonly known probability density. The important point,
however, is that we can now begin to study “irrationality” empirically to see if
our models can account for it in the framework of the rational choice para-
digm. The implication of such models in political science is that barring some
complicated measurements that are allowed only if we observe the same game
played many times (in which case we must be concerned about the supergame
that participants might perceive), there is no way for us to determine whether
any observed irrationality is “real” or strategic. Thus, debates in both the aca-
demic and popular literature over the meaning of rationality or which pertain
to some evidence we assume supports the contention that someone is irrational
ought to be seriously scrutinized with our example in mind. If we observe some
national leader pursuing policies that make little sense to the rest of us, our first
instinct as analysts should not be to presume irrationality; instead, we should
examine the nature of the uncertainty that confronts us and try to determine
whether those actions are consistent with some strategic imperative. It may be
true, of course, that we will learn eventually that these policies were dictated

--- Sayfa 332 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  323
by poor information on someone’s part or that a national leader was mentally
unbalanced. But an appearance of “irrationality” may also be merely part of the
deception that incomplete information allows, and it may follow a logic that is
readily understood by supposing that people are rational and strategic.
7.10  Key Ideas and Concepts
incomplete information
asymmetric information
conditional probability
Bayes’s Law
Bayes equilibrium
separating equilibrium
pooling equilibrium
beliefs
reputation
chain store paradox
signaling
deception
rational
Exercises for Chapter 7
1.
In late 1941 the British were concerned as to how to respond to an antici-
pated invasion by Japan of Thailand’s (and Myanmar’s) Kra Isthmus and
an eventual invasion of Malaya and the critical British outpost and naval
base at Singapore. Thailand was ostensibly neutral and the critical issue that
confronted Britain’s strategic planners was whether they should attempt to
forestall a Japanese occupation of Thailand by invading the country them-
selves beforehand and thereby block the ports and airfields Japan would
most likely use in its move toward Malay and Singapore. As the situation
has been described by one historian of the period, “If British forces only
entered the Kra Isthmus after a Japanese incursion . . . they would probably
set off a war with Japan. If [they moved] . . . before the Japanese entered
Thailand . . . Tokyo could use this as a pretext for its own invasion . . . [The
British] had been told, possibly accurately, that the Japanese might even
attempt to trick Britain into taking the first step . . . [in which case] Britain
might lack for the support of the United States” (Evan Mawdsley, Decem-
ber 1941, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011: 54). More specifically, as
the British concern was most clearly stated by Churchill, “We should not
resist or attempt to forestall a Japanese attack on the Kra Isthmus unless we
had a satisfactory assurance from the United States that they would join us
should our action cause us to be involved in a war with Japan.” Of course,
this concern became moot in less than a week with Japan’s attack on Pearl
Harbor. Nevertheless, without assigning values to the possible outcomes,
sketch out a description of this situation in extensive form, treating the

--- Sayfa 333 ---
324  Games with Incomplete Information
preferences (responses) of the United States as not known with certainty
by either Britain or Japan.
2.
Consider the following strategic form game:
0, 0
−K, 5
  K, 10
    5, 0
Suppose only person 1 (row chooser) knows K with certainty, which nature
has set equal to 10 and −10 with equal probability (a fact that is known to
column chooser, person 2). Solve for this situation’s Bayesian equilibrium
strategies.
3.
In his unsuccessful surgeries (those in which the patient dies) Dr. Ian Com-
petent has only a fifty-fifty chance of not being at fault. With this in mind,
the relatives of his latest victim have asked for compensation: $1,000,000. If
Competent (who has already had his insurance policy revoked but who as a
shareholder in a local savings and loan association is quite wealthy) refuses
to settle, the relatives can take the matter to court (or they can forget it).
Once in court assume that justice is done. (This is not an exercise that
concerns the competence of lawyers.) So if Competent is innocent (and
only he knows for sure), he loses nothing and the relatives lose $1,000,000
(attorney’s fees being what they are). On the other hand, if he loses, then he
loses $3,000,000 and the victim’s relatives gain $2,000,000 (again, lawyers
take their cut).
a.
Portray this situation’s extensive and strategic forms.
b.
Determine the game’s equilibrium.
c.
Interpret this equilibrium.
4.
Country 1 has secretly approached country 2 with a disarmament pro-
posal that focuses on a new weapons system developed by 2. However,
this system has only a 70% chance of being effective, although 2 knows
the system’s capabilities with certainty. Country 2 can ignore 1’s proposal
and allow the arms race to continue; alternatively, it can publicly make
the same proposal, at which time country 1 must “fish or cut bait” by for-
mally accepting 2’s public offer. Associate what you regard as reasonable
payoffs with the outcomes, portray this situation’s extensive and strategic
forms, and find any pure strategy equilibria. Interpret these equilibria, if
any exist.
5.
Consider the following sequential elimination agenda: “Alternatives A and
B are first paired. If A wins, it is the outcome; but if B wins, B is paired
against C and the winner of this vote is the final outcome.” Suppose that
only these three preference types are possible (ranked from first preference
to last):
t1:
A
B
C
t2:
B
A
C
t3:
C
B
A

--- Sayfa 334 ---
Games with Incomplete Information  325
Assuming that a person has type ti preferences with probability pi, that
the pi’s are common knowledge, and that a person knows his own prefer-
ences, show that the selection of a Condorcet winner corresponds to an
equilibrium.
6.
Consider the following two-person, zero-sum game. Nature first chooses
player 1’s type, L, C, or R, with equal probability. Player 1 knows his type
and chooses “Yes” or “No.” After player 1 chooses, player 2 chooses “Yes” or
“No.” Player 2, whose type is common knowledge, does not observe 1’s type,
but does observe 1’s choice of “Yes” and “No.” Player payoffs are determined
according to the following table:
1’s type
1’s choice
2’s choice
1’s payoff
L
Y
Y
1
L
Y
N
2
L
N
Y
4
L
N
N
3
C
Y
Y
3
C
Y
N
7
C
N
Y
9
C
N
N
7
R
Y
Y
3
R
Y
N
4
R
N
Y
2
R
N
N
1
a.
Draw the game’s extensive form.
b.
Identify the pure strategies available to each person.
c.
Portray the situation’s strategic form.
d.
Find all the pure-strategy equilibria.
7.
Refer to section 7.8 and reproduce our analysis of the Centipede Game,
assuming that each player’s probability of irrationality is .3 rather than .03.
8.
The political philosophy—authoritarian or democrat—of President Bulsky
of Lower Slobovia is unknown to everyone but himself, including his chief
rival, Drinksalotov. So people assume that Bulsky values democratic princi-
ples with probability q, .5 < q < 1. Seeking favor with the members of NUKE
(Nations United for Kapitalist Expansion), Bulsky has pledged to allow a
national election for president—an election that can go either way with
equal probability if Drinksalotov runs against him. Presently, Bulsky must
decide whether to use recent ethnic unrest as an excuse for reneging on his
pledge. If he reneges, he retains his position but his wife cannot anticipate
an invitation to shop on Rodeo Drive at the next summit whereas Drinksa-
lotov wins international sympathy and an appearance on Nightline. If Bul-
sky commits to an election, Drinksalotov must decide whether to challenge.
An unchallenged Bulsky wins by a slim margin in an uncontested election.
If Drinksalotov challenges and loses, he is revealed as someone who cannot
defeat an incumbent who has steered his country to 40% unemployment

--- Sayfa 335 ---
326  Games with Incomplete Information
and a −20% GNP growth rate. This outcome’s valuation depends also on
Bulsky’s commitment to democracy, since losing elections has been a “very
bad thing” in Lower Slobovia historically. Drinksalotov adheres to demo-
cratic principles, but a loss by a like-minded Bulsky is a crushing psycholog-
ical blow that leads to his semiretirement as assistant director of the Crapski
Tractor and Screen Door plant. We have, then, these outcomes:
O1: Bulsky cancels the election.
O2: Bulsky allows the election, but Drinksalotov declines to compete.
O3: Bulsky allows the election; Drinksalotov opposes him but loses.
O4: Bulsky allows the election; Drinksalotov opposes him and wins.

In terms of the world’s foremost hard currency—Disney Dollars—suppose
valuations, conditional on Bulsky’s philosophy, are as follows (with payoffs
to Bulsky and Drinksalotov respectively and assuming, as has always been
the case in Lower Slobovia, that Disney Dollars and utility are equivalent):
Authoritarian
Democrat
01
(−1, 1)
(−1, 1)
02
(0, 0)
(0, 0)
03
(2, −6)
(2, 0)
04
(−2, 4)
(−8, 4)
a.
Portray this situation’s extensive and strategic forms.
b.
Describe the players’ equilibrium strategies as a function of q.
9.
In an upcoming election on insurance rate reform, it is common knowledge
that you will cast the decisive vote. You are uncertain about the identity of
the reform’s sponsor but have (correct) beliefs that there is a 7-in-10 chance
that the reform is pro-insurance (INS) and as a consequence will raise your
insurance rates (making you poorer) and that there is a 3-in-10 chance that
the reform is pro-Consumer (CON), in which case the reform will keep your
insurance rates at their present level. A campaigner, who knows whether the
reform is the insurance type or the consumer type, and, in either case, is paid
only if the bill passes, must decide whether or not to go to your House to tell
you to vote for the bill. (Campaigner chooses “House” or “No.”) On election
day, you must decide whether to vote “Yes” or “No” on the reform. The pay-
offs are determined as follows: It costs the campaigner $5 to go to your house.
The campaigner gets paid $15 if the reform passes and $0 if the reform fails.
If either an insurance-type reform passes or a consumer-type reform fails,
your rates go up—you lose $10. If either a consumer-type reform passes or
an insurance-type reform fails, your rates stay the same—you get $0.
a.
Draw the game’s extensive form.
b.
Specify the pure strategies available to each player.
c.
Portray the situation’s strategic form.
d.
Find all the pure-strategy equilibria.

--- Sayfa 336 ---
8
Cooperation and Coalitions
8.1  The Concept of a Coalition
Of the political processes we have thus far considered or argued can be mod-
eled using game theory, there is one central to politics that we have not yet fully
explored—coalitions. Briefly,
A coalition corresponds to an agreement on the part of two or more players to
coordinate their actions so as to bring about an outcome that is more advanta-
geous to its members than what prevails from uncoordinated action.
The concept of a coalition encompasses a great many things in politics and
studying them includes studying the processes whereby governments are
formed and prime ministers chosen, alliances are negotiated and maintained
in international affairs, and legislators maneuver to pass mutually beneficial
legislation. Indeed, given the generality of our definition, nearly any entity that
facilitates the objectives of two or more persons simultaneously can be inter-
preted as the manifestation of a coalition. Thus, a political party, a legislative
caucus, a military alliance, a Soviet cooperative, a labor union, and a citizen’s
interest group all represent coalitions. More fundamentally, a constitution that
establishes and defines a state is the consequence of a coalition among those
who choose to give up some degree of individual sovereignty in order to secure
the gains that ostensibly flow from collective action.
Of course, no one disputes the fact that coalitions are an important part of
politics. However, rather than proceed into a substantive discussion of their con-
tent, let us take the more abstract view suggested by our definition and consider
at least these four general questions about processes of coalition formation:
1.
What coalition structure is likely to prevail—which players will coordinate?
2.
What will be the extent of this coordination—will they agree to coordinate
on all decisions or on only some subset of decisions?
3.
What will be the specific intent of coordination—what outcomes will they
seek to realize or avoid?
4.
How will the members of a coalition enforce the agreements they reach?

--- Sayfa 337 ---
328  Cooperation and Coalitions
Although we cannot answer any of these questions in isolation from the rest,
our answer to the last one sets the stage for how we approach the first three.
Taking an extreme possibility, consider a circumstance in which no agreement
can be enforced, so that in principle every person is free to renege on any agree-
ment he or she might reach with anyone else. In this event, the concept of a
coalition adds little to our understanding of events, because all action is neces-
sarily “non-cooperative” and our explanations for outcomes that “appear coop-
erative” must be formulated in terms of the ideas set forth in the preceding
chapters. Of course, even if no agreements are enforceable, the negotiations
that lead to them might signal something about preferences and intentions, in
which case they can assist people in coordinating to a particular equilibrium,
or they can affect beliefs in such a way as to influence the character of equi-
libria. But beyond this they cannot affect future actions, because such actions
are necessarily dictated by the individual strategic imperatives of the sort we
treat earlier. This is, in fact, the character of the Prisoners’ Dilemmas wherein
even if players agree to coordinate beforehand in order to avoid the mutually
disadvantageous outcomes, unless they somehow change or subvert the game’s
individual motives so as to render it something other than a Dilemma—unless
they invent some way to enforce agreements—the game remains what it is and
is hardly characteristic of the cooperative processes we normally associate with
those things we label “coalitional.”
If we view the sale of a house as a coalition between buyer and seller, the
“glue” that holds the coalition together and makes such activity worthwhile for
both participants is not only a mutual interest, but also the courts and a body
of contract law that protect a seller against theft and a buyer against fraud. This
glue keeps both buyer and seller from unilaterally reneging on their contract,
because without it the buyer prefers to halt mortgage payments after taking
possession of the property and the seller prefers to retain control of the prop-
erty after receiving a down payment. Remove the legal mechanisms for enforc-
ing contracts and one takes away the foundation of competitive markets. Take
away or modify the mechanisms of enforcement that define property rights
in markets and you change the character of markets, including what it is that
will be bought and sold in them, or whether anything will be bought, sold, or
produced for sale at all.
To the extent that the various mechanisms of enforcement render some
but not all types of agreements workable, identifying which coalitions might
form and the agreements they might implement depends on our understand-
ing of these mechanisms and the opportunities for participants to alter them
as a game proceeds. At this point, however, the reader might want to interject
the observation that, regardless of whether agreements are enforceable, no new
theoretical baggage is required to understand the processes whereby coalitions
form. If coalitions are agreements to coordinate choices in some extensive or
normal form game, then saying that a coalitional agreement is enforceable is
equivalent to saying that once we include the enforcement mechanisms as part
of our description of the game, the individual components of that agreement

--- Sayfa 338 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  329
correspond to a (Nash, subgame-perfect, perfect, Bayesian, etc.) equilibrium of
the extended game.
Earlier, for example, we described the cooperation that emerged during
World War I between opposing troops in their trenches—the Christmas Truce.
Surely, that cooperation can be described as a coalition—arguably, in this case,
a coalition against the opposing countries’ high commands. And as we argued
then, the mechanism for enforcing that “coalition” was not any external agent or
institution, but simply the fact that the troops were in effect playing a repeated
Prisoners’ Dilemma wherein defections from cooperation can be punished in
subsequent plays of the “game.” The perspective taken in the major part of this
chapter, though, is that, just as we commonly ignore the details of the judicial
system when studying the general character of markets, it is sometimes better
to focus on some simple possibilities and to postpone seeking answers to all
questions. Consider vote trading in legislatures. We know that we are unlikely
to witness the signing of legal documents when two legislators agree to support
each other’s bills, despite the fact that there are incentives for defection—if leg-
islation is considered sequentially, then once one legislator votes for a bill that
he otherwise prefers to see defeated, his partner in the trade prefers to renege
on the agreement when the second bill (on which he must now vote against
his preference) comes up for a vote. Nevertheless, just as was the case in World
War I, enforcement mechanisms exist that render abiding by the trade an equi-
librium. That mechanism is the shared knowledge that, if such an agreement
is broken without mutual consent, the defecting legislator’s reputation will be
damaged and his or her subsequent participation in advantageous vote trades
will at best be problematical.
How we approach matters, then, depends on our research goals and on our
beliefs about the enforceability of agreements. If we are not primarily interested
in, say, the evolution and maintenance of legislative norms, but if we neverthe-
less believe that any vote trade can be accomplished, then it is more conve-
nient to ignore those questions pertaining to enforcement, to assume that any
agreement is enforceable, and to focus instead on explaining and predicting
agreements. If, on the other hand, we believe that the available technology of
enforcement is critically important to the determination of what agreements
can be reached and implemented—if some agreements are enforceable while
others are not—then we must include an analysis of those mechanisms in our
models.
In this chapter we will first concentrate on trying to learn what agreements
people might reach when any and all agreements are somehow enforceable.
Later we will turn our attention to situations in which the subject of enforce-
ment cannot be divorced from the study of potential coalitional agreements. In
particular, we will look at an issue that has confounded students of international
politics for years, determining whether a balance of power can ensure stability
in systems that are otherwise anarchic—that have no exogenous enforcement
mechanism other than that countries or alliances with more power can defeat
those with less.

--- Sayfa 339 ---
330  Cooperation and Coalitions
The reader, however, may wonder why we might require additional concepts
to study coalitional processes, asking the question: Can’t we simply approach
things as we did with, say, the repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma, using the usual
notions of strategy and Nash or subgame perfect equilibria? In fact, people ask-
ing such questions have good instincts, since a good share of coalitional pro-
cesses can be studied in this way. Unfortunately, not all such processes lend
themselves to an identifiable extensive or strategic form without heroic assump-
tions. Consider a situation in which three people are seated around a table and,
in the context of free and open bargaining, must decide how to divide $100
using majority rule. In this case, there is no self-evident first mover or a prede-
termined order in which the bargainers can respond to whatever proposals are
made. Constructing an extensive or strategic form here to represent bargaining
would be an entirely ad hoc enterprise. And what of those bargaining situa-
tions that cannot be or are never observed, such as union contract negotiations,
electing a Pope, internal Supreme Court discussions, debates among a political
party’s leadership over strategy and platform? Surely we do not want to relegate
such things to the realm of the inexplicable. In the sections that follow, then,
we will illustrate both the application of previously introduced concepts to the
analysis of coalitions as well as introduce some new concepts intended to treat
these less structured and less observable situations.
8.2  Coalitions and Condorcet Winners
The simplest situation we might consider that has political content is a com-
mittee that, once again, abides by simple majority rule—where by “abides” we
mean that any agreement supported by a majority is assumed to be enforce-
able. But even if we thus ignore the issue of enforcement, we must consider
the institutional structure surrounding the use of any voting system that per-
tains to whether that system is exogenously or endogenously determined. At
one extreme, we can suppose that majorities must operate within well-defined
and firmly established rules. Thus, if parliamentary procedures are binding,
majorities may have to contend in debate and in voting with rules that disallow
joint consideration of more than one issue or topic and that specify an order of
speaking among participants. Alternatively, we can view even the rules them-
selves as the product of some majority decision—as a mechanism that, perhaps,
exists by tradition and bureaucratic inertia but can in principle be ignored by
that majority. For example, because our analysis of agendas assumes that the
extensive form summarized by an agenda tree is the only relevant aspect of
the situation, that analysis assumes implicitly that collusive agreements are not
enforceable—we do not allow voters the option of coordinating their actions.
However, if a majority coalition can coordinate so as to move along any path
of the agenda tree, the agenda becomes irrelevant to the final outcome: As long
as an outcome appears somewhere on the tree (as long as the outcome is fea-
sible), a majority can decide beforehand to select that outcome and can dictate

--- Sayfa 340 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  331
a path along the agenda that yields it as the final outcome. This fact suggests
that if simple majority rule is the final arbitrator of decisions, then the details
of institutional structure matter only insofar as there are frictions—transaction
costs—impeding the strict enforcement of coalitional agreements or impeding
the negotiation of those agreements. Without frictions, if the “institution” of
majority rule is otherwise adhered to (if, for example, the participants do not
revert to physical coercion), then a majority can over-ride any procedure such
as an agenda that tries to direct its actions. Indeed, we might even prefer to view
institutional details of such things as agendas as merely a part of some major-
ity’s plan to implement a particular outcome.
One example of procedures being part of the package that a majority coali-
tion imposes is the debate that arose within the U.S. Congress in 1981 over
President Reagan’s first proposed budget. Seeking to cut appropriations for a
variety of domestic programs, Reagan’s legislative strategists sought to treat his
proposed cuts as a package, whereas his opponents sought to consider them on
a case-by-case, program-by-program basis. Reagan’s side prevailed and the cuts
were implemented, with the general understanding that the initial procedural
decision was the critical determinant of the final outcome. Specifically, every-
one assumed that it would be easier to maintain Reagan’s legislative coalition
under one procedure and to disrupt it under the other. And because a majority
favored the proposed budget cuts, it was able to implement a procedure that
was best suited to its ultimate purposes.
This example suggests that if we want to understand the imperatives of coali-
tions in frictionless majority rule committees, it is oftentimes appropriate to
ignore the details of committee procedure and to focus instead on hypotheses
about coalitional preference. In order to pursue this suggestion further, how-
ever, we require a modest amount of notation and a few new definitions. Thus,
consider a committee of n members in which we denote a coalition with the
notation C and in which the set of all feasible outcomes is X. If minority coali-
tions are powerless to affect matters, we assume that the particular outcome x
is feasible if and only if any majority coalition can collude to secure x. Suppose
we now allow ourselves the luxury of being anthropomorphic about coalitions
by saying that the coalition C prefers x to x' if and only if the members of C unani-
mously prefer x to x'. Thus, if some members of C prefer x while others prefer x',
we say that C is indifferent between x and x'. We also say that C is indifferent if,
regardless of the preferences of the other members of C, one or more members
are indifferent between x and x'.
Having thus extended the notion of preferences from individuals to collec-
tivities, imagine treating coalitions as individuals, where majority coalitions can
alter the status quo at will, where minority coalitions have no power, and (if n
is even) where blocking coalitions (those controlling half the vote) can only
secure the status quo. Consider now the special property of Condorcet winners.
Making the bold assumption that such a winner exists, we know that regard-
less of the status quo’s identity, a majority coalition can implement any feasible

--- Sayfa 341 ---
332  Cooperation and Coalitions
alternative. The special property of a Condorcet winner, however, is that if it
is the status quo, then no majority coalition prefers anything else. Thus, we
can think of a Condorcet winner as a Nash equilibrium to the non-cooperative
game played among majority (winning) coalitions (where the extensive or
strategic form of that game remains obscure). Moreover, since such a winner
defeats every other feasible alternative in a majority vote, it must be a unique
equilibrium. Thus, quite directly, we can conclude that frictionless majority rule
committees select Condorcet winners as final outcomes. Our argument loses its
relevance if there is no Condorcet winner, but before we generalize our analy-
sis to accommodate this possibility, suppose there is more than one feasible
alternative that cannot be defeated in a majority vote. Such outcomes are not
Condorcet winners (because individually they cannot defeat everything), but
they share the property that no majority coalition has a positive incentive to
shift from such an outcome to anything else (because no majority has a unani-
mous incentive to shift). Clearly, these outcomes should also be thought of as
equilibria, except now equilibrium outcomes are not unique.
With but a few new ideas, then, we have extended our game theoretic
understanding of politics to include coalitions—albeit for a quite special case.
Moreover, we can glean some substantive lessons from this discussion. First,
consider the issue of predicting the coalitions that form. Such predictions are
important since in many circumstances coalitions are more readily observable
than outcomes. In parliamentary bodies, for example, we can easily see which
parties coalesce to form a government, but eventual outcomes—agreements
among coalition partners to share ministries, patronage, and policy domains,
and the policies a government ultimately implements—may be more difficult
to detect and measure. Indeed, a governing coalition may collapse before the
agreements that ostensibly led to it are implemented, and political scientists
have long believed that the preeminent objective of the study of parliamentary
systems is an ability to predict what coalition will eventually emerge to form a
government. Similarly, journalistic accounts of legislative deliberations explain
the passage of some bill using language as “legislators ___, after negotiating
an agreement over the bill’s content, formed a majority coalition in favor of
its passage.” However, the preceding discussion implies that if the set of feasible
outcomes and the individual preferences over them yield a Condorcet winner, it
may not be possible to predict which majority coalition will form—indeed, we may
observe no explicit coalition whatsoever or, with everyone seeing the inevitability
of things, a coalition that includes all members of the legislature. The rationale for
this assertion is that the particular coalition that forms to upset a status quo in
favor of a Condorcet winner need not be unique. If the status quo is onerous
to many voters, then any number of winning coalitions might form to displace
it. On the other hand, if the Condorcet winner itself is the status quo, then it
should be common knowledge that no alternative outcome can displace it, in
which case the futility of forming coalitions should itself be common knowl-
edge. Inaction on the part of a legislature, then, with respect to some issue may
indicate merely that the status quo is majority preferred to all other possible
policies.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  333
Example: Consider the single peaked preferences in Figure 8.1 wherein the
median ideal, x*2, is a Condorcet winner. But consider the four alterna-
tive status quos portrayed in that figure: x°1, x°2, x°3, and x°4 = x*2. If x°1 is
the status quo, then the members of every two-person (majority) coalition
unanimously prefer changing things to x*2. Thus, we cannot say whether
we will see all three people move unanimously to upset x°1 or precisely
which two-person coalition will do so. If x°2 is the status quo, then only
the coalition {2, 3} prefers a move to the Condorcet winner, whereas if x°3
is the status quo, then only {1, 2} would vote for a change to x*2. Finally, if
the status quo is x°4, which corresponds to the Condorcet winner, then no
coalition should form.
This last possibility—that we will see no explicit coalitions—can occur in
other contexts.
Example: Consider the vote-trading scenario in Table 8.1, which shows
the payoffs that each of five legislators associates with the passage of each
of five bills. If the payoff to each legislator from a bill’s failure is zero and
if payoffs are separable—if each bill has nothing to do with any other bill
so that the payoff from the passage of, say, two bills is simply the sum of
the payoffs associated with the passage of each—then failing all bills is a
Condorcet winner: No combination of pass-fail across the five bills can
secure majority approval over the status quo. Notice, though, that legisla-
tors 1 and 2 have an incentive to trade votes on A and B, because doing so
secures the passage, ceteris paribus, of A and B, which increases the payoffs
to them from zero to eight. It is the ceteris paribus condition, however, that
causes difficulty, because legislators 3 and 4 have an incentive to trade in
the opposite direction so as to cancel the effect of the trade between 1 and
2 (indeed, 5 has an incentive to bring this possibility to 3 and 4’s atten-
tion). Because failing all bills is a Condorcet winner, any trade that any
preference
Voter 1
Voter 2
x0
1
x0
2
x0
3
=
x0
4
x*
2
Voter 3
Figure 8.1  Alternative status quos

--- Sayfa 343 ---
334  Cooperation and Coalitions
pair of legislators might contemplate will be opposed by the remaining
legislators.
If all legislators understand that the status quo is a Condorcet winner and that
no set of trades can be sustained by a majority (which is implied by common
knowledge), the legislature can avoid time-consuming negotiation and coali-
tion formation by the simple expedient of allowing these bills to remain buried
in committee. And as to the issue of whether we might anticipate maneuvers
to bring only some subset of bills to the floor, if all legislators are fully cogni-
zant of strategic possibilities, then no such maneuver can succeed since, if such
a maneuver threatened to yield an outcome different from the status quo, a
majority of legislators would block the attempt. Thus, if a Condorcet winner
exists and if that winner corresponds to the status quo, then, at least for the case
of complete information environments, using data drawn from actual votes
poses a selection problem for empirical research—the only data we will observe
will involve situations in which there is no such winner (unless, of course, legis-
lators choose to vote on various measures in order to publicly affirm a position
on an issue for the benefit of their reputations among constituents).
Our example also illustrates an interesting general fact about vote trading
scenarios known as Schwartz’s Vote Trading Theorem (see Thomas Schwartz’s
1977 article, “Collective Choice, Separation of Issues and Vote Trading,” Ameri-
can Political Science Review 74, June):
If the payoffs from individual legislation are separable, and if a Condorcet
winner exists, then that winner is the outcome that prevails when everyone
votes sincerely on each bill.
Thus, if we observe vote trading in a legislature, we should infer that there is
no Condorcet winner among the feasible outcomes, that information is incom-
plete, or that the bills under consideration are not separable. Moreover, this
conclusion is not dependent on selecting an example in which the Condorcet
outcome is the status quo—our analysis holds regardless of what combination
of passage and failure is Condorcet winning. To see the proof of this fact, which
consists of showing that any outcome that is not the sincere outcome can be
beaten in a majority vote by some other outcome, let O denote the set of all
Table 8.1  Vote Trading with Status Quo as Condorcet Winner
Legislator
Bill A
Bill B
Bill C
Bill D
Bill E
1
10
−2
−5
     4
−5
2
−2
10
−5
  −5
   4
3
  4
−8
−5
     3
−8
4
−8
  5
  3
  −5
−8
5
−5
−5
   4
−10
   4

--- Sayfa 344 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  335
possible outcomes—all possible combinations of pass and fail for some set of
m bill and let o = (o1, o2, … om) be an element of O, where oj = 1 if bill j passes
and 0 otherwise. Now let o* = (o*1, o*2, …, o*j , … o*m) be the sincere voting
outcome and notice that if we change the vote on any one bill, say j, to form
the outcome o’ = (o*1, o*2, …, o’j , … o*m), then it must be the case that o* is
majority preferred to o’ since preferences are separable by assumption and since
a majority prefers o*j to o’j (otherwise o*j wouldn’t be the sincere outcome on
bill j). Now let o = (o1, o2, … om) be an arbitrary outcome other than the one,
o*, that sincere voting produces. Suppose o differs from o* on at least bill j
(since it must differ on one or more bills). However, if a majority prefer
o* = (o*1, o*2, …, o*j , … o*m) to o’ = (o*1, o*2, …, oj , … o*m), where oj ≠ o*j then
from separability, that same majority must yield the social preference (o1, o2, …,
o*j , … om) > (o1, o2, …, oj , … om), which is to say that if o is any outcome other
than what arises from sincere voting on every bill, it can be defeated in a major-
ity vote when preferences are separable by simply taking any bill in o for which
the disposition is the opposite of what sincere voting produces and substituting
the sincere disposition for it.
8.3  A Generalization—The Core
We know that there are a variety of voting mechanisms that ensure the selection
of Condorcet winners under complete information—two-candidate elections,
binary agendas, and cooperative majority rule committees with no impedi-
ments to coalition formation and the enforcement of agreements. However,
although the preceding discussion is useful, it hardly provides a general analysis
of coalitional processes. Two questions in particular come to mind: (1) What
can we say about processes that are not dictated by majority rule and (2) what
predictions about outcomes and coalitions can we offer if there is no Condorcet
winner? Answering the first question requires that we restate the theoretical
structure of the preceding section in a way that admits generalization. We
begin thus:
1.
Let the elements of X, the feasible set of outcomes, correspond to vectors
that denote the utility each player associates with each substantive out-
come, and let u = (u1, u2,…, un) be a specific vector in X.
2.
As before, assume that the coalition C prefers u to u' if and only if ui > u'i
for all i in C.
3.
Define the coalition C to be effective for u in X if the members of C can
coordinate their actions so as to ensure that each member, i, of C receives a
payoff of at least ui. Let v(C) denote the set of all utility n-tuples for which
C is effective, where v(C) is termed the characteristic function in the game
theory literature.
4.
Say that u dominates u' if there exists at least one coalition that is effective
for u and which prefers u to u'.

--- Sayfa 345 ---
336  Cooperation and Coalitions
Our final step is to define the concept of a cooperative game’s core:
The core of a cooperative n-person game is the set of undominated elements
of X.
More formally, let v*(C) ⊆ v(C) correspond to those outcomes from which we
cannot move, so as to make all members of C simultaneously better off. Thus,
The utility n-tuple u is in a game’s core if and only if it is in v*(C) for all
coalitions C.
If u is not a member of v*(C) for some coalition C and if u is feasible, then,
by definition, we can find a utility n-tuple in v*(C) that dominates u, thereby
prohibiting u from being an element of the core.
At times, especially when dealing with spatial games, it is convenient to define
v*(C) and the core in terms of outcomes rather than utility, provided that we
keep in mind that there are specific preferences defined over those outcomes.
For example, consider Figure 8.2, which shows the same single-peaked prefer-
ences of three voters that Figure 8.1 illustrates. Recall that our discussion of the
Median Voter Theorem revealed that such preferences occasioned a Condorcet
winner and an election equilibrium, which corresponded to the median voter’s
ideal—voter 2. However, rather than interpret these voters as an electorate, sup-
pose they are a committee that must choose a policy through negotiation and
majority rule. Notice now that all points lying between voter 1 and 2’s ideals
correspond to the outcomes that are Pareto optimal for the coalition {1, 2},
all points between 1 and 3’s ideals are Pareto optimal for {1, 3}, and all points
between 2 and 3’s ideals are Pareto optimal for {2, 3}. Thus, defined in terms
of outcomes as opposed to utility vectors, these sets of Pareto optimals corre-
spond to v*(1,2), v*(1,3) and v*(2,3) respectively, as shown in Figure 8.2. Thus,
since voter 2’s ideal is common to all three sets of Pareto optimal outcomes,
that ideal is the game’s core, which illustrates the fact that if a majority rule
cooperative game has a Condorcet winner, that winner corresponds identically to
the core. A Condorcet winner defeats everything in a majority vote, so no other
alternative dominates it; and no other alternative can be in the core since it is
defeated (dominated) by the Condorcet winner. However, we have introduced
the concept of the core to treat situations other than majority rule committees,
so consider what happens when we apply this idea to a cooperative Prisoners’
Dilemma:
Example: Consider the two-person Prisoners’ Dilemma in Figure  8.3a.
Notice, first, that although cooperation can yield a player a payoff of −3, a
player can be certain that he or she does no worse than 0 by refusing to cooper-
ate. Thus, we say that each player, acting alone, is effective for any outcome that
yields that player a payoff of 0 or less. So ν({i}) = {u: ui ≤ 0}, and v*({i}), the util-
ity outcomes that are Pareto optimal for i, corresponds to all feasible 2-tuples
in which ui ≥ 0. On the other hand, the coalition of both players, {1, 2}, is effec-
tive for all feasible outcomes. Hence, the core of the corresponding cooperative

--- Sayfa 346 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  337
game is any feasible outcome in which both players each receive at least 0, and is
Pareto optimal for {1, 2}. As Figure 8.3b shows, the only such outcome that does
not entail lotteries is (4, 4), which is what prevails if both players cooperate.
preference
Voter 1
Voter 2
V*(1,2)
V*(2,3)
V*(1,3)
Voter 3
Figure 8.2  Pareto optimals for 2-person coalitions with 3 voters
Don’t cooperate
Cooperate
Don’t cooperate
0, 0
7, −3
Cooperate
−3, 7
4, 4
Figure 8.3a  Prisoners’ Dilemma
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
7
u1
u2
v*(1,2)
core
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Figure 8.3b  The core in the Prisoners’ Dilemma

--- Sayfa 347 ---
338  Cooperation and Coalitions
This example reveals what we can and what we cannot learn from our analy-
sis thus far. Played non-cooperatively, the unique Nash equilibrium yields the
outcome (0, 0), whereas played cooperatively, we ostensibly avoid the dilemma.
What our analysis fails to specify, however, is the mechanisms these two players
might use to enforce cooperation. Thus, we learn what outcomes will prevail if
enforcement is feasible, but we do not learn how to ensure that feasibility.
The issue of enforcement is, as we have already indicated, profoundly impor-
tant theoretically. But it is also important substantively—a fact illustrated by an
important argument about the role of the courts in the adjudication of prop-
erty rights, called the Coase Theorem (Ronald Coase, “The Problem of Social
Cost,” The Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1960). This theorem asserts that
If transactions costs are zero, if there is a mechanism for enforcing contracts, if
there is a freely transferable numeraire (money), and if there is an unambigu-
ous specification of property rights, then everyone involved in a situation in
which the actions of some hurt or benefit others can reach mutually beneficial
bargains without government intervention. Furthermore, if a unique outcome
maximizes social wealth, then the parties will attain that outcome regardless
of the prior assignment of property rights and liabilities.
Recast in the terminology of our discussion of the Prisoners’ Dilemma,
the Coase Theorem counters the argument that the inefficiencies occasioned
by public goods and externalities justify government action, and in particu-
lar, government regulation. Instead, governments ought simply to ensure the
enforceability of contracts, thereby guaranteeing legally defensible and alien-
able property rights. If one can receive compensation for the benefits that one’s
actions bestow on others, and if an institutional arrangement can guarantee
such a right, then the public-goods problem dissolves. Political debate would
then focus on the allocation of those rights rather than on decisions about what
levels of various goods, services, and regulations to supply. For example, an
industry might have a property right to pollute, which the “victims” could buy
away from it if they value clean air more than the industry values the use of the
ambient air as a sink. Alternatively, the victims might have a property right in
clean air, which the industry might buy away from them. And if victims (indus-
tries) are willing to pay more for clean (dirty) air, then the same outcome, clean
(dirty) air, prevails no matter what the prior assignment of property rights
has been.
Example: Suppose persons 1 and 2 must choose an outcome from the set
O = {o1,…, o5}, where their payoffs are as shown in Table 8.2. Suppose per-
son 1 has the legal right to decide which outcome is chosen—person 1 has
control of the relevant property right—and suppose money and utility are
equivalent. Because 1 is effective for all outcomes, he can select outcome o5
and secure a payoff of 12. Thus,

--- Sayfa 348 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  339
v(1) = {u: u1 < 12}.
Person 2, on the other hand, cannot guarantee receiving more than 0,
so we set
v(2) = {u: u2 < 0}.
Persons 1 and 2 can secure any feasible outcome, including the one that
yields a total payoff of 14. Since we have assumed that money and utility
are equivalent, exchanging money is equivalent to transferring utility, and
since money, presumably, is freely transferable, persons 1 and 2 can thereby
secure any utility 2-tuple in which the sum of u1 and u2 does not exceed 14.
That is, 1 and 2 together can select outcome o2, realize a combined payoff of
14, and trade money to achieve any outcome in which u1 + u2 ≤ 14. Hence,
v(1, 2) = {u: u1 + u2 ≤ 14}.
Since no outcome in which 1 receives at least $12, 2 receives at least 0,
and 1 and 2 together receive at least $14 can be dominated by {1}, {2}, or
{1, 2}, it follows that the core to this game is the set of 2-tuples u = (u1, u2)
such that
core = {u: u1 ≥ 12, u2 ≥ 0, u1 + u2 = 14}.
Alternatively, suppose 2 has the right to decide the outcome, so v(1),
v(2) and v(1, 2) become
v(1) = {u: u1 ≤ 0}; v(2) = {u: u2 ≤ 12};
v(1, 2) = {u: u1 + u2 ≤ 14},
in which case the core is
core = {u: u1 ≥ 0, u2 ≥ 12, u1 + u2 = 14}.
Thus, the specification of a property right dictates the eventual distribu-
tion of payoffs between 1 and 2, but o2 prevails regardless of who controls
the decision.
Table 8.2  Illustration of the Coase Theorem
outcome
person 1
person 2
total
o1
$0
$12
$12
o2
  4
  10
  14
o3
  6
    6
  12
o4
  7.5
    4
  11.5
o5
12
    0
  12
The implications of this example are viewed as important by those who criti-
cize an expanding role for government. Instead of becoming directly involved

--- Sayfa 349 ---
340  Cooperation and Coalitions
in the production of commodities and the delivery of services—instead of
establishing specific clean-air and safety standards with which businesses must
comply or instead of centralizing decisions about the resources people should
allocate to each of these activities—the theoretical argument here suggests that
governments ought simply to assist in reducing transaction costs among rel-
evant parties and in establishing and enforcing property rights. That is, if trans-
action costs can be reduced to zero so that individuals can efficiently negotiate
among themselves, then, while ensuring the enforceability of agreements, the
state can establish property rights in such a way as to effect whatever redistribu-
tion of income is somehow deemed appropriate. Reality, of course, is far more
complex than our example, and the presumption that transaction costs can be
set to zero is utopian. However, our intent is simply to show how a simple game,
in conjunction with the concept of the core, leads to a discussion of important
political matters.
8.4  The Politics of Redistribution
Earlier we note that a state’s functions can be divided into two broad
categories—regulating those Prisoners’ Dilemmas that markets cannot resolve
(including the implementation of mechanisms for enforcing those contracts
that are an essential part of markets) and the redistribution of wealth. Our ear-
lier discussion of the Prisoners’ Dilemma played cooperatively reveals that the
central problem with respect to the first function is enforcing decisions that
yield outcomes in the core. Hence, governments are necessarily coercive enti-
ties. Our discussion of the Coase Theorem, on the other hand, suggests that if
government can ensure the implementation of effective enforcement, then its
primary task should be that of lowering transaction costs and determining the
form of redistribution—determining who wins and who loses via the specifica-
tion of property rights. This argument, however, should not be interpreted to
mean that dictating the eventual form of redistribution is a straightforward
task for a democratic state. Both Chapters 2 and 3 illustrate electoral instability
in redistributive elections, where the source of that instability is the fact that
such situations do not have Condorcet winners. To see this problem using the
definition of the core, consider a game of pure redistribution in which:
1.
Outcomes are defined in terms of a transferable commodity, such as
money. Thus, every outcome in the feasible set X is characterized by the
distribution of money among the players.
2.
Each person’s utility for this commodity is linear. So if the commodity is
money, then money and utility are equivalent and utility is transferable
among people. If, for example, players 1, 2, and 3 can secure the payoffs x1,
x2, and x3, then they can also secure the payoffs y1, y2, and y3, provided that
y1 + y2 + y3 = x1 + x2 + x3.
3.
The transferability of utility allows us to summarize the utility outcomes
that a coalition can secure, v(C), more conveniently as a single number,

--- Sayfa 350 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  341
with the understanding that the coalition C, if it forms, can secure any fea-
sible allocation in which the sum of payoffs to its members does not exceed
v(C).
4.
No resources are created as a function of the way players play the game,
so if N denotes a coalition of the whole (of all n players), v(C) + v(N − C)
equals a nonnegative constant for all C; nor are resources destroyed
by the process of coalition formation, so if C' and C" are two disjoint
coalitions, then
v(C' + C") ≥ v(C') + c(C").
5.
Strict inequality must hold in the preceding expression for at least two dis-
joint coalitions; otherwise, no coalition is worthwhile. In particular, if indi-
vidual players can get as much acting alone as they can get by coalescing,
there is no need to form a coalition.
A game of pure redistribution, then, models a legislature contemplating a
revision of tax codes under the constraint that the total revenues to be collected
are constant. Equivalently, such games correspond to those legislative delibera-
tions in which, after the revenues are collected, the issue is how to allocate them
across the population in the form of various subsidies and transfer payments.
Notice, moreover, that if the constant to which condition 4 refers is zero—if
v(C) + v(N − C) = 0—then the pure redistribution game corresponds to a situa­
tion in which one coalition expropriates from another, whereas if the constant
is positive—if v(C) + v(N − C) > 0—then the game is one in which some spe-
cific total of resources is to be allocated across the players.
That games of pure redistribution do not have cores—that they share the
instability of majority rule games without Condorcet winners—can be estab-
lished with the following somewhat fanciful example:
Valley of the Dump: Suppose there are n clans, each living in its own part
of a valley totally walled in by the surrounding cliffs that tower above it.
Everyday, each clan produces precisely one bag of garbage, but the cliffs
prevent exporting the valley’s garbage. Thus, each clan faces a solid waste
disposal problem. The legal code of the valley, strictly enforced, allows clans
to dump their garbage in their own back yards or the yards of others, but it
also permits coalitions. Assume that each clan evaluates the outcome of the
garbage problem solely in terms of the total number of bags dumped in the
yards of its members. More precisely, each clan has a linear utility function
in bags, preferring fewer bags to more, and that the utility for having one
bag dumped on one’s yard is −1. To see that this game of redistribution has
no core, suppose to the contrary that the payoff vector x = (x1, x2,…, xn) is
in the core. Then, since any coalition with n − 1 members can dump all of
its garbage on the yard of the excluded clan and, presumably, will have one
bag of garbage spread across its members’ yards, it must be that

--- Sayfa 351 ---
342  Cooperation and Coalitions
x2 + x3 + … + xn ≥ −1
x1 + x3 + … + xn ≥ −1
·
·
x1 + x2 + … + xn−1 ≥ −1.
which is to say that for x to be in the core, it must give every coalition of
n – 1 members a payoff of no less than –1, since any such coalition can
guarantee against having more than one bag of garbage dumped in total
across the lawns of its members. Since there are n such equations, if we add
them up, we have
(n − 1)(x1 + x2 + … + xn) ≥ −n.
But since there are precisely n bags produced per day and since those n
bags cannot be exported out of the valley, it must also be true that (x1 + x2 +
… + xn) = −n. So x is in the core only if −(n − 1)n > −n, which requires that
n ≤ 2. That is, the redistributive game in the valley has a core only if there
are not more than two clans.
That games of pure redistribution do not have cores helps explain a great
many things. We have already argued in an electoral context that to the extent
that the policies with which an incumbent must deal are redistributive, a chal-
lenger in the next election can always find some coalition of voters that can
be made better off with some alternative policy and pattern of redistribution.
The task for the challenger, then, is to find such a coalition and to convince its
members that, were he or she in office, an appropriate redistribution would
prevail. The incumbent’s task, on the other hand, is to convince voters that poli-
tics is not purely redistributive or, as in the U.S. Congress, that the incumbent’s
seniority is critical in keeping the federal government’s largesse from being
redistributed away from the constituency in question. Incumbent presidents
seeking reelection will tend to portray themselves as statesmen who are leading
the nation to more Pareto efficient outcomes, whereas especially attractive plat-
forms for challengers will consist of populist appeals identifying the incumbent
as an enemy of “us” (a majority) and an ally of “them” (some sinister, easily
identified, “overfed,” minority). Within Congress itself, redistributive politics is
equally unstable since our formal analysis applies to majority rule committees
as well as elections. Indeed, some scholars have argued that the U.S. Congress’s
propensity to form overly large coalitions that grant special benefits to a great
many constituencies derives from the inherent risk aversion of legislators with
respect to the prospect of finding themselves in a losing coalition. The alterna-
tive to a norm of “universal inclusion” is the instability and uncertainty associ-
ated with a majority rule game without a core.
8.5  The Core and Spatial Issues
The fact that cores and Condorcet winners are nearly equivalent in majority
voting games and the fact that Condorcet winners are rare in multi-dimensional

--- Sayfa 352 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  343
spatial voting games tell us that cores are rare in such voting games if played
cooperatively. To see this directly, consider again the three-voter configura-
tion of spatial preferences in two dimensions, shown in Figure 8.4. Rather than
assume that these preferences refer to voters in some mass electorate, suppose
instead that they pertain to members of some committee, and, rather than have
the eventual policy correspond to the position chosen by a successful election
candidate, suppose that policy is the one agreed to by some majority coalition.
Our earlier discussion of these preferences in an electoral context led to the
conclusion that the ideal point configuration in Figure 8.4 does not yield a
Condorcet winner. Here the cooperative, majority rule, coalitional game can-
not have a core. To see this using the core’s definition directly, recall that an
outcome is in the core if and only if it is Pareto optimal for every coalition—if
and only if it is in v*(C) for every winning coalition C. In this instance with
circular indifference contours, the Pareto optimal policies for any two-person
coalition (a majority) corresponds to the line connecting their ideal points.
Clearly, there is no policy that is Pareto optimal for all three 2-person coalitions
simultaneously—the three lines describing the Pareto optimal outcomes for the
three 2-person (majority) coalitions do not have a common intersection. Thus,
the disequilibrium that pervades a two-candidate spatial election does not dis-
appear if we assume that the electorate is a committee.
We can extend this argument to assert that when a Condorcet winner exists
in an election, it exists also if that electorate acts as a majority rule committee.
In this way, then, we can view a two-candidate election as a device for achiev-
ing the same outcomes as would be achieved in a “New England town meeting
model” of democratic processes, except that the election has the advantage of
v*(12)
v*(23)
v*(13)
x*2
x*1
x*3
Figure 8.4  An empty core with two issues

--- Sayfa 353 ---
344  Cooperation and Coalitions
easier implementation in large electorates whereas the town meeting has the
advantage of ensuring that the members of the electorate can inform each other
directly about their views.
8.6  Majority Rule Games Without Cores
In Chapter 6 we offer several examples of where institutional “frictions” such
as issue-by-issue voting can, if they are unequivocally binding, yield stability in
spatial contexts where otherwise there is no Condorcet winner. Before assert-
ing, though, that institutions can induce stability, we need to take into account
the fact that the choice of institutions themselves can inherit the instability
(social intransitivity) that characterize social preferences over the outcomes
with which they deal. For example, if we take the usual three-voter example of
the Condorcet cycle over the alternatives A, B, and C (in which A defeats B, B
defeats C, and C defeats A), we now know that if voters are strategic, the agenda
“A versus B, the winner against C,” yields B,
“A versus C, the winner against B,” yields A,
“B versus C, the winner against A,” yields C.
So, although a specific agenda yields a determinate outcome because it neces-
sarily constrains what alternatives can be paired in a vote, a cycle reappears if
the committee is tasked without constraint with voting on the agenda itself.
This example illustrates a principle we might call the unavoidability of cycles:
Unless individual preferences over the basic outcomes themselves occasion a Con-
dorcet winner, we cannot escape the fact that at some point in the process of select-
ing rules or voting on outcomes, alternatives will cycle, and opportunities will
present themselves for people to try to manipulate the agenda selection process to
their own advantage.
This principle tells us that it is imperative that we say something general
about majority rule games without cores. Saying something about coalitions
and outcomes when there is no core, however, requires an adjustment in our
thinking about the nature of prediction. Accustomed as we are to assuming
that, except for the chance events of nature, outcomes follow a definitive logic,
we commonly overlook the possibility that there may be fundamental indeter-
minacies in politics. When we observe and attempt to understand the formation
of a particular legislative or parliamentary coalition, we commonly approach
matters with the implicit supposition that we should attribute an inability to
explain why a particular coalition formed as against some other to a failure to
measure some relevant parameter such as unobserved interpersonal relation-
ships among the participants. This may be true, but generally such refined mea-
surement is impractical or even impossible; moreover, we have little theoretical
guidance in determining what ought to be measured and how measurements
and prior observations relate to subsequent events. A  similar problem con-
fronts those who wish to predict whether a tossed coin will land heads or tails.

--- Sayfa 354 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  345
In principle, precise measurement of all physical characteristics of the coin toss
will allow a prediction to some refined degree of accuracy. But such measure-
ment is impractical, and, thus, we find it more convenient to treat the outcome
as a random event.
In a similar spirit, imagine that three people, who, absent deep psychological
testing and observation, seem identical in every respect, must use majority rule
to divide $1,000. If utility and money are equivalent, the corresponding pure
redistribution game has no core. But because they abide by majority rule, we
might be willing to utter the tentative prediction, based on the assumption that
each is “sufficiently avaricious” so as to be unconcerned with “fairness,” that two
people will coalesce to divide the money evenly between themselves, excluding
the third from any payment. Notice, though, that we cannot say which coalition
will form—from our view, all three 2-person coalitions are equivalent. Indeed,
in this circumstance, the only reasonable prediction is that some two-person
coalition will form.
To this point nothing seems unusual since we have already encountered inde-
terminacy in games with multiple equilibria. But recall that whether a particular
n-tuple of strategies is or is not an equilibrium depends solely on the properties
of that equilibrium’s character or the character of the strategies that comprise
it. We do not say that some n-tuple is a Nash or subgame perfect equilibrium
because some other n-tuple is or is not an equilibrium. In the context of coop-
erative games without cores, on the other hand, things may be quite different.
Specifically, in the cyclic bargaining that seems inevitable in pure redistribution
games, we might speculate that the participants will be especially attracted to
specific proposals and that these proposals will achieve special significance as
a set. For the case of three people negotiating to divide $1,000, the set of out-
comes {(500, 500, 0), (500, 0, 500), (0, 500, 500)} comes to mind. Our attention
focuses on this set, we suspect, for several reasons. First, as a set it treats the
three otherwise indistinguishable bargainers as equals—each is excluded from
precisely one winning coalition and each wins the same amount when in a win-
ning coalition. As a consequence, no proposed outcome in the set advantages a
member of the corresponding winning coalition so as to give his or her partner
an incentive to switch to another proposal in the set. And second, all other fea-
sible ways of dividing the $1,000 are dominated by at least one proposal in the
set—at least one proposal in the set will be preferred by a majority.
Although this reasoning is imprecise, what we want to emphasize is this: we
do not focus on the set {(500, 500, 0), (500, 0, 500), (0, 500, 500)} because each
of the outcomes in it satisfies some property that renders it an equilibrium;
rather we focus on these outcomes because they satisfy certain properties taken
together as a set. Thus, although we do not attempt to predict which of the three
outcomes will ultimately prevail, labeling the set as a “solution” to the 3-person
bargaining game corresponds to the prediction that some outcome in it will
prevail. For example, then, although recognizing that an understanding of why
one coalition rather than another forms in a Parliament or a legislature may
require a detailed analysis of personalities and chance events, even without such

--- Sayfa 355 ---
346  Cooperation and Coalitions
measurements, we may be able to exclude a great many coalitions as possibili-
ties merely on the basis of the participants’ general policy preferences. It is in
this spirit that we consider the hypothesis that a general abstract characteriza-
tion of situations allows us to identify sets of feasible outcomes as predictions.
To make this reasoning more precise, we proceed by first trying to generalize
the definition of the core. There are several possibilities. First, we could simply
play with the component parts of the core’s definition, weakening one or more
of those parts. Second, using some general ideas about how bargaining might
proceed, we could specify “reasonable” properties that a predicted set ought to
satisfy. Finally, we could attempt to describe an explicit extensive form model of
bargaining and thereby deduce an appropriate solution as a Nash equilibrium
to the corresponding non-cooperative model of the coalitional game. Tradi-
tionally, game theory focuses on the first two avenues, but some progress has
been made with respect to the third. For the moment, though, let us focus on
the first.
Recall that the elements of a core share two properties: The core is internally
stable in the sense that if there is more than one outcome in it, no outcome in it
dominates another outcome in it. And the core is externally stable in the sense that
outcomes in it are undominated by the feasible outcomes that are not in the core.
The problem in games without cores is that everything is dominated—there is
no externally stable set. However, looking back at our example in which three
people use majority rule to divide $1,000, one feature of the set of outcomes
V = {(500, 500, 0), (500, 0, 500), (0, 500, 500)} that we find especially attractive
is that coalition partners do not have any apparent incentive to switch from
one coalition to another within this set. Maintaining this requirement (which is
admittedly arbitrary at this point), we know that feasible outcomes outside the
set dominate outcomes in it (otherwise, the set is a core, which doesn’t exist).
But in this pure redistributive example, we can readily verify that every out-
come outside of V is dominated by some outcome in V. Thus, even if bargain-
ing “wanders out of V,” there is an outcome in V that takes negotiators directly
back to this set. So if we modify only the definition of external stability, we
arrive at the following characterization of a stable set:
1.
V is internally stable in the sense that no outcome in it dominates any other
outcome in it.
2.
V is externally stable in the sense that every feasible outcome not in V is
dominated by some outcome in V.
Sets of feasible outcomes that together satisfy internal and external stability
are called von Neumann solutions, or V-sets. Thus, V-sets are like cores except
that their definition imposes a weaker definition of external stability. The core
requires that every outcome in it be undominated by every outcome outside of
it; the V-set requires that every outcome outside of it be dominated by some-
thing inside of it.

--- Sayfa 356 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  347
Although we will argue shortly that the V-set is deficient as a general hypoth-
esis, we want to reemphasize the profoundly important and innovative perspec-
tive it takes with respect to prediction—a perspective that is not familiar to the
general character of political analysis. Specifically, if we predict outcomes in V, we
do so not merely because of the properties of those outcomes taken one at a time,
but rather because of the properties of the set, V, to which they belong. Thus, our
explanations for legislative or parliamentary outcomes can no longer take the
form “outcome . . . prevailed because the majority . . . preferred it to all other
outcomes and because this majority had sufficient skill in forming before any
opposition could materialize.” To this explanation we must append such state-
ments as “and because that outcome was among a set of outcomes, consisting
of . . ., that could prevail in this way.” The V-set, then, requires that we diminish
somewhat our focus on the particular character of victorious outcomes and
coalitions and that we pay greater attention to the general characteristics of
such outcomes and to the other outcomes that share these characteristics.
Aside from its innovative perspective, the notion of the V-set is attractive
because it seems to be a mathematically straightforward generalization of the
core. And historically at least, the V-set served as the focus of research into
cooperative games for much of game theory’s initial development. However, its
definition occasions certain problems, the most important of which is that for
a great many games V-sets are not unique. Indeed, the set of outcomes in some
V-sets typically include nearly all feasible outcomes. For example, in a 3-person
divide-the-thousand-dollar game, the set
V’ = {u: ui = c, uj + uk = 1,000 − c, c ≤ 1,000/3}
satisfies both internal and external stability. For example, with i = 1, the two
payoff vectors (300, 350, 350) and (300, 400, 300) are in V’ and in accordance
with internal stability neither dominates the other. On the other hand, the vec-
tor (350, 300, 350) is not in V’, but in accordance with external stability, it is
dominated (via players 2 and 3) by the vector (300, 325, 375), which is in V’.
A second difficulty is that as a generalization of the core, the V-set’s definition is
wholly ad hoc and without behavioral justification. For this reason game theo-
rists have sought to narrow its predictions with additional refinements and to
associate it with some notions of the bargaining process. One such refinement
is the main-simple V-set, which treats majority rule games.
A V-set is main simple (denoted Vm) if each outcome in it can be associated
with a minimum winning coalition so that every member of that coalition
prefers that outcome at least as much as any other in Vm and where no such
coalition is associated with more than one outcome in Vm.
The important property of main-simple V-sets is that they are unique for an
important class of games:

--- Sayfa 357 ---
348  Cooperation and Coalitions
if utility in a majority rule game is like money and is perfectly transferable
among the players, then that game has a unique main-simple V-set.
For example, in the divide-the-thousand-dollars game, Vm is the set {(500, 500,
0), (500, 0, 500), (0, 500, 500)}. More generally, if the game is perfectly sym-
metric in the sense that each player has one vote and if each minimum winning
coalition can win the same amount, X, as any other, then the elements of Vm
take the form (2X/(n + 1),…, 2X/(n + 1), 0,…, 0). Thus, main-simple V-sets
rationalize the prediction that, in majority rule pure redistribution games,
some minimum-winning coalition will form to divide the spoils evenly among
its members.
Universalism in the U.S. Congress: A  seemingly disquieting note with
respect to the main-simple V-set’s predictions is that in the U.S. Congress
we often observe nearly unanimous agreement to pass legislation that
is redistributive because the component parts of that legislation benefit
only specific constituencies. One explanation for this phenomenon is that
legislators choose beforehand between being competitive versus coopera-
tive, where being cooperative means to avoid forming a minimal winning
coalition in favor of a more universally acceptable result; being competi-
tive means seeking to form a minimal winning coalition that expropri-
ates from a maximal minority. The advantage of being competitive is that
it maximizes one’s gains whenever one is included in the winning coali-
tion, but the disadvantage is that one takes the chance of being excluded
from the majority. Being cooperative ensures against losing, but one can-
not win a great deal. For example, in a divide-the-thousand-dollar game
with n bargainers, each person in a minimal winning coalition gains 1,000/
[(n + 1)/2] whereas excluded players gain nothing. The probability that
any specific person is included in a minimal winning coalition equals the
proportion of such coalitions that includes that person, (n + 1)/2n, so the
expected gain in a non-cooperative legislature is
2,000
1
1
2
0 1
1
2
= 1,000 ,
n
n
n
n
n
n
+
+
+
−
+












which is what one earns if everyone plays cooperatively and simply
divides the thousand dollars among all players. Thus, risk averse legislators
or a sense that outcomes ought to be “fair and equitable” is sufficient to
explain unanimity within a legislature.
Example: Figure 8.5 reproduces the preferences in Figure 8.4, but now
let us focus on the three outcomes A, B, and C formed by the simultaneous
tangencies of persons 1 and 2’s indifference contours, 1 and 3’s contours,
and 2 and 3’s contours. Notice first that, because the players are assumed
to be able to bargain only over policy, utility cannot be transferred among
them—one player cannot transfer x units of utility to some other player,

--- Sayfa 358 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  349
because there is no commodity like money in the game. However, this game
does have a main-simple V-set. First, to see that {A, B, C} is that set, notice
that since A and B both lie on the same contour for person 1, 1 is indiffer-
ent between these two outcomes. Persons 2 and 3, on the other hand, hold
opposite preferences, so A does not dominate B nor does B dominate A.
The same argument holds for B and C and for C and A, so the set {A, B,
C} is internally stable. To show, then, that {A, B, C} is a V-set, notice that
the two shaded “petals” in Figure 8.5 correspond to the set of outcomes
that defeat A. A simple paper and pencil exercise, though, reveals that B
or C defeats any outcome in this set, while those outcomes that defeat B
are defeated by A or C and that those that defeat C are defeated by A or
B. Hence, {A, B, C} is a V-set. The reader should be able to confirm now
that this set is a main-simple solution, although as we show later, there are
majority rule spatial games without main-simple V-sets.
B
C
A
A´
x*3
x*2
x*1
Figure 8.5  A spatial V-set
The impetus for the development of the main-simple V-set lies not only with
the necessity for refining the V-set but also with the view that in a competitive
coalitional environment, minimal winning coalitions somehow play a special
role. Thus, the definition of a main-simple V-set adds some seemingly reason-
able conditions to those of internal and external stability in the hope of gener-
ating a more refined prediction. Unfortunately, although its predictions seem
reasonable within its domain, important problems remain. First, its definition
pertains only to majority rule games, and, second, its definition, like that of the
V-set itself, is ad hoc. Thus, the logical connections of this idea to the general
perspectives of game theory are unclear. For this reason two related alternatives
to the V-set have been offered—the bargaining set and the competitive solution

--- Sayfa 359 ---
350  Cooperation and Coalitions
(for formal definitions of the bargaining set, see Robert Aumann and Michael
Maschler, “The Bargaining Set for Cooperative Games,” in Dresher et al., eds.,
Advances in Game Theory, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964: 443–476
and Richard McKelvey, Peter Ordeshook and Mark Weiner, “The Competitive
Solution for N-Person Games Without Transferable Utility,” American Political
Science Review, June 1978).
The bargaining set is based on the idea that if a coalition can form around a
specific outcome, then each member of that coalition should be able to defend
what he or she receives from the outcome, which the coalition proposes against
the possible objections of other members of the coalition. If a person is getting
“too much”—if he or she cannot defend a payoff—then we ought not predict
that outcome. But if each person can mount a defense against every conceivable
objection, then that outcome is “stable” and it should be included in the set of
predicted possibilities. Put differently, members of a coalition should be able to
offer legitimate counter-objections to any objection against what they are getting
in a coalition; if they cannot formulate such a defense, then either the coalition
must adjust the payments to its members or that coalition cannot form.
Example: Consider again the divide-the-thousand-dollars game, and the
outcome (500, 500, 0) supported by the coalition {1, 2}—denoted by the
proposal ((500, 500, 0), {1, 2}). Suppose person 2, seeking a greater share,
objects against 1 with the proposal ((0, 550, 450), {2, 3}), which he and his
proposed new coalition partner prefer to the original proposal. However,
1 can defend his payoff of 500 in the original proposal by counter-objecting
with ((500, 0, 500), {1, 3}), because this counter gives him 500 and is pre-
ferred by 3 to the objection. Indeed, every objection by 2 against 1 (as well
as every objection by 1 against 2) can be countered, so ((500, 500, 0), {1, 2})
is in the bargaining set. Alternatively, consider (600, 400, 0). In this instance,
2 can object with ((0, 500, 500), {2, 3}) and 1 cannot counter—person 1
cannot give 3 as much as 500 and at the same time defend the original
proposed payoff of 600. So the proposal ((600, 400, 0), {1, 2}) is not in the
bargaining set.
The bargaining set clearly provides a more reasonable basis for analyzing politi-
cal coalitions than does the V-set, but like the V-set, it is not without difficulties.
First, there are several variants to its definition, and there is no clear reason to
choose one variant over another. For example, can several persons object simul-
taneously against more than one person? If an objection can be directed against
more than one person, must the targets of the objection all counter simultane-
ously with the same proposal, or can they counter individually with different
proposals? Must those who are included in the counter strictly or weakly prefer
the counter to the objection? Must the counter itself be stable (in the bargain-
ing set) and, thus, be believable? (Bargaining sets satisfying this property are
called strong bargaining sets.) A more serious problem, however, is that this idea
is designed for redistributive games and not for spatial policy games. In a pure

--- Sayfa 360 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  351
redistributive game there is presumed to be a commodity (typically money)
that can be traded among the players so as to allow for the perfect transfer of
utility. Thus, if a player is “getting too little” in a coalition, a transfer is feasible
from those who are getting “too much.” But such transfers are generally impos-
sible if only policy represented by spatial preferences is considered. If the only
way to adjust a coalition partner’s payoff is to alter the coalition’s policy pro-
posal, then we may be unable to transfer utility to one or more coalition part-
ners without fundamentally undermining the coalition’s viability. Nevertheless,
the idea of a bargaining set does seem to take us part way to a solution to the
bargaining problem since, among other things, it does serve to rationalize main
simple V-sets. Specifically, it is possible to show that main simple V-sets and
strong bargaining sets are equivalent. Thus, the bargaining notions behind the
bargaining set provide a behavioral rationalization for looking at main simple
V-sets as predictions.
An alternative to the bargaining set is the competitive solution, K. Briefly, this
hypothesis is based on the suggestion that coalitions, in order to form, must
compete successfully with other coalitions for critical—pivotal—members. If
two coalitions, C and C', are to be simultaneously viable—if they are both capa-
ble of forming in a competitive environment—then it must be the case that the
players who pivot between C and C' (the members who are common to both
coalitions) cannot all prefer the proposal of one coalition to the proposal of the
other; otherwise, these pivotal players would block one coalition in favor of the
other. Referring to the three-person game in Figure 8.5, suppose, for whatever
reason, that voters 1 and 2 do not appreciate the potential value of their coali-
tion. Since player 3 is temporarily the sole pivot between the coalitions that
might form—{1, 3} and {2, 3}—we can imagine a bargaining process in which
voters 1 and 2 begin by offering 3 outcomes such as B and C, but find them-
selves eventually “bidding up” to 3’s ideal point as they each try to secure 3’s
loyalty. However, unless 1 and 2 are completely dense, one or the other should
soon realize that they can avoid compromising in the direction of 3’s ideal by
forming a coalition of their own. With voter 3 no longer enjoying the position
of sole pivot, and finding it necessary to compete with 1 and 2 as potential piv-
ots as well, we can expect 3 to begin proclaiming, “Honest, I was only kidding in
asking for my ideal. I’ll settle for B or C as originally discussed.” The competitive
solution tries to formalize this bargaining scenario.
To define the competitive solution, we first introduce the notion of viability.
Focusing on proposals that identify a payoff vector and the coalition that forms
to realize that outcome (note that p does not refer here to a probability),
If p = (u, C) and p' = (u', C') are any two feasible proposals, then p is viable
against p' if
1.
u is Pareto optimal for C.
2.
It is not the case that everyone in both C and C' prefer u' to u – at least one
common member is indifferent between u and u' or strictly prefers u to u'.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
352  Cooperation and Coalitions
And p is strictly viable against p' if all pivotal coalition members strictly prefer
u to u'.
The notion of domination used to define the core and the V-set focuses on all
the players in a coalition that might enforce a particular outcome. The notion of
viability, on the other hand, focuses only on the players that are pivotal between
alternative proposals. With this difference, we then say that the set of feasible
proposals K is a competitive solution if
1.
No coalition is associated with more than one proposal in K.
2.
K is internally stable in the sense that all proposals in it are viable against
each other.
3.
K is externally stable in the sense that if some p" not in K is strictly viable
against some p in K, then there is a p' in K that is strictly viable against p".
Clearly the definition of K parallels the definition of the V-set—like the V-set,
it makes use of notions of internal and external stability and it focuses on the
properties of a set of outcomes rather than on the properties of outcomes taken
one at a time. However, note the important differences.
First, because it is based on the idea of coalitions competing against each
other, because a coalition’s strategy is its proposal, and because “players”
can choose but one strategy in a game, K, like the main simple V-set, allows
coalitions to have only one proposal.
Second, as we have already noted, K uses the notion of viability rather
than that of domination.
Third, rather than supposing that all feasible proposals not in V are
dominated by at least one proposal in V, we require that some member of
K be strictly viable against only those feasible proposals not in K that might
upset K—that are strictly viable against something in K.
Despite these differences, there are important relationships between the V-set
and K, as well as between the core, the bargaining set, and K. Specifically,
An outcome in the core (associated with any winning coalition) is a competi-
tive solution. The outcomes in a main-simple V-set (associated with the appro-
priate minimum winning coalition) also constitute a competitive solution.
Finally, the elements of the strong bargaining set are a competitive solution.
In this way we can think of K as a generalization of the core, the V-set, and
the strong bargaining set (at least for majority rule games), so consider this
example:
The “Corrupt Bargain” of 1824: In the U.S. Presidential election of 1824
no candidate secured a majority of the Electoral College vote, whereupon
John Quincy Adams was elected president over Andrew Jackson by the
House of Representatives even though, following the election, Jackson

--- Sayfa 362 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  353
controlled more electoral votes and had secured a majority of popular
votes in more states than had Adams. The actual Electoral College vote
tabulation following the general election was
Jackson:
99 votes and a majority in 11 states
Adams:
84 votes and a majority in 7 states
Crawford:
41 votes and a majority in 3 states
Clay:
37 votes and a majority in 3 states
In the House each state has one vote, but because the Constitution
dictated that only three candidates could be considered there, Clay was
eliminated. The issue for Clay, then, was: Whom should he support? An
intense series of negotiations preceded the final vote, with some of Jack-
son’s support shifting to the other three candidates, and with Clay’s sup-
port in Missouri shifting to Adams, at which time, with the remainder of
Clay’s support still uncertain, the candidates’ support became
Adams:
10 states
Jackson:
7 states
Crawford:
4 states
Clay:
3 states
Suppose for purposes of a numerical example that if C is winning, then
v(C) equals the size of the opposition. That is, taking considerable liber-
ties with the meaning of numbers, suppose size measures resources, which
a winning coalition can expropriate from the losers. For example, then,
v(Adams, Crawford) = 10. Assume that a coalition’s value can be divided
in any way among its members, and let J, A, Cr, and Cl denote Jackson,
Adams, Crawford, and Clay, respectively. There are three facts now that we
can use to find this game’s competitive solution:
1.
The game has a main-simple V-set, because it has only winning and
losing coalitions and because utility is transferable among the players.
2.
The outcomes in this set correspond to a competitive solution, and
each minimal winning coalition is represented by a proposal in K.
3.
If K is a competitive solution, then each proposal in it must be Pareto
optimal for the respective winning coalition—otherwise that coalition
has a proposal that is strictly viable against its own proposal in K and
viable against all other proposals.
Consider the set of proposals K = {(w, {A, J}), (x, {A, Cr}), (y, {A, Cl}),
(z, {J, Cr, Cl})} made by the four minimum winning coalitions. Because
the elements of K must be Pareto optimal for the corresponding winning
coalition, we must have,
wA + wJ = 7,
xA + xCr = 10,
yA + yCl = 11,
zJ + zCr + zCl = 10.

--- Sayfa 363 ---
354  Cooperation and Coalitions
To ensure that those who pivot between the coalitions with proposals in
K are indifferent—that no proposal in K be strictly viable against any other
proposal in K—we must have
wA = xA = yA,
wJ = zJ,
xCr = zCr,
yCl = zCl.
These equalities, taken together, solve to establish that Adams receives
6 whenever included in the winning coalition, Jackson 1, Crawford 4, and
Clay 5. Thus,
K = {((6, 1, −4, −3), {A, J}),
((6, −7, 4, −3), {A, Cr}),
((6, −7, −4, 5), {A, Cl}),
((−10, 1, 4, 5), {J, Cr, Cl})
is a competitive solution. Hence, Clay could join either with Adams alone
or with Jackson and Crawford.
8.7  Parliamentary Coalitions
It would be foolhardy to claim that the above example and its analysis explains
why Clay and Adams coalesced or whether their bargain was indeed corrupt, as
was claimed by Jackson’s supporters when Adams subsequently nominated Clay
as his Secretary of State and heir apparent—an implicit promise that Adams
was ultimately unable to deliver on owing to Jackson’s victory in the next elec-
tion. The liberties taken with the meaning of numbers are far too great to lend
confidence to any substantive interpretation of the example, which merely illus-
trates the calculation of a competitive solution using what we know about main
simple V-sets when utility is transferable. But questioning the validity of any
substantive interpretation here also causes us to examine more closely how we
should model legislative and parliamentary coalition processes.
It is of course the case that one of the most widely studied coalitional pro-
cesses in politics is that of parliamentary coalitions wherein parties maneuver
to form governments and the “commodities” most often subject to negotiation
being policy and the allocation of ministerial positions. That both policy and
ministries are negotiated simultaneously, though, presents some modest con-
ceptual difficulties. Specifically, we should ask: Are ministerial positions valued
as badges of prestige and as sources of employment or are they valued because
their control also implies control of dimensions of public policy? If the primary
motivation of parties is to secure prestige and jobs, then parliamentary maneu-
vering ought to be conceptualized as a purely redistributive game in which the
parties vie for some (imperfectly) divisible commodity—the total of ministries.
On the other hand, if control of policy is the primary motivation, then we must
conceptualize the preferences of political parties differently.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  355
To take the most interesting possibility, assume that policy is the principal
motivation, and to simplify matters, suppose we view a political party in a par-
liamentary setting as a unitary decision-making entity with a complete and
transitive utility function defined over a policy space. Thus, we suppose that
the set of all alternative governmental policies can be represented by a simple
coordinate system with each dimension of the coordinate system correspond-
ing to a specific issue, that each party has an ideal point (most preferred policy)
in that policy space, and that the party’s utility declines as we move away from
that ideal point in any direction. We know, of course, from Arrow’s Impossibil-
ity Theorem that this simplification cannot be sustained generally, and, in par-
ticular, that it glosses over the policy conflicts within parties that often manifest
themselves as competitions for party leadership. Nevertheless, this simplifica-
tion does allow a “first-pass” at the issue of parliamentary coalition processes.
Example: Consider once again the three policies A, B, and C in Figure 8.5,
except in this instance we will associate those ideal points specifically with
parties 1, 2, and 3. Recall that the outcomes A, B, and C, which together
constitute a main-simple V-set, are selected so that party 1 is indifferent
between A and B, party 2 is indifferent between A and C, and party 3 is
indifferent between B and C. What we want to establish now is that {A, B,
C} does in fact correspond to a competitive solution; more precisely,
K = {(A, {1, 2}), (B, {1, 3}, (C, {2, 3})}.
First, no coalition is associated with more than one outcome. Second,
having associated the outcome A with {1, 2} and so on, party 1 is pivotal
between the two coalitions {1, 2} and {1, 3}—and, as required by K’s defini-
tion, 1 is indifferent between A and B. Similarly, the other pivotal players
are indifferent in the required way. Thus, no proposal in K is strictly viable
against any other proposal in K. Finally, to see whether K can be upset with
a new proposal, consider the possibility that a coalition already represented
by a proposal in K, say {1, 2}, tries to upset K with a new proposal. Refer-
ring to Figure 8.5, if {1, 2} proposes A', then although (A', {1, 2}) is viable
against (A, {1, 2}) (because the pivots, 1 and 2, do not strictly prefer one
outcome to the other) and although (A', {1, 2}) is strictly viable against (B,
{1, 3}) (the pivot, 1, strictly prefers A' to B), the proposal (A', {1, 2}) is not
strictly viable against (C, {2, 3})—the pivot, party 2, strictly prefers C to A'.
Similar reasoning establishes that no larger coalition—in particular, {1, 2,
3}—can upset K, so K is a competitive solution.
Before we consider parliamentary games with more than three parties, it is use-
ful to pause at this moment to consider the fact that, aside from assuming that
no party controls a majority of seats (a majority of the votes in Parliament),
our discussion of this example makes no reference to the actual number of
seats allocated to each party. Thus, subject only to the constraint that no party
is a majority, the identification of {A, B, C} as the predicted set of outcomes is

--- Sayfa 365 ---
356  Cooperation and Coalitions
invariant with the actual distribution of seats. If there are 99 seats in the Parlia-
ment, then we predict the same set of outcomes regardless of whether those
seats are divided (33, 33, 33) or (49, 49, 1)—even if one party’s share of the seats
is considerably smaller than the other two parties, it is as essential to the forma-
tion of a winning coalition as are the two large parties. The suggestion here,
then, is that the electoral success of a party should not be measured simply by
the number of seats it controls, but rather by whether it is a potentially critical
member of a winning coalition.
In addition, we can use the competitive solution and the spatial representa-
tion of preferences to demonstrate the importance of the relative positioning of
parties in the issue space.
Example: First, consider Figure 8.6, which shows the ideal points of four
parties, and suppose that seats are allocated so that only {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4},
and {2, 3, 4} are minimal winning coalitions. Next, consider the set
K = {(A, {1, 2}), (B, {1, 3}), (C, {1, 4}), (D, {2, 3, 4})}.
To see that K is a competitive solution, notice that no coalition has more
than one proposal in K. Second, A, B, C, and D are positioned so that the
pivots between any two coalitions in K are indifferent between the out-
comes associated with those coalitions. Next, suppose {1, 2} tries to upset K
with (A',{1, 2}). However, if {1,2} selects an A' that makes (A',{1,2}) viable
against, say, (B,{1,3}), that proposal cannot be viable against (D,{2, 3, 4})—
if we make any move from A that does not injure party 1, we necessarily
make party 2 worse off. Thus, no coalition in K can upset K. And once
again, a similar argument establishes that no other coalition can upset K.
Example: Now consider the ideal point configuration in Figure  8.7,
which differs from the one shown in Figure 8.6 only in the location of
2
A
A'
1
3
4
B
C
D
Figure 8.6  A competitive solution

--- Sayfa 366 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  357
party 3’s ideal. In this instance, we can establish that the coalition {1, 3} no
longer has a proposal in K. Specifically, let
K = {(A, {1, 2}), (C, {1, 4}), (D, {2, 3, 4})}
and suppose {1,3} tries to enter with (B,{1,3}). Notice that to be viable
against (A,{1,2})—and Pareto optimal for {1,3}—B must be located on the
line between the point q and party 1’s ideal, because 1 pivots between {1,3}
and {1,2}. However, if we satisfy this constraint, then party 3 strictly prefers
D to {1,3}’s proposal, and since 3 pivots between {1,3} and {2,3,4}, no such
proposal can be viable against D. Thus, {1,3} cannot upset K. (Since it is
not the case that all minimal winning coalitions have proposals in K, one
implication of this example is that once we turn to a game in which utility
does not act like money and is not perfectly transferable among the players,
then that game need not have a main-simple V-set.)
The preceding examples reveal that when predicting parliamentary coali-
tions we should be concerned not only with what coalitions are winning and
losing but also with the parties’ policy preferences. This analysis also reveals that
the overall policy associated with a parliamentary coalition is not some simple
weighted average of the policies preferred by the member parties. Rather, it is
the product of bargaining that takes into account the alternatives available to
all coalition members. Closer inspection of our example reveals, moreover, that
the coalitions with proposals in K are generally those that consist of “contigu-
ous” parties—roughly speaking, parties with diametrically opposite preferences
will not coalesce if there are winning coalitions that require less compromise.
Finally, the coalitions with proposals in K generally will not contain inessen-
tial members—only coalitions just large enough to win will form, and if other
2
1
A
3
4
C
D
B
q
Figure 8.7  A competitive solution

--- Sayfa 367 ---
358  Cooperation and Coalitions
parties are allowed to join in to ratify a government coalition, they may be
allowed to do so but they cannot affect policy.
8.8  Problems and Some Incomplete Ideas
It might seem from this brief survey that we are well on our way to treating
at least a sizeable part of those coalitions that most concern those who study
politics—coalitions based on some form of majority rule. Unfortunately, that
is not the case, since there is one issue that we have not yet confronted—the
existence of these various solution ideas. We know, of course, that the core is
often empty and although various existence theorems can be established when
utility is freely transferable among the players, for the more general context of
bargaining without transferable utility, general existence of these ideas eludes
us. Indeed, there are a sufficient number of counter examples to existence in
varied contexts to convince us that none of the above-discussed ideas is wholly
satisfactory. But we can speculate as to what a more satisfactory approach might
look like. We can begin that speculation by imagining a bargaining scenario in
which the players each begin with a level of utility in mind, li, they believe they
will strive for (or, alternatively, settle for). As negotiations proceed, however,
some players realize that they can raise their expectations without damaging
their prospects while others must lower theirs if they are to have a chance of
being included in some winning coalition and realizing a “minimally satisfying”
outcome. Now suppose we can formalize this idea and look for a Nash equilib-
rium of levels—a vector of levels l* = (l*1, l*2, …, l*n) such that no person has
an incentive to raise or lower their level.
This perspective, then, has much in common with Herbert Simon’s early
idea of satisficing and the argument that people do not maximize utility but
rather, given the constraints of time and search costs, they satisfice. In this case,
rather than assume that the level at which people are willing to be satisfied is
exogenously given, we are speculating that such a level is endogenous to the
bargaining process. There is, though, a huge chasm between verbal speculation
and the precise formalization of an idea. As a start we can introduce the notion
of the Defensible set which has some of the flavor of the bargaining set. Specifi-
cally, let p = (o, C) be an objection against player i at li and the proposal p’ = (o’,
C’) if ui(o) < li and p is strictly viable against p’. p” = (o”, C”) in turn is a counter
objection by i at li to p if ui(o”) ≥ li and p” is strictly viable against p. The idea
here, then, is to not have players defend the specific utility they associate with
a proposal, but rather to defend only up to some level of utility they are satis-
fied with. If a person’s coalition partners choose an outcome that gives player
i more than he or she is asking for, player i need not defend that level utility.
To see what we mean here, consider Figure 8.8 where the points p1 through p5
are the points corresponding to the Competitive Solution. In this instance, we
can assume that 2’s satisficing level is the indifference curve on which p1 and p3
lie. However, suppose players 1 and 3 attempt to coalesce with 2 with p2. With

--- Sayfa 368 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  359
the bargaining set as originally defined, player must defend the level of utility
he associated with p2. With transferable utility this may be possible, but here
utility isn’t transferable. All that a coalition can adjust is policy (the spatial posi-
tion of a proposal). So in a sense, if the coalition {1, 2, 3} forms, player 2 enjoys
a positive externality, but in defending that externality, he is required only to
defend up to the level defined by proposals p1 and p3.
To define a solution, now, with this idea, if we restrict the consideration of
coalitions to those that are winning, then let
S(l) = {p = (o, C) such that for all i in C, ui(o) ≥ li}.
Thus, S(l) consists of all proposals that might be formed that satisfy the levels
of the individual bargainers. And the support set for an individual player, Si(l)
is simply the set of proposals for which i is a member of the corresponding
coalitions. The Defensible Set, D(l), in turn, consists of a set of supported pro-
posals at levels l such that each player can defend the proposals in S(l) that he
supports—that are in Si(l)—against all objections and no one can defend any
supported set at any higher level, given everyone else’s level.
For an explicitly game theoretic formulation of these ideas, let
fi(l) = max{li such that (l1, l2, …, li , … ln) is defensible by i}.
Thus, fi(l) is the highest level of utility that i can defend, holding constant the
levels of all other bargainers. Next, define the payoff
3
2
5
1
L1
L2
L3
P1
P2
P4
P3
P5
L5
L4
4
Figure 8.8  Levels for a defensible set

--- Sayfa 369 ---
360  Cooperation and Coalitions
gi(l) = li if fi(l) ≥ li and 0 otherwise,
assuming that all possible payoffs have been scaled to be non-negative. This
expression, then, can be used to define an n-person non-cooperative game
where the player’s strategies are the levels they propose to defend. We have,
then, come full circle in a sense of taking a cooperative bargaining game that is
most likely impossible to describe in extensive or strategic form and converted
it to a non-cooperative game wherein we search for Nash equilibria of satisfic-
ing levels. The predicted outcomes of that game are, then, the proposals sup-
ported by those levels—the Defensible set. The two questions that remain with
respect to D(l), though, are the usual ones—uniqueness and existence. That
D(l) need not be unique is established by the ordinal preferences in Table 8.3.
Specifically, some complex calculations (aided by a computer search program)
that need not concern readers here, we find two “solutions”
{(E,{2,4,5}), (A,{3,4,5}), (O,{1,2,4}), (H,{1,3,5}), (B,{1,2,3,5}), (D,{1,2,4})}
and {(E,{2,4,5}), (A,{3,4,5}), (O,{1,2,4}), (H,{1,3,5}), (F,{1,2,3})}
In the first solution, the players set their levels at B, G (≈ B), A, A and H
respectively. In the second, those levels are O, E, F, A and H. Thus, in the first
solution, player 3, by committing to a relatively high level, “traps” 1 and 2 into
setting their utility values at B and D respectively as the highest levels they can
defend. In the second solution, if 3’s level is lowered from A to F, players 1 and
2 can raise their levels to establish a different equilibrium. We should not be
surprised at this possibility, and its implication; namely, that there most likely
exists a third solution in mixed strategies. Nor should we be surprised that some
Table 8.3  Non-Unique Defensible Set
Player 1
Player 2
Player 3
Player 4
Player 5
N
J
B
L
B
J
O
H
E
A
F
M
A
D
E
I
F
F
O
H
K
E
I
A
G
H
I
L,N
G
K
O
K,D
P
M
Q
G
G,B
Q
I
D
P,Q
H,C,P
K,M,D
P
M
D,M
L,N,Q
J
K,B
O,C
B
A
E,C
F,C
P
A,C
O
N,J,Q
L,N,J
L
H
F,I
E

--- Sayfa 370 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  361
games have only mixed strategy solutions. Specifically, the preference orders
in Table 8.4 do not give rise to a Defensible set in pure strategies—the players’
levels cycle endlessly. However, since the number of players and possible levels
is finite, it must have at least one mixed solution.
This brief review of the Defensible set does not, however, solve all problems.
First, if preferences are spatial so that each player’s strategy space is continuous,
the existence of the Defensible set in either pure or mixed strategies is simply
unexplored. Moreover, if the Defensible Set exists but the closely related Com-
petitive Solution does not, we do not know the Defensible Set’s properties. So
clearly, this approach to coalitions and bargaining remains an area for future
research. Nevertheless, the ideas behind the Defensible Set—notably, the notion
of endogenous satisficing—point the way toward a melding of cooperative and
non-cooperative perspectives without recourse to the ad hoc construction of
extensive forms when treating various forms of bargaining.
8.9  The Balance of Power Versus Collective Security
Thus far our discussion of cooperative games sweeps aside the issue of
enforcement—the V-set, Bargaining Set and Competitive Solution all assume
that whatever agreements are reached can be enforced. There is, however, at
least one circumstance in politics in which the task of understanding how the
absence of an exogenous enforcement mechanism affects outcomes is the cen-
tral research issue. Specifically, consider the view of international affairs that
argues that stability in international politics, if it arises at all, arises because of
a “balance of power.” Without delving into the many issues surrounding this
argument (such as the definition of “power” and the confusing array of defini-
tions of “balance of power” in the literature), this view sees international affairs
as basically anarchic in the sense that whatever cooperation we observe arises
and is enforced endogenously by the self-interest of relevant decision. States
have interests and they pursue those interests by applying whatever resources
Table 8.4  Empty Defensible Set in Pure Strategies
Player 1
Player 2
Player 3
Player 4
Player 5
B
D
H
E
G
H
C
I
C
I
J
A
J
B
B
D
J
C
H
E
A
I
B
J
H
F
F
A
G
D
G
E
E
A
A
C
B
G
F
C
I
H
D
D
J
E
G
F
I
F

--- Sayfa 371 ---
362  Cooperation and Coalitions
they possess toward those ends, including if necessary the threat and use of mil-
itary force. Institutions and organizations such as the United Nations, then, are
deemed either largely irrelevant to the establishment and maintenance of sta-
bility because they are themselves endogenous phenomena or merely an instru-
ment whereby states can seek legitimacy for their actions. From this view, then,
arguing that international institutions stabilize international politics merely
pushes our explanation back a step to where we must explain why countries
establish and abide by the edicts of such institutions.
The difficulty with the argument that a balance of power enforces stability
is that it does not establish the circumstances under which various alliances
but not others—specific subsets of countries—are enforceable in the sense that
abiding by an agreement is an equilibrium strategy for the states in question.
Why, for instance, prior to the outbreak of WWI did Britain stick by its com-
mitment to France and why did Russia feel compelled to defend Serbia against
Austria? It cannot be merely because they made agreements to do so—after all,
Germany and Russia signed the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact a few decades later
and we know how that fared subsequently. Of course, we have already seen
how cooperation can emerge in repeated Prisoners’ Dilemmas, but balance of
power politics differs from such games in important ways. Cooperation in the
repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma arises in a game in which all players gain when
cooperating as compared to when they are not cooperating. That is, coopera-
tion moves outcomes from Pareto inefficient to Pareto efficient ones. However,
power is presumably a relative variable and in constant supply, so unlike a
Prisoners’ Dilemma, balance-of-power politics is, in its base form, necessarily
constant or zero sum. Hence, with games like “divide-the-dollar” in mind, the
question that arises in arguments over the viability of a balance of power system
and international stability is the following: If power politics is like a major-
ity rule game in which coalitions with a majority of power can defeat those
with less, then why doesn’t a majority coalition of countries form to eliminate
the rest, with this process continuing until there are only two equally powerful
countries in the system?
There exists in the literature, though, an alternative view that stability in
international affairs can be secured instead via collective security agreements
wherein countries agree to refrain from hostilities and the remaining mem-
bers of the agreement punish whoever might choose to defect. Institutions, in
this view, play a profound role in that it is through them that agreements are
reached and the punishment of defectors applied. This was, after all, the original
intent of the United Nations when it was first envisioned in the heat of WWII.
This was also the glue that held the Warsaw Pact together—a fact fully on dis-
play when it was enforced in 1956 and 1968 by Soviet troops in Hungary and
then Czechoslovakia. The problem for proponents of this view, however, is that
absent a dominant player such as the USSR in the Warsaw Pact who can pun-
ish any and all defectors, it leaves unstated the mechanisms whereby threats or
promises of punishment are credible—where potential defectors believe it will
in fact be in the interests of others to punish them in the event of a defection.

--- Sayfa 372 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  363
We have, of course, necessarily greatly simplified the positions of those
whose view of international affairs corresponds to either the balance of power
paradigm or that of collective security. But what interests us here is that the
proponents of these two paradigms often argue as if they were treating differ-
ent universes—that if one argument is correct then the other must be incorrect.
A game theorist is well aware of the fact, however, that most games of interest
have multiple equilibria. Thus the question arises as to whether the “game of
international politics” has two alternative types of equilibria, and whether the
academic debate here is which type is the easier one to achieve and maintain. To
examine this possibility, we follow the model of balance of power politics offered
by Niou and Ordeshook (“Stability in Anarchic International Systems,” Ameri-
can Political Science Review, December 1990) that differs from a divide-the-
dollar game in that even if we play a “divide-the-dollar game” several times in
succession, we can define the game so that the players’ voting weights remain
constant, with each player controlling 1/nth of the vote. In a balance of power
scenario, on the other hand, a “voting weight” is presumably endogenous and
equals that country’s proportion of resources (“power”). That is, countries can
expropriate resources from others in order to augment their ability to threaten
and overcome adversaries. In a balance-of-power game, then, a country must
be concerned about the possibility that if it coalesces with someone to eliminate
others, it will become the next victim of its coalition partner.
To see how such a concern changes our view of coalitional possibilities, con-
sider a system with three countries, i = 1, 2, and 3, and suppose country i con-
trols r°i resources, which it values and which can be used to defend against or
to overcome an adversary (for convenience, let r°1 ≥ r°2 ≥ r°3). Thus, if rj > ri,
then in principle at least j can defeat i and expropriate all of i’s resources. Next,
assume that no country controls more than half the resources in the system, so
no country can overwhelm the other two. Now consider the following extensive
form game, which we denote by Г:
1.
Nature randomly picks one of the countries—say, i.
2.
Country i chooses whether to make a threat, r = (r1, r2, r3), or to pass; if it
passes we return to step 1.
3.
If i threatens r and if rj ≥ r°j, j is i’s coalition partner and must approve
or reject i’s proposal. If j rejects, we return to step 1; if j accepts, then r
becomes the current threat.
4.
Let k be the country threatened by r (which requires that rk < r°k). Coun-
try k has three responses: do nothing, in which case r becomes the status
quo and we return to step 1; propose an alternative threat r'; or transfer
resources to i or j in the attempt to “buy them out.”
5.
If k chooses the second option, its coalition partner (i or j) must approve or
reject k’s proposal. If this partner rejects, r becomes the new status quo and
we return to step 1, whereas if it accepts, r' becomes the new current threat
and we return to step 4 with k replaced by the newly threatened player. If k
chooses the third option of transferring resources, then if the country who

--- Sayfa 373 ---
364  Cooperation and Coalitions
is a party to the transfer accepts, the transfer is consummated to form a
new status quo, and we return to step 1, but if it is rejected, then the current
threat r becomes the new status quo and we return to step 1.
We also impose two assumptions that help define the game’s strategic charac-
ter. First, we suppose that if two countries “war,” then a third country that is
larger than each of them can take advantage of the situation to realize some
unspecified gains. This assumption has the effect of “freezing” systems in which
one country controls half the resources. For example, if (150, 100, 50) is the
status quo, then 2 will not attack 3, because 1 can use the conflict to become
predominant—in which case it will eliminate both 2 and 3. Similarly, if 1
attacks 2, then 3 must come to 2’s aid lest it become 1’s next victim (which illus-
trates some of the “glue” that sustains alliances in international politics). Since
1 knows this beforehand, it will not attack 2.
Our second assumption accommodates in a modest way the costs that might
reasonably be associated with conflict. Specifically, if given a choice between
securing X units of resources by implementing a threat versus securing those
resources via a transfer, a country prefers the transfer.
The analytic problem that confronts us now is that, in theory at least, our
game can continue forever—1 and 2 could threaten 3, 3 could counter by pro-
posing that it and 2 threaten 1, 1 can counter by proposing that 1 and 3 threaten
2, and so on. This fact creates two problems. First, if we once again define a strat-
egy as a “plan of action” for the entire game, there are infinitely many possible
strategies. Thus, we may have to appeal to various intuitive criteria in order to
narrow the list of possibilities we consider. Here we will initially consider only
stationary strategies whereby countries merely try to form the best available
coalition, without regard to the threats or counters others have previously par-
ticipated in—countries will form coalitions with whomever they can, without
regard to what country might have defected from some coalition or agreement
in the past. One might say, then, that the strategies considered here correspond
to General de Gaulle’s dictum that “France has no friends, only interests.” The
second problem with which we must contend is that it is inappropriate to sup-
pose, as we did in the analysis of infinitely repeated Prisoners’ Dilemmas, that
future payoffs are discounted or that even payoffs ought to be discounted at
all after one threat is replaced by another: the reasoning that our game models
may merely occur in the heads of participants as they contemplate strategic
possibilities. Because the status quo never changes along those branches of the
extensive form in which threats and counterthreats follow each other in an infi-
nite sequence, there need not be any stream of benefits or losses to discount.
However, we can solve this game by pretending that it is finite—by sup-
posing that we know the consequences of all branches in the game’s extensive
form. After postulating these consequences, a subgame-perfect equilibrium is
characterized by strategies in which no one has an incentive to defect unilat-
erally to any choice not dictated by that player’s strategy, and the postulated

--- Sayfa 374 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  365
consequences are consistent in that they are “self-fulfilling prophesies”—the
subgame perfect choices they imply must yield those consequences.
To formalize this idea, suppose, in accordance with the assumption that
countries consider only stationary strategies, that all countries respond to a
threat r without regard to the histories associated with each player. Next, let Гr
denote the subgame that follows the threat and acceptance of r. If each country i
associates the value vi(Гr) with playing that subgame, then v(Гr) = (v1(Гr), v2(Гr),
v3(Гr))—the continuation value of Гr summarizes what countries 1, 2, and 3
believe follows from r becoming a standing threat. Thus, vi(Гr), when compared
against whatever follows if r is rejected, determines i’s preference for acceptance
or rejection of r or for making this threat in the first place. Once values for all
threats are specified we can assume that the acceptance of a threat or counter
is a terminal node with its continuation value as the “final outcome.” We then
analyze Г like a finite extensive form game of complete information, deduc-
ing the subgame perfect equilibrium strategies by working backward from the
“terminal nodes” in the same way we treat finite agendas in majority voting
games—we deduce what each country ought to do any time it must choose a
threat, a counter, or accepting or rejecting a threat or counter. Hence, an equi-
librium is a set of continuation values—one for each threat—and a set of strate-
gies for each country such that these values and strategies are consistent. That is,
in equilibrium, the choices implied by the continuation values—the strategies
that are a subgame perfect equilibrium given the continuation values—must, in
turn, imply those continuation values.
Example: Suppose (S, r°) = ({1, 2, 3}, (120, 100, 80)), and let country 1
propose the threat ({1, 3}, (150, 0, 150)). Limiting our discussion to threats
in this form (i.e., two players threaten a third with elimination) and to
transfers, consider the representation of the situation in Figure 8.9, where •
denotes a terminal node. After 1 proposes its threat, its proposed coalition
partner 3 must decide whether to accept or reject. If 3 accepts, then ({1, 3},
(150, 0, 150)) becomes a standing threat. At this point, given the limits we
have temporarily placed on the threatened player’s actions, if 2 hopes to
survive it must then offer a counter that is either a coalition with 1 or with
3 to divide 300, or a transfer of thirty units to 1 (which, if offered, 1 accepts
since this is the best possible payoff for 1 given that 2 and 3 will not allow
an outcome that gives 1 more than 150). Country 2 need not consider a
transfer to 3 since, being larger, 1 can be made to prefer the transfer over
the original threat with the expenditure of fewer resources. Depending on
which counter 2 chooses, either 1 or 3 must decide whether to accept or
reject the offer. In the event of a rejection, the threat is implemented and
2 is eliminated. In the event of an acceptance, the counter becomes the
new current threat, and the subgame that follows is denoted by Г with an
appropriate subscript. Figure 8.9 portrays the next step in this process with
either 1 or 3 offering a counter.

--- Sayfa 375 ---
366  Cooperation and Coalitions
Without concerning ourselves for the moment with how they arrive at such
numbers, suppose the countries in this example assume that the following con-
tinuation values hold for the three threats that eliminate a country (we need not
consider threats that give someone more than 150 since no one will allow it to
go unchallenged):
v(Г(150, 0, 150)) = (150, 70, 80),
v(Г(0, 150, 150)) = (70, 150, 80),
v(Г(150, 150, 0)) = v(Г(150, 0, 150))/2 + v(Г(0, 150, 150))/2 = (110, 110, 80).
The value for v(Г(150, 150, 0)) is based on the assumption that country 3 counters
with (150, 0, 150) and (0, 150, 150) with equal probability whenever it is indif-
ferent between these two choices (or that 3 accepts each counter with equal
probability if it is indifferent). Once we have assigned values to each subgame
we can then deduce the choices they and subgame perfection imply for the
extensive form in Figure 8.9. Referring to this figure, then, after 1 proposes a
threat and 3 accepts, country 2 has three choices:
1.
Counter with the threat (0, 150, 150).
2.
Counter with the threat (150, 150, 0).
3.
Transfer resources to 1 so as to make 1 near-predominant and to freeze the
system.
Consider the top-right of Figure 8.9, which assumes that 2 counters with (0, 150,
150), and suppose for the moment that 3 accepts 2’s offer. At this point, with (0,
150, 150) the current threat, country 1 must act, and it has three choices:
1.
Counter with the threat (150, 0, 150).
2.
Counter with the threat (150, 150, 0).
3.
Transfer to 2 so as to make 2 near-predominant and freeze the system.
If 1 proposes (150, 0, 150), 3 rejects 1’s offer because it prefers (0, 150, 150) to
the continuation value of Г(150, 0, 150). At this point, given our assumption about
continuation values, 3 is choosing between a payoff of 80 (v3(Г(150, 0, 150) = 80)
and a payoff of 150. We indicate this preference by an arrow. Similarly, if 1
approaches 2 by proposing (150, 150, 0), then 2 rejects since v2(Г(150, 150, 0)) cor-
responds to a lottery between 150 and 70. Thus, 1 prefers to transfer resources
to 2, because each of the other alternatives available to 1 leads to 1’s elimination.
(We need not consider any other type of transfer: Transfers giving less than 150
are rejected because rejection implements the threat, and a transfer that renders
3 near-predominant is more costly than a transfer to 2.)
Notice, now, that the node corresponding to the point at which 1 must
respond to 3’s acceptance of 2’s counter begins a subgame, Г(0, 150, 150), with which
we initially associated the continuation value v(Г(0, 150, 150)) = (70, 150, 80). Since
we have shown that 1 transfers to 2, our initial supposition is sustained—to this

--- Sayfa 376 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  367
point at least, subgame perfection and our initial conjectures about continu-
ation values are consistent. Also, country 3 prefers not to play this subgame
and instead rejects 2’s offer of (0, 150, 150) in favor of implementing the initial
threat, because it gives 3 a payoff of 150.
Next consider the lower-right part of Figure 8.9. In this instance, 2 counters
the initial threat with (150, 150, 0). Suppose for the moment that 1 accepts. This
acceptance marks the beginning a subgame, Г(150, 150, 0), in which it is 3’s turn to
respond. Notice, however, that given the continuation values, country 3 need
not consider offering to transfer any portion of its resources since either coun-
terthreat has associated with it a value of eighty for 3. However, this fact implies
that 3 is indifferent between countering with (0, 150, 150) or with (150, 0, 150),
so let 3 choose between these counterthreats with equal probability. Once again,
then, we deduce a value v(Г(150, 150, 0)) that is consistent with our initial con-
jecture. But just as 3 rejects 2’s offer of (0, 150, 150), 1 rejects 2’s offer of (150,
150, 0), because 1 prefers the certainty of getting 150 units by implementing the
original threat to the lottery that Г(150, 150, 0) implies.
Thus, both of 2’s counterthreats are rejected, leaving 2 with only one
choice—transfer enough resources to 1 so as to make one near-predominant.
Although we have not drawn in 1’s decision as part of Figure 8.9, it is evident
that 1 accepts this transfer since it knows that it can never get more than 150
and since it prefers becoming near-predominant by accepting a transfer over
implementing a threat. But notice now that the acceptance of the initial threat
by 1 or 3 marks the beginning of a subgame, which we have just shown leads
150,70,80
150,0,150
150,0,150
150,0,150
150,0,150
150,100,50
150,150,0
(150,0,150)
150,150,0
(0,150,150)
0,150,150
150,150,0
(150,150,0)
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
150,0,150
70,150,80
0,150,150
(0,150,150)
(150,0,150)
0,150,150
0,150,150
0,150,150
150,150,0
(150,150,0)
150,0,150
(150,0,150)
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
3
2
3
3
1
2
3
2
1
1
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
150,150,0
Figure 8.9  Balance of power game

--- Sayfa 377 ---
368  Cooperation and Coalitions
to 2 transferring resources to 1. So as initially conjectured, v(Г(150, 0, 150)) = (150,
70, 80). A similar analysis for initial threats of (150, 150, 0) and (0, 150, 150)
confirms the continuation values we posited for them.
What remains in the analysis of this example is a specification of v(Г)—the
value of the entire game—and an equilibrium identifying the initial choices and
responses of countries. We have, after all, merely identified what will happen
if certain actions are taken and not what actions will in fact be taken—what
strategies are in equilibrium in the overall play of the game. And it is here that we
return to the debate between proponents of a balance of power view of interna-
tional affairs versus those who see collective security bolstered by international
organizations as the path to stability. Suppose first that v(Г) = (120, 100, 80)—
in effect, suppose that no initial threat is offered or accepted, and that the status
quo prevails. This supposition is sustainable, in fact, if we characterize equilib-
rium strategies thus: A country does not initiate or agree to a threat unless it
gains resources. Since the v(Г)’s imply that countries 1 and 2 can each gain from
an initial threat, whereas 3 can neither gain nor lose, 3 has no positive incentive
to participate in a threat. Thus, the only threat that might be approved is (150,
150, 0). However, 1 and 2 are essentially playing a constant sum game since, as
we have already learned, player 3 is never forced to transfer to 1 or 2. So, depend-
ing on the probability that 3 chooses one action or another when it is indif-
ferent, neither 1 nor 2 has an incentive to threaten or to approve of (150, 150,
0). Indeed, 3 can counter with a threat that requires the originally threatening
country to transfer resources to 3’s partner in the counter. Hence, three-country
systems can be wholly stable without anyone offering an initial threat.
There is, however, another stationary equilibrium that generates a realloca-
tion of resources characterized by: Accept all initial threats if they promise no
loss; otherwise reject. This equilibrium sustains v(Г) = α(150, 70, 80) + (1 − α)
(70, 150, 80) = (70 + 80α, 150 − 80α, 80), where α is the probability that 3
coalesces with 1 if it is indifferent between coalescing with 1 and 2. Although
country 3 cannot gain resources if it abides by such a strategy (the continuation
values for all threats remain as before), 3 has no positive incentive to defect uni-
laterally to another strategy. However, although 2 transfers to 1 or 1 transfers
to 2, no country is eliminated. Thus, our conclusion about this three-country
system is that if we see any coalition, it will be either {1, 3} or {2, 3}, with either 1
or 2 becoming near-predominant. And since all three-country systems without
a predominant player are equivalent to our example, this fact establishes the
possibility of stability in anarchic international systems.
Naturally, we should extend this analysis to larger systems before inferring
anything general about balance of power. Rather than consider this generaliza-
tion, though, which in fact takes us into a morass of algebra, let us consider
instead the possibility that there exists a “nicer” equilibrium in which no threats
are ever made. Recall that as a partial justification for the Iraq war, President
George Bush presented American intervention as a prelude to the formation
of a “new world order” in which the confrontational style of the Cold War was
to be replaced with a universal agreement among nations to eschew conflict
in favor of the mutual benefits of economic cooperation. Of course, this idea

--- Sayfa 378 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  369
met with considerable skepticism, in part because such a scheme had been
attempted before in the form of the abortive League of Nations and had clearly
failed. One failed experiment, however, does not invalidate a theory, because we
can always appeal to the particular circumstances of that experiment to explain
the failure (in the case of the League, we have the “circumstance” of the Great
Depression). The issue, then, is whether there is any theoretical basis for look-
ing at Bush’s proposal with skepticism. To address this issue, we note that this
new world order in fact corresponds to the notion of collective security dis-
cussed earlier, which is an international system in which all countries initially
agree to refrain from making an initial threat and to refrain from accepting
one in the event that it is offered. And to enforce such an agreement, coun-
tries also agree to punish, whenever possible, those who defect or those who
fail to participate in the administration of punishments (regardless of whether
the initially threatened states export oil or mushrooms). So the game theoretic
question that confronts us is whether states will have an incentive to administer
punishments in the event that one or more other states defect from the initial
agreement and whether the existence of this incentive is sufficient to preclude
any initial threat.
To answer this question, notice first that a collective security equilibrium
calls for strategies of a different sort than the type we have thus far considered.
Specifically, it calls for an equilibrium of non-stationary strategies in which the
target of threats is a function of history (defined in terms of who has defected).
However, to make matters precise, assume that if a non-punishing threat is ever
made and accepted so that it becomes a standing threat, all countries play sta-
tionary strategies thereafter as described previously—that is, the game thereaf-
ter reverts to the somewhat nastier balance-of-power mode. Staying now with
our three-country example, suppose country 1 defects and, seeking to increase
its advantage over 2, proposes (150, 0, 150). If 3 accepts, then, since all countries
play as before, we know from out previous analysis that 2 transfers resources
to 1 so 3 gains nothing by accepting. Suppose, then, that 3 rejects 1’s overture,
at which point the question becomes whether punishing 1 is sustainable as an
equilibrium. If nature chooses 2 to make the next move and fails to propose to
punish 1, then again the game is played as before with 2’s continuation value
being α70 + (1 − α)150; if instead it proposes to punish 1 by threatening (0,
150, 150), 3 accepts because it has no positive incentive to defect—as the small-
est country, we already know that it can never gain resources—in which case
2’s continuation value increases to 150. Similarly, if 3 has the first opportunity
to punish 1, it is indifferent between defecting and proposing the (0, 150, 150)
punishing threat; thus, it has no incentive to defect from the presumed punish-
ment equilibrium. Nor does 2 have any incentive to reject 3’s proposal of (0,
150, 150) and to listen to anything that 1 might have to say thereafter, since this
guarantees 2 a transfer from 1 and a final payoff of 150. Hence, 3 receives eighty
regardless of whether it accepts 1’s initial offer or rejects it in favor of adminis-
tering a punishment, which is to say, as before, that 3 has no incentive to defect
from the presumed equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 379 ---
370  Cooperation and Coalitions
At this point, of course, the reader may feel a bit uncomfortable with our
assumptions about 3’s actions whenever it is indifferent. Indeed, because of
such indifference, the presumed collective security equilibrium is weak and vul-
nerable to the possibility that countries choose “erroneously.” However (and
we refrain from demonstrating this fact because of the algebra involved), the
extension of the analysis to larger systems reveals that in such systems all coun-
tries can be targets of “profitable” threats, which thereby gives everyone a posi-
tive incentive to avoid the possibility of being the target of a punishment as well
as a positive incentive to punish defectors. This model, then, has at least two
equilibria that are of opposite types in the sense that one predicts the eventual-
ity of threats and the other predicts that the status quo prevails. Admittedly,
this model is far too abstract to allow definitive statements about the viability
of foreign policies based on collective security arrangements versus balance-of-
power. Among other things, it does not consider uncertainty, the costs of con-
flict, geography, and the possibility of more complex equilibria (as when, for
example, subsets of countries form alliances and agree to play “collective secu-
rity” among themselves and stationary strategies with respect to everyone else).
Nevertheless, this type of analysis does establish the possibility of sustaining
cooperation without exogenous enforcement in a world in which “power” is
the sole arbiter of disputes while at the same time cautioning that some degree
of coordination is required to ensure that players are being coordinated to the
same equilibrium.
This model, though abstract and incomplete, offers a final lesson in the
value of a game theoretic perspective of politics. In this specific instance, in the
absence of such a model the proponents of collective security versus those who
see balance of power as the ultimate source of international stability—those
who emphasize the importance of international institutions versus those who
focus on military capabilities—could, most likely, argue endlessly. Each side of
the debate would bring to the table their examples of where collective security
or balance of power either worked or failed, while each side laid claim to the
state’s foreign policy resources (or, in the case of academics, research support).
But even if we ignore the specifics of the model just presented, game theory
introduces an alternative hypothesis; namely, that collective security and bal-
ance of power merely correspond to alternative equilibria, and that the prop-
erties of those equilibria will depend on some of the substantive things our
model ignores. Any debate over where a state’s priorities ought to lie can then
be addressed in combination with extensions of this model. Indeed, even if
one chooses to forgo such extensions, in lieu of arguing as if one were debat-
ing alternative universes, the model focuses that debate on the specific things
that might make one equilibrium more attractive than the other. Thus, game
theory’s contribution to our understanding of politics need not lie in specific
abstract models and a blizzard of notation and impenetrable mathematics.
Rather, that contribution can lie merely in making us sensitive to the ideas of
strategy and equilibrium and to the difference between decision and game the-
oretic thinking, which of course is where we started this volume.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  371
8.10  Key Ideas and Concepts
coalition
divide-the-dollar game
feasible outcomes
coalitional preference
Schwartz’s vote trading theorem
core
dominates
effective
characteristic function
Coase Theorem
internal stability
external stability
V-set
main simple V-set
universalism
proposal
viable proposal
competitive solution
minimal winning coalition
satisficing
endogenous satisficing
defensible set
balance of power
collective security
Exercises for Chapter 8
1.
Is vote trading in a legislature profitable and most likely to be observed
when (a) various minorities find it in their interest to thwart the will of
the majority? (b) there is no uniquely stable outcome, and it is possible for
every agreement to be upset by something else? (c) congressional rules are
sufficiently inflexible that only behind-the-scenes deals will accommodate
the majority will? or (d) legislators are constrained by their constituents
from voting sophisticatedly?
2.
Suppose one of the following four payoff vectors must be chosen by three
voters using simple majority rule:
voter 1
voter 2
voter 3
2
−1
−1
−1
−3
3
1
3
−3
−3
1
1
a.
Does this game have a core or a V-set?

--- Sayfa 381 ---
372  Cooperation and Coalitions
b.
If you assume that utility is transferable, does your answer to part (a)
change?
3.
Recall our example from section 8.4 of the Valley of the Dump. Suppose,
however, that there are only four clans (euphemistically named 1, 2, 3,
and 4), each living on its own quarter of the valley, and that every day, the
number of bags of garbage produced by each clan equals its name—clan i
produces i bags of garbage per day. As before, the legal code of the valley,
strictly enforced, requires each clan to produce its allotted bags of garbage,
and it allows clan i to dump exactly i bags of garbage in its own backyard
or the yards of others. However, the bags must be dealt with as distinct
units—no scattering of any bag’s contents is permitted. (They have high
standards in the valley.) Assume that each clan evaluates the outcome of
the garbage problem in the same way as in our original example.
a.
Define and interpret the conditions that must be satisfied if this game
is to have a core.
b.
Does a nonempty core exist for this game?
c.
How do your answers change if we suppose that bags of garbage are
infinitely divisible?
4.
Assume that a five-person committee uses issue-by-issue, majority rule
voting, and that its members have the following ideal points on the
two-dimensional issue space (let  all indifference curves be concentric
circles):
voter 1: (7, 2)
voter 2: (8, 9)
voter 3: (3, 4)
voter 4: (4, 8)
voter 5: (10, 5)
a.
If communication and coordination are impossible, what is the
outcome?
b.
If the committee abandons its restrictive rules in favor of free and
open debate, does the game have a core?
c.
More generally, can issue-by-issue voting lead to a different outcome
than the core with simple Euclidean preferences? Explain your answer.
5.
Consider the following system of representative majority rule among
twenty-seven voters: There are three regions, each divided into three dis-
tricts. Each district has three voters. There are representatives (who are
computers, and are not to be considered part of the voting body) at the
regional and district levels. District level representatives inherit (over any
pair of alternatives) the majority preferences of the voters in their districts,
and regional representatives inherit the majority preferences of the repre-
sentatives in their region. A policy outcome is chosen by a majority vote of
the regional representatives.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  373
a.
What is the minimum number of voters that can form a decisive coali-
tion (i.e., get their preferred policy positions as the outcome)? Con-
struct an example to support your answer.
b.
How does your answer to (a) change if the district level representatives
are eliminated?
c.
Assuming that all preferences are single-peaked over a single issue,
does the final outcome depend on the existence of the district level
representatives? Why?
6.
Consider a six-person symmetric game where the value of a coalition C,
v(C), is given by
v(C)
1
2
3
3
4
C
2
3
4
5
6
=




















=














0
1
if







where |C| denotes the number of members of C. Assuming that what a
coalition earns is infinitely divisible among the coalition’s members, does
this game have a core?
7.
In economics, a common representation of utility for two commodities is
the function ui(xi, yi) = xi
αyi
β where both α and β are positive constants. So
suppose two persons are bargaining over the allocation of ten units of each
of the goods, where both goods are infinitely divisible. Let α = β = 2 for
both persons, and suppose that person 1’s initial endowments of the two
goods are 2 and 7, respectively (so that 2’s initial endowments are 8 and 3,
respectively). What is the core to this two-person game?
8.
Using the spatial policy positions in problem 4, determine whether the
coalition {1, 3, 4} has a stable coalition proposal in the bargaining set.
(Hint: Suppose players 1, 3, and 4 tentatively agree to the proposal that
is Pareto optimal for them and approximately midway between 1 and 4’s
ideal. Now let 1 object against 3 with a proposal that is Pareto optimal for
{1, 2, 5}, and check whether 3 can counter with any coalition that excludes
1 and with a proposal that gives 3 as much as 3 get from the original pro-
posal with {1, 3, 4}.)
9.
Suppose three houses, each with a large front-facing window, are arrayed
in a triangle such that a person sitting in any house can see one-fifth of
its own garden, all of the garden of the house on the left, and none of the
garden belonging to the house on its right. Suppose each homeowner is
endowed with one bag of fertilizer and is required by law to use it (subur-
ban values being what they are). A bag of fertilizer, allocated to one gar-
den, improves that garden so that a person having a full view of it enjoys a

--- Sayfa 383 ---
374  Cooperation and Coalitions
benefit of five units of utility, a person having only a one-fifth view enjoys
a one unit utility increase, and a person with no view is not benefited at all.
Assume that the homeowners can coalesce to allocate their fertilizer, and
that people cannot fertilize another’s garden without permission. Suppose
also that if two bags of fertilizer are allocated to any one garden, then that
garden is doubly beautiful. Does the game have a core?
10.	 Sketch the proof of the assertion that the core of a majority voting game,
after being associated with any winning coalition, is a competitive solu-
tion. Also, sketch the proof of the assertion that the main-simple V-set,
in association with the appropriate minimal winning coalitions, is also a
competitive solution.
11.	 Suppose three people, 1, 2, and 3, must use majority rule to choose a rule
for dividing $1,000 among themselves, and suppose that only two rules are
available: (1) face-to-face bargaining in which persons 1 and 2 have two
votes and person 3 has one vote, and (2) a procedure whereby 1 makes a
proposal in which he or she receives $500 and in which 2 and 3 divide the
remaining $500 in units of $250 (i.e., 2 gets either $500 or $250 or $0). If
the proposal is accepted by 2 or 3, it is implemented. If it is rejected by both
2 and 3, then player 3 can make a similar proposal (i.e., $500 for person
2, with persons 1 and 3 receiving the remainder in units of $250). If it is
rejected, the outcome (333, 333, 333) is implemented. What is the final
outcome?
12.	 Describe the V-set and Competitive Solution to the following vote-trading
game (excluding lotteries, letting the defeat of each bill be worth zero to
each legislator, and assuming the payoffs across bills are separable):
Legislator
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
3
3
2
−4
−4
2
2
2
−4
−4
2
3
3
3
−4
2
3
3
2
−4
13.	 Consider the preferences of the following four-person committee over
three bills, A, B, and C:
L1
L3
L5
L7
Ui
A
B
C
A
2
B
C
A
B
1
C
A
B
C
0

Suppose the committee can pass one and only one of the three bills. In
order for a bill to pass, it must receive at least two-thirds of the vote. Vot-
ing is weighted so that L1’s vote counts once, L7’s vote counts seven times
and so on. Legislators are strategic, vote simultaneously, vote for only one
bill, and are free to communicate and form cooperative agreements. A leg-
islator receives a payoff of 2 if his most-preferred alternative passes, 1 if
his second-most-preferred alternative passes and 0 otherwise. Utility is

--- Sayfa 384 ---
Cooperation and Coalitions  375
transferable and infinitely divisible. All cooperative agreements are cost-
lessly enforceable.
a.
Which, if any, of the bills pass?
b.
If L1’s vote is counted three times instead of once, how does your
answer to part (a) change?
14.	 Bicameralism (a two-chamber legislature) is often assumed to facilitate
stability relative to a unicameral legislature. Consider a spatial situation
with three legislators in each of two chambers, and assume that all pref-
erences are given by simple Euclidean distance. Indifference contours are
circles.
a.
Construct a 2-issue example in which, under simple majority rule,
there is no core within each chamber, but there is a core if the two
chambers are combined into a single unicameral legislature.
b.
Can there be a circumstance in which the status quo is a core under
bicameralism, by which we mean that it cannot be upset by the same
alternative in both chambers, but can be upset if the two chambers are
combined?

--- Sayfa 385 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 386 ---
Appendix
Chapter 1 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
Portray a utility function for money in which a person is risk averse for
small amounts and risk acceptant for large amounts.

Answer: Risk aversity implies that the utility function is concave such that
additional amounts for money have diminishing returns. Risk acceptant
preferences, on the other hand, imply convexity. Therefore, the utility func-
tion should be concave for smaller amounts and convex for larger amounts.
A utility of the form U(x) = (x − a)3 + b would satisfy these conditions.
3.
Consider the following six strict preference orders over three alternatives:
Order 1
Order 2
Order 3
Order 4
Order 5
Order 6
A
A
B
B
C
C
B
C
A
C
A
B
C
B
C
A
B
A

If you are told that a group of people all simultaneously have single peaked
preferences over a single issue, can all six preference orders coexist simulta-
neously; and if not, what are the various subsets of preference orders that
can simultaneously describe individual preferences?

Answer: The six preference orders cannot coexist simultaneously, given
the single peaked preference assumption. The order ABC is not feasible
because of ACB and CAB, ACB because of ABC and BAC, BAC because of
BCA and CBA, BCA because of BAC and ABC, CAB because of CBA and
BCA, and CBA because of CAB and ACB. However, for each possible order-
ing of the three alternatives on the issue space, one can have a set of four
preference orders. For ABC: {ABC, BAC, BCA, CBA}, for ACB: {ACB, BCA,
CAB, CBA}, for BAC: {BAC, ABC, ACB, CAB}, for BCA: {BCA, ACB, CAB,
CBA}, for CAB: {CAB, ABC, BAC, ACB}, for CBA: {CBA, ABC, BCA, BAC}.
5.
Assume 7 people have circular indifference contours preference orders in
two dimensions and assume that for the three alternatives, A, B and C,
that B is a Condorcet winner. Locate 7 distinct ideal points consistent with
this fact.

--- Sayfa 387 ---
378  Appendix

Answer: The six preference orders given in question #4, with the addition of
the following Order # 7: B > A > C, leads to B to be the Condorcet winner.
A vs. B: A ≈ B
A vs. C: A ≈ C
B vs. C: B ≈ C
Assume the six preference orders
in question #4:
Assume Order 7 to be:
B
A
C
then B is the Condorcet winner.
Ideal points: X1, X2, X3, X4, X5, X6, X7
X3
X7
X4
X6
X5
X2
X1
C
ISSUE 1
ISSUE 2
A
B
1
A
B
C
2
A
C
B
3
B
A
C
4
B
C
A
5
C
A
B
6
C
B
A
7.
Can a person with a single peaked preference be risk acceptant between
two alternatives and at the same time risk averse with respect to two other
alternatives?

Answer: Yes, the following two graphs are examples of preferences that are
single peaked, and that display different attitudes toward risk for different
intervals of x.
U(x)
x
x
U(x)
Chapter 2 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
Suppose persons 1 and 2 make a sequence of binary decisions, first 1, then
2, then 1, then 2, and so forth, and suppose that all decisions are observed
by both persons. Portray an extensive form to represent a situation in
which 1 has perfect memory but 2 can only recall the last move of 1.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
Appendix  379

Answer:
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Y
N
Y
N Y
N
Y
N Y
N
Y
N Y
N
Y
N
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
2
3.
Draw the extensive form of the agenda “A versus B, the winner against C”
for a three-person legislature in which legislator 3 observes 1’s choice, but
in which no other legislator observes any other choices.

Answer:
A
B
L3
A
B
L2
A
B
L1
A
B
L2
A
B
L3
A
B
L3
A
B
L3
A
C
L1
A
C
L1
A
C
L1
A
C
L1
B
C
L1
B
C
L1
B
C
L1
B
C
L1
A
C
L2
A
C
L2
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
C
A
A C
L3
L3
A
C
L2
A
C
C
L2
A
C
L2
A
L2
C
A
C
L2
A
L2
C
B
C
L2
B
L2
C
B
C
L2
B
L2
C
B
C
L2
B
L2
C
B
C
L2
B
L2

--- Sayfa 389 ---
380  Appendix
5.
Referring to problem 4, suppose you must make your decision before the
bureaucrat chooses the program in which to bury the cost overrun and that
the bureaucrat can pay you two units to learn beforehand how you intend
to assign your auditors. Describe the extensive form for this situation.

Answer:
You
 Bureaucrat
 Bureaucrat
 Bureaucrat
B
A
C
x
y
(4,–4)
(–2,2)
x
y
(–4,4)
(2,–2)
x
y
(–8,8)
(6,–6)
7.
If free competition reigns in an industry with two firms, each firm sells
20 million units of that industry’s products at a net profit of $1/item. But if
they collude to set a higher price, each sells 15 million units at a net profit
of $2 each. If one firm defects to the lower competitive price, its sales soar to
35 million units while the other firm sells nothing. Before each firm sets its
price (which they do simultaneously) Senator Billie Bob proposes a licens-
ing agreement whereby each pays a tax of $.20/item to produce the product
at the fixed cartel price—ostensibly to insure that “destructive competition”
does not “leave hard-working Americans unemployed.” Construct this situa-
tion’s extensive form, where each firm must first approve or disapprove of the
licensing arrangement, which goes into effect only if both firms agree to it.

Answer:
Firm 1
Firm 2
(27,27)
(30,30)
(30,30)
(20,20)
(20,20)
(0,35)
(0,35)
(35,0)
(35,0)
Firm 2
Firm 2
Firm 2
Accept
Accept
Decline
Decline
Firm 1
$ 1/item
$ 1/item
$ 1/item
$ 1/item
$ 1/item
$ 2/item
$ 2/item
$ 2/item
$ 2/item
$ 2/item
Firm 1
$ 1/item
$ 2/item
Firm 2

--- Sayfa 390 ---
Appendix  381
9.
Assume the following preferences by a five-member committee, all of
whom are sophisticated voters.
1
2
3
4
5
A
B
C
C
B
B
C
A
A
C
C
A
B
B
A
You are voter 1. Each voter receives a payoff of $100 from his or her first
choice, $50 from a second choice, and $0 from a last choice. You and voter
2 are competing to set the agenda, but who will do the setting depends on
who can “buy” voter 4. You and voter 2 must announce how much of your
winnings you will pay, after which voter 4 will choose between you and 2
to be the setter. Because of your sterling character, an indifferent voter 4
will choose you. To simplify matters, suppose that you and 2 must each bid
$75, $25, or $0.
a.
Assuming that money and utility are equivalent, what is your bid, and
what is the final outcome?
b.
How does your answer to part (a) change if 4 chooses 2 when
indifferent?

Answer: a. Given the preferences of the committee members, a majority of
the committee prefers A to B, B to C, and C to A. Since everyone is a sophis-
ticated voter, if you are the agenda setter, you can secure your most preferred
outcome, A, by using voting agenda ((A,C),B))—that is, pitting A versus C
first, then pitting the winner against B. But if voter 2 secured the right to set
the agenda, he would use agenda ((A,B),C) to secure B as the outcome.

Each player can either bid $75, $25, or $0 to win voter 4’s favor. The fol-
lowing is the extensive form representation of the game.
You
Voter 2
$ 25
$ 0
$ 75
(25,0)
$75
$0
$25
(25,0)
(25,0)
Voter 2
(50,25)
$75
$0
$25
(75,0)
(75,0)
Voter 2
(50,25)
$75
$0
$25
(50,75)
(100,0)

You bidding $25 and voter 2 bidding $75 is the unique equilibrium. B is the
final outcome, and your payoff is $50 and voter 2’s payoff is $25.
b.
If voter 4 chooses voter 2 to set the agenda when indifferent, then the pay-
offs for the extensive form game are changed to the following:

--- Sayfa 391 ---
382  Appendix
You
Voter 2
$ 25
$ 0
$ 75
(50,25)
$75
$0
$25
(25,0)
(25,0)
Voter 2
(50,25)
$75
$0
$25
(50,75)
(75,0)
Voter 2
(50,25)
$75
$0
$25
(50,75)
(50,100)

Now each player bidding $25 becomes the equilibrium. So B is the
outcome and the payoffs for voters 1 and 2 are $50 and $75, respectively.
11.	 Portray a congressional voting tree in which, with the alternatives B (bill), A
(amended bill) and Q (status quo) already on the agenda, a predesignated
legislator must decide before the actual balloting whether to introduce a
substitute bill S. Assume that, regardless of whether or not the substitute is
introduced, Congress must first decide whether to amend the original bill B.

Answer:
Introduce
Not
Introduce
Legislator
B
A
B
A
Congress
Congress
B
Q
Congress
A
Q
Congress
A
S
Congress
B
S
Congress
B
Q
Congress
S
Q
Congress
A
Q
Congress
S
Q
Congress
13.	 Suppose two countries, 1 and 2, each have second-strike nuclear capa-
bilities in that they can retaliate after suffering a first strike or they
can launch a second strike after sustaining a retaliation. Nature picks a

--- Sayfa 392 ---
Appendix  383
country at random, whereupon it, say 1, can launch a preemptive attack
(p) against the other’s military capabilities. If 1 attacks, 2 can retaliate
(r) or capitulate (c). But if 2 retaliates, 1 can choose between launching
(1) its second-strike (which 2 no longer has) that moves 2 back to the
stone age or it can do nothing (~1). On the other hand, if 1 does not
launch a preemptive attack (~p), then the first move is 2’s, with 1 and
2’s roles reversed. The game ends if neither country attacks, after one
country capitulates, or after one country launches its second strike fol-
lowing a retaliation. Assign some “reasonable” payoffs to the outcomes
and determine the eventual outcome. What are the preferences that make
a preemptive attack inevitable?

Answer: Suppose countries prefer to launch their second strike (over not
launching), given that they have done a preemptive strike and there was
retaliation. That is, given retaliation, a state does not feel disheartened by the
fact that a second strike would annihilate a country and wants to take fur-
ther action. Under this scenario, retaliation is not a best response—because
it leads to further destruction—and countries prefer to capitulate after the
initial strike. Given a country’s tendency towards capitulation, a preemp-
tive strike becomes inevitable if the country prefers to attack and show
dominance through capitulation over the status quo. Thus, a preemptive
attack becomes inevitable if the other country’s best response is to capitu-
late instead of retaliate because of fear of a second strike, and the country
prefers to the outcome of a preemptive attack and capitulation to status
quo because of a need to display an act of power.
1
2
1
2
p
r
r
c
c
~p
~p
p
(100, 50)
(80, 0)
(70, 60)
(50, 100)
l
~l
l
~l
(40, 70)
(0, 80)
(90, 90)
1
2

--- Sayfa 393 ---
384  Appendix
Chapter 3 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
Going into the home stretch of a research and development project, you
are six months ahead of the competition. To bring the project to comple-
tion requires finishing the development stage, and you have two strategies:
Risky and Safe. Safe takes two years but is guaranteed to work. Risky takes
only a year, but there is a 50% chance it will get you nowhere, in which
case you will have to return to the safe strategy and take an additional two
years. In six months, your competitor (who cannot observe your decision)
will confront an identical choice between Safe and Risky strategies with
the same properties as your alternatives, and they too must switch to Safe
if their Risky choice fails. Only the first to complete is awarded the patent,
and due to limited resources it is not possible to pursue both strategies
simultaneously.
a.
Which strategy should you pursue to maximize your chance of
winning?

Answer: The strategic form of the game can be seen below with the relative
probabilities of winning and losing the project.
Opponent
You
Risky
Safe
Risky
3
4
1
4
4
1
4
3
win
lose
lose
win
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
+
,
 
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
win
lose
win
lose
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
+
,
Safe
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
win
lose
win
lose
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
+
,
win, lose

If both you and the opponent play Safe then you will win the project as you
will be done within 2 years whereas your opponent will be done in 2.5. If
you play Safe and your opponent plays Risky, then the outcome depends on
your opponent as you will be done in 2 years and there is 50% chance that
your opponent will be done in 1.5 (you lose) and 50% chance in 3.5 (you
win). Similarly, if you play Risky and your opponent plays Safe, then for sure
he will be done in 2.5 years and there’s 50% chance that you’ll be done in
1 year (you win) and 50% chance that you’ll be done in 3 years (you lose).
If both players play Risky then you have the advantage in terms of the prob-
ability of winning as you have the six-month head start in the project.

There is no pure strategy Nash equilibrium. To find the mixed strategy
equilibrium, suppose the opponent plays Risky with a probability q, and
Safe with a probability (1 − q). Additionally, assume for simplicity that
when a player loses they get zero and if they win the project they get 1 as
utility. The expected return for each strategy is:
E
Risky
E
Safe
YOU
YOU
(
) =
(
)

--- Sayfa 394 ---
Appendix  385
q
q
q
q
3
4
1
1
2
1
2
1
1



+
−
(
)


= 


+
−
(
)( )
3
4
1
2
1
1
2
q
q
+
= −
q
Safe and q
Risky
≤
→
≥
→
2
3
2
3
E
Risky = E
Safe
OPPONENT
OPPONENT
(
)
(
)
p
p
p
p
1
4
1
1
2
1
2
1
0



+
−
(
)


=



+
−
(
)( )
1
2
3
4
= 


p
p
Safe and p
Risky
≥
→
≤
→
2
3
2
3

Therefore the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium becomes {(2/3, 1/3), (2/3,
1/3)}.
b.
Do you want to keep your move hidden?

Answer: Yes. Suppose I let my opponent know that I am playing Risky;
then he will choose to be Safe, and my probability of winning the project
is
1
2 .



Similarly, suppose I let my opponent know that I’m playing Safe;
then he will play Risky, and again my chance of winning the project is
1
2



.
Assuming utility of winning is equal to 1 for simplicity, my expected return
from telling my move to my opponent is
1
2



. We need to compare this
value to the utility I would get from hiding my move, which is obtained
by computing E
Risky = E
Safe
YOU
YOU
(
)
(
)  =  1 1
2 =1 1
2
2
3 = 2
3
−
−
q




, which is
greater than 1
2 .




3.
Consider the following scenario: With one opportunity to bet remaining in
the game show, player A has $7,200, player B has $5,000, and player C has
$3,601. Assume that there is no benefit to being second versus third, and
that the player with the most money wins that amount of money in cash.
Each player must decide whether to bet All or Nothing. Prior to betting
(which they must do simultaneously), nature tosses a fair coin to deter-
mine which “state of the world” will pertain: in State 1, players A and B win
their bets, but C loses; in State 2, players A and B lose their bets, but C wins.
Assume that if a player bets “all” and wins, his wealth is doubled. If he loses,
his wealth is zero. If a player bets nothing, his wealth does not change. The
player with the most money at the end of the game wins. Draw this situa-
tion’s extensive form and show what each player does in equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
386  Appendix
Answer: Each player has the following strategy set S
S
S
A
B
C
=
=
=
All A Nothing N
( )
(
)
{
}
,
. Under State 1, A is a strictly dominant strategy for
Player A, A is a weakly dominant strategy for Player B, and Player C is indif-
ferent between the two strategies. Under State 2, N is a weakly dominant
strategy for both Player A and B, and A is a strictly dominant strategy for
Player C. Since State 1 and State 2 occur with equal probability, betting All
gives player C a higher expected payoff regardless of Player A and B’s strat-
egies. Given that player C will bet All, betting All is the weakly dominant
strategy for players A and B. In equilibrium, all three players will bet All.
The extensive form of the game is represented in the following.
Nature
State 1
A & B wins
C loses
State 2
A & B lose
C wins
All
A
B
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
B
B
B
A
Nothing
All
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
A
N
7,000
0
0
7,200
0
0
0
0
7,202
0
5,000
0
0
0
7202
0
0
3,601
0
0
7,202
7,200
0
0
7,200
0
0
0
10,000
0
14,400
0
0
14,400
0
0
14,400
0
0
14,400
0
0
0
0
7,202
Nothing
All
Nothing
All
Nothing
All
Nothing
All
Nothing
A: $7,200
14,400
A: $5,000
10,000
A: $3,601
7,202
Double Amount
0
10,000
0
5.
Prior to playing a game, a fair coin is tossed to determine which of the fol-
lowing two 2 × 2 games will actually be played (the first number in each cell
denotes your payoff—row chooser—whereas the second number denotes
your opponent’s):
b1
b2
b1
b2
a1
9, 5
  1, −3
3, 0
  9, −2
a2
3, 7
4, 6
9, 9
3, 8
a.
Assuming that neither person observes the outcome of the coin toss
and that both of you must choose simultaneously, portray the situa-
tion’s extensive form.

--- Sayfa 396 ---
Appendix  387
Answer:
Nature
L
a1
a1
a2
a2
R
Player 1
Player 2
b1
b2
Player 1 (Me)
(9, 5)
(1, –3) (3, 7)
(4, 6)(3, 0)
(9, –2) (9, 9)
(3, 8)
Player 2
b1
b2
Player 2
b1
b2
Player 2  (Opponent)
b1
b2
(a)
b.
Portray the extensive form, assuming that you can secretly pay $3 to
learn the outcome of the coin toss.
Answer:
(b)
(3,8)
(9,9)
(9,–2)
(3,0)
(4,6)
(3,7)
(1,–3)
(9,5)
Player 1
Pay
Not Pay
Nature
(0,8)
(6,9)
(6,–2)
(0,0)
(1,6)
(0,7)
(–2,–3)
(6,5)
a1
a2
a1
a2
L
R
P1
P2
P2
P2
P2
P1
Nature
a1
a2
a1
a2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
b1
b2
L
R
P1
P2
P2
P2
P2
P1

--- Sayfa 397 ---
388  Appendix
c.
If neither player observes the outcome of the coin toss, how much
would you pay to learn the outcome of the toss (assume that all pay-
offs are in terms of dollars and that utility and money are equivalent)
and for what information cost is 2 indifferent between learning and
not learning the outcome of the coin toss?
Answer:

For both games, the dominant strategy for Player 2 is to play a1. Therefore
the best response for Player 1 under Game 1 is to play a1, and under Game
2 is to play a2. For Player 1, the expected return for playing a1 is (1/2)9 +
(1/2)3 = 6 and the expected return for playing a2 is (1/2)3 + (1/2)9 = 6.
Therefore, if the coin toss is unknown to Player 1, she expects to receive
6; meanwhile, if she learns the outcome of the toss, she will receive 9 for
sure as she will play her best response. Thus, she would be willing to pay
3 maximum to learn the outcome of the toss. Because playing b1 is the
strictly dominant strategy for Player 2, the information cost for her would
be zero as she is already playing the optimal strategy available.
7.
Let two political candidates each have two strategies, as indicated in the
table below, and let the probability that candidate 1 receives specific plu-
ralities from the four possible joint strategy choices also be as indicated. If
the objective of both candidates is to maximize their probability of win-
ning the election, what, if any, is the equilibrium to this game? How does
this equilibrium change if both candidates seek to maximize their expected
plurality? Note that p(x) is the probability of winning a plurality of x votes.
b1
b2
p(0) = 5/8
p(8) = 1/2
a1
p(400) = 1/8
p(0) = 1/8
p(800) = 2/8
p(−80) = 3/8
p(−400) = 1/2
p(0) = 3/4
a2
p(400) = 1/2
p(−75) = 1/8
p(−125) = 1/8

Answer:

If both candidates maximize the probability of winning, then (a2,b1) is the
unique equilibrium.
b1
b2
a1
3/8, 0
1/2, 3/8
a2
1/2, 1/2
0, 1/4

But if both candidates maximize the expected plurality, then (a2,b2) is the
unique equilibrium.
b1
b2
a1
250, –250
–26, 26
a2
0, 0
–25, 25

--- Sayfa 398 ---
Appendix  389
9.
Recall the game from elementary school called “one, two, three, shoot!”
One of the players chooses “even” and the other player gets “odd.” On the
count of three, each of the two players simultaneously casts out either one
or two fingers. If the total number of fingers is even, then the “even” player
wins, while if the sum is odd, then the “odd” player wins. Suppose the pay-
off is 1 for the winner and − 1 for the loser.
a.
Show the extensive form for this game.
Answer:
Player 1
Player 1
Player 2
Sum: 2: even
4: even
3: odd
3: odd
(–1,1)
(–1,1)
(1,–1)
(1,–1)
Player 2
1
1
1
2
2
2
Choose
odd
b.
Show that this game has no pure strategy equilibria.

Answer: The strategic form is as follows and the best responses are high-
lighted in bold. There is no pure strategy equilibrium.
Player 1
(odd)
Player 2 (even)
1
2
1
–1, 1
1, –1
2
1, –1
–1, 1
c.
Prove that “acting randomly” is the only equilibrium.

Answer: We need to show that the mixed strategy equilibrium we find will
be both players playing each strategy with 0.5 probability, and that they are
randomly choosing their strategies.

Suppose Player 2 plays 1 with a probability of q; then the expected returns
for Player 1 are:
E
E
1
1
1
2
( )
( )
=

--- Sayfa 399 ---
390  Appendix
q
q
q
q
−
+
−
=
+
−
−
(
)
(
)( )
( )
(
)(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
 q* = 



1
2

Suppose Player 1 plays 1 with a probability of p; then the expected returns
for Player 2 are:
E
E
2
2
1
2
( )
( )
=
p
p
p
p
1
1
1
1
1
1
( )
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)( )
+
−
−
=
−
+
−
 p* = 



1
2

The mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is {(1/2, 1/2), (1/2, 1/2)}.
d.
Suppose the rules of the game are changed so that at the count of
three a person can hesitate. If both hesitate, each receives a payoff of 2
whereas if only one hesitates, that player loses 1 and the opponent gets
0. What is the outcome now?
Answer: The new game in its strategic form is:
Player 1
(odd)
Player 2 (even)
1
2
hesitate
1
–1, 1
1, –1
0,–1
2
1, –1
–1, 1
0,–1
hesitate
–1,0
–1,0
2, 2

There is now one pure strategy Nash equilibrium (hesitate, hesitate) with
payoffs (2,2).
11.	 In a two-player game, the following pairs of actions lead to the following
outcomes:
(Player 1’s Action, Player 2’s Action) → (1’s Utility, 2’s Utility)
(L, L)
(3, 6)
(R, R)
(1, 5)
(C, C)
(6, 8)
(L, R)
(9, 6)
(R, L)
(9, 9)
(L, C)
(6, 1)
(C, L)
(2, 2)
(R, C)
(4, 4)
(C, R)
(4, 3)
a.
What is the outcome of this game if 1 goes first and 2 observes 1’s
action and then chooses his own action?

--- Sayfa 400 ---
Appendix  391

Answer: Player 2, given L will play either L or R, given C will play C, given
R will play L. Player 1 will play R with the highest payoff (9,9). The equilib-
rium is (R,L).
b.
What is the outcome if 2 goes first and 1 observes 2’s action and then
chooses her own action?

Answer: Player 1, given L will play R, given C will either play L or C,
given R will play R. Player 2 will play L and the equilibrium is the same
as (a).
c.
What is the outcome if each player has to choose an action before he
or she knows the other player’s action?
Answer:
Player 1
Player 2
L
C
R
L
(3, 6)
(6, 1)
(9, 6)
C
(2, 2)
(6, 8)
(4, 3)
R
(9, 9)
(4, 4)
(1, 5)

There are three pure strategy Nash equilibria: (L,R), (C,C), and (R,L).
d.
A third player enters the game. If the third player chooses L, he gets the
average of the payoff to players 1 and 2 for any given outcome. If the
third player chooses R, he gets a payoff equal to whichever of player
1’s payoff or player 2’s payoff is higher. What is the outcome of the
game where 1 goes first, 2 observes 1’s action and chooses, and then 3
observes 1 and 2’s actions and chooses?
Answer: The Nash equilibria are (R, L, L), (R, L,R), (L, R,R).
e.
What is the outcome of the three-player game if all players must
choose their actions at the same time?
Player 3 chooses L
Player 3 chooses R
Player 2
Player 2
L
C
R
L
C
R
Player 1
L
(3, 6, 4.5)
(6, 1, 3.5) (9, 6, 7.5)
(3, 6, 6) (6, 1, 6)
(9, 6, 9)
C (2, 2, 2)
(6, 8, 7)
(4, 3, 3.5)
(2, 2, 2) (6, 8, 8)
(4, 3, 4)
R (9, 9, 9)
(4, 4, 4)
(1, 5, 3)
(9, 9, 9) (4, 4, 4)
(1, 5, 5)

Answer: The Nash equilibria are (R,L,L), (R, L, R), (C, C,R), and (L, R, R).
13.	 Let four individuals have the following net valuations over the three alter-
natives, A, B, and C:
person
A
B
C
1
30
0
50
2
45
65
0
3
10
20
45
4
50
35
0

--- Sayfa 401 ---
392  Appendix

Assume that each person must report a valuation for each alternative and
that the alternative chosen is the one with highest summed valuation.
Assume also that taxes are collected as described in Section 3.7.
a.
How much incremental tax will be paid by each person?
person
A
B
C
1
  30
    0
50
2
  45
  65
  0
3
  10
  20
45
4
  50
  35
  0
Total
135
120
95

Answer: The project with the highest sum is A, which would be chosen. If
voter 1 is excluded, then project B would be chosen; the difference between
the valuation of A and B without voter 1’s preferences is equal to 15. If
voter 2 is excluded, then project C would be chosen and voter 2 pays the
difference in net value between project A and C, without her preferences
taken into account: 5. If voter 3 is excluded, it does not change the net
value ordering of projects and therefore he does not pay any tax. If voter 4
is excluded, then project C is chosen and voter 4 pays 10.
b.
Suppose persons 2 and 3 can hire an agent who will coordinate their
responses (reported evaluations), including lies. Should they hire such
a person if the fee is not too great?

Answer: No, under the incremental tax scheme telling the true preferences
is the strictly dominant strategy. Additionally, for voter 3, project A is the
most preferred project to begin with, so she cannot do better by claiming
different preferences. For voter 2, even though B is the most preferred out-
come, it is still optimal to vote truthfully. Suppose voter 2 claims to enjoy
project B with net value of 85 so that the total project value of B increases
to 140 and is chosen over A. The incremental tax associated with this deci-
sion then would be 40, and the net utility for voter 2 would be 65 (true
preference) − 40 = 25, which is less than the truthful outcome where A is
chosen and the utility of 45 received.
Chapter 4 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
A (row chooser) and B (column chooser) must play the following 2 × 2
game:
8, −8
4, −4
2, −2
6, −6
Summed net
valuations
Excluded
voter
A
B
C
Incremental
tax
1
105
120
45
15
2
  90
  55
95
  5
3
125
100
50
  0
4
  85
  85
95
10

--- Sayfa 402 ---
Appendix  393
Beforehand, B can pay four dollars to a third person to learn A’s decision.
a.
Draw the full extensive form, assuming that A does not know whether
or not B purchased the information.
b.
Portray the corresponding strategic form.
c.
Solve the game for equilibrium strategies.

Answer:
a.
The extensive form is as follows:
B
A
B
B
A
Pay $ 4
Not pay $ 4
SA = {T, B}
SB = {L, R}
T
B
T
B
L
R
L
L
R
R
L
R
B
B
(4, –8)
(0, –4) (–2, –2)
(2, –6)
(8, –8)
(4, –4)
(2, –2)
(6, –6)
b.
Player A plays T or B. Player B pays (Pay, Not Pay) X Strategy where
strategy describes either (L,R) X (L,R) where he plays a certain strat-
egy after L and R if he pays, or (L, R) if he does not pay.
PLL
PLR
PRL
PRR
NR
NL
T
8, –12
8, –12
4, –8
4, –8
8, –8
2, –2
B
6, –10
2, –6
2, –6
6, –10
4, –4
6, –6
c.
PLL and PRR are all strictly dominated by NL and PLR is strictly dom-
inated by NR. PRL is strictly dominated by any convex combination of
NL and NR. The equilibrium of this game is for player A to play T and
B with probability ¼ and ¾ respectively, and for player B to play NL
and NR with probability ½.
3.
Does the following zero-sum strategic form game possess a pure strategy
equilibrium (games within cells are played if that cell is realized as a result
of players’ initial strategies)?

--- Sayfa 403 ---
394  Appendix
b1
b2
b3
a1
10
1
3
6
4
2
a2
7
10
10
20
6
6
5
5
10
a3
8
5
5

Answer: The pure strategy equilibrium of this game is (a2, b3). First, we
solve the three embedded games when (a1, b2), (a2, b1), and (a2, b2) are
played. If (a1, b2) is played, then the column player will play the left and
right strategies with probability q and 1 – q to induce row player’s indiffer-
ence, satisfying the equation:
–1q – 3(1 – q) = –4q – 2(1 – q)
q* = 1/4

The expected payoff for the row chooser is 2.5. If (a2, b2) is played, then
row player always plays top and column player always plays left, and the
expected utility of the game is (10, –10). If (a2, b1) is played, column player
plays left and row player plays top and the expected utility of the game is
(7, –7). At which point, examination reveals that (a2, b3) is the pure strategy
Nash equilibrium.
5.
Suppose two presidential election candidates, who maximize their prob-
ability of winning, must decide how to allocate three days among six
states. Whoever allocates the most time to a state wins that state and
whoever wins the most electoral votes wins the election. The states’ elec-
toral votes are as follows: 27, 27, 24, 18, 2, and 2. Assume that all ties are
broken by a coin toss and that transportation technology renders days
non-divisible.
a.
Does the corresponding two-candidate election game have a Nash
equilibrium in pure strategies?
b.
Does your answer change if the three largest states have the same elec-
toral weight?
c.
Does your answer to part (a) change if days are divisible?

Answer:
a.
In terms of probability of winning, allocating one day each to the three
largest states, (1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0), weakly dominates any other strategy.
b.
No, if the 3 states all have the same electoral weight, each player spend-
ing 1 day in each is still the equilibrium. A player deviating to spend
another day in one of the large states would lead to no change in vote
totals, and deviating to one of the smaller states would decrease that
player’s total.
c.
If days are divisible, then (1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0) is not a weakly dominant
strategy anymore. For example, it loses to (1.5, 1.5, 0, 0, 0, 0). It is fairly
straightforward to show that there is no pure strategy equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 404 ---
Appendix  395
7.
In addition to choosing a policy on the real line, suppose the candidates can also
try to mask their positions by presenting themselves as lotteries—as probability
distributions over the feasible policy space. Suppose that two parameters—the
mean and variance—characterize a candidate’s strategy (such as when that
strategy corresponds to a normal density function), and that voter i’s utility
for position x is ui(x) = −(xi − x)2. Describe the two-candidate election equi-
librium if all other provisions of the Median Voter Theorem apply.

Answer: Given the utility function ui(x)  =  −(xi  −  x)2, voters are risk
averse and will vote for the candidate with minimal variance for a
given position. At a given level of variance, a candidate at the median
will defeat a candidate not at the median, by the median voter theorem.
Therefore, the unique equilibrium is to set the policy at the median with
zero variance.
9.
Consider a nine-voter electorate in which voter i’s ideal point on the
issue equals i. Suppose a two-candidate election is held and that all of the
assumptions needed for the median voter result hold except that candidate
I must choose voter 3’s ideal point as his stated policy. Candidate II has no
such restriction.
a.
Who wins the election?
b.
Below are four possible descriptions of the outcome. Decide which of
the following statements are true.
i.
The median voter’s ideal point must be the outcome.
ii.
The median voter’s ideal point cannot be the outcome, but
another voter’s ideal point can be the outcome.
iii.	 The median voter’s ideal point cannot be the outcome and nei-
ther can any other voter’s ideal point.
iv.	 Either the median voter’s ideal point or another voter’s ideal point
can be the outcome.

Answer:
a.
II will win the election, as candidate I’s best response function to
all actions by candidate II is mandated to be 3. The best response
­function to 3 for candidate II is (3 < x < 7) wherein candidate II
will win.
b.
IV is the answer because (3, 5) is an equilibrium, but so is (3,4) and
any other combination of 3 and a position that defeats 3.
11.	 Consider the following twenty-nine player game, where two players (I and
II) are candidates and the other players, (1, 2, . . . , 27), are voters. Candidates
will compete for office by using one of four possible campaign strategies (A,
B, C, D) to recruit voters who will vote for them. The outcome of the elec-
tion will be determined by which of the two candidates has recruited the
most voters. In the first stage of the game, the two candidates simultaneously
choose one of the four campaign strategies. For some combinations of cam-
paign strategy choices (BB, CC, DB), the candidates must debate. Candidates
choose debate strategies simultaneously, but afterward they both learn the
other’s campaign strategy. Below is a table that shows the results of different

--- Sayfa 405 ---
396  Appendix
combinations of campaign strategies. The cell values represent the number
of voters recruited by candidate I (row chooser); 27 minus the cell value
equals the number of voters recruited by candidate II (column chooser).

A
B
C
D
A
15
3
21
7
B
9
12
27
5
13
0
15
C
17
19
24
17
23
14
18
D
11
12
13
27
11
11
14

After the campaign, the winner of the election is determined by major-
ity rule. Thus, the candidate that recruits a majority of voters, wins the
election.
a.
Which candidate wins the election?
b.
If campaign laws are changed so that strategy D cannot be chosen,
which candidate wins the election?

Answer:
a.
If both players play B, then in the subgame, candidate I will play T and
candidate II will play L and the outcome will be 12. If they both play
C, they will mix to maximize their expected plurality and the expected
supporters for candidate I will be approximately 17. If the outcome
is DB, candidate I will play top and candidate II will play left and the
outcome will be 12. At this point, candidate I has an option, C, which
guarantees victory in the election.
b.
Strategy C still determines victory in the election.
Chapter 5 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
For what values of x is the following game a Prisoners’ Dilemma?
x, 1
  3, −4
1, 3
2, 3
Answer: Assume two strategies, C (cooperate) and D (defect), such that
when the row chooser Player 1 and the column chooser Player 2 both play
C, the payoffs are (2, 3). Therefore, the payoffs corresponding to strategies
(D,C) (C,D) (D,D) become (3,–4), (1,3), and (x, 1), respectively. In order
for the game to be a Prisoners’ Dilemma, we need (D,D) to be an outcome
that is less desirable than (C, C) but that is nevertheless played because of
the higher returns from defection: 1 < x < 2.

--- Sayfa 406 ---
Appendix  397
3.
If free competition reigns in an industry, 20 million units of that indus-
try’s products will be sold by each firm at a net profit of $1 per item. But
if they collude to set a higher price, each firm will sell 15 million units
at a net profit of $2 each. If one firm defects to a lower price, its sales
will soar to 35 million units while every other firm will sell nothing, and
the creditors will begin to circle overhead. Senator Billie Bob proposes a
licensing agreement whereby each member of the industry must pay a
tax of $.20/item to produce the product at the fixed price that the car-
tel prefers—ostensibly to insure that “destructive competition” does not
“leave hard-working Americans unemployed.” What is the upper limit on
how much money he can extract from each firm in the form of campaign
contributions to his party?
Answer: Each firm has two strategies, either to sell at the market price, or
the cartel price. The game in strategic form is shown below. If every firm
sells at the cartel price the profits earned by each firm are 2 ∗15 = 30 mil-
lion dollars. When sold at market price the profits earned by each firm are
1 20
20
∗
=
 million dollars. If any firm defects into selling the goods at the
lower market price, then the expected profits equal 1 35
35
∗
=
.
Pmarket
Pcartel
Pmarket
 20, 20
35, 0
Pcartel
0, 35
30, 30
Destructive competition, that is, a firm lowering its price to increase its
own goods’ sales, can be avoided if the cartel price becomes the law. The
senator wants to tax $.20/item at cartel price; therefore, the new amount
of profits each firm collects becomes 1.8 15
27
∗
=
 million dollars. Thus,
the senator can extract, at most, 27
20
7
−
=
 million dollars from each
firm as contributions as a substitute for not passing the tax law on cartel
pricing.
5.
You direct Consolidated Smoke and you must decide whether or not to
agree to meet the president of Acme Sludge so that the two of you can fix
prices for your similar products, in which case your corporations each earn
$220 million. Both of you recognize however that the situation is a Prison-
ers’ dilemma: at the market price, you each earn $90 million, while if only
one defects from the agreement, his corporation earns $300 million and
the other corporation earns “zip.” Being competitive entrepreneurs with
your MBAs, neither of you trusts the other to maintain any agreement
reached. An additional danger is that federal antitrust investigators (with
probability .4) will detect your agreement, negate the price fixing scheme,
and impose a fine of $50 million each. Congressman I. M. Crass, however,
proposes to offer legislation that will make the cartel legal and enforce-
able in a court of law, and that will provide the regulatory teeth to main-
tain it; he demands some assistance in the next election—say, $50 million
from each firm. The problem is he wants his money up front, before the

--- Sayfa 407 ---
398  Appendix
legislature votes, and he can promise only a fifty-fifty chance that the pro-
posed legislation will pass. Assuming that you make the best decision pos-
sible in the circumstances, what are your firm’s expected profits?

Answer: Let us first look at the game independent of Congressman’s
proposal:
Pmarket
Pcartel
Pmarket
 90, 90
300, 0
Pcartel
0, 300
0.4*(90 – 50) + 0.6*(220),
0.4*(90 – 50) + 0.6*(220),
There is a 0.4 chance that price fixing will be detected, cartel pricing re-
voked and a $50 million fine will be paid if both players choose to stay in
the agreement. The expected return is $148 million. The equilibrium is
both firms selling at the market price ( P
P
market
market
,
).

The expected return from Congressman’s offer is:
= 0.5 220 + 0.5 90
50 = 105.
(
)
( ) −
There is 50% chance that the legislation will pass and each firm earns 220,
and 50% chance that it will not pass and the game becomes as shown in
strategic form above with an expected payoff of 90 due to both firms’ de-
fection. Since 105
90
>
, the optimal strategy is to pay the Congressman
and hope that the legislations passes!
7.
Two farmers must share an irrigation system, which they use by alternating
their access to it day by day. The farmer whose turn it is to extract water on
a particular day must choose between taking the allotted share (for a ben-
efit of 0 to himself and a cost of 0 to the other farmer) versus taking more
than the allotted share (for a benefit of B to the farmer in question and a
cost of C to the other farmer). However, the farmer who must otherwise sit
idly by for the day can choose to inspect his opposite number’s activities
at a cost to himself of K. If an excessive extraction is detected, the farmer
is empowered to fine the offender an amount F, which can be kept as com-
pensation for any economic injury.
a.
Assuming that all parameter values exceed zero, and taking a myopic
one-day view, for what parameter values is there a pure strategy equi-
librium in which the farmer inspects with certainty?
Answer: Let Farmer #1 be the player to decide whether to take the allotted
share or more, and Farmer #2 to be the player who inspects. The game in
strategic form then becomes:
Farmer #2
Inspect
Not Inspect
Farmer
#1
Allotted Share
(0, –K)
(0, 0)
More than Allotted Share
(B–F, –C–K+F)
(B, –C)

--- Sayfa 408 ---
Appendix  399

Given that K > 0, (Allotted share, Inspect) cannot be an equilibrium outcome,
since Not Inspect leads to a higher payoff for Farmer #2. The only possible
equilibrium with inspection is (More than Allotted Share, Inspect) and it is
possible for the following values:
For Farmer #2: F
K
F
K
−
≥
→
≥
0
For Farmer #1: B
F
B
F
−
≥
→
≥
0
Therefore: B
F
K
≥
≥
b.
Assuming that there is no pure strategy equilibria, what is the mixed
strategy equilibrium?

Answer: Mixed strategy requires that the returns from playing either strat-
egy are equal:
Farmer #2 : 
E Inspect
E Not Inspect
(
)
(
)
=
p
K
p
F
K
C
p
p
C
−
+
−
−
−
=
+
−
−
(
) (
)(
)
( ) (
)(
)
1
0
1
F
pF
K
−
−
= 0
p
K
F
Inspect p
K
F
Not Inspect
≤
−
→
≥
−
→
1
1
,
Farmer #1 : 
E Alloted Share
E More than Alloted Share
(
)
(
)
=
q
q
q B
F
q
B
0
1
0
1
( ) (
)( )
(
) (
)( )
+
−
=
−
+
−
0 =
−
B
qF
q
B
F
More than Alloted Share q
B
F
Alloted Share
≤
→
≥
→
,
The mixed strategy equilibrium is 




1
1









−
K
F
K
F
B
F
B
F
,
,
;
.
c.
Suppose that one of the farmers is to be picked at random as the one to
use the irrigation system, and suppose the parameters are set such that
(take more than allotted share, inspect) is a pure strategy equilibrium.
Can we raise the value of F so that the farmers prefer that there not be
any pure strategy equilibrium over what they would expect to get from
playing the game with the old parameter values?
Answer: Yes, we only need to increase F such that B
F
<
. This leads to
Farmer #1 choosing Allotted Share given Farmer #2 Inspects, and there will
be no pure strategy equilibrium.
9.
Show that if the “normal” strategy in a society playing the Prisoners’
Dilemma is TFT, and if the allowable mutants are STFT, ALLD (always
defect), and TF2T, then TF2T can invade if the probability of ALLD is low
compared to STFT, whereas the opposite is true if ALLD is more common.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
400  Appendix

Answer: A strategy will invade the “normal” strategy if the return from
playing that strategy exceeds that of the “normal.” Consider the following
Prisoners’ Dilemma game.
Cooperate
Defect
Cooperate
10, 10
–5, 20
Defect
20, –5
0, 0

The return from playing the normal TFT strategy is:
E TFT
p U TFT TFT
p U TFT STFT
p U TFT ALLD
p U TFT TF
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
0
1
2
3
2
,
,
,
,
T
(
)
E TFT
p
p
p
p
(
)








[ ]
=
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
0
1
2
3
2
2
10
1
5
1
1
20
1
5
10
1
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ





The return from playing TF2T is:
E TF T
p U TF T TFT
p U TF T STFT
p U TF T ALLD
p U TF
2
2
2
2
2
0
1
2
3
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
,
,
,
T TF T
,
2
(
)
E TF T
p
p
p
p
2
10
1
5
10
1
5 1
10
0
1
2
3
(
)








(
)


=
−
+
−+
−
+
−
+
+
δ
δ
δ
δ
1−




δ
Since the returns with respect to p0 and p3 are the same, we need to compare
the values that are multiplied with probabilities p1 and p2 in order to see
if E TF T
E TFT
2
(
)
(
)
>
:
p
p
2
2
5
5 1
−

≥
−
+
(
)


δ
Therefore the value associated with p2 will always be greater for TFT, thus
we need the value associated with p1 to be greater for TF2T in order for
E TF T
E TFT
2
(
)
(
)
>
:
p
p
1
1
5
1
1
20
1
5
10
1
2
2
−
−
+
−
≥
−+
−








δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
With some rearrangement, we can see that the above inequality holds only
when
2
3
<




δ
. Thus, for values of δ < 2
3
, TFT will be the surviving
strategy against TF2T, for values
2
3
<




δ
, TF2T will invade if p1 > p2 ,
and TFT will survive if p1 < p2 .

--- Sayfa 410 ---
Appendix  401
Chapter 6 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
You are a member of a three-person committee that must choose one out-
come from the list (A, B, C, D). Suppose the following preference orders
describe the committee (from most to least preferred):
you:
A
B
C
D
member 2:
D
C
A
B
member 3:
C
B
D
A

Which of the following procedures would you prefer to see implemented
if you believed that the other two members of the committee were sophis-
ticated: (1) an agenda that first paired B against C, the winner against A,
the winner against D; (2) an agenda that first paired C against A, the win-
ner against D, and the winner against B; (3) an agenda that first paired B
against D, the winner against C, the winner against A; or (4) you should
not care which is chosen.

Answer: 4) Since C is the Condorcet winner, all possible agendas will lead
to policy C; therefore, you are indifferent. If agenda 1 is chosen, by back-
wards induction D will beat A and lose to B and C in the final subgame,
then B and C will defeat A in the next subgame, and C will defeat B leading
to outcome C. If agenda 2 is chosen again, D defeats A, and C and B defeat
D, in the final subgame, B defeats A and C defeats B in the next subgame,
and C defeats A at the top of the tree leading to outcome C. If 3 is the
agenda in the final subgame, A defeats B, and C and D defeat A. Up the tree,
C defeats D and B, guaranteeing the outcome is C.
3.
Suppose a majority of the legislature prefers A to B. If you are opposed
to A, if A and B must be voted on first regardless of what amendments
are introduced, and if everyone is a sophisticated voter, which alternative
would you prefer to introduce: C or D? C creates the majority rule cycle
“A preferred to B preferred to C preferred to A” while D defeats both A and
B. Your preferences are “B preferred to D preferred to C preferred to A.”

Answer: Introduce C. In the final subgame, C will defeat A and lose to B.
Therefore, at the top of the tree, B will defeat A, leading to your favorite
outcome.
5.
A  legislature (which we assume has three members) can consider four
motions, where each motion affects the amount of money going to a leg-
islator’s district. Let the amounts (in thousands) to each district from each
motion be as follows:
District 1
District 2
District 3
A (status quo)
300
0
−400
B (committee bill)
500
−600
0
C (possible amend.)
0
800
−900
D (possible amend.)
−900
400
450

--- Sayfa 411 ---
402  Appendix

Motions A and B are on the floor as proposals and you must decide whether
to propose an amended bill. If you propose C, the agenda will be C versus
B the winner against A; if you propose D the agenda will be D versus B the
winner against A. If D and C are both proposed, the agenda is D versus C,
the winner against B, the winner against A.
a.
Suppose you are the representative from district 2. Which amendment
should you propose: C, which pays your district $800,000 or D, which
pays $400,000?
b.
Suppose you are chairman (and dictator) of the relevant legislative
subcommittee, and that you can report out of your subcommittee
either B or C or D as the bill that the legislature must consider. But
you are also certain that whatever alternatives you fail to report out
will be introduced on the floor as amendments. Thus,
If you report B, the agenda is “C versus D, winner versus B, winner versus A.”
If you report C, the agenda is “B versus D, winner versus C, winner versus A.”
If you report D, the agenda is “C versus B, winner versus D, winner versus A.”

What would you choose as your bill if you were the representative from
district 2?
c.
With respect to part (b), if majority rule is used by the subcommittee
to choose whether to report B, C, or D, what will it report?

Answer:
a.
You choose D; if you chose amendment C the outcome will be B and
your district loses $600,000. If you choose D, the outcome will be D
and your district gains $400,000.
b.
You are indifferent. C will never be the final outcome; no matter what
order you introduce the bill, D will be the outcome.
c.
It will be indifferent for the reasons discussed in (b).
7.
A  nine-member legislature using majority rule faces a budget that
allows them to pass two of three proposed programs (A, B, C). The leg-
islature has the following preference orders (ranked from most to least
preferred):
Legislator
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
B
A
B
A
C
C
B
A
C
C
B
A
C
A
B
A
C
B
A
C
C
B
B
A
C
B
A

You chair the legislature and are legislator 1. The voting procedure is as
follows:

First, vote whether to keep or veto alternative B. If B is vetoed, the vot-
ing ends and alternatives A and C are implemented. If B is kept, then vote
whether to keep or veto alternative C. If C is vetoed, the voting ends and

--- Sayfa 412 ---
Appendix  403
alternatives A and B are implemented. If C is kept, then vote whether to
keep or veto alternative A. If A is vetoed, the voting ends and alternatives
B and C are implemented. If A is kept, one member of the legislature must
choose which alternative should be vetoed.
a.
As chairman, should you choose yourself to make this veto decision or
legislator 4?
b.
Assuming that legislator 4 makes the veto decision, design an
agenda of the type illustrated in which B and C are nevertheless
passed.

Answer:
a)	 The voting procedure can be illustrated by the following decision tree.
If you yourself make the veto decision when none of the programs is
vetoed, you will veto your least preferred program, A, and keep B and
C. So voters are indifferent between vetoing or keeping A. Moving up
the decision tree, program C will be vetoed because A,B are preferred
to B,C by a majority of the voters. By the same reasoning, at the begin-
ning of the decision tree, B will be vetoed because (A,C) is preferred to
(A,B) by the majority. The final outcome is (A,C). If voter 4 is the veto
player, it is straightforward to show that the outcome is again (A,C).
So there is no difference between having you or voter 4 to be the veto
player.
b)	 An agenda that produces (B,C) is as follows: keep or veto A first, then
B, then C.
Chapter 7 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
In late 1941 the British were concerned as to how to respond to an antici-
pated invasion by Japan of Thailand’s (and Myanmar) Kra Isthmus and an
eventual invasion of Malaya and the critical British outpost and naval base
at Singapore. Thailand was ostensibly neutral and the critical issue that
confronted Britain’s strategic planners was whether they should attempt to
forestall a Japanese occupation of Thailand by invading the country them-
selves beforehand and thereby block the ports and airfields Japan would
most likely use in its move toward Malay and Singapore. As the situation
has been described by one historian of the period, “If British forces only
entered the Kra Isthmus after a Japanese incursion . . . they would probably
set off a war with Japan. If [they moved] . . . before the Japanese entered
Thailand . . . Tokyo could use this as a pretext for its own invasion. . . . [The
British] had been told, possibly accurately, that the Japanese might even
attempt to trick Britain into taking the first step . . . [in which case] Britain
might lack for the support of the United States” (Evan Mawdsley, Decem-
ber 1941, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011: 54). More specifically, as
the British concern was most clearly stated by Churchill, “We should not

--- Sayfa 413 ---
404  Appendix
resist or attempt to forestall a Japanese attack on the Kra Isthmus unless we
had a satisfactory assurance from the United States that they would join us
should our action cause us to be involved in a war with Japan.” Of course,
this concern became moot in less than a week with Japan’s attack on Pearl
Harbor. Nevertheless, without assigning values to the possible outcomes,
sketch out a description of this situation in extensive form, treating the
preferences (responses) of the United States as not known with certainty
by either Britain or Japan.

Answer:
Britain
U.S. will back
Britain
U.S. will not
back Britain
Invade
beforehand
Attack
Thailand
Not
Attack
Thailand
Not Invade
beforehand
Attack
Thailand
Not
Attack
Thailand
Attack
Thailand
Not
Attack
Thailand
Attack
Thailand
Not
Attack
Thailand
Japan
Not Support
Britain
Go to war
with Japan
in Thailand
Not Go to war
with Japan
in Thailand
Go to war
with Japan
in Thailand
Not Go to war
with Japan
in Thailand
U.S.
Britain
Support
Britain
Not Support
Britain
Support
Britain
Not Support
Britain
U.S.
Support
Britain
Not Support
Britain
U.S.
Support
Britain
U.S.
Britain
Japan
Britain
Invade
beforehand
Not Invade
beforehand
Japan
Japan
Nature
3.
In his unsuccessful surgeries (those in which the patient dies) Dr. Ian Com-
petent has only a fifty-fifty chance of not being at fault. With this in mind,
the relatives of his latest victim have asked for compensation: $1,000,000. If
Competent (who has already had his insurance policy revoked but who as a
shareholder in a local savings and loan association is quite wealthy) refuses
to settle, the relatives can take the matter to court (or they can forget it). Once
in court assume that justice is done. (This is not an exercise that concerns the
competence of lawyers.) So if Competent is innocent (and only he knows
for sure), he loses nothing and the relatives lose $1,000,000 (attorney’s fees
being what they are). On the other hand, if he loses, then he loses $3,000,000
and the victim’s relatives gain $2,000,000 (again, lawyers take their cut).
a.
Portray this situation’s extensive and strategic forms.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
Appendix  405
Answer:
Nature
Relatives
(0, 0)
(–3, 2)
(0, 0)
(0, –1)
(–1, 1)
Dr. at
fault
Dr. not at
fault
Demand
$ 1,000,000
Demand
$ 1,000,000
Court
Forget
Court
Forget
~Settle
Settle
Relatives
1−p = 0.5
p = 0.5
Relatives
Relatives
Dr.
(–1, 1)
~Settle
Settle
Dr.
Doctor
Relatives
At Fault, Not At Fault
Court
Forget
(Settle, Settle)
–1, 1
–1, 1
(Settle, ~ Settle)
–0.5, 0
–0.5, 0.5
(~ Settle, Settle)
–2, 1.5
–0.5, 0.5
(~ Settle, ~ Settle)
–1.5, 0.5
0, 0
b.
Determine the game’s equilibrium.

Answer: For Dr. Competent, (Settle, Settle) and (~ Settle, Settle) are
dominated strategies. In the reduced 2 × 2 game, there is no pure strategy
equilibrium. It is straightforward to show that in the mixed strategy equi-
librium the doctor will mix between his remaining strategies with equal
probabilities, and the relatives will “forget” with two-thirds probability.
c.
Interpret this equilibrium.
Answer: The equilibrium suggests that if the doctor is at fault, he will mix
between settling and not settling with equal probabilities, and if the doctor
is not at fault, he will never settle. On the other hand, the relatives will mix
strategies too, going to court one-third of the time and forgetting about the
situation two-thirds of the time.

--- Sayfa 415 ---
406  Appendix
5.
Consider the following sequential elimination agenda: “Alternatives A and B
are first paired. If A wins, it is the outcome; but if B wins, B is paired against
C and the winner of this vote is the final outcome.” Suppose that only these
three preference types are possible (ranked from first preference to last):
t1:
A
B
C
t2:
B
A
C
t3:
C
B
A

Assuming that a person has type ti preferences with probability pi, that
the pi’s are common knowledge, and that a person knows his own prefer-
ences, show that the selection of a Condorcet winner corresponds to an
equilibrium.

Answer:
For voters with T1 preferences, between alternatives A and B, voting for
A weakly dominates voting for B because it might help A win, and even
if it did not, it would not decrease B’s chance of winning against C in the
subsequent round. Similarly, for voters with T3 preferences, voting for A,
their least-preferred alternative, is a weakly dominated strategy. For voters
with T2 preferences, if the number of voters with T3 preferences is greater
than the number of voters with T1 and T2 preferences, then B defeats A in
the first stage of voting regardless of whether they vote for A or B. If the
number of voters with T1 and T2 preferences is greater than those with T3
preferences, since B will defeat C in the second stage of the vote, voters
with T2 preferences have no incentives voting for A in the first stage of the
vote. In other words, voting for B weakly dominates voting for A for voters
with T2 preferences. Because everyone votes sincerely, the Condorcet win-
ner corresponds to an equilibrium.
7.
Refer to section 7.8 and reproduce our analysis of the Centipede Game,
assuming that each player’s probability of irrationality is .3 rather than .03.

Answer: This makes the payoffs for our 3 strategies:

s1
s2
s3
s1
89.8, 38.2
102.4, 88.6
220, 55
s2
105.2, 78.8
186.4, 109.6
304, 76
s3
206, 104
248, 272
640, 160

Inspection reveals that player 1 will always play s3. Given this, player 2’s best
response function is to play s2.
9.
In an upcoming election on insurance rate reform, it is common knowledge
that you will cast the decisive vote. You are uncertain about the identity of
the reform’s sponsor but have (correct) beliefs that there is a 7-in-10 chance
that the reform is pro-insurance (INS) and as a consequence will raise your
insurance rates (making you poorer) and that there is a 3-in-10 chance that
the reform is pro-Consumer (CON), in which case the reform will keep your

--- Sayfa 416 ---
Appendix  407
insurance rates at their present level. A campaigner, who knows whether the
reform is the insurance type or the consumer type, and, in either case, is paid
only if the bill passes, must decide whether or not to go to your House to tell
you to vote for the bill. (Campaigner chooses “House” or “No.”) On election
day, you must decide whether to vote “Yes” or “No” on the reform. The pay-
offs are determined as follows: It costs the campaigner $5 to go to your house.
The campaigner gets paid $15 if the reform passes and $0 if the reform fails.
If either an insurance-type reform passes or a consumer-type reform fails,
your rates go up—you lose $10. If either a consumer-type reform passes or
an insurance-type reform fails, your rates stay the same—you get $0.
a.
Draw the game’s extensive form.
b.
Specify the pure strategies available to each player.
c.
Portray the situation’s strategic form.
d.
Find all the pure-strategy equilibria.

Answer:
a.
The extensive form is as follows:
Nature
Campaigner
p = 0.7
Insurance
House
(1–p) = 0.3
Pro-consumers
No
You
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
You
You
You
Campaigner
House
No
(10, –10) (–5, 0) (15, –10)
(0, 0)
(10, 0)
(–5, 10) (15, 0) (0, –10)
b.
The campaigner has four strategies:
a1:  Visit the House regardless of whether the reform is pro-insurance.
a2:  Do not visit the House regardless of whether the reform is pro-insurance.
a3:  Visit the House only if the reform is pro-insurance.
a4:  Visit the House only if the reform is pro-consumer.
You also have four strategies:
b1:  Vote Yes regardless of whether player 1 visits the House.
b2:  Vote No regardless of whether player 1 visits the House.

--- Sayfa 417 ---
408  Appendix
b3:  Vote Yes if player 1 visits the House, and vote No if player 1 does not
visit the House.
b4:  Vote No if player 1 visits the House, and vote Yes if player 1 does not
visit the House.
c.
b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
10, −7
−5, −3
5.5, −10
0.5, 0
a2
15, −7
 0, −3
10.5, −10
4.5, 0
a3
11.5, −7
−3.5, −3
7, −10
1, 0
a4
13.5, −7
−1.5, −3
10.5, −10
4.5, 0
d.
(a2, b4) and (a4, b4) are pure strategy equilibria.
Chapter 8 Exercises
Answer Key
1.
Is vote trading in a legislature profitable and most likely to be observed
when (a) various minorities find it in their interest to thwart the will of
the majority? (b) there is no uniquely stable outcome, and it is possible for
every agreement to be upset by something else? (c) congressional rules are
sufficiently inflexible that only behind-the-scenes deals will accommodate
the majority will? or (d) legislators are constrained by their constituents
from voting sophisticatedly?

Answer: b) There is no uniquely stable outcome, or Condorcet winner, by
Schwartz’s vote trading theorem.
3.
Recall our example, from section 8.4, of the Valley of the Dump. Sup-
pose, however, that there are only four clans (euphemistically named 1,
2, 3, and 4), each living on its own quarter of the valley, and that every
day, the number of bags of garbage produced by each clan equals its
name—clan i produces i bags of garbage per day. As before, the legal code
of the valley, strictly enforced, requires each clan to produce its allotted
bags of garbage, and it allows clan i to dump exactly i bags of garbage in
its own backyard or the yards of others. However, the bags must be dealt
with as distinct units—no scattering of any bag’s contents is permitted.
(They have high standards in the valley.) Assume that each clan evaluates
the outcome of the garbage problem in the same way as in our original
example.
a.
Define and interpret the conditions that must be satisfied if this game
is to have a core.
b.
Does a nonempty core exist for this game?
c.
How do your answers change if we suppose that bags of garbage are
infinitely divisible?

--- Sayfa 418 ---
Appendix  409

Answer:
a)	 Assume the existence of a distribution (x1, x2, x3, x4) in the core and
that the payoff from a bag of garbage on one’s lawn is −1. Then it
must be that x1 + x2 + x3 ≥ 4, x1 + x2 + x4 ≥ 3, x1 + x3 + x4 ≥ 2, x2
+ x3 + x4 ≥ 1. These conditions state that for (x1, x2, x3, x4) to be in
the core, then it must guarantee that no three-clan coalition does any
worse than have the garbage of the excluded clan on the coalition’s
lawns. Similar inequalities can be written for each two-person coali-
tion. Finally, it must be the case that x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = −10, since
garbage cannot be exported from the valley.
b)	 Combining all three-clan constraints we have 3(x1 + x2 + x3 + x4)
≥ 10, and substituting in our total value, we have −30 ≥ 10, at which
point we have a contradiction, so the core is empty.
c)	 If the bags are infinitely divisible, we still need to satisfy the above
constraints, which is impossible, so there is no change.
5.
Consider the following system of representative majority rule among
twenty-seven voters: There are three regions, each divided into three dis-
tricts. Each district has three voters. There are representatives (who are
computers, and are not to be considered part of the voting body) at the
regional and district levels. District level representatives inherit (over any
pair of alternatives) the majority preferences of the voters in their districts,
and regional representatives inherit the majority preferences of the repre-
sentatives in their region. A policy outcome is chosen by a majority vote of
the regional representatives.
a.
What is the minimum number of voters that can form a decisive coali-
tion (i.e., get their preferred policy positions as the outcome)? Con-
struct an example to support your answer.
b.
How does your answer to (a) change if the district level representatives
are eliminated?
c.
Assuming that all preferences are single-peaked over a single issue,
does the final outcome depend on the existence of the district level
representatives? Why?
Answer:
a)	 8 voters are necessary to get majorities (of 2 to 1) in 2 of the 3 districts
in 2 of the 3 regions.
b)	 Eliminating districts means 10 voters are necessary to get majorities in
2 of the 3 regions.
c)	 The existence of districts changes who the decisive voter is, and thus
possibly the final outcome.
7.
In economics, a common representation of utility for two commodities is
the function ui(xi, yi) = xi
αyi
β where both α and β are positive constants. So
suppose two persons are bargaining over the allocation of ten units of each
of the goods, where both goods are infinitely divisible. Let α = β = 2 for
both persons, and suppose that person 1’s initial endowments of the two

--- Sayfa 419 ---
410  Appendix
goods are 2 and 7, respectively (so that 2’s initial endowments are 8 and 3,
respectively). What is the core to this two-person game?

Answer: Our answer depends on whether utility is transferable or not. If it
is transferable, then v(1) = 2272 = 53 and v(2) = 8232 = 73. v(1,2) is then cal-
culated by maximizing the players’ summed utility, x2y2 + (10 – x)2(10 – y)2,
which occurs when either player is given all of both goods so as to yield a total
of 10,000. The core is then the set of utility 2-tuples {(u1, u2) : u1 + u2 = 10,000
and v(1) ≥ 53, v(2) ≥ 73}. If, on the other hand, utility is not transferable, then
given the symmetry between the two goods for both players, only the initial
allocation corresponds to the core.
9.
Suppose three houses, each with a large front-facing window, are arrayed
in a triangle such that a person sitting in any house can see one-fifth of
its own garden, all of the garden of the house on the left, and none of the
garden belonging to the house on its right. Suppose each homeowner is
endowed with one bag of fertilizer and is required by law to use it (subur-
ban values being what they are). A bag of fertilizer, allocated to one garden,
improves that garden so that a person having a full view of it enjoys a ben-
efit of five units of utility, a person having only a one-fifth view enjoys a
one unit utility increase, and a person with no view is not benefited at all.
Assume that the homeowners can coalesce to allocate their fertilizer, and
that people cannot fertilize another’s garden without permission. Suppose
also that if two bags of fertilizer are allocated to any one garden, then that
garden is doubly beautiful. Does the game have a core?

Answer: The maximum summed benefit available to the occupants of the
three houses here is 18 (6 units of benefit to each household), which occurs
if each occupant fertilizes his or her own lawn. Thus, there exists an alloca­
tion of the fertilizer that yields a payoff vector of (x1, x2 , x3) such that
x1 + x2 + x3 = 18. Each coalition of two houses, on the other hand, can
guarantee themselves a payoff of 17, by putting two bags in the leftmost
garden and forbidding the excluded player from fertilizing the rightmost
member’s lawn (assuming that the excluded member responds rationally
by fertilizing his or her own lawn). We thus have:
x1 + x2 ≥ 17
x2 + x3 ≥ 17
x2 + x3 ≥ 17
which, if a core exists (if there is no two-household coalition that can upset
any feasible outcome) requires that 2(x1 + x2 + x3) ≥ 51. But substituting
x1 + x2 + x3 = 18 requires that 36 ≥ 51. Therefore, the core is empty.
11.	 Suppose three people, 1, 2, and 3, must use majority rule to choose a rule
for dividing $1,000 among themselves, and suppose that only two rules are
available: (1) face-to-face bargaining in which persons 1 and 2 have two

--- Sayfa 420 ---
Appendix  411
votes and person 3 has one vote, and (2) a procedure whereby 1 makes a
proposal in which he or she receives $500 and in which 2 and 3 divide the
remaining $500 in units of $250 (i.e., 2 gets either $500 or $250 or $0). If
the proposal is accepted by 2 or 3, it is implemented. If it is rejected by both
2 and 3, then player 3 can make a similar proposal (i.e., $500 for person
2, with persons 1 and 3 receiving the remainder in units of $250). If it is
rejected, the outcome (333, 333, 333) is implemented. What is the final
outcome?

Answer: If option (1) is chosen, the fact that person 3 has only one vote
is irrelevant as to which coalitions are winning—the same coalitions are
winning if all three voters have the same voting weight. Hence, the V-set
(as well as the Bargaining Set and Competitive Solution) is made up of 3
outcomes (500,500,0), (500,0,500), (0,500,500), and so two of the players
will vote to divide all of the money between them. If option (2) is chosen,
suppose 1’s initial proposal is rejected by both 2 and 3, and that 3 must
then make a proposal. If 3 proposes anything but (500, 0, 500) or (0, 500,
500)—if 3 offers (250, 250, 500)—it will be rejected because 1 and 2 both
do better at (333, 333, 333). Player 1, then, clearly would not want to make
an initial proposal that might be rejected by both players since in that event
1 cannot be certain as to whether it will get 0 or 500. Thus, 1 should pro-
pose either (500, 500, 0) or (500, 0, 500), and this proposal will be accepted
by either player 2 or 3. In choosing a rule, then, player 1 prefers the second
option but players 2 and 3 are indifferent so we cannot say definitively what
the final outcome will be.
13.	 Consider the preferences of the following four-person committee over three
bills, A, B, and C:
L1
L3
L5
L7
Ui
A
B
C
A
2
B
C
A
B
1
C
A
B
C
0

Suppose the committee can pass one and only one of the three bills. In
order for a bill to pass, it must receive at least two-thirds of the vote. Voting
is weighted so that L1’s vote counts once, L7’s vote counts seven times and
so on. Legislators are strategic, vote simultaneously, vote for only one bill,
and are free to communicate and form cooperative agreements. A legisla-
tor receives a payoff of 2 if his most-preferred alternative passes, 1 if his
second-most-preferred alternative passes and 0 otherwise. Utility is trans-
ferable and infinitely divisible. All cooperative agreements are costlessly
enforceable.
a.
Which, if any, of the bills pass?
b.
If L1’s vote is counted three times instead of once, how does your
answer to part (a) change?

--- Sayfa 421 ---
412  Appendix

Answer:
a)	 A winning coalition needs 11 votes to pass a bill, therefore no bill
passes without the support of L7. Passing bill A yields a total group
payoff of 5 (i.e., 2 + 0 + 1 + 2), B yields 4, C yields 3. Therefore all
transfers of utility in the core are those that follow passing A and give
legislator L7 at least 2.
b)	 A majority now requires 12 votes, so L7 remains essential to any win-
ning coalition. Thus, the argument of part (a) still holds.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
Index
abstention from alienation 159
abstention from indifference 158
Adams, John 6, 154, 354
Adams, John Quincy 352⁜–⁜4
Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”)
258⁜–⁜9
Afghanistan 315
agendas: endogenous formation of
237⁜–⁜8; manipulation of 70⁜–⁜4; plurality
voting 75; process of setting 70,
238, 256⁜–⁜63; sequential elimination
75, 324; and voting 233⁜–⁜8; see also
amendment agendas; voting agendas
agenda setters 70⁜–⁜1, 233
airline industry 195
Alessandri, Jorge 104, 253⁜–⁜4
Allende, Salvador 104, 253⁜–⁜4
amendment agendas 70⁜–⁜2, 234⁜–⁜7, 245,
293
American Association of Retired Persons
(AARP) 198
American Civil War 201⁜–⁜2, 218
ancestors and genealogy 209
Andropov, Yuri 272
anti-missile defense shield (Star Wars)
189
anti-missile deployment as example 7⁜–⁜8
approval voting 244, 251
Arab states, sanctions against Canada 316
arms races 189⁜–⁜90, 201, 303
Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem 39⁜–⁜40,
355
The Art of Strategy (Dixit & Nalebuff) 89
The Art of War (Sun Tzu) 1⁜–⁜2, 68
associations, voluntary 198
asymmetric information 273⁜–⁜5, 277, 310
atomic bomb example 3⁜–⁜4
auction for $100, 48⁜–⁜9, 65
Australia, WWII strategies 12
Austria, WWI strategies 180, 280⁜–⁜1,
302⁜–⁜3, 362
backward reasoning 84, 89
backward reduction 76, 97, 203, 205
Baklanov, Oleg 84
balance of power 303, 329; vs. collective
security 361⁜–⁜70
balance of power game 365⁜–⁜7
Baltic Republics 221, 228
Bargaining Set 349⁜–⁜51, 361; strong 350,
352
bargaining situations 330
Battle of the Marne 45
Bayes’s Law 281⁜–⁜8, 293
Bayesian Equilibrium 288⁜–⁜9, 294, 297;
and the Chain-Store Paradox 301
beliefs: incorrect or imperfect 65; initial
299; manipulation of 67⁜–⁜9, 299;
modeling 69; prior 278, 279, 281, 284
Berchtold, Leopold 280
Berlin Wall, fall of 273
Bernoulli, Daniel 14
Bernoulli, Nicholas 14
best response 98, 140, 266, 274, 285⁜–⁜7,
293, 306, 307
bicameralism 375
Bill of Rights 215
blackjack (card game) 78⁜–⁜9
bluffing 77, 196, 318
Boldin, Valery 84
Borda, Jean-Charles de 240
Borda Count 239⁜–⁜44
Boston Marathon bombers 4⁜–⁜5
branches (extensive form) 50, 58, 60
Brezhnev Doctrine 272
bribes 23, 91, 275, 278, 286, 289, 303, 304
Britain: goals prior to WWI 14;
sanctions against USSR 316; WWI

--- Sayfa 423 ---
414  Index
strategies 14, 280⁜–⁜1, 364; WWII
objectives 11⁜–⁜12; WWII strategies
11⁜–⁜12, 323⁜–⁜4
Bryan, William Jennings 49
Buchanan, George 281
budget constraint 25⁜–⁜9, 95, 265
budget simplex 29⁜–⁜30, 114
Bulgaria 272
bullies 273
Burma (Myanmar) 323
Burr, Aaron 33
Bush, George H.W. 368
Bush, George W. 141, 143
California state propositions 264
California flying club 237
California Institute of Technology Jet
Propulsion Lab 239
Calvo, John P. 201⁜–⁜2
Canada: Arab sanctions against 316;
geographic subdivisions in 245
candidates: introduction of new issues by
165⁜–⁜8; objectives of 143, 163⁜–⁜5; policy
decisions of 172⁜–⁜3
canoe races 191
cardinal preferences see utility
functions
Carnegie, Andrew 301
Carter, Jimmy 169
casino gambling 210⁜–⁜11
Castro, Fidel 315
cat and mouse maze 133⁜–⁜4
Catch-22 (Heller) 188⁜–⁜9
Cayuga tribe 48, 63
Ceausescu, Nicolae 196, 199
Centipede Game 82⁜–⁜3, 317⁜–⁜23
Central Europe 220, 227
Chain-Store Paradox 300⁜–⁜2
chance nodes 50, 58, 60
Chaos Theorem 147⁜–⁜8
characteristic function 336
cheap talk 303
Chen Shui-Bian 105
Chernobyl nuclear disaster 272
chess 96
Chile 104, 253
China: foot binding in 191, 214⁜–⁜15;
human rights status in 315, 316⁜–⁜17;
media policy in 17⁜–⁜18; Nepal’s
military ties with 316; overthrowing
the king in 192; relationship with
Taiwan 19, 278⁜–⁜9, 304, 301; self-
reporting in 10⁜–⁜11, 102⁜–⁜3; and Sun
Tzu’s Art of War 1; U.S. relationship
with 315, 316⁜–⁜17; WWII strategies 12
choices: collective vs. individual 36⁜–⁜41;
dominant 102⁜–⁜3, 118, 189, 197,
206, 285, 294⁜–⁜5; sequence of 78;
simultaneous 61⁜–⁜2, 79, 90⁜–⁜6, 179
Christmas Truce 204⁜–⁜5, 331
Churchill, Winston 11, 12, 323
The Cincinnati Kid 318
circular indifference contours and curves
146, 166, 257⁜–⁜8, 260
Cixi (Dowager Empress of China) 214
Clay, Henry 353⁜–⁜4
Cleveland, Grover 49
Clinton, Bill 315, 316
coalitional preference 331⁜–⁜2
coalitions: Christmas Truce as 329;
concept of 327⁜–⁜30; and Condorcet
winners 330⁜–⁜5; examples of 327;
feasible outcomes of 331; formation of
327⁜–⁜8; generalization about 335⁜–⁜40;
majority 330; minimal winning
348⁜–⁜9, 353, 356, 357; parliamentary
354⁜–⁜8; problems and incomplete ideas
358⁜–⁜61; and redistribution 340⁜–⁜2;
spatial issues in 342⁜–⁜4; unanimous
331
Coase Theorem 338⁜–⁜40
Cold War 368
collective action 40⁜–⁜1, 175, 193, 195⁜–⁜200,
201, 327
collective security 350, 361⁜–⁜70
collectivities 40
The Colonel Blotto Game 114, 152
The Commentaries of The Imperial
Academy of Science of St. Petersburg
(Bernoulli) 14
committees: frictionless majority rule
332; and majority rule 330; voting in
293⁜–⁜300
common knowledge 1, 2, 52, 96, 108, 117,
121, 128, 205, 277, 285, 287⁜–⁜8, 294,
332, 334
Common Sites Picketing Bill 75
Competitive Solution 349, 351, 355⁜–⁜6,
358, 361
complete preference see preferences,
complete
conditional probabilities 278, 281⁜–⁜3, 286,
296⁜–⁜7
Condorcet, Marquis de 240
Condorcet Paradox 37⁜–⁜41, 72, 81; with
spatial preferences 38⁜–⁜9

--- Sayfa 424 ---
Index  415
Condorcet winners: among three
candidates 252; and amendment
agendas 71⁜–⁜2, 236, 293; and coalitions
331⁜–⁜5; in committee voting 294,
298⁜–⁜300; and cores 342⁜–⁜4; games
without 113, 115, 145, 148⁜–⁜51, 166,
240, 252, 261, 340⁜–⁜1, 344; in legislative
actions 71⁜–⁜2, 298; in majority rule
cooperative games 336–7; and the
Nash equilibrium 101, 146, 148, 248,
253, 266, 332; and Pareto optimal
outcomes 145⁜–⁜6; and special voting
rules 239⁜–⁜43; in various voting
situations 73, 101, 105, 146⁜–⁜8, 155,
248⁜–⁜55, 257, 264⁜–⁜7, 295
Congress see legislator-lobbyist game;
legislators; legislatures
Conrad, Franz 280
constant-sum games 124⁜–⁜5, 139⁜–⁜40, 368;
see also zero-sum games
The Constitution of the Five Nations 48
Constitutional Convention (1787) 30⁜–⁜1,
70, 127, 213, 233, 255⁜–⁜6
constitutional design 211⁜–⁜19; see also U.S.
Constitution
continuation value(s) 206, 217, 365
contract curve 145, 147
cooperation 195⁜–⁜200, 205, 208; economic
369
cooperative equilibrium 208
coordination, social 226
core(s): of a cooperative game 335⁜–⁜40;
majority rule games without 344⁜–⁜54;
in Prisoners’ Dilemma 337; and spatial
issues 342
“Corrupt Bargain” of 1824 352⁜–⁜4
corruption 219⁜–⁜20, 226⁜–⁜8
counter-objections 350
Crawford, William H. 353⁜–⁜4
crime control example 6⁜–⁜7, 18⁜–⁜19
crisis escalation 48⁜–⁜9, 64⁜–⁜5
Croatia 228
Cuba 310, 315
Cuban Missile Crisis 48
cumulative voting 251
current threat 363
Czechoslovakia: defection from Soviet
Union 219; economic and political
reform in 227, 272; WWII
strategy 362
dating situations 274
De Gaulle, Charles 36, 364
deception 1, 165, 278, 290, 301, 302, 303,
305, 309, 323
decision makers: choices confronting 12;
identification of 12; perceptions of 12
decision making: political 12; two modes
of 2; see also decision making under
risk; game theoretic decision making
decision making under risk 2⁜–⁜3, 17;
anti-missile deployment example
7⁜–⁜8; atomic bomb and Japan example
3⁜–⁜4; Boston Marathon example 4⁜–⁜5;
crime control, police patrols and crime
voting example 6⁜–⁜7; electoral college
and bloc voting example 6; fighting
a war with allies example 11⁜–⁜12;
grading on a curve example 8⁜–⁜9,
12⁜–⁜13; presidential power example
9⁜–⁜10; voter interest groups in three
candidate elections example 5⁜–⁜6; West
Point honor code and Chinese self-
reporting example 10⁜–⁜11
decision nodes 50, 58, 60, 97
decision theoretic 3⁜–⁜12, 67, 118⁜–⁜19,
164⁜–⁜5, 292
Declaration of Independence, vote for
35⁜–⁜6
Defensible Set 60⁜–⁜3; non-unique 360
democracy, direct 264
democratic states 212
deterrence signaling game 307
diamond rings example 34
Dickinson, John 35
discount rate/discount factor 23, 190, 197,
206⁜–⁜9, 220, 226⁜–⁜8, 364; see also time
discounting
divide-the-dollar game 362, 363
Dixit, Avinash 89
domain, unrestricted 39
dominant choice 102⁜–⁜3, 118, 189, 197,
206, 285, 294⁜–⁜5
dominated strategies 115⁜–⁜16; examples
of 116⁜–⁜17
domination 114⁜–⁜15
domino theory 45
Dyer, James 239
East Germany 272
economic sanctions 310⁜–⁜18
economics: grocery store example 25⁜–⁜9;
vs. political science 25⁜–⁜6
effective 335⁜–⁜6, 338
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 142
election fraud 142, 153, 188, 219

--- Sayfa 425 ---
416  Index
election rules, and the Median Voter
Theory 141
elections: in Chile 104; in Korea 104⁜–⁜5;
limited information 169; with mixed
strategy equilibrium 110; multi-
candidate 159⁜–⁜63; multi-dimensional
spatial 114; runoff 141, 161⁜–⁜3, 241,
244, 250⁜–⁜1, 254⁜–⁜5; in Taiwan 105;
third candidate entry under majority
rule with a runoff 161⁜–⁜2; third
candidate entry under plurality rule
160⁜–⁜1; three-candidate 5⁜–⁜6; two-
candidate 153⁜–⁜6; two-candidate, three-
voter, one-issue, as example 100⁜–⁜1;
with uninformed voters 168⁜–⁜74; in
USSR 187⁜–⁜8; see also presidential
elections (U.S.); vote fraud; voting
Electoral College 6, 114, 141, 143, 352⁜–⁜3;
and bloc voting 6; political dilemma
of 185⁜–⁜6; potential for bias in 154⁜–⁜6;
two-candidate elections and 153⁜–⁜6
electorate see voters
electors, methods of selection 153⁜–⁜4; see
also Electoral College
elliptical indifference contours 258⁜–⁜9
endogenous agendas 237⁜–⁜8
endogenous satisficing 351⁜–⁜2
equilibrium/equilibria: collective security
369; cooperative 208; coordinating
devices 213⁜–⁜14; evolutionary stable
228; institutionally induced 261⁜–⁜2; in
multidimensional choice spaces 145;
pooling 289, 307⁜–⁜8, 315; separating
306, 307, 315; stationary 368; strategies
in 368; see also subgame perfect
equilibrium
equivalent objectives 163⁜–⁜5
equivalent strategies 70, 72, 78⁜–⁜80
Escape to Victory (movie) 106
Estonia 227
Eurovision Song Competition 240
evolutionarily stable equilibrium 228
evolutionary game 221⁜–⁜5
evolutionary stability 221, 223⁜–⁜6; hawk
and dove example 221⁜–⁜5
expected dollar return 14⁜–⁜15
extensive form: B’s choice of who to spy
on 58⁜–⁜9; C spying on A and B 56⁜–⁜8;
crisis escalation 64⁜–⁜5; description
49⁜–⁜50; horse racing with the king
60⁜–⁜2; imperfect recall 60; Iroquois
Confederation 63⁜–⁜4; legislation in a
2-chamber legislature 54⁜–⁜7; legislative
agenda with and without presidential
veto 62⁜–⁜3, 79⁜–⁜80; Populist Party
timing decision 66; sequential veto
52⁜–⁜4; voting on a pay raise 46⁜–⁜7,
50⁜–⁜52, 55⁜–⁜6, 90⁜–⁜3
external stability 346, 352
externalities 194⁜–⁜5, 198
faculty politics 246
FDA drug approval 34
feasible outcomes 19, 21, 39, 98, 234,
331⁜–⁜2, 334, 336, 339, 346⁜–⁜7
Fisk, James 301
fixed point 112
fixed point theorems 112
folk theorems 208
foot binding 191, 214⁜–⁜15
France, WWI strategies 14, 44⁜–⁜5, 180,
280⁜–⁜1, 302⁜–⁜3, 362
Franklin, Benjamin 35⁜–⁜6, 71, 127
Franz Ferdinand (archduke of Austria-
Hungary) 280
Frei, Eduardo 104
French Academy of Sciences 240
function(s): characteristic 336; linear 16;
utility 16⁜–⁜17, 20, 239
game of economic sanctions 310⁜–⁜15;
examples 315⁜–⁜17
game theoretic decision making:
application of 3⁜–⁜4, 118⁜–⁜19, 126;
and candidate objectives 163⁜–⁜5, 167;
in cooperation and coalitions 332,
359, 369⁜–⁜70; and the disintegration
of the USSR 272; and evolutionary
stability 221; in games with incomplete
information 293, 319; and preferences
13; and strategy 76, 95; and the U.S.
Constitution 213; see also game
theoretic examples
game theoretic examples: anti-missile
deployment 7⁜–⁜8; atomic bomb and
Japan 3⁜–⁜4; Boston Marathon 4⁜–⁜5;
crime control, police patrols and crime
voting 6⁜–⁜7; electoral college and bloc
voting 6; fighting a war with allies
11⁜–⁜12; grading on a curve 8⁜–⁜9, 12⁜–⁜13;
presidential power 9⁜–⁜10; voter interest
groups in three candidate elections
5⁜–⁜6; West Point honor code and
Chinese self-reporting 10⁜–⁜11
games: balance of power 303, 329,
361⁜–⁜70; coordination 120; deterrence

--- Sayfa 426 ---
Index  417
signaling 307; of economic sanctions
310⁜–⁜17; evolutionary 221⁜–⁜5; 4 × 4,
with dominated strategies 117;
of imperfect information 274; of
incomplete information 274; of perfect
information 274; pure redistribution
341; recursive 217⁜–⁜18; of reputation
274; screening 274; signaling 274;
and subgames 76⁜–⁜82; symmetric
124⁜–⁜6, 159, 224, 348; with two-sided
incomplete information 289⁜–⁜93; see
also constant-sum games; zero-sum
games
garbage dump example 341⁜–⁜2, 372⁜
genealogy and ancestors 209
Genossenschaften 175
George III (England) 45
Germany: elections in 159; geographic
subdivisions in 245; WWI strategies
14, 45, 180, 280⁜–⁜1, 302⁜–⁜3, 362; WWII
strategies 11, 44⁜–⁜5, 46, 271⁜–⁜2
Gibbard and Satterthwaite’s
Manipulability Result 131
global warming 194
Go (game) 96
gold standard 49
Goldwater, Barry 139, 169
goods, allocation of 26
Gorbachev, Mikhail 84, 121, 218⁜–⁜19, 272,
283⁜–⁜4, 300, 302, 303; and the arms
race 189
Gore, Al 141, 143
government intervention 192⁜–⁜5, 211
grading on a curve 8⁜–⁜9, 12⁜–⁜13, 186⁜–⁜7
Grey, Edward 280⁜–⁜1
grim trigger strategy see strategies, trigger
grocery shopping example 25⁜–⁜9, 95⁜–⁜6
The Guns of August (Tuchman) 182
gymnastic competition 192
Hamilton, Alexander 71
Hare, Thomas 246
Hare voting 246⁜–⁜50
hawk and dove example 221⁜–⁜5
Heisman Trophy 240
Heller, Joseph 188
herring behavior 40⁜–⁜1, 182
he-thinks regress 97⁜–⁜9, 104, 107⁜–⁜9, 120,
273, 278
Hitler, Adolf 44, 45, 107, 159, 196⁜–⁜7
Hollweg Bethmann 280
homeowners’ insurance 15⁜–⁜16
Honecker, Erich 272
horse racing against the king 47, 60⁜–⁜1
Hungary: defection from Soviet Union
219; economic and political reform in
227, 272; WWII strategy 362
Hungary, economic reform in 227
ideal point 170
imperfect recall 60
incentive compatibility 126, 127
incentives: positive 294; unilateral 97⁜–⁜8;
in USSR 188
income effects 131
incomplete information: asymmetric 277;
game of 275⁜–⁜8; symmetric 276; voters
with 289⁜–⁜93
incomplete information examples 271⁜–⁜3;
choice between candidates 289⁜–⁜93;
Pripyat marshes 271⁜–⁜2; Soviet Union
dissolution 272⁜–⁜3; Taiwan Straits
278⁜–⁜9; voting in committees 293⁜–⁜300
India, economic sanctions on Nepal 316
indifference curves 27⁜–⁜8; circular 166;
spatial 30⁜–⁜1
information: asymmetric 273⁜–⁜5,
277, 310; perfect vs. imperfect 58,
274; private 271, 273⁜–⁜4, 281, 287,
289⁜–⁜90, 293, 295; see also incomplete
information
information sets 50, 55, 58⁜–⁜9
institutional design 126
institutionally induced equilibria 261⁜–⁜2
interchangeability 125
interchangeable strategies 125; see also
strategies, equivalent
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 258
internal stability 346, 352
intransitivity, collective 41
Iran: economic sanctions on 310; US
policy regarding 279, 304
Iraq, economic sanctions against 315
Iraq War 368
Iroquois Book of the Great Law 48
Iroquois Confederation 47⁜–⁜8, 63⁜–⁜4
irrationality 39, 40, 41, 181, 183, 193, 287,
318⁜–⁜23
Israel: Canadian embassy in 316; US
policy regarding 279, 304
issue salience manipulation 165⁜–⁜8
issue-by-issue median variance 166⁜–⁜7
issue-by-issue voting 344; circular
indifference contours 257⁜–⁜8, 260;
effect of non-separability on 262;
elliptical indifference contours 258⁜–⁜9;

--- Sayfa 427 ---
418  Index
equilibrium to 259–60; intersection
of median curves 260; strategic voting
agenda 261
Jackson, Andrew 352⁜–⁜4
Japan: and the atomic bomb 3⁜–⁜4; crime
voting in 6⁜–⁜7; division into districts
245; economic sanctions on 310;
industrial competition from 163;
WWII strategies 3⁜–⁜4, 11, 66⁜–⁜8, 341⁜–⁜2
Jefferson, Thomas 6, 33, 154
Jews, European 196⁜–⁜7
job interviews 273
Johnson, Lyndon 139, 143, 169
Kennedy, John F. 143
Kim, D.J. 104
Kim, Y.S. 104
knowledge, common 1, 2, 52, 96, 108,
117, 121, 128, 205, 277, 285, 287⁜–⁜8,
294, 332, 334
Korea (in 1987) 104⁜–⁜5
Korean War 142
Kra Isthmus 323
Kramer, Gerald 260
Kryuchkov, Vladimir 84
Kuwait, Iraq in 315
labor unions 198⁜–⁜9, 303
Latvia 227
League of Nations 369
Lee, Robert E. 218
legislator-lobbyist game 275⁜–⁜8, 285⁜–⁜9,
299, 303⁜–⁜4
legislators: election of 74⁜–⁜5; pay raises for
46⁜–⁜7, 50⁜–⁜2, 55⁜–⁜6, 90⁜–⁜3; term limits
for 183⁜–⁜5, 210; voting decisions of
132⁜–⁜3, 281⁜–⁜2
legislatures: bargaining in 209⁜–⁜10; vote
trading in 185; see also U.S. Congress
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich 46, 198
Levine, Michael 237
Lian Chan 105
lighthouses 194
limited information elections 169
Lincoln, Abraham 142, 144, 201, 218
linear functions 16
Lithuania 227
lobbies and lobbying 231⁜–⁜2; see also
legislator-lobbyist game
The Logic of Collective Action (Olson) 198
lotteries: and risk 15⁜–⁜16; and risk analysis
20⁜–⁜21
low price guarantees, 190⁜–⁜1
Madison, James 31, 70, 127, 154, 211, 212,
215, 233, 236
main simple V-set 347, 349, 351, 354, 357
majority coalitions 330
majority rule games without cores
344⁜–⁜54
majority rule principles: and agenda
selection 212⁜–⁜13; in coalitions 330⁜–⁜2,
358, 362; in the Condorcet Paradox
37⁜–⁜9; without a Condorcet winner
113; in Congress 131; electorate as
majority rule committee 343; in filling
a committee 244; instability of 341⁜–⁜2;
as intransitive 147, 257; in issue-by-
issue voting 260; majority rule games
without cores 344⁜–⁜9, 352; and the
Median Voter Theorem 101; ordering
alternatives by 240; pair-wise 37, 71,
146; and redistributive politics 145;
with a runoff 250⁜–⁜1, 254⁜–⁜5; in zero-
sum games 155⁜–⁜9, 161, 175
majority rule with a runoff 250, 254⁜–⁜5
Malaya 323
manipulation 126
Mao Zedong 1, 191
market collusion 190⁜–⁜1
maxmin strategy 140⁜–⁜1
McGovern, George 139
McKelvey, Richard 147⁜–⁜51, 169, 233,
237⁜–⁜8
McKelvey’s “Chaos Theorem” 147⁜–⁜8
McKelvey’s 4r ball 149⁜–⁜53, 234, 238
McKinley, William 49
median ideal point 100
median lines 148
median variance, issue-by-issue 166⁜–⁜7
Median Voter Theorem 101, 114, 139,
141, 142, 169, 173, 176, 298, 336; and
candidate objectives 143; and election
rules 141; and the electoral college
153⁜–⁜5; in multi-dimensional contexts
150; and multiple issues 143⁜–⁜4; and
redistributive politics 144⁜–⁜5; and third
parties 141⁜–⁜2; and voter ignorance
142; and voter turnout 142, 156⁜–⁜9
Medvedev, Dmitry 188
Middle East, US policy regarding 279, 304
Miles, Ralph 239
minimal winning coalition 348⁜–⁜9, 353,
356, 357
mixed strategies 108, 110⁜–⁜14, 122; and
domination 115⁜–⁜22; solving for 308⁜–⁜9
mixed strategy equilibria 112⁜–⁜13, 123,
140, 151⁜–⁜3; finding 122⁜–⁜6

--- Sayfa 428 ---
Index  419
Mohawk tribe 48, 63
Morris, Gouverneur 71
Most Valuable Player awards 240
multiple issues 143⁜–⁜4
Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD)
304⁜–⁜10
Nader, Ralph 141
Nagy, Imre 272
naïve voting outcome 234, 236
Nalebuff, Barry 89
Nash equilibria: absence of 107⁜–⁜8,
112; and American football 109⁜–⁜11;
and the Chain-Store Paradox 301;
explained 96⁜–⁜100; and Pareto optimal
outcomes 145⁜–⁜6; and the Prisoners’
Dilemma 181; pure strategy 111, 120,
123, 140⁜–⁜1, 146, 149⁜–⁜52, 199, 238;
strategies in 111⁜–⁜14; in zero-sum
games 140⁜–⁜1
Nash equilibria examples: Chile (in
1970) 104; a game with an undesirable
equilibrium 102⁜–⁜3; hawk/dove 223,
224⁜–⁜5 Korea (in 1987) 104⁜–⁜5; Taiwan
(in 2000) 105; 2-candidate, 3-voter,
1-issue election 100⁜–⁜1
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) 239
Nemeth, Miklos 272
Nepal, economic sanctions against 316
Neptune, and the NASA space probes 239
New England town meeting model 343
new world order 368⁜–⁜9
New Zealand, WWII strategies 12
Nicholas II (Tsar of Russia) 280
Niemöller, Martin 44, 182
Nixon, Richard 139, 142
nondictatorships 39
non-separability see preferences, non-
separable
Normandy Invasion 107
norms: legislative 221, 329; social 10, 209,
214⁜–⁜15, 226
North Korea, economic sanctions on 310
North Vietnam 1, 45
Obama, Barack 139, 142, 165, 168
objections 350
objectives, equivalent 163⁜–⁜5
Ogallala aquifer 202⁜–⁜3, 208
Olson, Mancur 198
Oneida tribe 48, 63
Onondaga tribe 48, 63
Operation Barbarossa 45
Ordeshook, Peter C. 169
Oscar nominations 246, 250
outcomes: decision maker’s preference
for 12; feasible 19, 21, 39, 98, 234,
331⁜–⁜2, 334, 336, 339, 346⁜–⁜7; linked
with choices 12; naïve voting 234, 236;
possible 13; of public referenda 174;
strategic voting 235, 236
paradox of power 118⁜–⁜19
Pareto optimal policies and outcomes
145⁜–⁜6
Pasic, Nikola 280
Patton, George 107
Pearl Harbor 323
People’s Republic of China (PRC) see
China
perfect information 58, 274
Pliny the Younger 72⁜–⁜3
Plott, Charles 145⁜–⁜6, 148, 236⁜–⁜7
plurality rule 5⁜–⁜6, 73, 80, 97, 101, 104,
105, 113, 150⁜–⁜5, 160⁜–⁜5, 242, 244,
250⁜–⁜5
plurality vote 72, 118, 124, 131, 141, 143,
154, 159, 186
plurality voting agendas 75
Poincare, Raymond 280
poker game 318
Poland: and the Warsaw pact 218⁜–⁜19;
economic and political reform in 227,
272
polarization 151
policies: Pareto optimal 145⁜–⁜6;
undominated 151
political decisions 12, 46⁜–⁜7
political parties: preferences of 354, 357;
and voter turnout 156⁜–⁜9
political science: vs. economics 25⁜–⁜6;
elements of 24; grocery store example
25⁜–⁜6
politics, redistributive 144⁜–⁜5
poll sequence with informed and
uninformed voters 171⁜–⁜2
polls, voters’ response to 169⁜–⁜72
pollution control dilemma 175, 192⁜–⁜3
pooling equilibria 289, 307⁜–⁜8, 315
positive incentives 294
posterior probabilities 282
power: of agenda setters 70⁜–⁜1, 233;
balance of 303, 329, 361⁜–⁜70; paradox
of 118⁜–⁜19; resources as 363⁜–⁜4; as sole
arbiter of disputes 370
preferences: over choices entailing risk
or uncertainty 16; coalitional 159;

--- Sayfa 429 ---
420  Index
coherent transitive 14; collective or
group 36⁜–⁜41; complete 13, 15, 17,
40; of constituents 275⁜–⁜6, 287, 289;
of decision makers 12; individual
346; individual vs. collective 40⁜–⁜1;
intransitive 37, 62, 69, 147; irrational
vs. rational 41; misrepresentation
of 244, 245, 255⁜–⁜7; social 36⁜–⁜7;
lexicographic 34⁜–⁜5; median 100⁜–⁜1,
116, 149⁜–⁜50, 155, 163, 166, 173⁜–⁜4, 252,
257, 259–60, 262; non-separable 31⁜–⁜4,
166, 262, 264, 266⁜–⁜7; ordinal 124, 255,
360; of political parties 354, 357; of
possible outcomes 13; related to time
23; and risk 16⁜–⁜17, 20; separable 34,
259⁜–⁜67, 335; signals about 328; sincere
126, 129, 131⁜–⁜2, 245; single-peaked
27⁜–⁜9, 100⁜–⁜1, 154⁜–⁜5, 252⁜–⁜4, 262, 299,
333, 336⁜–⁜7; social 36⁜–⁜7, 39, 71, 74, 257,
335, 344; society’s 240; spatial 27⁜–⁜31,
38⁜–⁜9, 147, 167, 174⁜–⁜5, 234, 255⁜–⁜7,
264, 343, 351, 356, 361; transitive 13,
15, 17, 40, 72; unimodal 159; of voters
5, 30, 116, 131, 142⁜–⁜4, 148⁜–⁜51, 155⁜–⁜7,
166, 169⁜–⁜74, 249, 251⁜–⁜2, 262, 264⁜–⁜7,
294⁜–⁜7, 299; voting against 329
presidential elections (US): alternative
rules for 251⁜–⁜5; constitutional
restrictions on 33; popular vote
reversals in 141, 154; voter turnout for
157; (1800) 154; (1824) 352⁜–⁜4; (1860)
142, 144; (1896) 49, 65⁜–⁜6; (1952)
142; (1960) 154; (1964) 143, 169, 170;
(1968) 142; (1980) 169, 170; (2000)
141, 143, 154; (2008) 142; (2012) 142,
165
presidential power, in the US 9⁜–⁜10
presidential vetoes 47, 62⁜–⁜3
prior beliefs 278, 279, 281, 284
Pripyat marshes 271⁜–⁜2
Prisoners’ Dilemma 103, 180⁜–⁜3, 198;
and the balance of power 123; and the
Chain-Store Paradox 301; cooperation
in 362; core in 337; of planning
horizons 220⁜–⁜2
Prisoner’s Dilemma, examples: America’s
electoral college 185⁜–⁜6; arms races
189⁜–⁜90; canoe races 191; Catch-22
188⁜–⁜9; foot binding 191; grading on
a curve 186⁜–⁜7; gulags, famines and
vote fraud 187⁜–⁜8; gymnastics 192; low
price guarantees and market collusion
190⁜–⁜1; markets, public goods, and
why we have government 192⁜–⁜5;
overthrowing the king 192; school of
herring 182; term limits 183⁜–⁜5; vote
trading in legislatures 185
Prisoners’ Dilemma, examples of
escaping: ‘Christmas Truce of 1914’
204⁜–⁜5; casino gambling in Las Vegas
210⁜–⁜11; legal case of John P. Calvo
201⁜–⁜2; Ogallala Aquifer 202⁜–⁜3, 208;
solving through repetition 204⁜–⁜5
private goods 193
probabilities: conditional 278, 281⁜–⁜3, 286,
296⁜–⁜7; posterior 282; subjective 21
property rights 338
proposals: and bargaining sets 350;
competing 26; feasible 352; viable 351
public good(s) 192⁜–⁜4, 198⁜–⁜200, 210,
338
Puerto Rican independence 73
Pugo, Boris 84
punishment strategies 208
pure strategy: defined 108; empty
defensible set in 361; equilibria 243,
289, 304, 309, 314, 316⁜–⁜17, 321⁜–⁜2;
evolutionary instability of 226; in the
hawk-dove game 222; infinity of 208;
and mixed strategies 12⁜–⁜13; stationary
equilibria 217⁜–⁜18
pure strategy Nash equilibria 111, 120,
123, 140⁜–⁜1, 146, 149⁜–⁜52, 199, 238,
411
Putin, Vladimir 188
rationality 1, 3, 23, 41, 97, 194, 317⁜–⁜23
Reagan, Ronald 121, 169, 272, 331; and
the arms race 189
real estate sales 328
recursive games 217⁜–⁜18
redistributive politics 144⁜–⁜5, 340⁜–⁜2
referenda 21, 73, 174; and separability of
preferences 263⁜–⁜7
relevance of irrelevant things 119⁜–⁜22
repetition, indefinite 204⁜–⁜8, 225
reputation 209, 273; and the Chain-Store
Paradox 300⁜–⁜2; games of 274
resources: allocation of 26; as power
363⁜–⁜4
Reykjavik summit 189
Ribbentrop-Molotov Act 362
risk: analysis of 20; attitudes toward
15⁜–⁜16, 65, 124, 243⁜–⁜4; see also decision
making under risk
risk acceptance 15⁜–⁜16, 42⁜–⁜3, 243

--- Sayfa 430 ---
Index  421
risk aversion 15⁜–⁜16, 18, 42⁜–⁜3, 97, 253,
342, 348; and the FDA 34
risk examples: crime control proposal
18⁜–⁜19; risk, traffic control and China’s
media 17⁜–⁜18; strategic deterrence
through risk 19
Robber Barons 301
Rockefeller, John D. 301
Roh, T.W. 104⁜–⁜5
roll call voting see voting, roll call
Romania, economic and political reform
in 272
Rommel, Erwin 107
Romney, Mitt 139, 165, 168
Roosevelt, Franklin 11
Rosenthal, Robert 82
runoff elections 141, 161⁜–⁜3, 241, 244,
250⁜–⁜1, 254⁜–⁜5
Russia: Bolshevik 46, 198, 200; economic
development in 219⁜–⁜20, 227; and the
Middle East 279; WWI strategies 14,
46, 180, 280⁜–⁜1, 302⁜–⁜3, 362; see also
USSR
satisficing 358; endogenous 351⁜–⁜2
Sazonov, Sergei 280
Schlieffen, Alfred von 44
Schlieffen plan 44
school of herring example 40⁜–⁜1, 182
Schwartz’s vote trading theorem 334
screening games 274
secret ballot vote 80⁜–⁜1
security, collective 361⁜–⁜70
security value 208
Senators, election of 74⁜–⁜5; see also
legislators
Seneca tribe 48, 63
separability: disappearance of stability
without 263; see also preferences,
separable
separating equilibria 306, 307, 315
sequence of choices 78
sequential elimination agenda 75, 324
sequential veto 53⁜–⁜5, 79⁜–⁜80
sequential voting 266⁜–⁜7
Serbia, WWI strategies 180, 280⁜–⁜1,
302⁜–⁜3, 362
Shenin, Oleg 84
Sherman, Roger 71
Shevardnadze, Eduard 272
signaling 219, 274, 294, 302⁜–⁜10
signaling games 274
simultaneous choice 61⁜–⁜2, 79, 90⁜–⁜6, 179
Sinatra Doctrine 219, 272, 302
Singapore 323
single-peaked preferences see preferences,
single-peaked
single transferable vote system 244⁜–⁜6
soccer, penalty shots in 106⁜–⁜7
social norms 214⁜–⁜15, 226; self-enforcing
209
social preference see preferences, social
social science, vs. natural science 2
Solidarity 272
solution, competitive 349, 351, 355⁜–⁜6,
358, 361
Soong, James 105
South Africa 310
South Korea 254
South Vietnam 45
Soviet Union see USSR
spatial indifference curves 30⁜–⁜2; two-
dimensional 30
spatial preferences see preferences, spatial
St. Petersburg Paradox 14, 16
stability: disappearance of without
separability 263; external 346, 352;
internal 346, 352
Stalin, Joseph 187
Stallone, Sylvester 106
stationary equilibrium 368
stationary strategies 208, 217, 364⁜–⁜5,
369⁜–⁜70
strategic deterrence 19, 271, 305, 309
strategic equivalent 70
strategic form(s) 93, 114
strategic principles 1
strategic voting see voting, strategic
strategy and strategies 93; for extensive
forms 76⁜–⁜7; in equilibrium 368; mixed
108, 110⁜–⁜22, 308⁜–⁜9; punishment 208;
selection of 96; and simultaneous
choice 90⁜–⁜6; stationary 208, 217,
364⁜–⁜5, 369⁜–⁜70; trigger 208; see also
dominated strategies; pure strategy
strong bargaining sets 350⁜–⁜2
subgame perfect equilibria 77⁜–⁜9, 82, 89,
90, 99⁜–⁜100, 288, 294, 330, 345, 366⁜–⁜5
subgame perfection 205, 249, 285, 317,
366⁜–⁜7
subgames 76⁜–⁜80, 365⁜–⁜8
subjective probability 21; example, why
vote? 21⁜–⁜3
substitute bills 75
Sun Bin 47, 60
Sun Tzu 1⁜–⁜2, 68

--- Sayfa 431 ---
422  Index
Sun Yat-sen 127
Survivor (TV series) 89⁜–⁜90
Switzerland, national referenda in 264
symmetric games 159, 224, 348; two-
person 124⁜–⁜6
Taiwan: division into districts 245;
relationship with China 19, 278⁜–⁜9,
301, 304; 2000 presidential election
105, 254
Taiwan Relations Act 19
Taiwan Straits 278⁜–⁜9
tangency 29⁜–⁜30
targets, compliant vs. resilient 311
tautology 13, 23
tax scheme example 128⁜–⁜30
television programs, as public good 195
term limits 183⁜–⁜5, 210
terminal nodes 50, 58, 60
Thailand 323
third parties, and the Median Voter
Theory 141⁜–⁜2
Tian Ji 47, 60⁜–⁜1
tic-tac-toe 53⁜–⁜4, 93⁜–⁜4, 96
tilted ellipses 166
time discounting 23⁜–⁜4
Tisza, Stefan 280
tit-for-tat 207⁜–⁜9, 212, 217, 225
Tomic, Radomiro 104, 253
top cycle set 147
Tosca (Puccini) 182⁜–⁜3
traffic control example 18
Tragedy of the Commons 194
treaty negotiation 212⁜–⁜13
trigger strategies 208
Tuchman, Barbara 182
Ukraine: economic development in 219,
227; famine in 187
uncovered set 234, 236, 238
undominated policies 151
undominated set 234
unilateral incentives 97⁜–⁜8
unilateral moves 77, 97⁜–⁜8, 101, 106, 125,
254
unimodal preferences 159
union negotiations see labor unions
United Airlines (flight 93) 195
United Nations 362
United States: anti-missile deployment
by 7⁜–⁜8; and the atomic bomb 3⁜–⁜4;
geographic subdivisions in 245;
Middle East policy of 279, 304;
presidential power in 9⁜–⁜10; reaction
to Japanese industrial competition
163; relationship with China 315,
316⁜–⁜17; relationship with Soviet
Union 309⁜–⁜10; and the Taiwan/China
situation 19, 279, 304; WWII strategies
and objectives 3⁜–⁜4, 11⁜–⁜12, 66⁜–⁜8,
323⁜–⁜4; see also presidential elections
(US)
universalism 184, 348
University of Texas Government
Department 246
unrestricted domain 39
Uranus, and the NASA space probes 239
U.S. Congress: and Reagan’s 1981 budget
331; universalism in 348; see also
legislators; legislatures
U.S. Constitution: on presidential
election process 33; 17th Amendment
to 74⁜–⁜5; see also Constitutional
Convention; constitutional design
used car purchases 273
USSR: August 1991 coup 84; British
sanctions against 316; dissolution
of 218⁜–⁜19, 245,⁜ 272, 274, 300, 302,
303; election fraud in 142, 153, 188;
execution of counterrevolutionaries in
187; policy shift toward allies 272⁜–⁜3,
283⁜–⁜4; relationship with US 309⁜–⁜10,
315; WWII strategies 271⁜–⁜2, 362; see
also Russia
utility 169; expected 17, 22, 98, 108⁜–⁜9,
415; transferability of 340
utility count 240
utility curves 27
utility functions 16⁜–⁜17, 20, 239
Valley of the Dump 341⁜–⁜2, 372
Vanderbilt, Cornelius 301
Varenniko, Valentin 84
vetoes: presidential 47, 62⁜–⁜3; sequential
53⁜–⁜5, 79⁜–⁜80
viable proposals 351
Viet Cong 1
Vietnam War 1, 45, 142
Virginia plan 70⁜–⁜1, 236
Viviani, Rene 280
voluntary associations 198
vote fraud 142, 153, 188, 219
voter ideal points, uniform distribution
of 160
voters: ignorance of 142; interest groups
of 5⁜–⁜6; with incomplete information

--- Sayfa 432 ---
Index  423
289⁜–⁜93; informed vs. uninformed
171; uninformed 168⁜–⁜74; see also
preferences, of voters
voter turnout 142; and responsible
political parties 156⁜–⁜9
vote trading 185
voting: approval 244, 251; bloc 6;
cumulative 251; Hare 246⁜–⁜50;
manipulation of 72⁜–⁜5; roll call 35,
46⁜–⁜7, 50, 51, 55, 57, 79⁜–⁜80, 91; secret
ballot 80⁜–⁜1; sequential 266⁜–⁜7; single
transferable vote 244⁜–⁜6; sophisticated
vs. unsophisticated 73⁜–⁜4, 236, 253,
266⁜–⁜7; special rules 239⁜–⁜51; strategic
75, 79, 235, 236, 245; strategic vs. naïve
70⁜–⁜1; and subjective probability 21⁜–⁜3;
see also issue-by-issue voting
voting agendas 69⁜–⁜72, 75⁜–⁜6, 233⁜–⁜8; and
incomplete information 293⁜–⁜300;
impact on outcomes 69⁜–⁜70; plurality 75
voting trees 79⁜–⁜80
voting weight 364
Voyager space probes 239
V-sets 354, 361
Warsaw Pact 218⁜–⁜19, 283, 300, 362
weak domination 114
West Point honor code 10⁜–⁜11, 102⁜–⁜3
Wilhelm II (Kaiser of Prussia) 280
Wilson, James 35⁜–⁜6, 71
World War I strategies 14, 45, 180⁜–⁜3,
280⁜–⁜1, 302⁜–⁜3, 362; ‘Christmas
Truce of 1914’ 204⁜–⁜5; July crisis of
1914 280⁜–⁜1
World War II strategies 3⁜–⁜4, 11⁜–⁜12, 44⁜–⁜5,
46, 66⁜–⁜8, 202, 271⁜–⁜2, 323⁜–⁜4, 362;
differing objectives of US and Britain
11⁜–⁜12
Yanayev, Gennady 84
Yazov, Dimitry 84
Yeltsin, Boris 84
Yezhof, Nikolai 187
Yugoslavia 228
zero-sum games 124⁜–⁜6, 139⁜–⁜41, 364;
with spatial preferences 139⁜–⁜41, 145,
153, 159⁜–⁜60, 174
Zhang Xun 67⁜–⁜9